Story_ID: 667007
Speaker 1: I'm Denise DeBurst Gines [Denise Gines] with The HistoryMakers. Matthew Hickey is our videographer.  Would you state your name and spell it for me, please?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Stephen L. Williams, Stephen, S-T-E-P-H-E-N, L, Williams, W-I-L-L-I-A-M-S.
Speaker 1: Could you tell us what the L stands for?
Speaker 2: Lawrence.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth?
Speaker 2: June 10, 1956.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: The health director for the City of Houston [Texas].
Speaker 1: And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is November 28, 2016.
Story_ID: 667008
Speaker 1: We're gonna start off with just a few fun questions, okay?  Tell me, what is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: When you're talking about clothes or other things probably blue but if it's a car, black.
Speaker 1: What about a favorite food?  What do you like to eat?
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, I really like to eat some of everything.  Like, I was just in Florida with my brother [Lonnie Williams] and one of our traditions is eating Jamaican food.  I also had some Cuban food when I was down there.
Speaker 1: All right. So what is your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Right now I would say Florida because I, around Thanksgiving I spend a week on the beaches between St. Petersburg [Florida] beach and Clearwater [Florida] but more importantly it gives me an opportunity to spend time with all of my siblings.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite season?
Speaker 2: I like spring and fall, living in Houston [Texas] it's hot in the summer and it rains in the winter, if we're not in a drought (laughter).
Speaker 1: And, and do you have a favorite quote or saying?
Speaker 2: Not really.  It all depends on the circumstances and usually I'm influenced by people that are in my more immediate surroundings.
Story_ID: 667009
Speaker 1: All right.  Well, let's start with talking about, about your family.  Can you tell me your mother's name, if you would spell it for me, where she was born, if you know, and her date of birth, if you know that as well?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My mother's name is Loretta Williams.  She was born January 9, 1920.
Speaker 1: And where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Waycross, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Is that where you were born as well?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm a Waycrossian, a Georgian (laughter).
Speaker 1: So tell me about your mother.
Speaker 2: Oh, god, my mom was a maid.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She worked at a hotel in Waycross which is, right now Waycross has a population of around twelve thousand people.  Although geographically Ware County is the largest county in Georgia.  And she--and, and Waycross is a, a railroad town and it has been for a long time, maybe lesser so today because everything's been automated.  But she worked at the Ware Hotel [Ware County Hotel] for almost thirty something years until that hotel closed, then she went to work at the Holiday Inn in, in Waycross until she got sick and then retired.  Then went back to work part time but she really was a maid all of her life, that's all I have, I've seen her do throughout my life, of course.
Speaker 1: Do you know about her education?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she finished high school at, at Center High School in Waycross.  Didn't, didn't go to college but just worked.
Speaker 1: Did she share any stories about her growing up?
Speaker 2: Not, not a lot of specifics that I can remember.  I, I--she did talk about, you know, being in school because, and being in Waycross there were a lot of people that went to high school with her and stuff like that and so she would share stories about some of the things that they did.  I guess some of my fondest memories because I like jazz is when she used to tell me about some of the folks like, you know, Count Basie, Duke Ellington coming to town and it was hard for me to imagine, you know, those folks coming to a place like Waycross and, and--during my era.  And so that, that was kind of exciting.  And she also talked about traveling before she started to have children.  And I was able to spend time with she and one of her traveling buddies actually.  She went up north and stayed a while and came, came back.  And interesting enough, I met a guy here whose aunt was my mom's traveling buddy and I didn't know him growing up but he, he was here, he's a little older than I am, my sisters knew him but I didn't.
Speaker 1: And, and when you said she went up north, up north where?
Speaker 2: She went up north, on, on the East Coast, probably just like my aunt looking for jobs, you know, but obviously it didn't really--she went up into Michigan too because my middle sister [Mary Williams] was born in Michigan, Ypsilanti, Michigan.
Speaker 1: And do you have family in Michigan?
Speaker 2: Oh, only in-laws.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Only in-laws.
Story_ID: 667010
Speaker 1: What about your grandmother on your--so this is your mother's [Loretta Williams] mother?
Speaker 2: My mother's mother.
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: Rebecca. Rebecca Williams [ph.], of course, we called her Big Mama.  She wasn't no bigger than a gnat but that's what folks called her.  We--people that were close to her called her Big Mama.  Other folks, you know, the grown people would call her Miss Missy.  And, you know, around church folks would call her Mother Williams.
Speaker 1: And do you, did you have a, a close relationship with your grandmother?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she raised me, as a matter of fact.  My grandmother coming up worked really hard 'cause she and her husband divorced, I don't know whether they divorced or not, I know she left her husband.  And she didn't have a, enough time to spend with her children but she pretty much was our guiding light growing up.  And I didn't go to daycare I stayed home with Big Mama.  So that was, you know, she was a major influence.  I, I can remember, you know, spending the day with her, taking walks with her, her just telling me stuff, yeah.
Speaker 1: And in, in those conversations did she share anything about her growing up?  Was she also born in Waycross [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: No, she was in Marianna, Florida.  Her folks moved to South Georgia from Florida and, and probably looking for work.  But only vaguely did she talk about being, you know, some of the things that she and her brother, Uncle Buddy [Buddy Williams (ph.)], who lived with us for a while, well, who lived with us a long time.  But mainly, you know, it, it was vague, it was nothing specific enough for me to just remember.
Story_ID: 667011
Speaker 1: So did you all live in the same household?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Born--my mother [Loretta Williams] had five children, single parent, it was she and Big Mama [Williams' maternal grandmother, Rebecca Williams (ph.)] that pretty much raised us.  Uncle Buddy stayed there probably from the time that I was eight years old until he went into a nursing home during his, when he was about eight- well, when he was about eighty when he, when he went in a nursing home.  But I didn't meet him until I was probably, I, I wanna say I was about eight or nine years old, I'm not sure.  My Uncle Buddy had spent time in a mental institution [Central State Hospital] in Milledgeville, Georgia.  I can remember my uncle and Big Mama and I going to Milledgeville to visit Uncle Buddy.  He had been there thirty years.  And I can remember him holding my hand, walking me down the halls and, and one of the hospitals in Milledgeville, back in the day it was a series of hospitals and that, that was the economy for that, for, for that city.  And he would just point out people, his experience with them or whatever.  He had been there so long he was like an attendant that was working.  And we actually brought Uncle Buddy back home during that visit.  And so my life was influenced by him a lot.  It was good.  He was actually a paranoid schizophrenic.
Speaker 1: And so how did he influence you?
Speaker 2: Oh, Uncle Buddy was my buddy.  You know, my friends used to call him crazy Buddy Williams [ph.].  He would just talk to me.  He--sometimes when we would go across town he would take me by the hand and we would just walk and he would just tell me about stuff, you know.  A lot of it I don't remember I just remember the conversations and his willingness to just talk to me.  Uncle Buddy had to be committed intermittently over the years when he became psychotic.  I remember the incidences very vividly.  I remember him actually having an axe and my friend, my, my grandmom, of course, she was close to him trying to get him under control.  I remember the sheriff picking him up and taking him to the hospital.  And, you know, when he got better he would come back and live with us.  I remember when I was, I would go home when I was in college [Huntingdon College, Montgomery, Alabama] 'cause I went to school in Alabama and his room was at the back of the house and I'd be walking out the back door and he'd pull me into his room, open my hand up, put some money in there, close my hand, and tell me I better not tell anybody that I, (laughter) that he gave me money and would send me on to, to, to school, to Alabama.  So, a great source of support, you know.
Story_ID: 667012
Speaker 1: All right.  And who else lived in, in your household?  You said your mother [Loretta Williams] was a single mother, did you know your father?
Speaker 2: I--I didn't--I knew my father, I didn't learn who my father was until I was like in the third or fourth grade.  But I had, had interactions with him all of my life.  He used to take my brother [Lonnie Williams] and I to the barbershop to get our hair cut or used to take us down to the train stations.  We, we liked trains and so he would take us down there to look at trains.  I even remember a trip we took to Miami [Florida].
Speaker 1: And, and tell me your father's name.  Do you know his date of birth?
Speaker 2: I don't know his date of birth.  His, his, his name was Rosebud Smith, Sr.
Speaker 1: Roosevelt Smith?
Speaker 2: No, Rosebud Smith, Sr.
Speaker 1: Rosebud--
Speaker 2: Smith, Sr.  As a matter of fact, my half brother was a, a teacher at my junior high school [Center Junior High School, Waycross, Georgia].  And, of course, by that time I knew what the deal was but before that I didn't really know.
Speaker 1: And so you, did you know anything about his family at all?  Except for his, his brother [sic.] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I didn't.  I know, I knew he had one son, Rosebud [Rosebud Smith, Jr.], and I know, I, I think my half brother had a daughter and a son, I think the son has died.  And actually his son was my brother's age so.  But not a whole lot just only the interactions that he and I had and he and my brother and I had.
Story_ID: 667013
Speaker 1: So tell me about your siblings.  Tell me their names.
Speaker 2: Oh.  I'm smiling because I--I just spent time with them.  My oldest sister is named Gloria James.  She was a teacher.  She taught for forty something years.  She traveled from Waycross [Georgia] to a small town outside of Waycross, Homerville, Georgia, to teach.  I remember riding the train with her sometimes to go over there and spend a couple of days with her.  I also remember her having to catch rides with my neighbor, my godmother and goddaddy, so we would, I would ride with 'em sometimes to take her back on Sundays so that she'd spend that week in Homerville teaching school.  I also remember just meeting kids that she taught and how, you know, they felt really close to her.  My brother and I also remember her taking our clothes and giving 'em to her students too (laughter) so.  But Gloria was like a second matriarch.  Being an educator she wanted to expose my brother and I to a whole lot of stuff and so she took us on a train trip to Newark [New Jersey] as, as an example.  And always insisted that, you know, we go to school and tried to get us involved in a whole lot of stuff.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: My middle sister, Mary Jane [Mary Williams], Mary Jane, she's like the rock, she didn't go to school, she was also, she worked at the pecan factory in Waycross until it closed and then she got a job at the Holiday Inn with my mom [Loretta Williams] as a maid.  But she was really the person that everybody would kind of go to, financially she might have had less but she was a stabilizing force within the family.  Always supportive of my nieces and, and nephews, and she could cook too really good, bake good cakes.  As a matter of fact, she owes me a, a, a fruitcake because my first Christmas away from home, of course, being from the South my mom wanted to make sure that I was comfortable so she sent me a fruitcake, it's not like your traditional fruitcake, it has like nuts in it, more nuts than that cherry fruit which I don't like.  And when my mom died about twelve and a half years ago, Mary Jane had to figure out how to make the cake so that she would continue that tradition and so she's still doing it.  She didn't this year because she has leukemia and she was not feeling as strong and she told me in a couple of weeks she'll send me that cake.  But always that guiding light.  My third sister, and all of these are older, is Carastine [Carastine Smith].  Carastine--
Speaker 1: How, how do you spell that?
Speaker 2: C-A-R-A-S-T-I-N-E, Smith.  Carastine was the person that kind of guided me I, I'd say to the world, you know.  Carastine liked music, clubs, and stuff and I'd go hang out with her a lot of times.  And I even remember one time she and I swapped cars so I could have a more sportier car when I went to college [Huntingdon College, Montgomery, Alabama], she let me keep it for a couple of months (unclear).  That, that was real cool.  But, you know, of course, as she got older she settled down, she has a child now, and that child is very supportive and, and a rock to the family over all.  My brother, Lonnie [Lonnie Williams], he and I are pretty much we're la- we're pretty much alike.  He is a social worker at a VA [Veterans Administration; U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs] down in Bay Pines [Florida].  My advice to him was don't go into social work, go do something else to make a lot of money and the next thing I know he's at Alabama State [Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama] and what, what is his major?  Social work.  Then he decides that he's gonna go to Alabama and get a master's in social work and he's been doing that ever since.  And he loves it, he's working with veterans and really enjoying it.  Challenging because he's working with homeless vets but we were having conversations about that when we were there a little during, during the past week.  And I'm glad he didn't take my advice because I, I think it's made him a different kind of person.  But he and I, especially around this time of the year really like to spend time together listening to music and just enjoying life and being brothers.
Story_ID: 667014
Speaker 1: So what is actually your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Somehow I knew you were gonna ask me that.  And I told Mama [Loretta Williams] this one time, we were trying to figure out how I could even remember this.  But they were pouring like a concrete walkway in front of the house and I remember being on my mama's hip. And I don't know where that came from but that I remember, just--
Speaker 1: They were pouring concrete, where were they pouring concrete?
Speaker 2: In front of our house.  I mean, we were, I was raised in a shotgun house [in Waycross, Georgia].  And, and we put some additions on it, at least my sister did, but I guess they were redoing the concrete and we were trying to add up the dates to see how I could actually remember that. But it was just hanging on my mother's hip.  And they told me that, you know, the people in the neighborhood used to talk about my mama and my sisters because I would never really walk, I would, you know, be, they would carry me around on their hip, and I think I was kind of a chunky kid so (laughter).
Story_ID: 667015
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you, you talked about your house being a, a shotgun house.  Did your, your mother [Loretta Williams] and [maternal] grandmother [Rebecca Williams (ph.)], did they own the property?  Or did (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, they still, well my, my sister and my brother [Lonnie Williams] own it now.  Yeah, they owned, they owned the property.  I was trying to figure out when it was built.  It's probably over a hundred years old now.  It, it, it was a traditional shotgun house, it had no indoor toilet until my sister started working and she built a toilet and we built an addition with a living room, dining room, and a, and, and a kitchen.  I can even remember, you know, I was probably in the third or fourth grade before we even got a television.
Speaker 1: Okay. So tell me about the neighborhood back then in which you lived and the people who owned businesses.  Say if you went a square block around from your house, what would we see?
Speaker 2: A square block?
Speaker 1: Yes if you go all the way around (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well if, well, if you look in front you're gonna see the railroad because we live next to the railroad shops.  And this is where they repair diesel engines.  And everything around there for the most part was just residential except for a couple of stores.  I mean, the Sams [ph.] owned a store, and there was a, another store right before you get to the neighborhood.  You know, we didn't do much shopping there because, of course, the prices were kind of jacked up.  My mom always believed in us going to the grocery where we could get a better deal and we would always have to, each, each kid had a bag and we would carry it back to our house.  But mainly rural.  I mean, when I was growing up also, well, it's, it's not rural, it's actually a small town.  And the, the, the streets were not paved, they had open ditches.  And, of course, later on they, they, they did pave 'em but not before I left home.  When I left home they were still like ditches.  And Waycross [Georgia] is situated close to the Okefenokee Swamp and so it's pretty much a, a, close to sea level.  And it, it's not the swamp that you would see on TV because you have to go back off to see that but, you know, you, you had snakes and everything else around in the woods.
Speaker 1: So how close was the nearest house to you?
Speaker 2: Well, a couple of feet, well, there was a vacant lot, there's always been a vacant lot on the side of us and it's vacant today.  And then on the other side of the vacant house was--vacant lot was a house, the Stanleys [ph.] lived there, and in front of them the Meritts.  In front of my house was my godmother, Miss Ruby [ph.] and Mr. Stack [ph.].  And so it was just right across the streets.  And then later on some folks built on the other side of the street to our right.
Story_ID: 667016
Speaker 1: When you think about that time in, in, in your neighborhood [Newtown, Waycross, Georgia], what sounds, smells, and sights would take you back to that time?
Speaker 2: Of course, the sound of a train whistle blowing.  At seven o'clock and at three- 3:30, there would always be a whistle because it was the end of a shift in the railroad.  If--like wet sand 'cause when it rained, you know, the dirt roads that's the smell of wet sand would, would, would be something that would, would take me back to that time.  But we're talking about an area where there's a lot of vegetation and pine trees.  Pulp wooding was, was a, a major industry back there.  And matter of fact, the Stanleys' [ph.] father worked in pulp wooding.  A number of the guys in, in that neighborhood--
Speaker 1: You're saying pup--
Speaker 2: Pulp.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) P-U-L-P, wooding.  Timber but they were pine trees (laughter).  It's different, it all depends on the, the part of the country.  It, it's really more like East Texas here except for the hills, it's flat.
Story_ID: 667017
Speaker 1: And who was your best friend?
Speaker 2: J.B. Merritt, older, about four years older I think.  He was like my life coach back then (laughter).  You know, whether it was about how to deal with situations with girlfriends, how to fight, how to, you know, just do when I'm going out.  I remember he had a, he was a, a paperboy, he threw papers, and so he convinced me that I should tell a lie at eleven and tell people I was twelve so that I could become a, a newspaper carrier, and I did it.  And he, you know, he, he had a different paper route than I did but I, he, he, and he's still my friend today.  We would always visit when, when I go back home and just kind of catch up.
Story_ID: 667018
Speaker 1: So tell me about your elementary school.  Where did you go to elementary school?
Speaker 2: It was called Reidsville elementary school [Reidsville School, Waycross, Georgia], and we had to walk, walk through some woods.  And I just found out actually this is a conversation that I was having with my siblings, the area that we walked through is actually contaminated because of how the railroad dump ha- materials and stuff.  And I went to Reidsville from grade one through four.  And then in grade five I went to Gilchrist Park [Gilchrist Park Elementary School, Waycross, Georgia] because we integrated. It was an all-black school grades one through four.  I tell my wife [Carolyn Williams] that, she finds it unusual, she's a little older than me because even her older brothers went to an integrated school but I had to remind her that I was in the South and that was just the way it was.  But Gilchrist Park was pretty cool.  My mom [Loretta Williams] actually knew the principal of the school.
Speaker 1: Who was the principal of the school?
Speaker 2: Her name is Miss Maxine Numeer [ph.].
Speaker 1: Numeer?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And who were some of your teachers?
Speaker 2: You know, other than her and Miss Battle [ph.] I don't remember many of 'em.  I can, I think there was a teacher at Reidsville, Miss Thomas [ph.], Miss Loud [ph.], those were like my second and third grade teachers.
Speaker 1: Did you have a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But--
Speaker 1: --well, what, what type of student were you?
Speaker 2: You know, looking back I was a above average student that probably could have done better if I was a little bit more disciplined and had a little bit more confidence in myself.
Speaker 1: And what was your favorite subject?
Speaker 2: Geography.
Speaker 1: Why?
Speaker 2: Because it talked about things that I wasn't necessarily familiar with, introduced me to other parts of the country.  Some of 'em I've seen, some of 'em I haven't but I, I think that's why I liked it.
Speaker 1: Did you do a lot of reading?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't.
Speaker 1: Not at all (laughter)?
Speaker 2: No, I, I didn't.  And, you know, I, and I can say that now looking back, I avoided it when I could.  As a matter of fact, I remember the first pack, set of encyclopedias my sister bought and I thought--I was thinking about this a (laughter) couple of days ago, I didn't really read those things except when I had to do a paper or something, you know.
Speaker 1: Did you have any aspirations or, or dreams of what you thought you might wanna become when you grew up?
Speaker 2: Not as early as elementary school.
Speaker 1: Not yet (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, absolutely not.  Unh-uh.  It just, it was just trying to make it, you know.
Speaker 1: So now when you go to the school that's integrated, tell me about your experience.  How did you find that experience?
Speaker 2: You know, actually it was okay except that I was in the class with all white students except two other kids and they dropped out, so I found myself by myself, I mean, and from a racial standpoint.  But remember the town is small so you know where the kids live and everything and so it ended up being okay.  I mean, some of the kids had attitudes and stuff but just looking back on it because I had that balance, you know, in my neighborhood and those folks it, I--I don't know that I felt as isolated.
Story_ID: 667019
Speaker 1: Okay.  So when you said you didn't feel alone because of the balance in your neighborhood, tell me what, what you meant about that?  You lived--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --in a segregated neighborhood, correct?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is Waycross, Georgia (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right.  So tell me--
Speaker 2: But let's put it like this, okay, this is like an all-black neighborhood but if I go a block to the east it starts the white neighborhood.  It was pretty much a line by socioeconomic structure.  Clyde Farmer lived a block from me who was in my class and he was white and so you know him that way.  And we would like, on Sundays, we would go and play football, you know, the, the black kids would play football against the white kids.  And so, and that--that's how it existed so it, it wasn't integrated at that point.
Speaker 1: So what other extracurricular activities were you involved in?
Speaker 2: In elementary school?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: None.  I don't, I don't remember being involved in anything.  All I can remember going back to elementary school for--I guess, this should have been telling--it was my vaccinations because we would go back on Sundays to get our vaccinations and I can remember standing in line for those.  And here I am sitting in a health department like wow, (laughter) I never would have put the two together.
Story_ID: 667020
Speaker 1: Tell me about religion.  Was your family religious?
Speaker 2: Lord, yes.  Big Mama [Williams' maternal grandmother, Rebecca Williams (ph.)] was Pentecostal Holiness [International Pentecostal Holiness Church].  And, of course, my mom [Loretta Williams] grew up Holiness too.  She later went--my, my grandmama was Pentecostal all of her life, she went to a church across town, that's where she had a membership but we had a Holiness church in our neighborhood, Zachary Holiness [Zachary Holiness Church, Waycross, Georgia], and she would go there sometimes.  And that was the first church that I actually belonged in, belonged to.  I was Pentecostal.  Although a lot of our neighbors, well, not a lot of our neighbors but so there was the Pentecostal church and there was the Baptist church. Went to the Baptist church too, St. Paul [Greater St. Paul Missionary Baptist Church, Waycross, Georgia].
Story_ID: 667021
Speaker 1: And what about traditions on and during the holidays? Was there anything special that your family did?
Speaker 2: You know, we did about what we're doing now.  We would all get together, we would eat and sit down and just spend time with each other and talk.  As a matter of fact, that seems to be our, something that we've all gravitated to at, at holidays.  Whenever there is an opportunity for us to get together we do that and seem to just enjoy each other.  When, before my mom [Loretta Williams] died about sixteen years ago we started gathering down in Florida, all of my siblings would go down to stay at my brother's [Lonnie Williams] house and I would travel because I have more, more flexibility than they do and we'd just spend time together talking, kind of reliving some of our earlier experiences and letting the, the kids interact with each other and talking about what's going on in the world today, you know, and, and it really feels good.
Speaker 1: So coming up when--Christmastime, what type of gifts, you know, did, did you look forward to or, you know, what type of things did your, your family be able to share with one another besides talking, I mean, tell me about--
Speaker 2: We would always--
Speaker 1: What--
Speaker 2: --I can't, I, I was very young, I would say probably even in elementary school when I started buying gifts for my siblings.  They would figure out a way for me to get some money and I would always buy something for all of my siblings and my mom and my grandmama [Williams' maternal grandmother, Rebecca Williams (ph.)] and Uncle Buddy [Williams' maternal uncle, Buddy Williams (ph.)].  I cannot remember, it, it's only been like two years ago that we stopped exchanging gifts.  I mean, even from Houston [Texas] or when I was in Phoenix [Arizona], we would either buy gifts or ship gifts back, back and forth.  And, and so I, I grew up, I laugh, you know, you know, buying my sisters, you know, female type gifts (laughter).  And I can only think and look back and, and think of that so that's--and they were simple things, they didn't cost a whole lot of money but it was just a gesture 'cause we didn't have a lot.
Story_ID: 667022
Speaker 1: So moving on to, to high school, or middle--did you go to a middle school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Middle school was where everybody from different parts of the city came together and we got to meet the kids that were from like the north side or O Nine [Waycross, Georgia] or the Hill [Waycross, Georgia], we all gathered at Center Junior High [Center Junior High School, Waycross, Georgia].  And, of course, this was the South and as in Waycross [Georgia] they closed the black high school and turned it into a middle school and then all the kids went to Waycross High [Waycross High School, Waycross, Georgia] for high school.  But in, we went to Center Junior High for middle school.
Speaker 1: And at that time did you pick up any other activities, I mean, did you play sports at all?
Speaker 2: Not in junior high.
Speaker 1: Not in junior high?
Speaker 2: Not in, not in junior high.  I pretty much just, I mean, getting to school was, was the deal.  I mean, here, like in a city like Houston [Texas] we call it transportation issues but our transportation options--you know, because we didn't have a car--was, you know, I'd walk to middle school or catch a ride with somebody.
Speaker 1: How far away was it from your home?
Speaker 2: Elementary school I would say was about maybe two and a half miles.  And then the middle school was, I wanna say about, at least four miles, four to, it might even have been five miles.  And I, I usually caught a ride there though.  I never rode the bus though, just I would catch a ride with neighbors that had cars to go to junior high school.
Speaker 1: Were there any teachers of influence in, in middle school?
Speaker 2: You know, I remember the speech teacher that told me I didn't have a southern, a southern accent (laughter) that's the only thing I remember (laughter) to be honest with you.  No, not really.  You know, I was going to school to get the work because that's what I was supposed to do.  And I was more into, you know, interacting with people.  I wasn't really that social though but I like had one or two friends that I hung out with.  But and I didn't have a whole lot of flexibility to go out and stuff because mama [Loretta Williams] was kind of strict in that regard so I'd hear about stuff that was going on when I'd have to stay in and make sure I went to Sunday school Sunday morning, you know.
Story_ID: 667023
Speaker 1: I'm trying to -this of ther- is there anything else during those years of junior high school [Central Junior High School, Waycross, Georgia] or middle school that you can remember, you know, that--did you start thinking about high school, were you thinking about college at that time?
Speaker 2: I don't remember thinking about college until I was in high school.
Speaker 1: So what high school did you go to?
Speaker 2: I went to Waycross High School [Waycross, Georgia].  And--
Speaker 1: What year did you go, I'm sorry, what year did you go to junior high school?
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, it, it had to be in the late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s] because I graduated from high school in '74 [1974].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And I'm sorry, what high school did you go to?
Speaker 2: Waycross High School.
Speaker 1: So tell me about Waycross High School, tell me about the students and--
Speaker 2: Well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) your friends.
Speaker 2: In high school, of course, I became sixteen and my old man [Rosebud Smith, Sr.] bought me a car so I was a little bit more mobile.  And I was smart, I told him I wanted him to give me the down payment and I would pay the payment, but I got a car that was cheap enough that he just wrote a check for it (laughter).  Of course, he had to fix it (laughter) after a couple of weeks but it lasted until I went to college [Huntington College, Montgomery, Alabama].  In high school I started playing football and so that, I think, it was in my junior year, junior and senior year I played football.
Speaker 1: What position did you play?
Speaker 2: Offensive tackle.  Too light for the position but my coaches taught me techniques and drive and convinced me that I can block people that were significantly heavier than I was and I was foolish enough to believe 'em.  And so it was really fun.  And I had a partner that, Hicks [ph.], that played with me and he, he lived in Newtown [Waycross, Georgia] too and we would hang out together, going to and from practice, we were late to practice.  And whenever we did something outside of the rules it was usually the two of us doing that and we'd have to stay extra and do whatever, and do whatever punishment the coach decided that we would do.  But that's when I became a little bit more social.  Would even like pick my, drop my mom [Loretta Williams] off for work, I would pick her up after work and take her home.  And became closer to some of the kids in, in high school.  I guess, that's when I started to form some close relationships there other than the folks that were in Newtown.
Speaker 1: And you say Newtown, what, what is Newton?
Speaker 2: That, oh, sorry about that.  That, that's actually the section of Waycross [Georgia] that I lived in.  Every- you know, in small towns, people kind of pride themselves in the neighborhoods that they come from and we came from new, Newtown.
Speaker 1: What was the name of your football team?
Speaker 2: The Bulldogs.
Speaker 1: And do you remember who your coach was?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Dale Williams was the coach at the time and Coach Herring [Leroy Herring] was the offensive line coach.
Speaker 1: And do you remember who the principal was?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I really don't remember the principal.  I, but I do remember my junior high school football coach.
Speaker 1: So you did (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Coach Sunders [Everett L. Saunders].
Speaker 1: --you played football in, in--
Speaker 2: Well, well junior varsity, excuse me, junior varsity.
Speaker 1: Oh, junior varsity, okay.
Speaker 2: And the only reason--well, not the only reason that I remember him but I actually met his college roommate when I was in Austin [Texas] and we went to the same church and he would always ask me how was he doing and, you know, and, and tell me about it when he heard I was from Waycross he told me who his roommate was and I said, "Oh, Coach Sunders was my junior varsity coach."
Story_ID: 667024
Speaker 1: You're playing football, are you still holding down a job, you were delivering papers at eleven, so did you have any other jobs after that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, after football season I worked in a Shoney's [Waycross, Georgia] and then a Western Sizzlin [Western Sizzlin Steak House, Waycross, Georgia], these were all restaurants.  And when--in, in the summertime I cropped tobacco, I worked in the fields.  And after the field work was done you would have to like hang the tobacco up in the, in, in the barns and stuff like that.  I, I did that.  And then I would work in the tobacco warehouse because that area in south--North Carolina, of course, is really famous for tobacco and so I would go and get me a job working for one of those tobacco companies and where you'd have these rows and rows of sacks of tobacco and the, the buyers were bidding on each sack and they would throw a ticket on it and I would tie it up with these two older guys that I was working with and we'd put it on the trucks and we'd go from warehouse to warehouse doing that.
Speaker 1: What, do you remember what your salary was like?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I remember working in like the tobacco fields from anywhere from eight to twelve dollars all day (laughter).  Yep.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: That I remember.
Story_ID: 667025
Speaker 1: So when did you start thinking about going to college?
Speaker 2: I didn't think about going to college until my family came down on me for saying that I was gonna go to the [U.S.] Army.  And they told me that they thought that my attitude was such that I probably wouldn't survive and I needed to come up with another alternative.
Speaker 1: What was your attitude like?
Speaker 2: They thought I was too strong willed, too independent in thinking, and that I would push back too much and so they didn't want me exposed to that.  And they thought that a better alternative would be for me to go to college.
Speaker 1: So how did you decide what college you would go to?
Speaker 2: Well, I talked to my counselor, Miss Denton [ph.], and, of course, she encouraged me to go to college and be a teacher.  And, of course, living in Georgia she pointed out some of the HBUs [sic. historically black colleges and universities] that I might be interested in.  But, of course, I did some research on my own and I was looking at this college in Alabama called Huntingdon College [Montgomery, Alabama], a United Methodist college, very small, saw pictures of the campus, it looked pretty neat.  So I, I remember applying to Huntingdon, but I don't remember applying to any of the other schools.  I might have applied to Paine in Augusta [Paine College, Paine, Georgia], I'm not sure.  But I got accepted to Huntingdon and it, it seemed like it would be a good fit.
Speaker 1: And how were you going to pay for college?
Speaker 2: I had no idea but my sister, of course, talked about some of the loans that I could get and whatever and I did, I did get a couple of loans, they weren't that much because when I got out of school I didn't owe that much.  And I applied for financial aid and work study and so I was able to get that.  And so it was Huntingdon that I chose and, you know, people asked why did I choose Huntingdon.  As a matter of fact, my insurance guy and his son, he was a white guy, his, his son played football, he was the guard next to me, asked me, his wife went to Huntingdon College when it was an all-girls school, and it was like, "Stephen [HistoryMaker Stephen L. Williams], why you wanna go to that all-girls school, that's a girls school." Like, "No, it's not, guys go there now," so I chose Huntingdon College.
Story_ID: 667026
Speaker 1: So before going to college [Huntington College, Montgomery, Alabama], your last year [at Waycross High School, Waycross, Georgia], your senior year, you're playing football, did you go to your senior prom?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.  I went to my senior prom.
Speaker 1: Who did you take to the prom?
Speaker 2: Oh, actually I, I took my girlfriend at the time.  Her name was Sandra Croom [Sandra Croom Broussard].  And I think we had only been dating a few months but that was a pretty good, a good experience.  She and I with two of my good friends Willie [ph.] and Glen [ph.] and we have a picture, I probably have it in my desk, I know because it was so funny, we had on those popsicle looking colors, (laughter) you know, and suits.  And we had a good time.  It, it, it was a pretty good time.  Interesting enough, Sandra lived here in Houston [Texas], she died I think it was last year or the year before last.  And her funeral was no more than two blocks from my house and I found out on Facebook that she had died.  Yep.
Story_ID: 667027
Speaker 1: So before we leave high school [Waycross High School, Waycross, Georgia]--and, and what year did you graduate from high school?
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-four [1974].
Speaker 1: Seventy-four [1974].  Okay.  So your junior high school or middle school and high school years, you know, was during the Civil Rights Movement.  Tell me what was going on in your community that you can remember, 'cause I, I know you were very young.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But do you have any--
Speaker 2: I remember--
Speaker 1: --any ideas of what was going and one question I wanna ask is when Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and John Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] were killed, what do you remember about that time?
Speaker 2: Okay.  First generally, I remember there being a few marches in Waycross [Georgia] during this time.  And I remember having a conversation with my mom [Loretta Williams] because I wasn't gonna go to work, I was gonna march.  And she said, "Well, Stephen [HistoryMaker Stephen L. Williams], you know what people are marching for don't you?"  (Laughter) I said, "What?"  She said, "They're marching to have access to the jobs, you know, and everything else and, you know, I think it would be a good thing if you went to work" (laughter).  I said, "Okay, mama" (laughter).  "I get it."  But yeah, I, I remember, I remember that.  I remember walking to school when, when Kennedy was killed and I remember some older kids quizzing me about what did I know about that and I remember answering the question, I remember them saying, "Oh, you're kind of smart," it's like, "Everybody ought to know this."  I remember not so much the specifics but there being a, a, a level of tenseness and questioning about what was gonna happen now and a sense that people, I don't know whether they were feeling hopeless but I think folks were feeling threatened.  And it was more of a feeling though, not, you know, it was a, it was almost an aura, or, or a climate that, that was created around that, that I, that I can remember.
Speaker 1: Okay. And, and was your family political?  Do you remember your mother going to vote?
Speaker 2: She voted, but no, not very actively political.  Remember mom was a maid, if she didn't work she didn't get paid.  And even when I was young it, I understood that she made less than a hundred dollars a week because I remember the guys that worked in pulp wood, lumbering, timbering, whatever fancy folks wanna call it, but they made a lot more than she did.  And I can al- and I also remember wondering, you know, we were poor but I didn't exactly know that we were poor. And I was wondering well, some of my neighbors who I knew made more money why wasn't they doing better, why did they seem to be struggling so--and I, now I know, I'm grown but (laughter) we seemed to make ends meet.
Story_ID: 667028
Speaker 1: All right.  And one other question about, just befo- so that we can go on is in your neighborhood [Newtown, Waycross, Georgia], and you- the friends and people who lived there, were, were there mostly two parent households?  Or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) On my street there were.  J.B. [J.B. Merritt] had a mom and dad, but his dad died.  Scottie [ph.] and Wade [ph.] had a mom and dad.  I remember Lionel [ph.], Bernard [ph.], and Burr [ph.] and Joe [ph.] and them, they had a single parent household, their mom had divorced.  So it, it was a mixture.  And the interesting thing though that is although I was in a single family, a single parent household like I mentioned that my godmother lived in front of me and Mr. Stack [ph.], my goddad but then a guy that worked in the railroad with my dad [Rosebud Smith, Sr.], Mr. Dewey [ph.], I, I did some work with him sometimes and, you know, he would kind of keep me under his wing.  You know, I talked about going to church or whatever, I mean, at funerals, Dewey would always pull me in and he would be a pallbearer but he'd have me doing the work and he'd just have his hands on my shoulders so they were kind of, I didn't know what they were doing at the time but they were molding me at, at, to, and supporting me at the same time so.
Speaker 1: Okay. But you just mentioned that your, your dad worked on the railroad?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he worked in the shops, yeah.
Speaker 1: Was that near your, near your house?
Speaker 2: He lived in a different neighborhood than I did, not in the same neighborhood, but Dewey worked with him on the same shift, Mr. Dewey.
Speaker 1: And--okay.  All right.
Story_ID: 667029
Speaker 1: So now you're going to Huntingdon College [Montgomery, Alabama].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Is this the first time you're away from home?
Speaker 2: Yeah, for any extended period of time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So tell me about the experience there.  Who was the president when you went to school there, do you remember?
Speaker 2: No.  I remember the dean was Dean Trobah [ph.].  I can remember the president's face but I, I forgot his name, it was doctor somebody (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so had you decided what you would, what your major would be or how did you--
Speaker 2: An interesting thing happened before I even got to college.  In my senior year [at Waycross High School, Waycross, Georgia], my friends tend to feel comfortable talking to me about stuff, you know, of course, their problems or whatever.  And I got into a mode where I would kind of counsel and coach.  I remember after choir rehearsal talking to one of my good friends and, and she was going through some stuff, I was talking to her, she said, "You know, Stephen [HistoryMaker Stephen L. Williams], you ought to be a counselor you're pretty good at this."  I said, "Oh," that sounded like a good idea so I decided to major in sociology and social work when I went to Huntingdon College.
Speaker 1: After you had told your friend he shouldn't (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Well, well, I told my brother [Lonnie Williams] that, that was later on.
Speaker 1: Your brother?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That was later on?
Speaker 2: Later on I told--
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) my brother, yeah.  But, yeah, I, I decided to major in--they didn't have a pure social work school because Huntingdon had like less than five hundred students.  And in the heart of Alabama, I'm at Montgomery, Alabama, a United Methodist school.  You know, we had to have religion, philosophy, first year we had to go to vespers and all of that stuff, which I think suited me well, didn't know it at the time or wondered why I had to do all that stuff but it suited me well.  And, of course, it was predominantly white.  And that was one of the things I think my counselor was pushing back on because I chose to go to a non-HBU [sic. historically black college or university].
Speaker 1: And so you transitioned very well?
Speaker 2: You know, at--I, they put me in the athletic dorm probably because I was a black guy and they thought I was gonna play sports but I didn't play basketball, they didn't have a football team.  And the guy that I was supposed to be roommates with lived in Montgomery and he just came to the room occasionally so I kind of had the run of the room to myself and I really liked that.  But, you know, the, the, the, the students there were okay.  They were generally friendly.  A lot of 'em were religion majors too and went on to, I guess, be ministers in--in the church.  There were a small group of black folks that were there, some played basketball, some were nonathletic.  And they came from like parts of Alabama and Florida for the most part, not many people from outside the South, actually outside Georgia, Alabama, and Florida really.
Story_ID: 667030
Speaker 1: And is, is there a professor that you can remember that inspired you in any way?
Speaker 2: Sure.  I had a social work professor, Dr. Beverly [ph.], he was out of New Orleans [Louisiana], he was a social worker, Cajun.  He even taught with an accent, I never figured that out 'cause he had been living here all his life but he was Cajun.  He was very influential in terms of how I thought.  I remember one time, George Wallace, Jr. actually went to Huntingdon College [Montgomery, Alabama] during the time that I was there.  And we were in, I think, some family class or something that Dr. Beverly was teaching and he was saying something on, off the wall and he was wondering, "Well, Stephen [HistoryMaker Stephen L. Williams], why didn't you confront him?"  I said, "Because, you know, that was just crazy mess, I don't, it's not something that I, I wanted to deal with because, what he said didn't make sense."
Story_ID: 667031
Speaker 1: So, George Wallace, Jr. we were talking about the fact that he said something, you don't remember what it was, that--
Speaker 2: I don't remember what it was (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, and it had to do, I think, with, with we're all fair or something like that.  I think, it was really a stereotype of poor people when in fact that wasn't true.  And, you know, I, it's not like I was quiet. I said a couple of things.  But, you know, my belief at the time was this guy, you know, he's been taught this crap and it's not accurate at all but most people in the class didn't really agree with it.  And there, there were actually three people that were very influential in my life, my college life [at Huntingdon College, Montgomery, Alabama].  Another was actually the chair of the psychology department, Dr. Stanton [Thomas F. Stanton].  He was not only the chair but he was also chair of the board of corrections. And during the summertime he would leave Alabama and go to Northwestern University [Evanston, Illinois] where he taught.  Old guy but man he was smart, I think he even had one eye.  But for some reason he saw something in me and he really supported me and pushed me out there.  Matter of fact, he wanted me to teach a, a class when I was like a junior but because I had to take a class I couldn't do it 'cause I had worked at, later on after my freshman year I had worked at a, what I call a juvenile jail [Alabama Industrial School for Boys; Mount Meigs Campus] in, in, Mount Meigs, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Actually, it was a juvenile prison, not a jail (laughter).
Story_ID: 667032
Speaker 1: Okay and so you said three, so Dr. Beverly [ph.], Dr. Stanton [Thomas F. Stanton]--
Speaker 2: And, gosh, I think her name was Miss Anderson [ph.] but I'm not sure.  I can see her face, I know her daughter, but I got involved in a program called the University Year for Action.  It's kind of like, it's a part of the VISTA [Volunteers in Service to America; Americorps VISTA] program, back in the day.  And so this involved me going to school [Huntingdon College, Montgomery, Alabama] but then have a practical work experience and I think that really like turned my life around because at age eighteen or nineteen I went to work at a juvenile prison [Alabama Industrial School for Boys; Mount Meigs Campus] in Mount Meigs, Alabama, where I worked in a drug treatment program, I was a counselor.  And the young folks that I was working with, I was only a couple of years older than they were, and I got exposed to things that I didn't necessarily, I wasn't really exposed to before in, in Waycross [Georgia] in terms of, you know, the fact that, you know, kids committed crimes, they got a couple of chances but after a few chances, you know, they went to prison. And we had kids that were in this program that had done major crimes.  One kid had actually killed someone.  I remember one kid, he was only thirteen but we ended up having to send him to South Carolina because we didn't have a facility in Alabama that could actually hold him.  And so I just started to learn about that.  And the director of the program, Jim Portavent [ph.], he ended up, you know, hiring me when I was twenty years old because I stayed in the program for more than a year and I think you had to be twenty-one to work but by the time I was twenty I actually had work experience and they knew me and so they hired me even though I was under age.  And so that I think opened a lot of doors for me.  So it was miss, Miss Anderson, I forget her name, but anyhow he ran that program and really because there were two other guys that went out to that institution with me, I was the only one that actually worked out. One of 'em quit, one of 'em got kicked out.  And so I helped to make that program look good and so she was very supportive.  But the campus culture with the adults there, is with guys that were supportive, both African American and, and white guys, Portavent was white.
Speaker 1: So, so after working there, how long did you, what, what year was this that you worked there?
Speaker 2: I think it was after my freshman or sophomore year, I'm not really that sure.  Actually, it's on my resume.
Speaker 1: Well, it's like 1975 or so; right?
Speaker 2: Probably '75 [1975], '76 [1976].  I--god, it's--it's like the dark ages now since--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --I'm so old.
Story_ID: 667033
Speaker 1: All right.  So now this was in Mount Meigs [Alabama] but Montgomery [Alabama]--
Speaker 2: Actu- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) also has its own historical relevance.  So what did you learn about the Montgomery area while you were there?
Speaker 2: Oh, actually, I worked at Alabama youth services [Alabama Department of Youth Services] in '75 [1975], from '75 [1975] to '77 [1977].  That's interesting because that means I started like a year after I was in college there [Huntingdon College, Montgomery, Alabama].  Because, there was some concern about a couple of us participating in that program that was not spending enough time in the class so they reassigned me to the VA [Veterans Administration; U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs] in Alabama so that I could spend more time in the classroom.  And I then decided that I wanted to, to work on--and the, the woman who was running the program had a, a daughter, a daughter that ran a transitional home for the Montgomery Area Mental Health Authority [Montgomery Area Mental Health Authority, Inc.].  And so she got me a job as a, a, a resident supervisor, a house parent on the weekends in Montgomery.  And I pretty much stayed with the clients over, over the weekend while I was still in school.  And, and, and I have to give you that background because you were asking me about Montgomery.  One of the ways that I learned more about Montgomery is because I took my clients to Dexter Avenue Baptist Church in Montgomery because they, you know, they would say, "Stephen [HistoryMaker Stephen L. Williams], we wanna go to church."  Like, "Okay, fine."  And that was one of the closest churches.  And, you know, and so I'm taking these mentally ill clients to this silk stocking church in Montgomery, and that was pretty cool.  I, I enjoyed the services, it gave me some level of familiarity with, with the culture in Montgomery.
Speaker 1: So now, now you said you were working with the VA but--
Speaker 2: That was just as an intern.
Speaker 1: Oh, just an intern (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was, it, it was, it was the second placement that I had as a, as a volunteer for University Year for Action.  They pulled me out of the Mount Meigs setting [Alabama Industrial School for Boys; Mount Meigs Campus, Mount Meigs, Alabama], put me in the VA, I didn't last that long there probably about I think six months in the VA, it was boring to me.  I was interviewing clients in the outpatient clinic or whatever.  Ironically, my brother [Lonnie Williams] is a social worker in the VA but I didn't last that long there.  And I did know his supervisors when he was there so (laughter).
Speaker 1: So you were working with mentally ill patients now at this time (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's when I started, yes, as a house parent, yes.
Speaker 1: As a house parent, okay.  So now do you think that the, the relationship you had with your--
Speaker 2: Uncle Buddy [Williams' maternal uncle, Buddy Williams (ph.)] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) uncle--
Speaker 2: Now I think that. Back then I didn't know it, you know. But I had a good level of comfort with the clients.  And, you know, people think that when folks are mentally ill they're mentally ill all the time, no, they're not.  When they're on meds a lot of times they're fine, they're just like you and I.  And so because of my openness I formed a close relationship with the, with, with the clients.  And the clients who were older actually taught me stuff.  I can remember this Italian woman who taught me how to cook a pot roast (laughter).
Story_ID: 667034
Speaker 1: So what happens next?  Now you get your, your master's degree in education; right?
Speaker 2: That was after I finished college [Huntingdon College, Montgomery, Alabama], yes.
Speaker 1: Well, I'm--all right.  Your undergrad was in what, tell me.
Speaker 2: Sociology and social work.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's right.  All right.  So now how do you transition into starting to work on your master's degree?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I was a house parent [at Alabama Industrial School for Boys; Mount Meigs Campus, Mount Meigs, Alabama] but then I finished school early, I finished school and, technically in '77 [1977] although I was gonna graduate in June of '78 [1978] so I had to have something to do.  And so I asked the, the center director whether or not I could do a full time job and, of course, the school said, "Yes, he's completed all of his requirements he will be getting this degree in June," and so they hired me as a day treatment counselor.  This is an operation where people are coming out of the hospital and transitioning back into the community but they are not staying in a facility, they're actually staying at home.  It also serves to prevent people from going into the hospital.  So it's really a day activities with, with also some level of therapeutic intervention with folks that are severely mentally ill.  And to this point the transitional home folks as well as the people in day treatment have severe mental illness.
Speaker 1: So you, so you started going, you went to, what school did you go to? Auburn [Auburn University at Montgomery, Montgomery, Alabama]--
Speaker 2: Well, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) for your master's or was that--
Speaker 2: Yeah at, when I was at--
Speaker 1: --that year?
Speaker 2: --when I was a day treatment counselor a position as a therapist opened up and I, and at the time I was enrolled in a, in a master's program in education but it really was a therapeutic counseling program.  And so I went to Auburn at Montgomery for that first master's in, in education.  And that, because I was involved in that curriculum that, it give me the opportunity to become an outpatient therapist.
Speaker 1: So tell me how, how interesting was that?
Speaker 2: Oh, god, I loved it.  You know, at one point as a therapist I only had one goal, and that was to treat anybody that walked into my office and sat in that chair, to be able to relate to 'em, to help them attain a level of peace and a higher level of functioning.  And, and so I thought that I would never wanna do anything other than that in my life.
Speaker 1: And what changed your mind?
Speaker 2: The fact that I was working in an organization that needed to change.  And that there were people that were giving me directions, they were good people but I didn't always think that they made the--the right decisions.  And so I had an opportunity to go back and run the day treatment program and so I became the day treatment director after I got, after I got my master's, was a therapist, and then I went back and I ran the day treatment program.  And I did that for a few years, probably about three or four years, I think.
Story_ID: 667035
Speaker 1: And so what happened after that time?
Speaker 2: Well, I--day treatment was good, I enjoyed the staff [at Alabama Industrial School for Boys; Mount Meigs Campus, Mount Meigs, Alabama], I enjoyed, you know, molding the programs, we had a very energetic staff, I thought we were doing really good.  But then the director offered me a job as the personnel director for the mental health authority [Montgomery Area Mental Health Authority, Inc.] because what I don't really tell people is that even, after I was in, the director of day treatment I went back to work on a second master's at Auburn at Montgomery [Auburn University at Montgomery, Montgomery, Alabama] and it was in personnel administration (laughter), a, a master's in public administration, personnel administration.  And so Henry [ph.] knew that I was doing that and he o- and the personnel director was retiring and so he offered me that job.
Speaker 1: So going to school, okay.  So first you're, you're there to get the, the, the counseling degree, and were there other African American students in that same course with you there--
Speaker 2: One (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and with, and going into the personnel, were there many--
Speaker 2: Only--
Speaker 1: --African Americans?
Speaker 2: I only remember one African American student that was in my class.  There might have been someone else but I only remember one.
Speaker 1: And what about the, the staff and, and the teachers?
Speaker 2: They were all white.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: They were all white.  But I did become close with one of the professors there, Bob Bender [Robert C. Bender] because I thought, I thought he was very good and he had very good clinical skills.  I kind of stood out in the class because everybody else was trying to learn how to be a therapist, I already was one.  And we used to role play and I would role play, you know, situations that I faced in my office and it freaked everybody out, (laughter) you know, and so I kind of laughed at that.  And so when it was time for us to like have a practicum or whatever, he said, "Stephen [HistoryMaker Stephen L. Williams], you don't really need to do this."  I said, "No."  And he asked me, said, "But I gotta get you to do something."  I said--he asked me, "What do you want me to do?"  I said, "I want you to treat me."  And said, "What?"  "I want you to give me up to X number of sessions of therapy."  He said, "Why?"  I said, "Because I'll become a better therapist if I do that."  He said, "Well, you're right."  So that's what we did.
Speaker 1: Did you have any, was there any racial problems at all while you were in any of these, taking any of these courses?
Speaker 2: No, not in the courses themselves, not in the environments.  Remember Huntingdon [Huntingdon College, Montgomery, Alabama] was small, AUM at the time was very small, the classes were small.  And so I think I was blessed in that the environments were supportive.  I'm not saying that it was perfect, I mean, people have their attitudes and stuff like that but it was pretty much supportive.  I mean, I met enough people that seemed to be interested in my succeeding.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so, what happens next?  Now after you did this--
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: --six weeks of, of (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Therapy.
Speaker 1: --of therapy.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, well, the truth is, is that it was good because I knew that I had some issues related to my mom [Loretta Williams] and my dad [Rosebud Smith, Sr.] and so that's what I dealt with in those therapy sessions.  As a matter of fact, I can remember very distinctly me going home on a Saturday, it was raining, I drove from Montgomery [Alabama] to Waycross [Georgia], I picked my mom up from work, she was wondering why is he here?  We did our traditional thing, we went to the fish market 'cause I loved her fried fish, got some fish and we sit down in the fish market and I talked about my feelings about her relationship with my dad and all of that.  And she really like breathed a sigh of relief, like whew.  I said--she said, "Oh, my god, I'm so glad that you're talking to me about this."  And I asked her why.  And she said that she and my dad had had conversations about that and they thought that I had a level of angry, of anger that would have resulted in my hurting someone or getting hurt.  And I didn't know that.  It's--
Speaker 1: Well, it worked out well.
Speaker 2: Yes, it did (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 667036
Speaker 1: I only stayed in the personnel director job [at the Montgomery Area Mental Health Authority, Inc.] for a couple of months because at the time I had a friend, Joyce [ph.], who worked with me, who thought I needed to leave Alabama. She thought--she saw something in me that I probably didn't see in myself.  She told me that I should apply for this program.  She gave me a, an ad in a JET magazine for the National Urban Fellows program.  She said, "Here, this is what you need, you need to apply, get out of here."  And I applied and I got accepted into the program even though I had just taken a job as personnel director.  And so my director and I were close enough to where he said, "Okay, I get that you're gonna do that, but I want you to take the job anyhow and I want you to do something with me."  He said, "You've been taking that, you know, public administration class where you're doing classifications and stuff," like job classifications.  And I said, "Yeah."  And he said, "Well, I want you to work with me to reclassify the whole mental health center."  And he and I, before I left did a reclassification of jobs and of the whole mental health center and brought salaries in a line and everything and that was my final job in Montgomery [Alabama].
Speaker 2: And, and what year was that?
Speaker 1: That was in, it ended in 1984.
Story_ID: 667037
Speaker 1: So now the, the fellows position, where was this program?
Speaker 2: New York City [New York, New York].  I went to Montgomery [Alabama]--to Baruch College in New York.  There were two components to the Urban Fellows program [National Urban Fellows], one is working on a master's in public administration, even though I had a half a master's in public administration.  And the thing that was attractive about it was I would get an eight month mentorship with a key public or nonprofit executive.  And so I applied for the program, I got accepted, I left Montgomery, I went to New York and did the first summer, academic, had the first summer academic experience in, in New York City.  After that I was assigned to Maricopa County, Arizona.  I went to Phoenix [Arizona] where I worked in the county manager's office as a special assistant to the county manager but really it was a management analyst, going around to different departments within the county doing analysis and making recommendations and that was a pretty fun experience.
Speaker 1: Well, before we, we get to that experience, and tell me a little more about your experience at Baruch in New York and living in New York City from, from Montgomery (laughter) to--
Speaker 2: You know--
Speaker 1: --to New York City in 1985?
Speaker 2: I totally enjoyed it because remember the Urban Fellows program, we had about twenty-five students, they're from all over the country, diverse.  I met, you know, Puerto Ricans that were from New York, Native Americans from Oklahoma, southern boys from Tennessee and Mississippi, East Coast folks, you know, and Midwestern folks from Chicago [Illinois], I met--it was, it was really, it was enlightening and it was really energetic too.  Because we lived on Columbia's campus [Columbia University, New York, New York], some of us, and we had to stay together, a common living area, a common kitchen, and our individual bedrooms.  And it was the, the mixed genders and so we really created our own little family, you know, getting on the train, going downtown in New York, I mean to Baruch, we'd have to be there at eight o'clock, we might work 'til eight, eight or nine o'clock that night because it really, what it did was it condensed a public administration degree into two summers with a couple of classes being done while we were off site in our various placements.
Speaker 1: And you said you were where with your placement?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: Where was your placement, where--
Speaker 2: Maricopa County, Arizona.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Which is, I meant, the, the city is Phoenix but it was Maricopa County.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, until you got to your (unclear) I got it.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So and then once again you had to transition to Arizona.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I think the New York experience kind of prepared me for Arizona, you know, salsa music, good food, (laughter) and various cultures.  And I had a couple of people that had experienced Arizona and they kind of gave me a heads up, letting me know that the culture would be different and the people that I experienced would be somewhat different.  But one of--my mentor, I had two mentors actually, my formal mentor was the county manager who was actually a, a white guy from, I think Bob Monie [ph.] was from South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But he had also managed, been a manager in Glynn County [Georgia] which is Brunswick [Georgia], which is next to Waycross [Georgia], and he had also managed a county around Atlanta [Georgia], I don't know which one it was but he was county manager there before he went to Atlanta.  And he was curious as to why would a, you know, if, if a boy from Waycross got this far, you know, what would I be like?  And so he wanted me to come there and work with him for a while, and I did.  It, it, it was really good.
Speaker 1: It was a good experience, okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, but my, my second mentor was a conservative, Hispanic guy from Arizona who was in the first Urban Fellows class, so two really good folks that were supportive and, you know, really kind of sponsored me and encouraged me to do whatever I could do.
Speaker 1: So what was your goal by getting this degree in public administration?
Speaker 2: Well, it really wasn't the public administration degree.
Speaker 1: It wasn't? What type of degree was it (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.  Well, well, I got, well, I got a public administration degree, yes, as a result of my completing the Urban Fellows program.  But I didn't go into the Urban Fellows program to get a public administration degree.  I went into Urban Fellows program to experience some other part of the country other than the Southeast.  My only criteria with Urban Fellows is that I get placed somewhere else outside of the Southeast.  Now, I kind of wanted the East Coast but I got sent to Arizona and I'm glad that I did.
Story_ID: 667038
Speaker 1: So when you finished in Arizona, you did, you talked about, you know, what your position was and what, what you accomplished there.  So what happens next?  So how, but how, how long did you do that?  How--
Speaker 2: Well, the Urban Fellows program [National Urban Fellows] actually lasted a year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so from '84 [1984] until '85 [1985] I was an Urban Fellow working in the county manager's office.  I decided that I wanted to--I had to go back to New York [New York] the following summer to finish up my program and get my degree and I did and I had, I told Adolfo Echeveste, who was one of my mentors that I wanted to come back to Arizona.  And so he said, "Okay.  I'll see what I can do."  And he talked the public health director, the public health director was looking for another, additional assistant and he told the public health director that if he hired me he would give him the position that he had been wanting for like two or three years.  And the public health director interviewed me and said, "Okay, you finish your program, you can come back and work for me."  And that was my first introduction to public health.
Speaker 1: And, and, and that was in, in Phoenix [Arizona]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Maricopa County, Arizona.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I became, I finished my program and became an assistant to the public health director.
Speaker 1: So, so how long did you work there, and tell me about your responsibilities there?
Speaker 2: Well, I was really like an administrator of public health.  I, I worked there for four years.  I became, I handled information systems, human resources planning, and finance but I had a, a, a partner that handled those with me.  And so really the administrative aspects of--of that organization I, I was responsible for.
Story_ID: 667039
Speaker 1: And what else is going on in your life besides work?
Speaker 2: Oh.  I didn't think about that.  I always (laughter) think about just work.  Well, an interesting thing happened.  When I went back after I finished my degree--
Speaker 1: Which degree?
Speaker 2: In public administration at Baruch [Baruch College, New York, New York].  I went back to the office of management analysis and they took me out to lunch to welcome me back and there was this woman in, in the department who was an intern and the secretary, Chris [ph.], introduced me to her and told me I should start talking to her.  And that woman is now my wife.  So I, I met Carolyn [Carolyn Williams] when I came back and we started up a relationship, had a child, and eventually got married.  So that was probably one of the most important factors that happened.  And also I had a child at, two years after I got back, and so here I have a little daughter and working in the health department [Maricopa County Department of Public Health] and that was pretty good because the guy that ended up hiring me left shortly after I got there and then his replacement was a pediatrician and so he would give me good tips about how to deal with my child (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, so what year did you get married? In, in eighty- (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I wasn't married at the time that I had the child.  I did not--
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: --I didn't get married until--
Speaker 1: You said that. Well let's say and your, your daughter's name?
Speaker 2: Jennifer [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what year was she born?
Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty-seven [1987].
Speaker 1: And then you and Carolyn, is your wife's name?
Speaker 2: Yes.  We lived together before we got married that's the deal (laughter).
Speaker 1: And then when did you eventually get married?
Speaker 2: In 1990, a year before I moved to Texas.
Speaker 1: And so you were living with your family in Arizona?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).  All right.  Fantastic.  All right.  So you worked there for how many years?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I worked in, I--I worked in Maricopa County until 1990.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that was from '85 [1985], so that's five years?
Speaker 2: Yeah, from '85 [1985] until 1990, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had a couple of different jobs but I worked there.
Story_ID: 667040
Speaker 1: We're now in, in Arizona with your family.  And you said that you worked, you had four different positions while there so tell me about those.
Speaker 2: Well, very briefly, I came in as I said as the assistant to the public health director.  And after a while there were some issues that arose in the department [Maricopa County Department of Public Health] and my mentor and boss the assistant county manager, Adolfo [Adolfo Echeveste], wanted to send a, an administrator in to run the whole department.  And he had a, a colleague that was seasoned in Maricopa County [Arizona] and she was the director of community development.  And so he asked me would I be willing to go and work in community development.  It was Adolfo so, of course, the answer was yes.  And so he named me interim director of community, interim assistant director of community development and he sent Randy Baca [Randy Baca Hensel] over to run the health department.  And I stayed in community development for about a year as assistant director.
Speaker 1: From what year to what year?
Speaker 2: From 1989, from March of 1989 until March of 1990.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And then there for a year and then what position did you move to after that?
Speaker 2: Well interesting enough, one of the things that I had done in the department before I left was reorganize the department.  And, of course, I had to get my, Adolfo's blessing to reorganize the department.  And so after being in community development for a year I was given the option of staying on as assistant director because I was interim and my, my boss at the time said, "Stephen [HistoryMaker Stephen L. Williams], you've been here for a year, are you gonna, do you wanna stay, and you can have this position if you want it."  I elected to go back into public health in a, and, and accept a demotion because even though I liked community development, public health seemed to be drawing me in.  And there were a number of initiatives that we had started in the department that I really wanted to continue and so I went back as an administrator in one of the divisions in, in the health department, which was a lesser position than I had before.
Story_ID: 667041
Speaker 1: And you wanted to be involved with--what programs did you have in mind or did you have anything in mind when you took that position?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I was--some things, there were some things under, and I, I worked under like three health department directors, but under one of the health department directors the second one that I worked for I was able to develop a couple of programs that I really liked.  I reinstituted a, a community health nursing, public health nursing program back into the department [Maricopa County Department of Public Health] by asking my mentor [Adolfo Echeveste] for half of the positions back that he had taken to develop a home health program.  I, I was teaching myself public health along with coaching from my boss because my background wasn't public health.  And one of my coaches gave me a book to read, 'Public Health Primer' ['The Public Health Primer' Jo Fairbanks and William H. Wiese].  And I was reading this book and found out that there were things in the health department we didn't have like a, an epidemiology department that looked at general data for the community to do community assessments.  And so I asked my boss whether or not we could create a unit and he just laughed and said, "Sure, what would it look like?"  And so he gave me the responsibility of creating that unit and it was a really rewarding experience because I talked a guy who had actually accepted another job in a smaller jurisdiction as a health director into coming and running our epidemiology.  And so it was those kinds of experiences that I really liked and I wanted to replicate some of those and so I went back into the department to do some of the things like that.
Speaker 1: And, and so how long were you in that position, and was there any other program that you instituted besides the epidemiology?
Speaker 2: Well, we started--well, when I went back we developed a pregnancy outreach program which one of the, the goal of that was certainly to prevent secondary pregnancies but to also make sure that young children had a healthy start at birth.  Another thing that was happening is we had a measles epidemic and because I was close to developing the, developing the community health nursing program I helped to facilitate community meetings to figure out where we need to do off-site vaccinations for measles.  And that was really a fun experience because I had to talk the nurses into driving these big RVs and the way I did that was to tell them that if they wrecked the RV I'd cover it, they didn't have to worry about anything.  And so, of course, one day I got a call, "Stephen [HistoryMaker Stephen L. Williams], you need to come out and see this RV," one of the nurses had run it into an awning at a grocery store.  But we were out and, you know, 117 degree weather, giving immunizations.  And you can talk to my daughter [Jennifer Williams (ph.)] today and she can tell you about her experiences even as a young child following me, well, going around with me giving the nurses water and, you know, support.  And I have a tee shirt also with all of 'em, where they all signed their names on it and I kept it, ever, ever since I've been there, so those things are, things that I remember and that I liked to do.
Speaker 1: All right.  So any other programs or what did you--what (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well, well the two most remarkable things I think was the recreation of the community health nursing, the public health nursing program, where nurses actually did community health assessments and had assigned geographical areas; and the epidemiology program, although we did some other stuff I, but I, I, those were like systems changes at the time.  And I was grateful for having the opportunity and the support to do that because I was pretty young, (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah (laughter).  You were making marks even then.
Story_ID: 667042
Speaker 1: What was your next position?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I remember being in, in San Diego [California] looking at homeless services in San Diego, homeless services as well as substance abuse services, treatment services in San Diego.  And I got this call from Austin, Texas.  There was a position that was the administrator of public health for the City of Austin, Austin, Austin, Travis County [Texas] at the Austin/Travis County health department [Austin/Travis County Department of Health and Human Services].  And they asked whether or not I'd be willing to come in for an interview.  I don't even remember applying for the position or whatever but they had called and asked for people that might be good fits for that.  And so I flew back to Phoenix [Arizona] from San Diego and then ventured into Austin, Texas, to interview for the position.  To be truthful the only reason I interviewed for the position was because I'd--participating in an, in another program through the National Forum for Black Public Administrators called the Executive Leadership Institute and that was in '88 [1988], '89 [1989], and I had gone to Austin, Texas, and I liked it so I wanted to make another trip back to Austin.  I wouldn't--I was happy in Phoenix, you know, who wouldn't be with the support and the opportunities to do things? But so I decided to like go to Austin and talk to the people since I wasn't really that experienced at interviewing and people say you're supposed to go out and interview so I just did it.
Speaker 1: And so Austin, Texas, was your next move?
Speaker 2: Yes, I ended up interviewing.  I remember they asked me to stay a second day, I didn't know what that meant, I called Adolfo [Adolfo Echeveste] and said, "Adolfo, they want me to stay another day." And he gave me a good mentorship talk and that was, "Stephen [HistoryMaker Stephen L. Williams], you probably know more than you think you know, you've learned a lot here, we don't really want you to go but sometimes in order to grow you have to move.  You will probably get the position but you should be okay with that."  And sure enough I got the position.  By the end of this, the middle of the round of interviews on the second day they didn't offer me the position but they cut all the interviews off and told me, flew me back to Phoenix and they told me that I would likely get the position.  And so I became the administrator of public health for Austin/Travis County Health and Human Services and that, I was responsible for all of the administrative stuff that I had initially done in, in Maricopa County [Arizona].
Speaker 1: And so you worked with, with human services and did you work with the veteran services as well?  Was that included?
Speaker 2: Well, it's gonna get a little bit complicated now--
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) because I went in as administrator of public health and then my boss figured out that although I did the administrative stuff I was not superior in it.  And so she decided to make me deputy director over all the programs and services in the department and she brought in an administrator to handle personnel, finance, and all of that stuff.  And so all the programs within the department pretty much reported to me.  And that was good because my first job there as administrator was to reorganize the department.  When I went there they didn't, they were reorganizing but they didn't know what they wanted to reorganize to and so she gave me that assignment and I went around and I interviewed everybody and, of course, I had learned stuff from Adolfo in Maricopa County and after talking to everybody I came up with a reorganization proposal and everybody accepted it.  And she wondered why it went so smooth, it's because I talked to people, got their feedback and, you know, made it work.
Speaker 1: And so by making these changes what were you able to accomplish after that point?
Speaker 2: Well, it--it's interesting because after I was on, in the, in that job for a while, one of the things that we did, I, I started doing some things that weren't necessarily traditionally in public health.  For instance, I did work in, with, they were gonna build a new city hall downtown and that was the site of a, the, the day labor site downtown and the homeless resource center.  And so I had the responsibility with the assistant city manager and the department director of relocating the day labor site. So I had to find a, a site to, to move it to and we were able to do that successfully.  And we were able through facilitation of a lot of meetings with a lot of stakeholders, develop a homeless resource center downtown in the City of Austin.
Story_ID: 667043
Speaker 1: All right so nontraditional ideas were working for you.  So what happ- what happens next?  And, and how long were you in this position?
Speaker 2: Technically, I stayed in that position until 1999 when I moved over to the county [Travis County, Texas].  But what I'm gonna say now is gonna seem a little bit different to you because while I was under the deputy director position for Austin/Travis County Health and Human Services [Austin/Travis County Department of Health and Human Services], and it was both a county and a city agency but it's through an interlocal agreement that we did the county services, the county judge had seen me work, do some work in facilitating meetings and stuff and they had just created these positions within the county called executive managers.  I--he asked me would I be interested in applying for the executive manager position and remember I was still a little young then, I was kind of flippant and said, "No, I'm not really that interested in it."  And he said, "Well, why don't you come and talk to me?"  And I went to talk to him and I, I told him that I could do the position that I was in and the position that they were advertising 'cause there wasn't that much difference between 'em.  And he said, "Well, you know, why don't you interview for the position and see where this goes?"  So I interviewed for the position, they offered me the position.  When they offered me the position I repeated, I can do that position and the position that I'm in now.  And so he asked me to come up with a plan of how that would happen.  And so I went and I talked to my boss, who was also a mentor, Sue Milor [ph.], and I told her that they had offered me a position and she said, "Well, take it if you really want it but it won't--," she made sure that money wasn't an issue.  And so I told her I wanted both of the positions.  And the interesting thing about that would mean that I would be working for her and I would be working for Commissioners Court [Travis County Commissioners Court] but when I worked for Commissioners Court she would be working for me.  She agreed to do it.  We went to the city manager and said, "Okay, Stephen [HistoryMaker Stephen L. Williams] wants to do this, I want him to stay where he is but he wants to do this crazy thing."  And the city manager shook his head and said, "That is crazy, why do you wanna do that?  But okay.  I'll let you do it."  And he convinced me to stay on the city's payroll, so I had to go back to Commissioners Court and say, "I will take your position as long as you let me stay in the position that we're in now."  And so I had two positions, the executive manager of Health, Human Services and Veteran Services [Travis County Veterans Services] for the county, and deputy director of program services for Austin/Travis County Health and Human Services.  And I did 'em both at the same time for about three or four years.  Everybody thought I was nuts but I enjoyed it and we started to merge and integrate the programs.  When that, we did that until my boss, who understood the relationship and, of course, she was supportive of it 'cause she was also my mentor, she decided that she had had enough and she quit.  Wow.  Can you imagine someone coming in to a position where one of their subordinates is also their boss?  And so we had to go through a deal.  First we integrated the positions, the county decided that they wanted to leave me in the position, the city decided that they wanted someone else because I wouldn't commit to spending most of my time on the city side so they picked someone else.  And after a short time there arose a personnel conflict and my staff were unionizing so they went and talked to the county judge and he told me to split out the department back to where I would come and work solely for the county.  And so then after that, after four years I became just the executive manager of Health, Human Services and Veteran Services and I managed a contract with the city.
Speaker 1: And right, during though that--in that position what were some of the things that you accomplished?
Speaker 2: Well, we worked to develop a comprehensive juvenile crime prevention strategy.  We also started to work to foster our collaborations between the mental health folks, the people that were in juvenile justice, and child welfare because partly the county operation was child welfare and that reported to me and it was also a relationship with the, with the state.  And also I worked with both the police and the mental health center to look at possibilities around lessening interactions with, between people who are mentally ill and, and the police.  We also started what is going on today but it's changed its name, that name that was called the Community Action Network that really did community health assessments and community health planning and it brought education, the justice people, elected people, sitting all around the table to really assess issues in Austin [Texas] and move folks towards some level of action.
Story_ID: 667044
Speaker 1: And so four years you were in that position and how do you move to your next position?
Speaker 2: Same deal.  I was happy there but I think that I probably was a little bored too, and the former city manager who is now the director of the Seton system [Seton Healthcare Family] in that region, Seton health system which runs the hospitals, it recommended, they were looking for a director of this department, the Houston Health Department, the, it, at the time it was Houston Health and Human Services Department, and he suggested that they talk to me.  And I decided that I would come over, I wasn't really that interested in moving from Austin [Texas].  I had a daughter here that was in med school and I decided, a grand--excuse me, a goddaughter that was in med school, and I was gonna make the trip over here because there were some things that Houston [Texas] was doing that we did not do as a smaller health department in Austin and I wanted to go through the interview process to figure out what those things were so that I could take 'em back to Austin, and take Erica [ph.], who is my goddaughter, out to dinner.  And so it was what, twelve and a half years ago, right before, the Saturday before Super Bowl [Super Bowl XXXVIII, Houston, Texas] with, that was here, that I came here and had a conversation with Mayor White's [Bill White] health policy person.  And she encouraged me to participate in the formal interview process and I told her I would because as before I hadn't interviewed a whole lot, excuse me, and I thought it would be an opportunity to, you know, hone up on my interview skills.  Of course, my wife [Carolyn Williams] wasn't that interested in (laughter) moving to Houston either but so I went through the process and got offered the job.
Speaker 1: So eventually you did move so and what year are we in now when you move to Houston?
Speaker 2: We're in 1991.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: No, excuse me, I'm sorry, that was the year I moved to Texas.  I moved to Houston in 2004.  I started this job in 2004.  My daughter [Jennifer Williams (ph.)] and wife stayed in Austin because my wife, excuse me, my daughter was in her last year of high school and so I commuted for one year.
Story_ID: 667045
Speaker 1: And so 2004, you have this, you change to Houston [Texas]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And so what were your, your plans, because actually you, you can't, you wanted to come to Houston to take some of the ideas in Houston back to Austin [Texas] but when you got here what did you see that needed to either be changed or new programs that needed to be implemented?
Speaker 2: Well, I saw a lot of programs that would, were traditional public health programs.  I mean, they were pretty solid in, in, in that area.  But I, I guess when you look at things with a fresh set of eyes ideas start to pop up.  I mean, I remember sitting in the room that we're sitting in now and I was surrounded by five people and my question was, how am I gonna manage an organization through five people?  And so one of my first strategies was to flatten the organization [Houston Health and Human Services Department; Houston Health Department]. I restructured.  And, and, of course, as I said before this is like, you know, the, the, fourth organization that I've actually gone in and restructured to flatten the organization.  The assistant directors didn't have the authority that I thought that they should have and so I gave that authority to them to manage their own budget, I wasn't going to, you know, watch over their shoulders as long as they were fulfilling their mission.  One of the first exercises that we had, we had to cut the budget and they asked me what I wanted to cut, I looked at 'em and say are you crazy, you think I'm gonna cut the budget?  You have to do this.  And so I sent them in this room, we had a number that we had to reach and I told 'em don't come out of the room until they gave me some suggestions of what those cuts would be.  I would pick and choose so they probably needed to give me suggestions that exceeded the amount because there are some things that I just, you know, wouldn't cut so they needed to do that.  And that was an empowering experience for those who understood what I was doing.  And so that was one of the first administrative moves that I made.
Story_ID: 667046
Speaker 1: And so once you got the structure together and started looking at the programs, new programs, you're thinking out the box, what were some of the programs that were implemented?
Speaker 2: Well, one of the first programs that we looked at was called our Assessment, Intervention, and Mobilization, our AIM initiative.  We, remember around 2004, 2005, you know, we were still at, on high alert around bioterrorism and I thought that we needed to have a closer relationship with our communities. And so sitting in this very room a, one of the cup, neighborhood folks came to me and said they wanted a health clinic in their room and--excuse me, in their neighborhood.  They didn't have about twelve hundred folks in the whole deal, six hundred houses.  And that's not enough to maintain a practice and we don't do primary healthcare.  And so I asked that they, I--I told 'em that they didn't know and, of course, you know, everybody swears they know everybody in their neighborhood and what their issues are and whatever.  I told them that we were gonna test their hypothesis, and they asked me how?  I said, "Well, we're gonna knock on doors and ask people."  And so I worked with my folks, with an intern, and we developed a model for AIM where we would go out and knock on doors and we would ask a series of questions.  Now my more scientifically oriented people said, "Well, that's not gonna be valid, you know, for research."  And I'm not doing research and if I ask half of the people in the neighborhood what's going on, I'm pretty sure that they are gonna tell me most of the things that are going on in the neighborhood.  And since I'm not interested in publishing we can act on that information.  And so the compromise was that we'd do it my way and we would also do it their way so if they wanted to publish or do whatever.  And so we knocked on doors with community, community based organizations and some of my staff.  And this was another thing that I introduced to the department.  We were quite comfortable taking staff, the way I sold it to the staff was, your people are off on vacation time, they're off on sick leave, or sometimes they're just off 'cause they wanna be off, and so when we have special projects there's no reason we can't take people from other areas and assign 'em to do special projects.  And AIM was our first experience in doing that.  And so we learned and the, we knocked on six hundred doors in like three days the first time.  And we found out as a result of that that the people then, the people then, their insured rate was much higher, was not much, it was higher than the average insured rate within this area, the area in general.  And one of the reasons was because a lot of the folks were widows or retired people that worked in the shipping industry, in the ship channel.  So but we did find out that there were seniors that issues around safety and, and isolation and so we were able to bring in community based organizations to respond to that.  And so we really perfected the model to where, you know, we knocked on six hundred doors but then we have knocked on as many as eight thousand doors.  And what we do, we give information related to health and other stuff but we also interview people to see what needs they have and we have a response team that will go out say and give food to people, do a more thorough interview, and really case manage those families until we can get some resolution to the issues that we confront.  And we've done probably around fourteen different interviews over the last, not interviews, AIMs, over the last few years and they've become more specialized now.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so the community really that, that was getting closer to working with, within the communities, you know, of the Houston [Texas] communities which was--
Speaker 2: Yes, and one of the, one, a secondary thing was that it made our folks more familiar with the communities.  And when I tell people, okay, if you're gonna tell, if we're in a situation where you want someone to take a red pill to, as a result of some bioterrorism attack, if they don't know you they're not gonna take that pill.  And so they need to see you before an incident like that happens.  And we need to become more familiar with the community and we need to learn how to work in a more organized way, well, you know, to coordinate delivering services.
Story_ID: 667047
Speaker 1: And what other projects or programs were instituted?
Speaker 2: Well, there were a couple of home visitation programs that I initially introduced to the organization [Houston Health and Human Services Department; Houston Health Department].  One was Healthy Families [Healthy Families Houston], and that is a program that is centered on home visitation with first time moms.  A nurse family partnership also that's a nationally recognized program that utilizes nurses, is similar to healthy families but it utilizes nurses to really work with, with, with first time moms to ensure that the, the first few years of a, of a, of a child's life is actually positive and it, and both of the programs actually help to coach moms on--and families--on how to be good parents.
Story_ID: 667048
Speaker 1: Let's talk about some of your other programs that you have initiated since being in this position.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well, one of the things that we have tried to is to really recognize the fact that social determinants have an impact on one's health or health outcomes.  And so in addition to our traditional public health programs, if I say immunizations, you'll smile because you know that's pure public health.  If I say, you know, STIs [sexually transmitted infections] or communicable diseases, infectious diseases that, that is pure public health too.  But one of the things that we realize is that we're not a primary care provider because we couldn't ensure continuity of care and so we looked at those things from a clinical standpoint that we should stay involved in.  And so we're still involved with TB [tuberculosis], communicable diseases, infectious disease, family planning, and, and immunizations.  And we have both population aspects of that as well as our clinical aspects of that.  But there are some things that we've recognized that need to happen in, in order for people to--we--for us to, we, we decided that we would be a safety net and kind of fill in the gaps.  Shortly after Hurricane Katrina we were introduced to an initiative regarding vision.  The OneSight foundation out of Chicago [Illinois] came here to do these vision missions where they brought mobile clinics down, set up in, in our buildings, and we helped to coordinate with the schools to get kids in.  They were pleased enough with us so that when they started to come here two weeks out of the year and they would see in, at least twelve hundred kids a, a week.  And through that effort we found out that at the time there were more than seventeen thousand kids in school that had had vision screenings in school and more than likely needed glasses but didn't get 'em by the end of the school year.
Story_ID: 667049
Speaker 1: And then the next thing that happened was that OneSight, during the economic downturn, said they could no longer afford to come here two weeks out of the year and they would only do a week.  And so here we have at least seventeen thousand kids probably needing glasses and only one week, which means that we would see, what, maybe twelve hundred kids.  And so we created a, we had, in, in the meantime we had created a Houston Health Foundation [Houston, Texas] which is a nonprofit with a separate board that's appointed by the mayor that raises money for certain initiatives within the health department [Houston Health Department], vision happens to be one of those.  And we recruited a couple of retired colleagues to come and help us look at how we can respond to that gap in services.  And so we formed a public-private partnership with Walmart [Wal-Mart Stores, Inc.], with the Essilor Foundation [Essilor Vision Foundation] which is an international foundation, with Berkeley Eye Center [Houston, Texas], University of Houston school of optometry [University of Houston College of Optometry, Houston, Texas], San Jacinto school [San Jacinto College, Pasadena, Texas], to create, to recreate the OneSight model that the folks from Chicago [Illinois] were doing.  And we started out the first week doing a trial run and we initially kept the numbers down low and where we could see four hundred kids, we saw four hundred kids that first week.  Our, our volunteers and staff were so excited with this that they decided to expand and do another project.  And so I challenged my folks, we visited with Chicago, they were seeing like ten thousand kids a year.  And so I challenged our folks to figure out how we could build a capacity to see ten thousand kids a year.  Not only did we develop the capacity over the years to see ten thousand kids a year, we were able to see over four hundred kids a day.  And we do this six times a year, one week at a time.  And we have formed a vision collaborative in this community bringing in every, the other partners that are interested in, in vision.  90 percent of the children that we see need glasses.  There--the first really touching story that I had heard was of a seventh grader that didn't realize that he had lines in his hands.  And we're continuing to do that and we wanna expand that capacity because that number in spite of what we've done has really gotten to twenty thousand kids a year and so we're trying to match that twenty thousand with the kids that we actually see.  And we have had interventions where, that were lifesaving in some instances.  Our folks saw a, a, a child with a detached retina.  Another woman, a teenager, who was pregnant who had vision issues but that was only a symptom of another illness that she had.  And so that's something that we want to continue to do as a safety net provider.  It would be good if we were able to do this in the regular system but these are kids that may have Medicaid, that for whatever reason their parents don't get them in to be seen.  And then another interesting thing is that a lot of the school nurses know the kids that need glasses and have actually been trying to encourage the parents over a couple of years to get these kids in to see them.  We like--we work very closely with the school districts to arrange for transportation for these kids to come in to our site but we also have been mobile, we go out to places like Pasadena [Texas] to see these kids because it's funded both by, by our foundation and monies that we raised through foundations.
Story_ID: 667050
Speaker 1: Because this worked so well we had another program that we call Project Saving Smiles.  We were going from school to school with portable dental chairs, chairs, putting in dental sealants in second graders mouths.  And we were seeing a couple of thousand kids a year using that model but we decided to use the OneSight model to where we'd bus kids into a single site.  And we then, this past year we were able to see over nine thousand children.  And so, you know, Houston [Texas] is large.  And one of the things that we recognize is that if our numbers are not at a certain level we're not gonna be able move the needle.  And so those are examples of two programs that we are involved in and that has a particular focus on children, and children's health.
Speaker 2: That, that, that absolutely is, is phenomenal the numbers that you were able to, to see and this, the kid because he needed glasses he didn't even realize he had lines on his--
Speaker 1: He didn't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) on his hands.
Speaker 1: --he didn't, he didn't see that.  And, you know, this is a problem that I think is overlooked.  I was presenting at George Washington University [Washington, D.C.] last week and actually it was the week before last, but and we were--no, excuse me, I was presenting in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] last week (laughter) at a conference and I was talking about some of the initiatives that we had started related to prevention and health.  And I had a guy that was sitting in the front row and this is at the National League of Cities conference.  And after the conference he beckoned me to come over and he was wearing glasses and he was telling me that if it were not for his fourth grade teacher he probably wouldn't be sitting there because he had vision issues, she recognized it and, and told his mom and his mom took him for an eye exam and he's been wearing glasses ever since.
Story_ID: 667051
Speaker 1: So is there any other initiatives that stick out in your mind that--
Speaker 2: There, there are a lot of things that we have done and that we're continuing to do.  One of the things that this department [Houston Health Department] organized and led was around ACA enrollment, the Affordable Care Act [Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010] enrollment.  We were able to bring together not only recipients of the grants but people that were involved in reducing the number of uninsured people within their community and to develop what we call Enroll Gulf Coast.  And we, we served as the backbone organization for Enroll Gulf Coast.  And we coordinated enrollment events, we helped to support from a logistical standpoint events that were really led by other organizations.  That was the first year of the grant.  We didn't get the grant the second and third year but we still maintained that role.  We are, we see ourselves as the coordinating and the backbone organization to make sure that everybody that is interested in decreasing the number of people that are uninsured have an opportunity to participate in this Enroll Gulf Coast.  And we've brought together hospitals, nonprofit organizations, and advocacy organizations to help with that effort.  And at the time that we started the uninsured rate in this community was around 30 percent or more which is really huge when you compare us to some of the other major cities.
Story_ID: 667052
Speaker 1: Are there any mental health initiatives? You talked earlier about a program that help to train the police on the mental health issues and, you know, given what's going on today with the police and mental health--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: What do you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) actually, you're, you're actually teasing my memory because I had forgotten about this.  Several years ago there were I think an escalation of situations where our police had to shoot people who were mentally ill.  And at the time Mayor White [Bill White] had given us a budget to do what we wanted to with.  And, and in this very room we brought together the police department and people from mental health centers and the goal was to lessen the number of inappropriate incidences.  And it was really interesting because we spent the first few weeks with people just venting because no one wanted that situation to happen, we had the therapists and the police.  But one interesting thing that I found out is that the police department actually knew the people who were more likely than not to end up in that situation.  And so what we did was, they wanted to like take the money, and we didn't have that much, and invest it in their usual programs, and we said no, you're not gonna do that.  We only want to focus on that particular objective.  And so they came up with a deal to where we would look at the number of folks that were, that had these high, high numbers of police interactions and so we got the mental health folks to agree to hire a couple of social workers, psychiatric social workers, and take that list of people and just start making cold calls.  And by doing that, it was called CCSI [Chronic Consumer Stabilization Initiative], and by doing that they were able to bring the people into treatment before an incident actually occurred.  And we played a facilitator role in that.  And the, those incidences actually decreased by about 30 percent.  But the, I have to give the credit to the social workers because they would sometimes, they reported that they would have to visit people four and five times before their patients would even acknowledge their existence.
Story_ID: 667053
Speaker 1: Another related program, now that you brought that up, before we did that--and this was also after Katrina [Hurricane Katrina]--we were down at the convention center [George R. Brown Convention Center, Houston, Texas] and our EMS [emergency medical service] folks were complaining about all the inappropriate calls that they were getting.  And so we, you know, we're kind of flippant and say, "Oh, we, we can fix that for you if you want us to."  They said, "Well, how are you gonna do that?"  And so we said, "Well, why don't we go and ask the people why they're calling?"  They said, "Really?"  "Yeah, why don't you ask them why they're calling?"  I said, "If you find out why they're calling I think it will tell you what we need to do."  And so we reallocated some money and we created what we call Care Houston.  The fire department created an algorithm of their high utilizers, I think, I forget it was like, if you call X number of times in X number of time frame, you would go on the list and we would send social workers out to visit with you.  And we started in the Sunnyside [Houston, Texas] area and we were able to decrease those inappropriate calls by about 60 percent and the fire department said that that also resulted in several million dollars of cost avoidance.  And, and what that, how that materializes is that they didn't need to buy as many EMS units as they were projected to buy because of, of the volume of, of calls that were low.  We've since developed through our 1115 waiver project, a project called ETHAN [Emergency Telehealth and Navigation] that actually is run out of the fire department.  And we have a base station of--and I'm saying we, it's actually run out of the fire department, we fund it through our 1115 Waiver project of emergency room docs who are communicating with the patient and the EMTs [emergency medical technician] in the field to determine whether or not that person needs to be transported to the ER [emergency room].  80 percent of the people who experience ETHAN do not need to be transported.
Story_ID: 667054
Speaker 1: Right before we started, I went back to talk about mental health to add about that, you were talking about the Affordable Care Act [Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010].  What are your thoughts about ObamaCare?
Speaker 2: I think it's a good thing, it's not perfect.  I think anything that results in people having insurance and accessing healthcare is a good thing.  And I don't know any public health director that would say otherwise it's okay to just kind of hang out there and not have a primary care home.  I, I think there are also some tenets in the ACA that it's really accountability, that increases accountability, meaning that you're not gonna get paid just for seeing people, you're gonna, you're looking at, you know, what do you do with folks?  Are they getting re-hospitalized?  And I--I think that's the good part that most people don't really, really talk about.  And, and certainly the clause about preexisting conditions is a good thing.  Being able to keep your children on your insurance until they're twenty-six is also something that's very positive that impacts people across socioeconomic lines.  So yes, it needs tweaking, it's not perfect, but so was social security and Medicaid and Medicare when they were first invented and developed.  And the bottom line is that that usually happens over years.
Story_ID: 667055
Speaker 1: Tell me about the, the demographics of the Houston [Texas] area.
Speaker 2: Well, well, Houston itself is like 2.1 million people.  Houston is the most diverse city in the country.  Certainly large Latino population, African American, Vietnamese.  And so certainly as a health department [Houston Health Department] we have to be diverse in our approach, we have to be flexible in our approach and culturally competent.  And I won't sit here and tell you that we, we're perfect at that, we're still working at it, and it's actually receiving an increased emphasis with, within our organization because of the people that we serve.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, and with that type of demographic there are certain diseases that go along with being a, a person of color and are there initiatives that are, I guess, in the forefront like diabetes or what type of programs are available for knowledge on HIV [human immunodeficiency virus] and AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome]?
Speaker 2: Okay.  There are a couple of things.  Let's do with the HIV and AIDS issue.  We had a program that actually, an initiative, and it's changed names over the years, first it was called Hip Hop for HIV [Hip Hop for HIV Awareness Intervention].  We basically encouraged folks to get tested and receive tickets to a hip hop concert, and true, I di- they were hip hop concerts 'cause I went to a number of 'em (laughter).  And I, I think the response there was great.  We got national and international recognition for that.  We've transitioned that to other, other strategies.  I mean, the concert part is there but we've partnered with other folks like our local baseball team and participated in an after the game concert there.  We--one of the things that we're recognizing is that in order to get access to certain communities we have to work very closely with folks from those communities and various groups and so some of our work is subcontracted out so that we can get access to those communities but certainly HIV is one of the things that is top priorities.  I am very proud of our, our staff in, in, in that area because they're extremely creative and I think they are willing to go anywhere, almost any, any time to access patients.  Most people in this community, as almost anywhere, actually die of, some, some issue related to chronic disease.  And so we were fortunate to have one of my colleagues and later I found out that she was my neighbor (laughter) introduce us to a program in Dallas [Texas], that was located at the Juanita Craft recreational center [Juanita J. Craft Recreation Center, Dallas Parks, Texas] but it was a program that ran by Baylor [Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas] that was focusing on diabetes, and sent a team of folks from our department up, after I looked at it to look at that program and determine what parts of that program we should replicate.  And so now we have a program that we call DAWN, the Diabetes Awareness and Wellness Network, where we certainly want to connect people with their primary care physician but we serve as an ancillary or an adjunct service to the primary care physician giving, you know, nutrition counseling, cooking classes, access to farmers markets, exercise coach, life coach, to really help people access the supportive services that they would need in order to prevent diabetes or to manage their diabetes.  A couple of weeks ago I participated in a men's forum around diabetes and it was really rewarding from where I sit to see what the staff is doing with, you know, regular folks that are both members of our DAWN program but also from the community to where there's a men conversation around diabetes and complications and issues that they are dealing with from a, a, a men's perspective.  Told our staff that I wanted to go back because I thought it was really something that was useful and I saw how the guys were able to get in it and to really open up in conversation about that which doesn't happen probably as much as, as it needs to happen.
Story_ID: 667056
Speaker 1: So you see that, you see these programs actually, I don't know, but do you have numbers to determine whether the programs are--are you seeing a decrease in--you, you do testing for HIV [human immunodeficiency virus] and you have the different clinics to do diabetes?
Speaker 2: Well, we only have one DAWN center [Diabetes Awareness and Wellness Network] but we're planning on expanding that offering throughout the city.  You know, the--and I said this earlier about Houston [Texas], it, it, it's all about the numbers.  If the, the, probably the major challenge that we have with a number of our initiatives is scaling.  I talked about the division program and that twenty thousand number.  We're able to see, you know, over ten thousand but if we're seeing twenty, we would wanna make sure it's the right twenty thousand kids that we're seeing so that the next year it won't be, you know, another fifteen, twenty thousand kids that have gone unserved as it relates to vision.  And so with all of those other initiatives, we, we get a lot of money from the feds for our traditional programs like HIV, STD [sexually transmitted diseases], well, but there is a need for a greater investment in like chronic disease and issues around youth violence.
Story_ID: 667057
Speaker 1: Now, Houston [Texas] was a, a saving grace for people that were, were in Louisiana and where Katrina [Hurricane Katrina] actually was--hit and they came to Houston so is there a new or an improved disaster readiness program available?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, it, it is about readiness and, and people preparing not only from a system standpoint but also from an individual standpoint.  And we certainly are putting those messages out there.  I do think that there has to be a higher level of touch involved in order for people to get the message.  And that was one of the reasons why we continue to do AIM [Assessment, Intervention and Mobilization].  That is one of the things that we care for when we're knocking on doors and that is be prepared.  But it's not only because of, you know, health related, well, yeah, it is, it--it's health related issues but it's also manmade or natural disasters too.  We live in a tropical community, the motion of an, of the possibility of infectious disease is very high.  Last year it was Ebola, this year Zika, right before we came in to talk we just heard that there was a local transmission down in South Texas which is only a couple of hours away from here and so as a metropolitan area our people certainly are looking at what we can do in--in response to a potential local transmission here.
Story_ID: 667058
Speaker 1: Is there anything that we have not talked about that you would like to talk about?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, certainly I, I can go on and on about the, the, the programs.  We have about fifteen 1115 waiver projects that are enhancing our home visitation programs.  We have projects that I haven't mentioned that are around seniors where we are helping to decrease the re-hospitalization of people with congestive heart failure that's run in our Area Agency on Aging [Harris County Area Agency on Aging].  One of the things that we are also involved in that is not necessarily under the traditional public health is the Area Agency on Aging.  We've done an aging agenda, we did that about five years ago, we've just updated it to see what kind of progress that we've made in the area of aging and, and what we need to do.
Story_ID: 667059
Speaker 1: All right.  So tell me about My Brother's Keepers [sic. My Brother's Keeper], that's one of your programs that we didn't talk about.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, that's an initiative that we, that was originated out of the White House and it was quite timely, I think.  A lot of police shootings, a lot of issues around youth violence and, and, and crime.  And so the president, Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], challenged cities and leaders of cities to create more opportunities for boys and young men of color.  And our mayor [Annise Parker] because of our work around ACA [Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010] and in discussions with the White House, decided that we were probably the more, more appropriate agency [Houston Health Department] to lead that effort.  And so what we've done is to assemble folks from various sectors to work on six different milestone areas.  This community decided that it would not just be satisfied with one milestone area but it would work on all six and they ranged from entering school ready to learn, reading at grade level by third grade, finishing high school, being prepared for college and career, reducing violence, and giving folks a second chance.  And so since we, one of the programs we have is reentry, we work with folks who have been incarcerated and help them to transition back into community.  We have brought in the public safety folks, we have brought in folks that represent academia, education, work force development people, our library folks, our park people, nonprofit organizations, and we have connected with community based organizations that were natural leads of each one of these areas, and we just had a meeting this morning and they were reporting out on some of the plans that they have.  For example, for the first milestone area, we, one of our strategies is to adopt Boston Basics where Dr. Ferguson [Ronald Ferguson] had five things that he wanted, that we, that Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] was encouraging parents to concentrate on in raising their children, you know, using everyday opportunities to count, to identify colors, and so we're gonna be one of the cities that replicate that and, of course, call it Houston Basics.  We're working with the school system to put in wrap around services in certain schools.  We chose three school feeder patterns because we can't do all of Houston [Texas] at one time just because of limited resources to--so we're focusing on three school feeder patterns which has twenty-nine, thirty schools in the feeder pattern.  And we're patterning some of these at individual schools.  We have our work force development people that are working and on, you know, training opportunities for individuals from seventeen to twenty-five.  And so really it's a, a collection of interventions that are geared to certain outcomes that are related to the milestones and we see ourselves as the backbone organization in coordinating all of that.  And quite frankly it was a matter of just reaching out to these different institutions whether they be government institutions or, or nonprofits or academic institutions and asking them to come and sit around the table with us and to share their gifts with us but in a more focused manner to deal with this issue.  This is probably one of the most strategic things I think that this community and other communities can do.  We always talk about, you know, the number of boys and young men of color that are incarcerated or don't finish school or various other things, so just imagine if we were able to really invest in creating opportunities for these folks and what that would do for our communities, because there is a lot of brain power and energy that's wasted because we haven't done that.  And so I would say this is the most complicated but probably the most, it could be the, the most instrumental thing that we can do as a health department in, in carrying out this even if we're able to reach just a fraction of the folks and then I think you'll see a significant change within the community.  What I found is that most folks wanna be productive, they wanna work, but because of, of various barriers and challenges that they've had, they're not there yet and so when we're able to, I think, intervene and offer people, you know, a bridge to some of those opportunities I think that we could make a significant difference.
Story_ID: 667060
Speaker 1: Is there anything else that you would like to talk about that we haven't spoken about?
Speaker 2: No, we, we have a host of other things that we're doing but--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --its (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, let's talk about, quickly about things that, other things that you are involved in.  Are you involved in any other organizations?  Are you sitting on any boards?
Speaker 2: God.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) And tell me about some awards that you have been, that have been bestowed upon you.
Speaker 2: Well, one thing that I didn't mention about this health department [Houston Health Department] is that we are an accredited health department, Chicago [Illinois] was the first big city health department to become accredited before we were, but we are an accredited health department.  I do sit on the national accreditation committee for health departments [Public Health Accreditation Board].  And I had nothing to do with my evaluation (laughter) by the way or no evaluation of any health department in Texas and so that's one of the things that has taken up some of my time.  I also personally chair what's called, we call it 969 [S.B. 969] committee, it's the Public Health Funding and Policy Committee where we are, give advice to the state health commissioner on funding and policy issues around public health.  We also have to produce reports for the legislature and, and the lieutenant governor's office too, on the progress that we've made with that.  And one of the charges of that committee is to really define what public health should look like in Texas and what are some of the core services that we should be involved in as, as public health departments.  In terms of awards I was awarded the Marks of Excellence Award that is sponsored by the National Forum for Black Public Administrators.  That was particularly touching for me because one of my mentors, a couple of my mentors is- have actually achieved that, received that award and, of course, I never thought that I'd ever be considered for something like that.  And, you know, oftentimes your peers can be your harshest critics so.
Speaker 1: Which mentors and what does the award signify (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, well, actually the National Forum for Black Public Administrators is, goal is to really promote the advancement of African Americans and other people of colors actually in public administration positions.  My mentor, I, I didn't mention Byron Marshall [Byron C. Marshall] who was the city administrator actually for Atlanta [Georgia] but he was also deputy city, a, a city manager in Austin [Texas] when I was there, got that award.  Anthony Hall [HistoryMaker Anthony W. Hall, Jr.] who's here in Houston [Texas] got that award.  He was city attorney, he was on city council and he was the city administrator here.  So when I think of myself I don't think of myself in, in the ranks of people like, like that.
Story_ID: 667061
Speaker 1: I've also, you know, gotten awards from folks like the Black Expo, Texas Black Expo folks Building Better Lives Award [ph.].  I've gotten a Trailblazer award from D-mars [d-mars.com] which is a, a local publication that, that's here.  I think earlier I mentioned that I was selected as to participate in the Executive Leadership Institute.  I mentioned that I was a National Urban Fellow.  And as a matter of fact now I am a mentor for National Urban Fellows.  A couple of years we've had even two, and I think we've hired about five so far here in the department [Houston Health Department] so that helps us to diversify.  I'm a member of the Texas Public Health Association, I sit on the board for that.  I'm, I'm a member of the Texas Association of City and County Health Officials.  Past president of that organization.  I was president of an, an organization that was the healthcare, Harris County Healthcare Alliance but we've since discontinued as an organization.  I was a board member of the homeless coalition [Houston Coalition for the Homeless] here and I served two and a half years as president of the, of the homeless coalition here.  I'm on the national commission of prevention [National Commission on Prevention Priorities].  I am on the, a member of the urban advisory board for Tege- Texas Agrilife Extension [Texas A and M Agrilife Extension Service, College Station, Texas].  I'm a member on the National Association of City and County Health Officials, and, you know, that's enough (laughter).  It--it's things that are involved in either public health or, or public administration.  I mean, one of the things that I'm, I'm probably most proud of I just got a champion's award from a Bridges Conference [ph.] which is focusing on senior services.  And the reason that that kind of touches me is because when we first started, I mentioned we did their aging agenda, I really had a fight with the aging people, aging folks about whether or not we should do it, how it should be done and whatever, and then have the person that presented the award to be, be one of the top people I was fighting with, it was like hey, that, that's pretty good.  And she even said that, she told people the story about how we were calling each other at eight o'clock at night because we were trying to convince each other that our way was the right way to do that.  Another award that I've gotten that is really touching for me has to do with labor relations.  I was inducted to the Hall of Fame for the Texas Labor Management coalition [Texas Labor Management Conference, San Antonio, Texas].  And the reason that that was touching was because my staff from this department and my staff from Travis County [Austin/Travis County Department of Health and Human Services] got together and nominated me for that award.  And that made me feel really good, you know, the fact that, you know, that a former group of staff members thought enough of me to do that but really working with my current staff folks because we have done some training around labor management and we created a, really something that the city later adopted which is a, a, really an advisory group of rank and file employees to the director so that we can kind of hear what's going on from a non-management perspective.
Story_ID: 667062
Speaker 1: Is there something that you have not done that you still want to do?
Speaker 2: Retire (laughter).  No, not really.  I, you know, I, I'm thinking about what's next.  I, I think in my official role I, I feel okay with that.  I don't know that you are ever finished when you're in this business.  As you could probably sense I'm really passionate about the work that we do and about really being successful in some of the initiatives.  But I often ask myself, you know, what's next?  Certainly I wanna retire but I would still want to work and I'm sure it, it'll probably be related to servicing.  Things that I've talked about are not things that I haven't done, its things that I've done that I might wanna do again, like I, I talk to my colleague over at the mental health center and told him since he's a psychologist that he should actually supervise me so that I can get certified to be a therapist again (laughter).  And I've thought about, you know, maybe working with a non, a grassroots nonprofit organization and doing some community development to help institutions that are closer to the community, being more responsive and develop the capacity to receive grant monies and other money from other funding sources in order to be responsive to issues that they see in, in the communities.  And so these are just things that I've kicked around in my head but I don't really know.
Story_ID: 667063
Speaker 1: But on the personal side, not work 'cause, you know, we've talked a lot about work, but what do you like to do for fun?
Speaker 2: I bike.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I participate in, in MS 150 [Bike MS: MS 150 Ride] from Houston [Texas] to Austin [Texas].  Usually on a good weekend I'll ride anywhere between forty and sixty miles on my bike.  I jog.  I, I like doing that.  Of course, I'm a lot slower than I, I, I used to be but I still move around the neighborhood.  I like working in my yard.  I like planting stuff.  And there's always something to do there.  But in the last three almost four years, one of the things that has really influenced my life is my almost four year old grandson.  I try to make sure that there's time on the weekends so that I can spend with him and help to mold him and give him the experiences.  My only child, Jennifer [Jennifer Williams (ph.)], says that that's the son that I always wished that I had.  She's not right because I only wanted her (laughter) and totally enjoyed her when she was growing up.  But--
Speaker 1: What does Jennifer do?
Speaker 2: Jennifer works at the library here for the City of Houston.  She's working on a master's [degree] now and trying to figure out what else she wants to do so and I'm really proud of that.
Speaker 1: Did you ever tell us what your wife did?
Speaker 2: My, my wife is actually retired now but she was a social worker, Carolyn [Carolyn Williams].  She, in Phoenix [Arizona] where I met--once she finished her master's in social work she worked for protective services and in a series of nonprofits, like Big Brothers Big Sisters in Austin [Big Brothers Big Sisters of Central Texas, Austin, Texas], communities and school in, in Austin.  She's worked with the AIDS, AIDS Foundation [AIDS Foundation Houston] here in Houston.  And she was working in protective services here in Houston [Harris County Protective Services].  So she's, you know, she's a social worker and she's been doing that except that now she's not working anymore, which is fun.
Speaker 1: And, and what is your grandson's name?
Speaker 2: Caleb [ph.]. Caleb.
Story_ID: 667064
Speaker 1: When you look back over your life, and you've still got a long life to live, but up to this point, is there anything that you would change?
Speaker 2: Sometimes I wish that I had been more thoughtful about my education and more deliberate about it.  But, you know, I don't know the, that would have worked out or resulted in something that I was really passionate about.  I kind of followed the paths as they presented themselves and it just seemed like the right thing to do.  It wasn't exactly planned but it seemed to present, the opportunities presented themselves at the right time and there were people that were there that were encouraging or kind of pointed me in, in the right direction to accept those challenges.
Story_ID: 667065
Speaker 1: So what would you say to the future generations, 'cause, you know, this tape is gonna be from now on (laughter) so that, when we're long gone they'll be able to pull up this interview to hear you talk about your life, so what would be advice you'd give to a future generation?
Speaker 2: I would say the first thing that you should realize is that you can be anything that you wanna be.  You heard my history, a poor boy from Waycross, Georgia.  Not really, didn't make up my mind about what I wanted to be but, you know, took advantage of opportunities.  And realized that, for example, I'm the first non-M.D. to run this department [Houston Health Department].  And that what you see as a potential prototype may not necessarily be the prototype.  That you should still strive to be what you want but make sure that you're passionate about what you do, not because you just think you're gonna make a lot of money at it.  I, I think you really need to have your heart and soul in, in to what you do so that you can enjoy it so it doesn't feel like work.  I can't tell you that I don't get stressed out sometimes but I do but I can't think of me not wanting to do this because of the impact that it could have on the lives of people.  And really just stay the course.  Persistence is really the key.  You don't have to be the brightest bulb in the room in order to be successful.  I, I think I'm living proof to that.  I wasn't a straight A student.  Actually I have people that work for me they are really bright and they were like straight A students and we talk about that 'cause I tell 'em they're much smarter than I am and in some ways they are but and in a lot of ways, maybe not necessarily.  And that leadership, you know, requires a host of characteristics beyond academics, the ability to really work with people.  And, and learn to work with different kinds of people, not just people that come that have similar backgrounds that look like you, people from multi-generations, all races, because I think that's really what it's gonna take in order to move our society forward.
Story_ID: 667066
Speaker 1: What do you want people to say about you, when it's all said and done at this point in your mind what do you want people to say about you?
Speaker 2: That I really cared about people.  And that I really strived to improve the lives of folks, both people that worked with me and people that we were serving.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, I wanna thank you for taking the time out of your busy schedule to do this interview because like I said before generations from now will be watching this and getting inspiration from the work that you have accomplished here and that you will continue until you decide that you're gonna retire (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: So thank you so much.
Speaker 2: Thank you, I appreciate it.
