Story_ID: 621597
Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines, the interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Matthew Hickey is the videographer.  Would you please say your name and spell it for me?
Speaker 2: My name is Michael Gerard White: M-I-C-H-A-E-L, G-E-R-A-R-D, W-H-I-T-E [HistoryMaker Michael White].
Speaker 1: And tell me your date of birth and where you were born.
Speaker 2: I was born on November 29th, 1954 in New Orleans, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is June 7th, 2010.
Speaker 1: And what is the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: This interview is being conducted at Xavier University of Louisiana in New Orleans, in the administration annex third floor, English department.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your occupation or profession?
Speaker 2: Well, I am a jazz musician and historian and professor at Xavier University, Keller Endowed Chair in the Humanities.
Story_ID: 621598
Speaker 1: Let me ask you some fun or what I call People magazine-ish type questions.  What's your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Ah, wow, my favorite color these days is blue actually.  It, it's somewhere between blue and green, so.  It used to be, always be blue coming up, and then it changed to green for a while, and now I think it's blue again.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I came up in New Orleans [Louisiana].  And I like New Orleans food quite a lot, but I really used to like hamburgers more than anything else, which I'm trying to get off of right now.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: My favorite time of the year is, well, now, the beginning of summer when school is out and we have a long break.  That's usually the time of the year when I get to rest a little bit and also to travel and have exciting adventures in, in different parts of the world, performing on tour.
Speaker 1: Well, what is your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: My favorite vacation destination?  Well, I don't really do vacations too much.  Let's see--these are edited?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: No, okay.  Well, let's see, I don't do vacations too much, but some of the places where I've been I've really enjoyed quite a lot, the South of France.  I enjoyed very much coastal areas of Japan.  I enjoyed Norway in particular, some of the fjords, countryside.  I like places where there are, there's a lot of nature.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you have a favorite saying or phrase?
Speaker 2: Gee, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 621599
Speaker 1: Let's begin by talking about your family, and I want to start on your mother's side.  Tell me your mother's name and where and when she was born, if you know.
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Helen Forcia White.  Forcia is spelled F-O-R-C-I-A.  She was born here in New Orleans, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Do you know what year?
Speaker 2: She was born on October 29, 1922.
Speaker 1: Did your mother share any stories about her growing up in New Orleans?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  She talked about school all the time.  She talked about what it was like in her neighborhood.  She talked about the foods that she liked.
Speaker 1: What did she tell you?
Speaker 2: Oh, she told me that--she would describe what it was like as a kid going to school, the different schools she went to.  They went to Catholic schools.  She went to schools like Holy Ghost elementary school [Holy Ghost School, New Orleans, Louisiana] and Xavier Prep, Xavier prepar- preparatory high school [Xavier University Preparatory School, New Orleans, Louisiana].  And she would talk about how far they had to walk, seventeen blocks to get to school every day.  Some of the friends they had in the neighborhoods; some of her favorite foods, she used to like ice cream; she used to like tomatoes, just to eat tomatoes.  She, she was very proud of the fact that in those days, when black people did not generally own their homes, they owned their own home in their neighborhood, one of the very few families in their Uptown, New Orleans neighborhood to own a home at that time.  And they talked about--she talked about things that her mother [Natalie Gauff Forcia] did sometimes, her mother's work.  She talked about her brother [Clarence Forcia, Jr.], who she was very proud of because he was the oldest of the family, but he became a medical doctor, and they were very proud of him.  She talked about different parts of the neighborhood, how it was common to have lottery shops, you know, in houses.  And there was one in the back alley on the side of their house.
Speaker 1: What type--I'm sorry, what?
Speaker 2: Lottery shops.
Speaker 1: Tell me what that is.
Speaker 2: Well, like, you have the lottery.  They used to have lottery way back.  I think they were citywide lotteries, where people would buy tickets and play numbers and try to win money.
Speaker 1: Was this legal?
Speaker 2: I never found that out (laughter).  I never found that out.
Story_ID: 621600
Speaker 1: Now, tell me about her bro- what, what was her brother's name?
Speaker 2: Her brother's name was Clarence Forcia.  And he, like my mother [Helen Forcia White] and my aunt--there were, there were three of them altogether--they all went to Catholic elementary schools, finished from Xavier Prep [Xavier University Preparatory School, New Orleans, Louisiana], and all went to and graduated from Xavier University [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana].  And my uncle, whose name was Clarence Forcia, Jr., he became a medical doctor.  He got his medical degree at Howard [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.].  And he came back to Louisiana and became a main black doctor in Alexandria, Louisiana.  However, in 1960, at the age of thirty-nine, he had a fatal heart attack.  And I remember him because I guess I was about five or six years old when he, when he passed.  And I remember when he used to come down.  And they tell me I have a lot of his characteristics, both in appearance and personality.
Speaker 1: And your mother, did she go on to college?
Speaker 2: Yes, my mother finished from Xavier University.
Speaker 1: And what was her studies?
Speaker 2: She studied home economics.  And she was a teacher in the New Orleans Public School System for a number of years, and also she taught at the veterans cooking and baking school for several years.
Speaker 1: And it was just the two of them?
Speaker 2: No.  There were three.  My, my mother has a sister, Natalie Forcia, who started out in music but graduated from Xavier in elementary education, and she was an elementary school teacher here in New Orleans [Louisiana] for most of her life.
Speaker 1: Do you have any more information about the veterans baking and cooking school?
Speaker 2: No, other than the fact that my mother taught there for several years.  She taught African American ex-soldiers I think through the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944], they could learn and study various subjects.  Some of the guys I talked to had studied music, for example.  And I believe they were--some studied cooking and baking probably with some kind of culinary career in mind, chef or cook.  And she taught that for a number of years.  So, I knew, I know that the guys were older, I think in their twenties and thirties when, when she taught them.
Story_ID: 621601
Speaker 1: What was your relationship like with your mother [Helen Forcia White]?
Speaker 2: My mother and I had a very, very close relationship.  When I was a kid she was always very concerned about, you know, trying to teach us the proper things, the im- important values about cleaning your shoes, and having clean, pressed clothes, and you know, being neat, cleaning your fingernails, washing your hands, taking a bath, cleaning your teeth.  She was, was very strict on that.  She was, she believed in normal, middle class values.  She was very religious, Catholic, and she made sure we went to church and you know, were baptized, received communion and things like that.  In later years, we became even closer; we became more like brother and sister.  And I guess the glue for everything was, was my career in music.  She became my best friend, my biggest supporter.  She was a voice box (laughter).  She would come to some of my concerts.  She knew all of the musicians.  She would give reviews of what everybody looked like, what they sounded like, and, and how they presented themselves and things like that.  She kept up with most of my jobs, concerts.  She would want to know what, what happened on the job, how the music was.  When I had records, she would play records all day long.  And when I would go to visit her in her house I would say, "If you don't turn that off I'm leaving," (laughter).  But, so she was a, a, a big supporter, and she was very proud.  It was on her side of the family that the musical ancestry is, and she was very proud of that.  She used to tell me stories about when she came up.  She had a connection to traditional New Orleans jazz in that in her house in Uptown, New Orleans [Louisiana] on Liberty Street there was a park, and during the 1930s, the WPA program [Works Progress Administration; Work Projects Administration] existed, and the, part of it was there was a band that would come and play in this public park.  And they would go and see these musicians, and they happened to be the Humphrey brothers who lived in the neighborhood, Percy [Percy Humphrey] and Willie Humphrey.  And Percy Humphrey was born in 1905.  Willie was born in 1900.  They came from a musical family, and they lived in the neighborhood.  Their father [Willie Eli Humphrey] and grandfather [James Humphrey] were well known music teachers, the Humphreys.  And so, my par- my mother knew them from the neighborhood, but she would see them performing in this park.  So she would tell me about them.  And when I got into music many years later, the Humphrey brothers were still living and performing, and I got to play with them for several years.  So, we had a, a strong connection to the music through, though that.
Story_ID: 621602
Speaker 1: And then she would also tell me about some of my musical ancestors and--
Speaker 2: Okay.  You can tell me about your musical ancestors.
Speaker 1: Well, I come from a New Orleans musical family.  If you're from New Orleans [Louisiana] and you look at different sides of your family, chances are you're related to musicians.  Music is a way of life in New Orleans, and has been for several generations.  And one of the things that brought not only families together but neighborhoods and, and communities, bonding and having, well, extended families, was, was music, so you had musical families.  Sometimes those families would gather in the evenings or afternoons and play.  Different members of the family would play different instruments.  And that created a lot of professional musicians before and during the earliest days of jazz.  So I found out on my mother's [Helen Forcia White] side of the family there were several musicians from at least the first generation of jazz musicians.  And I did a little research and found three of them that were significant during that first generation of jazz, active in the early 1900s.  Papa John Joseph was a barber and a bass player.  He played bass, mandolin, clarinet, guitar, but bass was his main instrument.  He and his brother, Nelson Joseph, ran a barbershop on First and South Liberty streets, which was less than a half of block from the home of Buddy Bolden.  Buddy Bolden is known as the first, or the earliest jazz musician.  And so, Buddy Bolden would hang out in their barbershop.  Someone else owned it before, but then they got it I guess around the last two years that Bolden was active.  And--
Speaker 2: What year is this?
Speaker 1: Oh, we're talking about 1903, '4 [1904], 1903, '4 [1904], '5 [1905], in that, in that period.  And that barbershop became very important because it served as a, as a gathering place for musicians.  Musicians would hang out there.  When business was slow they would practice there, sometimes give lessons there, and more importantly, book jobs there.  There was a sign outside that said, "Musicians' Headquarters."  And when they got a telephone, most people didn't have phones, but you could call or look up musicians at the barbershop for jobs, to play for dances or parties or, or other events.  Papa John was a very interesting figure.  He kind of represented some of the most important values of the early New Orleans jazz tradition.  He was--he always presented himself in a, in a gentlemanly way.  He was very neat and professional.  He was known for being punctual, playing good music, having high musical values, but also having a good time.  And he had a little mystery, you know, about him.  He would sell, in the barbershop he would sell, you know, things that were like potions to cure a variety of different things, you know.  So he was a very colorful kind of character.  But Papa John was also important for two other reasons, one is that he is reportedly the earliest jazz saxophonist.  He bought a saxophone in the early 1900s when it was not fashionable in jazz playing brass bands.  And he was reportedly the first one to do that.  And also, in later years, he recorded with some of the legendary musicians of New Orleans like George Lewis and Kid Thomas Valentine, and he made several recordings in the 1950s and '60s [1960s].  And Papa John Joseph lived until 1965, when he was the oldest living active jazz musician in New Orleans, but probably also in America.  He was, at that point, ninety--he was supposed to be ninety years old, and he died while performing at Preservation Hall [New Orleans, Louisiana].  So that was Papa John Joseph.
Story_ID: 621603
Speaker 1: He [Papa John Joseph] had a brother named Willie "Kaiser" Joseph.  Willie Joseph was a clarinetist and very popular in New Orleans [Louisiana] in the '20s [1920s].  He played with dance bands, and he recorded in 1927 with Louis Dumaine's ja- jazz orchestra [Louis Dumaine's Jazzola Eight].  They recorded eight songs.  And there was another cousin in the family in the first generation of jazz musicians, Earl Fouche, but spelled F-O-U-C-H-E.  Earl Fouche was also a reed player.  He played clarinet and saxophone, and he played with one of the most popular dance bands in New Orleans, Sam Morgan's Jazz Band.  And they also recorded in 1927.  They recorded, again, about eight songs, and those songs remain classics.
Speaker 2: What are some of the songs?
Speaker 1: Some of the songs include the first recorded hymns.  You know, one thing that distinguishes traditional New Orleans jazz from other jazz styles is a large part of the repertoire consists of, of music of the church, hymns and spirituals.  And the first time they were recorded was not by King Oliver, Louis Armstrong, Jelly Roll Morton in the early '20s [1920s], when the musicians migrated out of New Orleans and recorded, but those that stayed here.  There were a, there were a small number of recordings of New Orleans musicians in the late 1920s by musicians that actually stayed and lived here, and Sam Morgan's band was one of those.  So they recorded eight sides, and that included the first recorded hymns in jazz style: 'Sing On,' 'Down by the Riverside,' and--there's another one, I can't think of what it is--'Over in the Gloryland,' of course 'Over in the Gloryland.'  So those are the first recorded hymns done in an up tempo, swinging jazz style.  And so that was Earl Fouche, and he played mainly saxophone on those recordings, and he's the main featured soloist throughout those recordings.
Story_ID: 621604
Speaker 1: But then I found out that I have musicians in the family in later generations that came from the country.  My mother's [Helen Forcia White] people came to New Orleans [Louisiana] from St. John [St. John the Baptist Parish, Louisiana] and St. James Parish [Louisiana], and there are a number of musicians in the family that come from there.  And I found out later two of them made some headway in other areas.  One of them is Renald Richard or (pronunciation) Renald Richard.  Renald Richard graduated from Xavier University [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana], went to school, in fact, with my aunt [Natalie Forcia].  He played trumpet, and he became a musician playing a variety of different styles.  And when early rhythm and blues became big in New Orleans, he was an associate of a lot of early rhythm and blues musicians.  He played and toured, in fact, with Ray Charles in some of his earliest bands.  And Renald Richard wrote the first big hit that Ray Charles had, 'I Got a Woman,' for which he still gets a lot of royalties.  I understand the rapper Kanye West used one line of, of that song, 'I Got a Woman,' and so Renald Richard--Richard gets composer credits for that.  So that's a great thing for him.  He lives in Florida.  He comes to New Orleans once a year around Jazz Fest time [New Orleans Jazz and Heritage Festival].  We always get together and have lunch, like we did a few weeks ago.  He wrote some other songs for Ray Charles.  I don't know what, what some of those are, but he's interviewed a lot about Ray Charles.  He's in a lot of the books about him as well.  Another cousin in the family is someone who everyone has heard his music if, even if they don't know his name.  His name is Plas Johnson.  He's a tenor saxophone player, and he also played rhythm and blues and modern jazz, and he became very proficient.  And he moved out to the West Coast, where his career did very well.  He played for a long time with Henry Mancini.  And he was the feature soloist on a lot of his recordings, including television and movie themes, in particular, 'Peter Gunn.'  And more notably, he's the guy that's playing the melody and the solos in the music of 'The Pink Panther.'  And that's Plas Johnson.  So Plas Johnson is in his late seventies, early eighties, and he's still performing and doing a little touring these days.  And then today in New Orleans there are several other musical relatives that I have, cousins that are around playing on that, from that side of the family.  So, it's a musical family, which I didn't know a lot about until I got into the, into the music.  I heard about it, but I didn't really know who was playing or what they played until, you know, until after I got involved in the music business.
Story_ID: 621605
Speaker 1: You talked about your mother's [Helen Forcia White] family being middle class.  Tell me about her parents.
Speaker 2: Well, let's see, my mother's mother--
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: --was named Natalie Forcia, Natalie Gauff, G-A-U-F-F [Natalie Gauff Forcia].  And she was from, they always say the country; they never say exactly where.  But most of them were from, like I said, St. James Parish, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Where is that in relations to New Orleans [Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: Oh, it's north--a little northwest of New Orleans, upriver.  Some of my people were from Reserve, Louisiana, a little north of, of New Orleans, northwest.  And she would have been described as a Creole.  She spoke, she came up speaking Creole French, which is broken French.  But she also learned standard French in school.  But my mother's mother did not have beyond the basic elementary education.  In fact, I don't believe she finished elementary school.  But she believed in education, and she sort of educated herself most of her life.  She--you would never think that she didn't finish college because she was well spoken.  And I used to find dictionaries with words underlined or words she would write in the, on the blank pages of words she was learning.  She used to collect and read a lot of books and play recordings of every kind of music you could imagine.  My grandmother used to like to dance.  But, you know, my grandmother has a very interesting story associated with her life, which is that she married my grandfather [Clarence Forcia, Sr.].  His people were from St. James Parish, Louisiana.  That's the actual musical side, the Fouches, or Forcias.  He's, he worked for a coffee company here.  And I think in those days, in the nineteen teens [1910s] and early '20s [1920s], I think he was making something like, I think they told me seventeen dollars a week, which was a good salary and enough for him to buy this house up on Liberty Street in Uptown, New Orleans, a double house.  My grandfather believed in hard work, but he didn't believe in a lot of education, but my grandmother did.  They had the three kids, my mother, her brother [Clarence Forcia, Jr.], and her sister [Natalie Forcia].  And they sent them--they worked hard to send them through elementary school, Catholic elementary school, Catholic high school, Xavier Prep [Xavier University Preparatory School, New Orleans, Louisiana], because there were a lot of black Catholics in New Orleans, and there still are.  But there were a lot of black Catholic parishes that had elementary schools.  So my mother and her siblings went to Holy Ghost [Holy Ghost School, New Orleans, Louisiana] and I believe also Blessed Sacrament [Blessed Sacrament School, New Orleans, Louisiana] for a while.  And then they went to Xavier Prep, which was a coed Catholic high school at that time, and then they all went to Xavier University [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana].  My grandfather didn't really believe in education beyond high school because he thought that there was not a lot of jobs for black college graduates as such.  And he thought after high school you should just work.  And I'm pretty sure paying for school for all the kids for those years put a financial strain on the family, so he wasn't too keen on the idea of sending his kids to college.  My grandmother, on the other hand, thought that college was necessary.  And she was very religious.  She prayed very hard to find a way to send her kids to college.  Now, my grandmother had been working for a number of years as a domestic.  She was a personal maid to one of the most prominent families in New Orleans, the Sterns, the Stern family, the family of Edgar B. Stern [Edgar B. Stern, Sr.], who at one time were the principal stockholders in Sears and Roebuck [Sears, Roebuck and Co.], Allstate insurance [Allstate Corporation], several other companies.  They owned at one point the major newspapers in New Orleans, and they also owned one of the major television and radio stations, WDSU [WDSU Radio, New Orleans, Louisiana].  So my grandmother was a personal maid for Mrs. Stern [Edith Rosenwald Stern].  Mrs. Stern was a, a very liberal philanthropist.  And I remember as a kid they would have parties at their house in this very exclusive area of New Orleans.  And they would have all of the workers' kids with their kids there and the largest Christmas tree I ever saw, and we all got presents.  And I remember that; I remember that very well.  So, my grandmother was working hard to try to find a way to send her kids to college, and she prayed, and eventually she got a way to do that.
Story_ID: 621606
Speaker 1: You were gonna tell me a story about your [maternal] grandmother [Natalie Gauff Forcia] and the people that she worked for at Christmastime, I think?  Yeah.
Speaker 2: So my, well, my grandmother wanted her three children [Helen Forcia White, Clarence Forcia, Jr. and Natalie Forcia] to go to college, and she prayed very hard for a way for that to happen.  And miraculously, a way came, which was she was also an expert at cooking and sewing, and she used to do that on her job: sometimes she would cook, sometimes she would sew.  She could make clothes; I mean, she did a variety of things.  And one day at home she was cooking some candy, and she left it on the stove too long and ruined it, ruined the pot of candy.  And it ended up being a large hard clump of just like sugar stuck in the pot.  And she tried to figure out what she could do with that.  She was gonna throw it away.  And then she looked at it for a while, and something told her maybe you can reshape it.  And so she heated it up a little bit and was able to soften it up enough to pull it out and stretch it into larger pieces.  And then she would reheat those pieces, and she discovered a way of making candy flowers, rose petals, roses, and just about any kind of flower you could imagine out of peppermint candy.  And it was completely edible.  At one point, she really became creative and was able to make a variety of things.  She claimed that she could make--anything she saw she could duplicate in candy.  So at one point, she would make doll dresses out of candy.  She made I remember one time a guy standing up playing guitar.  She would make other figures.  And eventually, she started selling these candies as her business.  The Sterns [Edith Rosenwald Stern and Edgar B. Stern, Sr.] at her work promoted what she was doing.  They hired her for several functions they had.  And with time, she started making these candies for weddings.  And this became a special New Orleans kind of wedding; something unique to, to New Orleans [Louisiana].  They would serve, among hors d'oeuvres, rose petals, and they were peppermint candy rose petals.  They looked just like roses because she would use artificial coloring to make them any color you could imagine.  They were very, very beautiful creations, but they were completely handmade--made, and completely all candy and edible.  So the roses could be eaten also, but people would, they didn't like to eat the roses 'cause they were so pretty.  And they would--you know, they had green leaves, and the roses would be pink or white or red or yellow, I remember.
Story_ID: 621607
Speaker 1: I just remember coming up as a kid, because around the age of--well, let's see, after my [maternal] uncle [Clarence Forcia, Jr.] died around the age of s- eight, we moved into the house with my grandmother [Natalie Gauff Forcia] because she had become very depressed over the loss of her son.  And they thought having her grandkids would, would cheer her up.  And so we moved in the house with her, and I remember many years the smell of that peppermint, which was very strong.  She used essence of peppermint.  And I remember that smell in my nose and burning my eyes a little bit.  I remember the taste of it.  She would always have extra pieces of the candy, and we would come up eating it.  I watched her for many years making that process, but I didn't know what kind of success she had with it.  At one point, she was hired by and worked for every major caterer in New Orleans [Louisiana].  There were several private caterers in New Orleans and Metairie [Louisiana], and she worked for them all: Beulah Ledner [Beulah Levy Ledner]; Mr. Wedding Cake, Lawrence Aiavolasiti, Lawrence's Bakery [New Orleans, Louisiana], several others.  And I remember making many trips to these bakeries and delivering boxes of these rose petals and, and roses.  But it became such a big business for her that she also sent outside of New Orleans.  She sent--I remember there was a letter where she had sent candies to a party that was hosted by Liberace.  I remember she was featured in 1950 in The New Yorker magazine, there was an article about her work.  She had in the early '50s [1950s]--I believe it was '52 [1952]--a full feature in Ebony magazine, with pictures and pictures of the candies, pictures of her, but a feature article about her candy making process.  With that, she made enough money to send all three of her kids through college and to help her son to get through medical school.  So, my mother [Helen Forcia White] eventually took up the art of candy making.  And she continued that until she retired and gave it up.  And unfortunately, no one in the family continues it today.  But that reflects really on, from my grandmother's side, a certain kind of creativity and, and artistic ability, which had been passed on to my aunt [Natalie Forcia], who played clarinet in, in school, and my mother who made the candies.
Story_ID: 621608
Speaker 1: Was your aunt--and tell me your aunt's name.
Speaker 2: My [maternal] aunt is also like my grandmother: Natalie Forcia.
Speaker 1: And was she an influence in your life as far as music?  And you said she played the clarinet as well.
Speaker 2: Yes, well, my aunt lived in the house with us, with my grandmother [Natalie Gauff Forcia], in the early '60s [1960s].  And she had played in college, in high school [Xavier University Preparatory School, New Orleans, Louisiana] and college.  And I just found out recently, like yesterday, the reason she started playing clarinet was 'cause her brother [Clarence Forcia, Jr.], who was the oldest of the siblings, he was playing in high school.  And she liked the sound of his playing, so she wanted to play.  And she started playing, and she went actually a lot farther than he did, far enough where she got a music scholarship to come to Xavier University [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana].  She took music as a major for one year, and then she realized that she probably wouldn't get a job as a musician back in those days.  So, she gave up the music scholarship and studied elementary education, and she became an elementary school teacher.  But she would play around the house every now and then.  On holidays she would pull out the old music books.  Everything she did she had to read, of course, 'cause she studied and played only basically class- classical music.  And so she would pull, pull out the old books and read.  And as a kid, I used to hear that sound, and I liked it, and I was intrigued by it, and I wanted to play clarinet as well.
Story_ID: 621609
Speaker 1: When you come up in New Orleans [Louisiana], music is always all around you.  And the big influence on me was going to Mardi Gras parades.  My mother [Helen Forcia White] used to take us to--she really liked Mardi Gras parades.  I think we were excuses for her to go to, to the parades.  But she would bring us to the parades, and we would see all kinds of bands, brass bands.  But what I remember the most were high school marching bands.  I remember going to the see the, the Zulu club [Zulu Social Aid and Pleasure Club] parade on Jackson Avenue in the early '60s [1960s].  And I remember hearing this thunderous sound coming up the street that really scared me because it was these drums.  And when the band got closer, they seemed to be so loud.  But I could see these, these guys.  It looked like a legion, or an army of people.  They looked like a thousand people on the street in perfect marching order, making high steps with these purple uniforms and gold trimming and gold helmets.  And they looked so tall and proud and strong and powerful, and that sound was so powerful.  And that was the St. Augustine High School Marching 100.  So, when I saw that, I wanted to become a part of that from the time I was a kid.  So, you know, there were musical influences all around.  Before we moved Uptown [New Orleans, Louisiana] with my [maternal] grandmother [Natalie Gauff Forcia] and my aunt [Natalie Forcia], my first few years I spent in the 9th Ward, in the Lower 9th Ward [New Orleans, Louisiana], below the Industrial Canal on Lizardi Street, 1329 Lizardi Street.  And even then, from my earliest recollections, music was a big part of the existence of everyone in New Orleans.  I lived around the corner from a guy who was a well known musician, and I went to school with his kids.  And his kids, you know, I remember in class they would tell the stories: "My daddy has so much money he's got to get a safe to keep it in."  And all the kids would be like, "Wow."  And I remember this guy's music was on the radio, and my mother had a lot of his records on the Imperial label [Imperial Records].
Speaker 2: What was his name?
Speaker 1: I used to see him, and you know, I remember passing by his pink house, which was, like I say, right around the corner.  And we'd see him on television sometimes.  And you know, he was a neighborhood guy to us, and we knew he was famous, but we didn't know that he was that famous.  He just happened to be Antoine "Fats" Domino [Fats Domino].  And so all of--when a lot of his early hit records came out, you know, 'Hello Josephine' and 'Walking to New Orleans' and I mean, that's all we would hear in the neighborhood, you know.  If it wasn't in your own house or on the radio, you would hear it coming out of someone else's house, so you'd see people walking down the street singing those songs, you know.  So there was always a consciousness of music of some type or another coming up in New Orleans.
Story_ID: 621610
Speaker 1: Before we go on to talk more about your coming up, let's go back and talk about your father and his side of the family.  So tell me your father's name and where and when he was born, if you know.
Speaker 2: (Pause) I feel very fortunate, in a sense, to be from New Orleans [Louisiana] because of sort of like jazz itself, I came from two dominant aspects of black culture that were very different in many ways.  My mother's [Helen Forcia White] side would have been traditional Creole people.  My father's side was very different.  My father came from Uptown, New Orleans, Protestant people, generally poor, limited in education, which would have been non-Creole type people, darker skinned, more African characteristics.  And his side of the family, my--was--well, let's see, he had three sisters [Mary White Williams, Vida White Rush and Mildred White Bell] and a brother [Oliver White].  My father's name was Oscar White [Oscar White, Jr.].  His father's name was Oscar White as well [Oscar White, Sr.].  My father was, for most of his life, a letter carrier [for the U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service].  He had served in the [U.S.] military, in the [U.S.] Air Force, honorably discharged.  As a kid, I used to go in his drawer and play with a lot of his medals that I saw, maybe three or four medals.  During--he was born in January of 1917.  So, during World War II [WWII], he was sent to France.  But like a lot of black soldiers, he was subjected to a lot of menial tasks, peeling potatoes, digging trenches, digging latrines, but somehow he seemed to have enj- he seems to have enjoyed his time in France quite a lot.  I think it was an exotic place and something very different for him.  And I think the French people treated black soldiers different than, than a lot of white Americans, so I think he had a good time there.  He talked a quite a lot about being in Biarritz, Biarritz he used to call it, France, which is really strange because as a musician I've been able to go there several times, and I could almost feel his presence there.  But he grew up with a lot of discipline, a lot of hard work, a lot of--he retained a lot of his military discipline and values, and he was tough.  But like a lot of black men of the period, for survival purposes he learned how to become a jack of all trades: he could do carpentry, electricity, plumbing.  He could build a house; he was an expert at painting; he knew how to fix cars.  I mean he could do a lot of different things.  But he was a letter carrier most of his life.
Story_ID: 621611
Speaker 1: But he [White's father, Oscar White, Jr.] was also a member of several organizations.  He was a member of the Catholic group known as the, the Knights of Peter Claver, and he was a fourth degree knight for a number of years.  He held several offices there.  I remember one time--for a long time he was treasurer.  I used to help him count money.  I remember many occasions where he would have what, what seemed like extremely large amounts of money, a few hundred dollars, and we would count this money.  And it would come up short, and then we would have to count it again.  He'd said a few cuss words, and then we'd start counting again, and we'd count it 'til we, until we found it to come out right.  But for also--for a number of years, he was a Boy Scout [Boy Scouts of America] leader.  And you know, it's only in later years that I realize how important that was to spend more than twenty-five years serving as a mentor and a father figure to a lot of, to really hundreds of boys who in many cases didn't have that kind of male--positive male role model around their own homes.  He was one of three or four longtime African American Boy Scout leaders.  He operated out of the Epiphany Catholic Church [Corpus Christi - Epiphany Catholic Church], which was in downtown New Orleans [Louisiana], the Creole section.  And he was the head scoutmaster, Troop 137, for a number of years.  Over those years, hundreds of boys went through his troop.  Many of them became prominent citizens.  I run into some of them today.  They have different positions.  One of them is a high ranking police, police officer; another became a chef; several others went on to, to have prominent roles in government and politics and what have you.  My father taught with a military type discipline.  He was very strict, but he also believed in having a good time.  For a lot of the scouts, he taught them basic values about survival.  I remember many camping trips.  He taught people how to survive: how to dig latrines, how to cook, how to hunt, how to shoot.  And I remember going on many camping trips where we would go boating, canoeing, fishing.  It wasn't like just fun; it was really, you know, survival.  And it was, it was almost like being in the military.  So, that was, that was very important for a lot of kids to learn, you know, the things that he taught them.  I was a Boy Scout in my father's troop for a number of years, until my later high schools years, when I got into music and I was in the band [St. Augustine High School Marching 100] and doing a lot more things then.
Story_ID: 621612
Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you a little more about the Knights of--
Speaker 2: Peter Claver.
Speaker 1: What type of organization?  Was that something like the Masons or the Shriners [Shriners International]?
Speaker 2: The Knights of Peter Claver was a--basic- basically a social service organization.  And they aided the community, but they also sort of practiced Catholic values, but they also, they had regular meetings, they had rank, they did social service activities.  I remember it was a proud organization.  They had, in fact, at one time they owned a building, and then at one point they built a new, a completely new building on Orleans Avenue near Claiborne [Avenue].  It was like the black parallel to a white organization, the Knights of Columbus.  So the Knights of Peter Claver, they had different rankings.  My father [Oscar White, Jr.] was a fourth degree knight, which is a high ranking.  I remember they had many services at churches, many different types of events that they participated in.  They used to wear uniforms, admirals hats, with large plumed feathers, large plumes.  The plumes would be white or yellow or light blue.  They had swords, long swords, real swords (laughter).  They had capes, black capes with yellow lining.  And they were very, very serious.  They were a proud organization.  They would dress a certain kind of way.  There was a ladies version of the Knights of Peter Claver.  And at one point, my [maternal] grandmother [Natalie Gauff Forcia] and my mother [Helen Forcia White] belonged to that.  Sometimes the La- Ladies of Peter Claver and the Knights were associated with individual churches as well.  So, I remember my grandmother and mother belonged to the Holy Ghost Church parish version of the Ladies of Peter Claver [at Holy Ghost Church, New Orleans, Louisiana].
Story_ID: 621613
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your mother [Helen Forcia White] and father [Oscar White, Jr.] met?
Speaker 2: I think my mother and father were introduced by friends.  They were both single and getting older I think.  I think my mother was getting into her late twenties and still unmarried, and I think my father was unmarried, and he had finished [U.S. military] service, got, he had gotten this job as a, as a letter carrier [for the U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service].  And through the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944] he was able to purchase this house, which was sort of like his version of the American dream, a small house on Lizardi Street in the 9th Ward [New Orleans, Louisiana].  And they were similar families at the, at that time who were kind of, you know, moving toward black middle class.
Story_ID: 621614
Speaker 1: What is your earliest childhood memory?  We talked about a lot of memories that you have, but do you have a, remember what is your earliest, earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory is of kindergarten.  I remember going to, to St. David kindergarten [St. David School, New Orleans, Louisiana].  I remember walking to the, the school.  It was about three or four blocks from, from home.  I remember my teachers, and I remember some of the things that happened in school.  At one time in the schoolyard I fell and scraped, had a bad brush burn on my hand, and I remember that (gesture).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: We were talking about your earliest childhood memory.  So tell me, what was your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Well, the earliest thing I remember was being in the house in the 9th Ward in New Orleans [Louisiana].  I remember my mother [Helen Forcia White] and father [Oscar White, Jr.].  I remember going to school, to kindergarten at St. David.  I remember some of the events they used to have.  My mother and father were very social people.  They were in a social club.  And as far back as I could remember they used to have neighbors coming in the house.  They used to have card parties.  They'd, they'd play cards on Friday nights.  And I remember my mother would cook.  She used to like to cook seafood, fish and shrimp, make potato salad and those kinds of things, which is typical in New Orleans.  You know, people are very social, like to eat, and get together and have a good time.  But they were in social clubs as well that would sponsor dances and different events.  In my school, St. David, they used to have events too.  I remember, early on I was in the, in a play in first grade.  I was the star of the play, 'Pinocchio.'  And I remember my mother and I going all over downtown New Orleans, all over Canal Street trying to find a long nose, a plastic long nose.  We eventually found one.  I remember people in the neighborhood selling hucklebucks, selling frozen cups that would, would be like frozen Kool-Aid or something like that, for nickel, things like that.  So I remember a lot of things that happened in my, my early neighborhood.  Inside of the house, I remember my mother used to do all kinds of things to us as kids.  She used to love Mardi Gras and take us to Mardi Gras parades, and when we couldn't go to a parade, we'd have to watch it on television.  So, during Mardi Gras they'd throw things to the spectators: beads, little coins they called doubloons, toys, combs, and any variety of other things, and you'd try to catch these things.  And that was a big thing for everybody that goes to parades, see how many beads you can catch, how many doubloons you'd get.  So, as kids, if we were at home watching the parade, we couldn't catch anything, but we actually did.  My mother would sit behind us, and as the floats would pass we'd see things being thrown toward the TV cameras.  And they magically came out of the television, and we would catch things, and it was her throwing stuff.  So I remember those kinds of things.  The spirit of celebration and, and atmosphere of just music and people that enjoyed life, I remember that quite a lot.
Story_ID: 621615
Speaker 1: You talked about the fact that you grew up in the 9th Ward [New Orleans, Louisiana].  Tell me where the 9th Ward is, or was, and take me on a tour of a square block of where you lived, who lived in the neighborhood.  Were there single families or head of households, or were all of your, did all of your friends have two parent households?
Speaker 2: I lived from 1954 until 1962 at 1329 Lizardi Street in the Lower 9th Ward, that's below the Industrial Canal.  And that's a section of New Orleans [Louisiana] that was, for all intent and purposes, nearly destroyed twice, first in 1965 by Hurricane Betsy and in 2005 by Hurricane Katrina.  The 9th Ward is varied.  Many people think of it as primarily an African American neighborhood, but actually it was mixed.  And there were some white sections, but also some of the neighborhoods had both black and whites in them.  In my neighborhood, in fact, there was one white family that lived next door to us for a number of years.  In those days, in the late '50s [1950s], early '60s [1960s], that part of the 9th Ward was almost rural.  Across from our house, there was a large empty lot that would have incorporated four city blocks.  And at that time, people would play in the park, in the--well, we called it a park, but it was a lot.  They would play in the lot.  Sometimes Boy Scout troops [Boy Scouts of America] would come and camp in the lot or have activities.  People would fly kites in the lot.
Story_ID: 621616
Speaker 1: So in those days parts of the 9th Ward [New Orleans, Louisiana] were pretty rural, and it seemed very different from other parts of New Orleans [Louisiana].  It was basically pretty quiet, country like.  I remember people having animals that you didn't (laughter) really have in other parts of the city, I don't imagine.  I remember people having chickens and turkeys and ducks in their yards and things like that.  And in fact, at one point, a lady gave, gave my sister [Janice White Brady] and I some ducks, and so for a while we had ducks.  I remember hearing roosters crow, so it was, it was kind of rural in a sense.  I remember people growing vegetables in their yards.  The neighborhood was predominantly black in my part of it, part of the 9th Ward.  And I remember there were a lot of well known families, established families, large families, families like the Jupiters [ph.].  We had a number of kids; they lived in the next, in the next block.  And they would have family gatherings and picnics in their large yard.  I remember they would make, it's this homemade ice cream that was the best I ever--remembered ever having had.  They would barbecue and just have a good time right in their yard.  They would invite family, friends, the whole neighborhood.  They were good friends of my family.  Some of the Jupiter kids were almost like my big sisters, you know.  They would come by and stay and kind of hang out, 'cause they got more attention from my mother [Helen Forcia White] 'cause they didn't have so many kids in my house.  They had people I went to school with in the neighborhood.  Like I said earlier, a little bit away around the corner was Fats Domino's house.  There was, I remember hairdressers and barber, a barbershop within a couple of blocks.   There was a what-- a grocery store, they used to call them sweet shops back then.  It was a sweet shop across the, the open lot.  There was a hardware store.  Around the corner there was a grocery store.  So you had a lot of little businesses.  For the most part, they were owned, I think at that time, by Italians, except for the barbershop and the, the hairdresser.  And life seemed to be good for people; both adults and children seemed to enjoy life.  A lot of the adults, as I said, were involved in social activities.  They played cards.  They had family gatherings.  They, they did a lot of things with, with neighbors and friends.  I remember the kids, early on we used to watch television, and imitate what we saw on television.  I remember when they had elections, we would take the, the sticks out of the ground from the voting advertisements and make--pretend that they were swords, 'cause they would be pointed on the end.  And we'd take the tops of garbage cans, and we would make those like shields, so we would imitate knights or Jason and the Argonauts or something (laughter); things that we saw on television and in the movies.  And I remember groups of us going out and having little battles with those things.  But not to do anybody harm; it was just, you know, fun.  And in those days there was not a lot of crime in that neighborhood.  It was pretty, pretty quiet, other than, you know, kids playing, you know, and families, people moving in and out of their homes.  But it was basically a, a peaceful, quiet community.
Story_ID: 621617
Speaker 1: Let's talk about, about school.  And how long did you go to St. David's [St. David School, New Orleans, Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: I went to St. David's from kindergarten through second grade.  And kindergarten was a separate building.  The church [St. David Catholic Church] was on St. Claude [St. Claude Avenue, New Orleans, Louisiana], and the kindergarten was in the next block, and then the main school was in the, another block.  But I remember my kindergarten days very well.  (Pause) There were a number of kids in that class that continued into the first and second grades with me, and I had friends.  And I remember playing and drawing things and them trying to teach us alphabets and numbers and all of those things.  I remember the smell of the lunch, lunches that we used to have.
Speaker 1: I was gonna ask you, because you, you've talked about different sounds, sights, and smells so far, but is there, besides the ones that you, you talked about--you've talked about your, the smell of your [maternal] grandmother's candy, and you've talked about the sights of the marching band [St. Augustine High School Marching 100].  But if there were sounds, sights, or smells that would take you back to that time, what would they be?
Speaker 2: Well, I remember the smell of when the grass was cut like in the lot across the street from our house, or in the neighborhoods.  And in the springtime there's a certain smell that cut grass gives and sometimes certain flowers that bloom.  And I remember that very well from the neighborhood [9th Ward, New Orleans, Louisiana].  But in, in a strange sort of way, I also remember it now as, as a bittersweet memory, two sided coin, because I also remember in 1965 when I was about, at that point, ten years old, almost eleven, having to go back to the house after Hurricane Betsy.  We had moved out of the house, but my father [Oscar White, Jr.] still owned it.  And I remember going back to the house to inspect it after half the house was flooded.  And I remember the, the smell of the neighborhood then was very much like rot.  You could smell rot, whether it was from dead animals, or insects, or just from stagnant water, or from water soaked buildings, you know.  I remember that smell as well.  So, when I go back into the neighborhood I remember both of those at the same time.  But in those days it seemed liked everything had a smell.  You could--I remember the smell of, you know, snowballs from the snowball stand.  You could smell that kind of sweet sugary smell.  I remember the smell of, of the things my mother [Helen Forcia White] used to cook.  She used to want us to eat oatmeal.  I didn't like oatmeal, and the only way I would eat it is if she cooked, made me some popcorn.  And she used to buy this popcorn that had different color kernels, and that had a certain smell to that and taste, and I remember that very well.
Story_ID: 621618
Speaker 1: But life was really interesting in those days.  There was a lot going on.  When my parents [Helen Forcia White and Oscar White, Jr.] would play cards in the, in the house, we, my sister [Janice White Brady] and I, would watch television.  And there was something on that was a local New Orleans [Louisiana] thing that used to scare us.  It was called Morgus, Morgus the Magnificent.  And we thought he was a monster, but actually he was a, supposed to be like a mad scientist.  But he was dirty and ugly and had strange teeth and hair, and he had this assistant called Chopsley who never spoke, and you never saw his face.  He was about, he looked like he was ten feet tall.  But he was real tall, dressed in black, and he had a black hood over his face, so you never saw his face, and he never spoke.  And Chopsley would just kind of do whatever the guy told him; that was like his henchman.  But it was only years later 'til I realized he, he was dressed like an axe man or you know, an executioner or something (laughter).  But Morgus would, they would have science fiction movies, and he was like the host of the movies.  But he was local, so he would talk before and between the movies during the commercials or what have you.  And that was a local thing, and it was a big thing in New Orleans, you know, at the time.  So, we used to watch that at home.  I remember that.
Story_ID: 621619
Speaker 1: In school, now you're at St. David's [St. David School, New Orleans, Louisiana] between kindergarten and the second grade.  Can you remember some of the teachers?  Was there anyone who might have been an influence on you at that time?
Speaker 2: Wow, I remember all of my teachers.  I'm trying to remember the names right now.  I always remember their names, but I was--having a hard time remembering them now.  I remember my first grade teacher was Mrs. Thea Ale [ph.].  I remember her very well.  I remember my kindergarten teacher and my second grade teacher; can't remember those names right now.  Soon as we finish I'll remember.  But those teachers emphasized, in those early days, trying to teach kids, you know, the basics of learning how to read and write.  And you know, it wasn't like that there were a lot of discipline problems or anything 'cause you know, in those days, they would pull out that ruler or something.  And I remember reciting ABCs, working on addition, timetables, reading.  There were school events of all kinds; there were plays.  As I mentioned, I was, I played the lead role in 'Pinocchio,' a play we had one time.  They used to ask if any of the kids played musical instruments, and I remember some of them did (cough).
Speaker 1: What type of student were you?
Speaker 2: Well, I was a good student.  I worked hard because my mother expected us to work hard, and she used to help with homework.  She used to make you go over the homework.  She used to talk to the teacher.  She used to--both of my parents [Helen Forcia White and Oscar White, Jr.] would, you know, go over your report card and discuss that with you, your grades.  And if you didn't get really good grades they'd want to know why, (audio disturbance) and they would expect you to work on whatever problems you had and make everything okay.
Story_ID: 621620
Speaker 1: What type of child were you?
Speaker 2: (Cough) In the early days in the 9th Ward [New Orleans, Louisiana] I was pretty quiet, sort of shy, and didn't say a lot.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: In the early days I was pretty quiet.  I was a good student, but I guess I, I was afraid of being punished a lot, you know.  My mother [Helen Forcia White] was big on this whole thing of punishment.  And in, in church and school, the nuns and the teachers were also big on this thing of punishment.  So, you know, you were afraid to, to do anything wrong or bad (laughter).  But I remember having good times and enjoying, you know, playing with friends.  I was, like most kids, oblivious to a lot of the adult problems and issues in the world at the time.  But I was curious, curious about a lot of things.
Story_ID: 621621
Speaker 1: You said that you were oblivious to some of the adult things.  Well, this was now let me see you're only eight or nine years old, so, civil rights is just getting, getting started.  Well, it's already started, but it's starting to escalate I should say.  Because you were born in '54 [1954], so civil rights is in full swing.  Were your parents politically involved?
Speaker 2: I remember my father [Oscar White, Jr.] at one point being a member of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and having a badge.  I don't remember my parents participating in any actual civil rights protests, like boycotts or marches.  But as time went on, there were a lot of hostilities in the city [New Orleans, Louisiana], and I remember certain incidents and things happening then.  You know, I first became conscious of race as I grew up by watching television.  There was a time when you rarely saw black people on television.  And it was such to a point where if you saw anybody black on TV in a positive way, people would call up all their (laughter) friends and family, say, "There's a colored girl on television, singing," you know.  And it would be like Leslie Uggams on the Mitch Miller show ['Sing Along with Mitch'], I don't know.  So if you saw anybody positive--I remember seeing Nat King Cole a couple of times on TV.  But generally, you know, you didn't see black people in positive roles on television.  You saw maybe in 'Tarzan' or something natives cringing and running.  But other than that, you, you didn't see a lot of black people.  So, that was kind of a, a strange thing.  And I remember as a kid having normal curiosity, they used to tell you about that stuff.  They would advertise products, and I remember the stuff they put in your hair to slick your hair back.  It was called--let's see, it's was either Brylcreem or Vitalis or both.  And I remember my father using Vitalis.  I remember going in the cabinet one day and imitating what I saw on television, put it in my hair, and put the comb through.  But the comb didn't go through like I saw it on television, and I, I couldn't figure that out.  So I remember putting more Vitalis on and more Vital- and it never seemed to work.  So I asked my mother [Helen Forcia White], "What's, why doesn't my hair work like it works on television?"
Story_ID: 621622
Speaker 1: I remember consciousness of being colored at the time.  I do remember a couple of times sitting in the back of the bus and the bus screens.  My mother [Helen Forcia White] used to go the grocery stores, and I do very distinctly remember eating, having to eat at the colored lunch counter, the colored side of the lunch counter.  I remember colored water fountains, colored restrooms.  As a kid going to the doctor, the first few years we went to a black doctor.  And then later on I got sick.  Well, I guess I was about nine years old, something like that, and we sought out a specialist doctor.  And I remember going to that doctor and remember having to sit in the colored waiting room.  And you know, that created sort of like a curiosity about what the other waiting room was like, 'cause it was like forbidden territory.  And you just imagine all kinds of things over there.  You know, and at one point I think--well, a few years later--I did a very bold thing and looked under the door and to see what was going on over there, and to my surprise, it looked just like our waiting room.
Speaker 2: What were you seeking a specialist for?  What was the illness?
Speaker 1: Well, let's see, I was having breathing problems, and at one point I had a heart, heart murmur as a kid.  And I was having problems that were bordering on emphysema.  Well, my mother--when I moved Uptown [New Orleans, Louisiana], my mother and [maternal] aunt [Natalie Forcia] smoked a lot, and that was a large part of the problem for me.  But I remember one time, I remember seeing things about protests on television, and I asked my mother what that was.  And she tried to explain to me about, you know, colored people.  And you know, I couldn't understand why we had separate everything, and she tried to explain what was going on.  And I remember seeing police and you know, protests and people getting beat or something.  And I remember one night we were at home, and there was a knock on the door.  And my mother opened the door, and there were two white police officers.  And they asked if my father [Oscar White, Jr.] lived there.  And he wasn't home; he was out at a meeting.  And I remember my mother getting all nervous and upset, thinking something happened to him and all of that.  Well, nothing happened.  What happened, he was going to a Knights of Peter Claver function, and he had his sword with him, (laughter) so they stopped this black man with this big sword.  And they thought it was some kind of weapon (laughter).  And so they were check- just checking up on him.  But I remember those kinds of things.  I remember my parents talking a little bit on the phone about some of what was going on with civil rights and things like that.
Story_ID: 621623
Speaker 1: Well, when we talk about race, now, earlier you talked about your grandmother on your mother's side [Natalie Gauff Forcia] being Creole.  You said traditional Creole.  So tell me, what does that mean?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, Creole is one of those words sort of like love; it can mean many different things to many different people.  In general, it seems to me that there, there are a couple of common definitions of Creole.  The two most common are what I call the Louisiana definition and then the New Orleans definition.  The Louisiana definition of Creole usually implies a person of French descent.  Originally, of course, the word Creole referred to anyone who was born in the Americas whose parents came from either Africa or Europe.  So, Creole originally meant first generation American, whether that be of African descent, slaves, free blacks, or whites.  First generation born here they would be called Creole.  But in common usage, as it is in my time and today, the two most common definitions seem to be, imply a person with black blood.  In Louisiana, what I call a Louisiana definition is a French cultured black person; a person that comes from French culture.  It doesn't matter what their appearance is.  They could be from the blackest black to the lightest light.  They could have African features, or they could have keen features, or Caucasian features.  But if they have black blood and they're French cultured, that's Creole in Louisiana.  And in other parts of Louisiana, in many cases, that's how it's viewed.  They generally speak Creole French.  They generally have certain cultural things handed down; there was certain kinds of music and food.  A large part of the state was Catholic, so many of them were, were raised Catholic as well.  But in New Orleans [Louisiana], I think after, especially after the Reconstruction period when blacks were losing a lot of rights and there was an increase in Jim Crow laws and racial violence, many Creoles of color were starting to lose their social status because at one point, Creole of color was a separate, third tier in society.  Everywhere else it was black and white; in New Orleans it was black, white, and wedged comfortably in between was Creole.  And while a lot of people tend to think of Creole today in terms of appearance, being a Creole, being a person--or having light skin and, and silky hair and keen features, actually, Creole is a cultural system that appearance has very little to do with, 'cause of course, there are dark Creoles, light Creoles, in between Creoles.  What the system refers to is--are things like religion.  Most Creoles were raised Catholic.  Most Creoles come from French background.  Some of them spoke Creole French.  Most Creoles come from, or many Creoles come from a tradition of, of middle class or upper low class (laughter)--lower classes.  Many Creoles have a mindset of upward mobility.  Many Creoles were skilled traders or tradesmen.  Some of them moved toward upward mobility in terms of leadership, education, and the benefits of education.  Part of this is because throughout history a lot of Creoles were given certain privileges that other blacks didn't have.  Many of them were free, many of them were born free; and many of them had rights and a lifestyle that was very different or could be very different from other African Americans.  Of course, when you say that, there are a lot of Creoles who always accepted their black heritage and did not harbor prejudice against darker skinned people or, or people who were black but non-Creole.  So, you know, it's, it's easy to make those generalizations, but you have to realize there's also that, as many exceptions as those that who follow or would be characterized by those generalizations.  So, you know, even among Creoles (laughter), there are many different types.  I mean, you know, there's a different type of the more upper class Creole, more educated; and yet, then there are the types of Creoles who were more lower class, less educated, who were, well, were workers, craftsmen, tradesmen, construction workers, bricklayers.  You had everything in between; sheet metal workers, plasterers.
Story_ID: 621624
Speaker 1: So, Creole, you said they came from African and French descent.  But placa- placage, is that how you say it?
Speaker 2: Placage.
Speaker 1: Placage.
Speaker 2: Placage.
Speaker 1: Placage was another way that people were Creole.  Is that right?
Speaker 2: Well, the whole idea, the whole concept of Creole as a separate racial designation came about through miscegenation, and that miscegenation took form in several ways: rape, prostitution, and perhaps the most common way was the placage system, as it was called, in which many of the white Creoles or men of French descent had a custom of having sexual liaisons with women of color.  And there was a belief that many of the women from the islands, from the Caribbean, some of them who were fair skinned, who were quadroons or octoroons, products of miscegenation of earlier generations, many believed that they were among the most desirable and beautiful women in the world.  So, sometimes they were brought here, and in other cases, men would make these liaisons with women of color.  And sometimes they would have, in fact, separate families, a white family and a black family.  And the placage system, one of the ways that it was facilitated was by what they used to call quadroon balls.  And those were large elaborate balls for young white men.  Black men could not attend; they could be servants or perhaps musicians, but not guests.  And these were balls with the purpose of setting up and arranging these long term relationships.  And if a man desired a woman he saw, he would ask her to dance.  And if he talked to her and enjoyed the conversation and wanted to hook up with her, perhaps he would talk to her guardian or, or relative, and they would make an agreement in which he would take care of the woman.  He would pay for her support, basic needs.  In many cases, they would provide houses; they would provide care for any children that were produced.  And in many cases, the children were educated, and sometimes those children were sent to France.  So, you can see the things that separate people when you talk about just normal culture that existed in black New Orleans [Louisiana] were very divisive.  You're talking about things like religion; you're talking about things like education; language; you're talking about freedom.  Some Creoles of color, in fact, had black servants, some had slaves.  Some were educated in France.  They were trained in classical music, they were trained in literature, and they had a very different life from the average slave descended African American.  So, of course, this was culturally very dif- different.  And so a lot of people felt that they were not black, they were not of the same group as the slaves.  But of course, again, you had everything in between.
Story_ID: 621625
Speaker 1: In New Orleans [Louisiana], the sort of New Orleans definition of Creole kind of came about as being more closely identified with physical characteristics like skin color, lighter skin color, more keen facial features, and, and longer silky hair, because when blacks were losing their rights in the post-Reconstruction period, there was this law enforced that if you had one sixteenth drop of black blood you were black, and therefore you couldn't have rights.  Well, Creoles were very outspoken.  They were powerful.  Some of them had money.  They were, had political positions.  They had a lot of influence in the community, so the new wave of racism sought to dismantle that Creole structure and humiliate them completely and say you're black, you have no rights, no privileges, and that's it.  And so, as a result, a lot of Creoles of color tried to maintain their own culture within themselves.  Many of them became kind of centered around what it means to be Creole, and they tried to hold onto their language, their culture.  And they looked at appearance as one of the ways of identifying them as something separate and distinct.
Story_ID: 621626
Speaker 1: After the second grade, tell me more about what school you went to after that.
Speaker 2: Well, after the second grade, when we moved into the Carrollton section of New Orleans [Louisiana] with my [maternal] grandmother [Natalie Gauff Forcia] and my aunt [Natalie Forcia], I became a lot more conscious of race and the racial situation then.  We were the only black family basically in a predominantly white neighborhood, very different from what it was like in the 9th Ward [New Orleans, Louisiana].  And in those days it was, it was pretty hostile.  I remember within a couple of blocks of the house, a washateria, restaurants, other businesses that had signs that would say things like whites only.  I remember seeing on the news, places that I would pass every day where people were arrested from trying to desegregate certain restaurants.  There were restaurants where my parents [Helen Forcia White and Oscar White, Jr.] wouldn't go.  I remember the smells so good, but they would never go there because blacks were not, were not allowed inside the restaurant.  In some cases, they couldn't get food at these places at all.  But in other cases, there was a window in the back, exposed window, and blacks could order food through the back window, and get food there, and then go on about their business.  But they couldn't enter the restaurant as guests, although many times there were black cooks and workers in the restaurants.  So, I remembered a lot of those things in those days, but it was very hostile in the neighborhood.  We were terrorized for a number of years, actually, in the neighborhood, because a lot of the people in the neighborhood didn't like the idea of a black family moving in.  Now, it was really kind of strange because my grandmother and aunt had been living there for a number of years without any problem.  But I found out eventually that a lot of people assumed that my grandmother was a white lady and that my aunt was her live in maid (laughter).  So they didn't realize that, you know, that was a black family that owned and lived in this large two story house.  But when we moved in the neighborhood, that was, that was quite pr- thought provoking.  We lived a half a block away from a Catholic school.  And instead of sending me to that Catholic school, my parents sent me to a black Catholic school, Holy Ghost [Holy Ghost School, New Orleans, Louisiana], and the reason was 'cause it was very hostile.  I'm the same age as Ruby Bridges, the little girl who desegregated Frantz Elementary School [William Frantz Elementary School, New Orleans, Louisiana] and went through a lot of trouble.  She ended for a year going to school by herself because parents in the school took their children out.  The National Guard [Louisiana Army National Guard] had to bring her into school every day.  There were protests, people shouting, throwing things, spitting.  It was, it was a horrible thing.  Well, when her parents, Ruby Bridges' parents [Lucille Bridges and Abon Bridges], made the decision to send her to Frantz, my parents made the decision not to subject me to that kind of danger.  And even though we're talking about a Catholic school, it was still very hostile.  We would go to the Catholic church on Sundays, and I remember for the first few years we had to sit in the black--in the back two pews, which was la- which were labeled colored.  And I remember people in church giving me strange looks.  I remember people saying not so nice things, and I remember being pretty afraid for a long time in the neighborhood.  A lot of things happened.
Story_ID: 621627
Speaker 1: In our house, people would pass by at night yelling and shouting things.  They would throw rocks at the house.  We would wake up in the morning, and sometimes balloons filled with various kinds of liquids would be broken on the house.  Eggs would be broken and dried all over the house.  Sometimes toilet paper thrown all over the house.  I remember the police, seemed like every week they were in our house because, you know, my parents [Helen Forcia White and Oscar White, Jr.] complained.  And my father was angry, but of course he felt that, you know, it was violent retaliation wouldn't do any good.  And so I remember those kinds of things.  Now, as a kid, going out in the neighborhood for me was a very frightening experience and one that I thought very dangerous.  There were two Italian grocery stores.  One was a block away, and the other was two blocks away.  And my parents used to want to send me--or my [maternal] grandmother [Natalie Gauff Forcia]--to the store.  And I was afraid to go to the store, 'cause when I'd go to the store I would get taunted, and I'd get terrorized.  And I remember any variety of things that kids would tell me and do to me.  I guess the, the thing I remember the most, the thing that kind of affected me the most was I was going to the store a half a block away.  And as I got about halfway, I saw some kids coming with a big German Shepherd dog.  And something told me cross the street.  I said no, I don't need to cross the street.  I'm almost to the store.  And as I got close to them, I remember the guy holding the dog, and he told the dog, he said, "Sic that nigger."  And of course, I was a kid; I was about ten years old, and, but I remember that it was like the dog looked up at him and was like (makes sound).  It was like, yeah, I'm gonna get him.  And he let him go, and the dog, (makes sound) and he jumped up and he bit me on the stomach, and then the guy pulled him back.  And I was more afraid than hurt.  The, the dog kind of just, you know, nicked me, but it was so vicious and so violent.  And I remember the, the, the--that utter look of just like total hatred from both the kids and the dog.  And I was like, why am I so terrible that even animals hate me?  And so that was a very hurtful time in my life.  And I didn't like going out, outside of the neighborhood [Carrollton, New Orleans, Louisiana], going to church, going to a school fair across the street, 'cause they had fairs there.  We'd go sometimes.  Those were dangerous things for me 'cause, you know, I remember the kids next door--if I'd go play in my own yard, the kids next door would be in their yard, and sometimes they would harass me; they would throw things at me; they would call me monkey and all kinds of names and, "My daddy said you're this, and my daddy said you're that."  And it was a, it was a tough time; it was a very tough time.  At the same, I remember in the neighborhood, there used to be protests against integration.  And I remember passing on the street one time and seeing this lady.  Her name was Mrs. Gaylap [ph.], never forget, with a bullhorn and big signs and people chanting: "Two, four, six, eight, we don't want to integrate," and big signs.  And I remember our people passing by that.  And you know, it, it was, it was a difficult time; it was a difficult time.  So I got to see a lot of things that a lot of other black kids didn't see.  And what that caused me to do was sort of go into my own interior world.  I created my own world, my own life, my own safe space.  And you know, that became a very important, I guess you could say, an influential period in my life.
Speaker 2: What kind of space did you create for yourself?
Speaker 1: A fantasy world, a fantasy world.  I would play with, you know, toy cowboys and Indians [Native American].  I would do I guess you could say unusual things.  I, I learned how to play games.  I created games with targets, games of like throwing, throwing things into baskets or you know, knocking down things.  I would play with soldiers.  I learned how to shoot rubber bands (laughter) and all kinds of things.  So I created, you know, sort of my, like, this interior world, and I felt safe in that world.
Story_ID: 621628
Speaker 1: So you were an only child?
Speaker 2: I have a sister who's three years younger, but she was, well, she was younger, and she was very different from, from me, so.  We played together some, but I was, I grew up a lot in that interior world.
Speaker 1: What is your sister's name?
Speaker 2: My sister's name is Janice, Janice Brady, Janice White Brady, and she's, like I said, three years younger than I am.  She was born in September of 1957.
Story_ID: 621629
Speaker 1: I just want to go back, 'cause I'm not sure we co- covered this.  But your grandfather on your father's side [Oscar White, Sr.], now he had the same name as your father [Oscar White, Jr.].  But where was he in this whole thing here?
Speaker 2: Not very present.  I think, I think my father was from a broken home early on.  And I really only remember seeing my grandfather on maybe two occasions.  One was I ran into him Uptown [New Orleans, Louisiana] when I was with my mother [Helen Forcia White] somewhere by a park, and she said, "That's your grandfather."  And I think the second time I saw him was at his funeral.  So I knew my father was from a broken home, and I don't think he had fond memories of his father.  My father was the oldest, and he had to take care of his kids.  In my neighborhood in the 9th Ward [New Orleans, Louisiana], most of the homes were two parent households, mother and father.  And so, you know, I'm sure, pretty sure that was tough on him when he grew, my father grew up with a mother [Margaret Miles White] and several brothers and sisters that he had to help take care of at an early age.
Story_ID: 621630
Speaker 1: Tell me more about your school and things that you did in the higher grades going through--what was the name of the school that you went to after St. David [St. David School, New Orleans, Louisiana] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) David.  From third grade into eight grade I went to an Uptown [New Orleans, Louisiana], predominantly black Catholic school: Holy Ghost.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.
Speaker 2: And Holy Ghost was one of the schools that my mother [Helen Forcia White], aunt [Natalie Forcia], and uncle [Clarence Forcia, Jr.] had gone to.  And a lot of black kids from different neighborhoods went to that school.  Some were Uptown kids that lived in the projects close by or other parts of Uptown, and some came from different areas whose, people whose parents had gone to Holy Ghost.  And I remember being in that, in Holy Ghost from, again, third grade into eighth grade.  I remember all of my teachers.  In third grade I had a nun named Sister Kevin [ph.].  And Sister Kevin was very hard on kids.  I remember, I remember her with this little long stick that she used to hit you with.  And I remember other things about Sister Kevin.  She used to have a, a name she used to call kids.  She used to call them a gom.  It took me years to finally figure out what a gom was.  I saw Sister Kevin many years later in a retirement home, and I was with another nun.  And I say, "Oh yeah, I remember her.  She used to call us goms."  And the other sister said, "Goms?"  She says, "What are goms, sister?"  And Sister Kevin said, "Well, that's a stupid person," (laughter).  So I remember that.  I remember in fourth grade my teacher was Mrs. Branch, Edwina Branch [ph.].  She had a couple of kids at Holy Ghost School.  She, like all of the teachers, were very strict on education, and they taught us well.  And, in New Orleans [Louisiana], at the time, Catholic schools were considered by far superior to any public schools.  You know, you paid for education, and you got one; you got a really good education.  Not that you couldn't get a good education in public school, but I think Catholic schools at the time, it was, it was just better.  So, a lot of the teachers were either lay teachers or nuns.  Usually the lay teachers were black.  So in fourth grade I had Mrs. Edwina Branch.  I remember some of her kids.
Story_ID: 621631
Speaker 1: I remember one day in class, while we were in class--this was November, 1963--an announcement came out, and she told us that the president had just been shot.  And I remember her breaking out in tears and a lot of the kids being confused.  It was, of course, President John F. Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy].  And a lot of kids were confused, and people were crying, and it was a very, very serious thing.  I remember black people felt at the time that Kennedy was one of their allies and had done things to, to kind of improve the black condition and, you know, try to work with some of the civil rights leaders.  So a lot of black people looked to Kennedy for hope at the time.
Speaker 2: But what were your feelings about the (unclear), the president being killed?
Speaker 1: Well, I mean, I was like everybody else.  I was nine years old, so I was sad.  I didn't know what was going on.  My parents [Helen Forcia White and Oscar White, Jr.] cried, you know.  Teachers were crying, and people were crying on television, so I was sad too.  I wasn't exactly sure why.  I just thought that a, a good person had, had gotten shot and killed.  I remember in fifth grade I had another lay teacher, Mrs. Penny [ph.].  And Mrs. Penny, I remember she kind of looked like Mahalia Jackson (laughter).  And she also had some kids that went to school there.  And she used to talk to us a lot about her family, her husband, her brother, her kids.  I remember learning math a lot in Mrs. Penny's class.  Sixth grade was a little different because Holy Ghost [Holy Ghost School, New Orleans, Louisiana] had gotten so large that they branched off and used another nearby school that was closed.  It was about eight blocks away, and I used to have to walk to that school.  That was St. Francis de Sales School [New Orleans, Louisiana].  And there was a nun there who was, I remember she was tall and had a very pretty face.  And she stayed maybe about half the year, and then she just kind of disappeared.  We never knew what happened to her.  I kind of suspect a little later on she got out of the convent.  Let's see, I don't remember who her replacement was, but I remember by that time in sixth grade people were starting to change.  I was starting to change, starting to kind of notice girls in a different way.  I noticed--well, it was a little different then because we were separated from the rest of the school.  So, the couple of classes that were at St. Francis de Sales kind of had their own way of coming up.
Story_ID: 621632
Speaker 1: I remember--let's see--when '65 [1965] came, Hurricane Betsy in September, that was a devastating thing for the city.  Schools were closed of course.  We huddled into our house.  I remember the winds and hearing things knocking out all over the place, like garbage cans flying and awnings flying off of houses and trees falling and lightning and thunder and rain.  And we kind of crouched down under the dining room table.  I remember sleeping under the dining room table.  But the idea of massive flooding and evacuating the city were not a part of New Orleans [Louisiana] vocabulary at the time, and in fact, for many years they weren't.  I remember after that was over, being out of school for the number of days, helping to clean up around the house, shrubbery everywhere, debris, maybe a broken window here and there.  I remember the appearance of a lot of different kinds of insects, worms and different things, after that.  But then I remembered hearing all these horror stories about what happened in the 9th Ward [New Orleans, Louisiana], where there was water that was, you know, eight, nine, ten, eleven feet high, where people drowned and you know, in my old neighborhood.  And I remember going back there for the first time with my father [Oscar White, Jr.] and seeing a green waterline across a white stucco house and that, that horrible smell that I mentioned.  So that was quite different.
Story_ID: 621633
Speaker 1: In seventh grade, I had Mrs. Penny [ph.] once again.  And my eighth grade started out at Holy Ghost [Holy Ghost School, New Orleans, Louisiana], but I ended up going to another school because I had a, let's say a misadventure with, with my teacher.  And so I ended up spending the--two thirds of the eighth grade year at St. Joan of Arc Catholic School [New Orleans, Louisiana], and that's where I graduated from.
Speaker 2: Were there any extracurricular activities?  I know you mentioned the Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America] during that time.  Were you active with the Boy Scouts during that time?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was active with the Boy Scouts since before I was even of, of age.  I remember as early as five years old going on camping trips and being with my father [Oscar White, Jr.] in those places, cooking and putting up tents and all this kind of stuff.
Speaker 2: Right.  Yeah, you did tell us about the different trips.  Were there any other extracurricular activities?  Or, tell me when did you first decide that you were gonna play the clarinet?
Speaker 1: Well, in school, like in seventh, eighth grade, I played ball, basketball, in the yard with the guys, but I wasn't very good.  One of the problems I had was I was growing up in an isolated world, in a neighborhood [Carrollton, New Orleans, Louisiana] basically by myself.  So, when kids learned how to play football, basketball, baseball, and everything else they did after school, I didn't know how to do that.  So when I was at school, I wasn't very good, so I ended up on the sidelines a lot.  I was very shy.  I wasn't interested really in ex- extracurricular activities at the time because I wasn't really that good at things.  So, I became interested in the clarinet sort of because my mother [Helen Forcia White], you know, saw me around the house not really doing anything, and she was hoping that I would get involved in something.  (Laughter) So, when I got to--well, let's see, eighth grade at St. Joan of Arc, I remember she bringing--calling a music teacher.  They started a music program at St. Joan of Arc.  And I remember my aunt's, my [maternal] aunt [Natalie Forcia] getting her old metal clarinet, silver, getting it fixed for me to play, and my sister [Janice White Brady], they rented a clarinet for her to play.  I remember the guy came to the house from the mu- from this music school that rented instruments, and then they had teachers.  And I remember--I didn't really learn how to play much of anything then, so I don't really consider that the start of my playing clarinet.  I remember for about half of that eighth grade year having once, once a week music, what they called music lessons.  But I remember we played in a parade for the sisters.  The, the--St. Joan of Arc was run by a number of, a sect of black nuns, Sisters of the Holy Family, that were founded by Sister Henriette Delille from down here, who was a descendant of a Creole family.  And they had built many schools.  Ironically, at one point, the black girls high school they had, St. Mary's Academy, was in the French Quarter [New Orleans, Louisiana] in the same building, or one of the same buildings where they used to have quadroon balls.  So that's very ironic that, you know, that turned in to a, a positive black girls Catholic high school.  But they had moved out on Sheffman [Highway], to a highway.  They had a, had acquired a lot of land.  They had a nice school and building, and they also had an elementary school nearby, an old folks home and all of those things.  And so they had a celebratory parade one time, and I remember being in St. Joan of Arc's band.  And there were maybe twenty of us that played instruments.  But I remember, and I could play it right now, the song we played.  It was only two notes (laughter): (makes sounds), and that's all we played, and that's all I really knew (laughter).  So I don't really be- consider that the beginning of my playing.
Story_ID: 621634
Speaker 1: But when I went to--I applied for St. Augustine High School [New Orleans, Louisiana], I was not a very good test taker, and so I didn't do well on the entrance exam.  And at the time St. Augustine had a tracked system, which was labeled like letter grades, which was supposed to represent your aptitude or abilities.  And they had, for example, the A, B, C, D, and E tracks.  And when I went to ninth grade at St. Augustine, I was in the D track.  Nobody believes that nowadays, but that's true.  And I spent four years in the D track, partly because of, I guess you could say, my shyness, but also partly because there was something else going on that I didn't quite understand and nobody else did at the time, which was, I had a different way of thinking and learning, and nobody addressed that.  It was a long time before I was able to figure that out and key into it.  But at any rate, high school in my freshman year was difficult for me because once again now, I went from a mixed boys and girls high school [St. Joan of Arc Catholic School, New Orleans, Louisiana] to an all--a tough all-male school, where in the lower track classes were athletes, scholarship people, guys that came from tough neighborhoods, and guys that were, you know, well versed in the sports and hip on the latest things, happening, phrases, words, actions; things I knew nothing about.  So it was very difficult for me being in that structure for a number of years.  But St. Augustine at the time was, they had strict discipline.  And I remember the first day of class, the teacher walking in and clinching his teeth.  And he threw this big paddle, stick on the desk, and I remember just that was ringing.  Many people jumped.  And he said you know, "I, I got a philosophy," he said, "and I call this a Negro stick.  I use it to hit Negroes."  He said, "I have a philosophy that you reach a Negro's mind through his behind."  And (laughter), and he--that was kind of law of the land, and they used the paddle quite a lot back then.  And it worked, it was a lot of discipline, people learned, people did--whatever.
Speaker 2: Who was the principal at that time (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The principal when I started out, the St. Augustine High School, again, black male Catholic high school was run by the Josephite fathers [Society of St. Joseph of the Sacred Heart].  And at that time, the principal was a white Josephite priest named Father Grant, I think it was Robert Grant.  And then after that we had a black lay principal who was a, an important figure in education and politics for a long time.  He was a principal in public schools.  He was a political features--polit- political figure.  He served on the school board [Orleans Parish School Board], Elliot C. Willard.  And when I graduated from St. Augustine in 1972 he was the principal.
Story_ID: 621635
Speaker 1: Now St. Augustine [St. Augustine High School, New Orleans, Louisiana] had that famous Marching 100 band that used to play at football games and in Mardi Gras parades.  And my mother [Helen Forcia White] kept telling me, "Wouldn't you like to be in that band?  You said you wanted to be in that band."  But I was too shy to even think about trying to get in the band.  And the band director, frankly, I was afraid of him.  He was, he looked very intimidating.  He had a hard look on his face.  He had a beard.  He looked like a real tough guy.  And toward the end of my freshman year, my mother called him up to find out if I could get lessons, said, "If you would take lessons would you go?"  I said, "Yeah."  She, my [maternal] aunt [Natalie Forcia] said, "If I get this clarinet really fixed up, would you play?"  And I said, "Yes."  So, that was the beginning.  And I started taking private lessons from Edwin Hampton, St. Augustine High School's band director, which I took for three and a half years.  And he taught me all the basic rudiments of clarinet.  Of course, everything was reading; there was no improvisation, no jazz, anything.  St. Augustine marching band [St. Augustine High School Marching 100] played a variety of music at the time, and they were like the, they were like the role model for other, for other bands to follow.  They played a variety of music, like a cross between tough standard marches and popular music.  They were one of the first high school bands in New Orleans [Louisiana] to start playing, you know, exciting arrangements of, of radio hits.  But at the same time, they were also known for really tough marches like 'March Grandioso' and 'Barnum and Bailey Favorites' [sic. 'Barnum and Bailey's Favorite'] and other marches like that, 'Confidence.'  And I remember those marches.  Those were very tough to play.  But I took those lessons from Mr. Hampton for three and a half years.  I advanced.  We started out in the Belwin elementary book and then moved up to Rubank elementary and then Rubank intermediate, Rubank advanced.  And those lessons were very important for me.
Story_ID: 621636
Speaker 1: So I remember having those music lessons on Saturday afternoons.  And Hamp [White's band director, Edwin Hampton] was a, he was a great private teacher.  And he played, you know, clarinet along with me sometimes, duets and things like that.  And it just seemed like he could play with such ease, effortlessly; seemed like he could just blow through the instrument like, like it was nothing.  And I just thought he was the greatest music, musician in the world at the time.  And, but I learned a lot from him, and I was able to advance.  The first--after that summer, I joined the Marching 100 [St. Augustine High School Marching 100].  But I just started playing, and I didn't want to try out for the band.  It was very competitive.  They took basically 100 students, but you had maybe almost twice that many trying to compete for the band.  So I didn't want to get rejected.  And so what I did was I applied for the color guard.  So the first year, my sophomore at St. Augustine [St. Augustine High School, New Orleans, Louisiana], I was in the color guard.  I carried the American flag, and so that way I was part of the band.  And I was still taking music lessons.  And th- I was in the band for football games and Mardi Gras parades.  Now, this was a time, I guess my first Mardi Gras with, as a member of the Marching 100 would have been 1970--let's see, sixty- '68 [1968], '69 [1969], '70 [1970], 1970.  This was only a couple of years after St.--St. Augustine became the first black band to desegregate Mardi Gras parades, and that was a very difficult and, and trying thing.  When they marched in the Rex parade [Krewe of Rex parade] on Mardi Gras day as the first black band in a white carnival parade, that was almost like a civil rights event.  On the one hand, the band was taunted.  Some people cheered them all the way, were happy to see them, and that was the general mood.  But some people cursed them, spit on them, threw cups of urine at them, threw other things at them, pushed them, all kinds of things.  And the band was told to maintain strict order.  Do not retaliate; just keep coming.  And that gave both black and white people in New Orleans [Louisiana] a lot of pride.  That was like a symbol of a new day coming, because they looked like a legion as much as they did when I was a kid, like a legion of, of soldiers that nothing could stop.  Their music was loud and powerful.  Their ranks were straight.  Those lines were straight.  They had this high deep knee bend step and like nobody else at the time, and they wouldn't let anything stop them.  So, it, it, it symbolizes--they would march up the street with this music.  It was like blowing up a new day.  It was like showing that, you know, we're coming, and nothing is gonna stop us, and that was a great thing.  So I got to see a little of that kind of feeling a couple of years later when I was in the color guard.
Story_ID: 621637
Speaker 1: In those days though the music in, in St. Aug's band [St. Augustine High School Marching 100] was very competitive.  Hamp [White's band director, Edwin Hampton] liked to create a sound, a very unique sound, in addition to creating incredible marching drill patterns on the football field.  He liked to create a very powerful but unique band sound.  So that meant he tried very hard to get a strong woodwind section, clarinet players mainly, saxophone players, flute players.  But there were about almost a third of the band, twenty-eight, thirty clarinet players in the band.  And he was trying to get a sound that would, would be more balanced than most high school bands.  He was trying to get a sound where the, the reeds would be sort of like a string section, and so you would get an, a, a very balance of voices.  I think there were only about sixteen trumpets, eight, eight or nine trombones, so you know, he really tried to maintain that, that reed section.  And so, being in the clarinet section was very competitive.  You know, you had first, first clarinets, second clarinets, third clarinets, fourth clarinets, and there would be maybe eight people in each section, you know.  And they would compete.  Who was the first of the first clarinets?  Who was the first of the second clarinets?  Who was the first of the third clarinets?  So my first year in the band, I was the first of the third clarinets.  My second year in the band, which was my senior year [at St. Augustine High School, New Orleans, Louisiana], I played, I became, I played first clarinet, not the first-first, but I was one of the first clarinets.  And that was a great honor, because you know, I had really moved up.  But I also played in the symphonic band.  And in the symphonic band, my first year I was the first third clarinet, and the second year I was the first second clarinet.  So that means if you had, if there was a solo or a principal part to, to play, written, that's what I would get to play.  I was expected to be sort of like the section leader of that, be the one that would play the part the right way.  So that was, that was important, and I really loved that music.  And, and that gave me a chance for the first time in my life to compete and to be able to advance and to win and find something that I could do that everybody else wasn't just heads and tails above me.  So I really enjoyed those, those years with the band.  But there was very little of anything that was connected with jazz at all.
Story_ID: 621638
Speaker 1: Because the clarinet is a very complicated instrument in itself, during those lessons, did he actually go over with you, or was it later on that you learned where the clarinet came from, the history of it, or the different sections?  Can you, can you speak to any of--any or all of those things?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, when you learn, when you learn standard lessons, private lessons, you don't really talk that much about things like the history of the instrument.  So, in fact, it was only until fairly recent years that I really started to be curious enough to learn about the history of clarinets: where they came from, how they're made, the different kinds of woods, the different varieties of clarinets, how they're used in different musical context, and things like that.  What I learned in lessons was just the, the rudiments of the instrument: learning how to, to play the scales, learning how to read music, learning how to, to play these different songs that we played in the, in the marching and symphonic bands.  We didn't really discuss, you know, what you could do with, with the clarinet outside of that.  Even though we're in New Orleans [Louisiana], and New Orleans has a very powerful clarinet tradition in its history, we didn't really deal with that much at all.  In terms of jazz, I remember three things that prob- probably kind of helped to spark my curiosity that happened.  One day, Mr. Hampton [Edwin Hampton] had a tape of a brass band.  I think it was the Olympia Brass Band.  And he turned it on, and I listened to that.  And I heard it, and I loved that music for some reason.  And I remember him saying how pure and uncut that music was or something like that.  The second thing was I remember, we had--he formed a brass band out of the Marching 100 [St. Augustine High School Marching 100] for, for a convention, to play at a convention, and he got together maybe eighteen people to play.  It was at the Hilton hotel.  And I was one of the eighteen people.  And we played what is a standard jazz number, a couple--three of them I believe.  I remember 'Bourbon Parade' ['Bourbon Street Parade'], 'When the Saints Go Marching In,' and a song called 'Second Line.'  And, but nobody improvised.  Everybody was reading.  He had written parts for all of the instruments.  And so it wasn't really jazz; there was no improvisation.  And I remember that.  And then the third thing was, during my senior year, he played--St., St. Aug [St. Augustine High School, New Orleans, Louisiana] was known for variety of musical styles.  So in addition to classical standards and sort of stock popular, popular music arranged for classical or symphonic bands, he tried to play New Orleans music, but those were stock arrangements of what would have been called (air quotes) Dixieland tunes, which is kind of strange because, you know, again, we're in New Orleans.  And if you find out about New Orleans and New Orleans jazz, New Orleans jazz, the authentic black New Orleans jazz is not Dixieland (laughter).  Dixieland is like an imitation of authentic New Orleans jazz, but a lot of people don't know that, and even black, some black people don't know that, people that are educated in music schools because, you know, you, you learn classical music, and sometimes you think everything else is not good or legitimate music.  So, whatever comes in stock arrangements or whatever the general thought of what a music style is, that's what you usually accept.  But I think those things influenced me a little bit in terms of, you know, thinking about the direction of, of jazz and, or at least be curious about what the clarinet did in, in, in New Orleans music.
Story_ID: 621639
Speaker 1: Besides music--now, you, you're in your last year of high school--was there someone who was going to be a mentor or steer you in the direction of where you would go to college?
Speaker 2: There was never any question about whether I would go to college, where I would go to college.  It was sort of like a understood and given thing.  My mother [Helen Forcia White], my aunt [Natalie Forcia], and my uncle [Clarence Forcia, Jr.] had gone to and graduated from Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana].  I never thought about the idea of, of leaving New Orleans [Louisiana] to go to college.  Xavier was just a natural choice.  I had started coming around Xavier from the time I was about nine years old with my mother and aunt who frequently came back to campus for homecoming and different events.  And they would bring us, and I kind of grew up in a sense with Xavier as part of my life.  So, it was always a given that I would go to Xavier.  The problem was and the question was, what was I going to major in?  At the time, I didn't like school (laughter), and I didn't know what I wanted to be, and I didn't like anything but music.  But I had a problem.  The problem was I didn't like, at the time, I didn't like classical music as, as a major.  I didn't want to become a classical musician.  I didn't want to become a music teacher, so I didn't really see the sense in majoring in music.  I didn't know or have a desire to learn other instruments and all of this, so the question was what was I going to major in.  During my sophomore year at St. Aug, I took a subject that I thought was very, very difficult.  People were complaining about it.  It was one of the subjects that people were really afraid of.  I remember the class the year before me.  The entire class failed this subject at the end of the year.  That subject was Spanish, and I had to take Spanish.  In the A class, the upper class, you took French.  The other classes, B, C, and D, you took Spanish.  So I, I dreaded the idea of taking this language, and I thought this would be the most horrible thing.  We had a very tough priest named Father Colbert [ph.].  He used to wear a long outfit, you know, black, and he had a big gray point in his head, and he kind of looked like Dracula.  And he was really kind of scary.  But Father Colbert was a drill sergeant for Spanish.  And Father Colbert had devised a system of teaching kids Spanish.  I don't know if our class, my year was the first year.  I think he had to figure out something other than keep failing entire classes.  So he figured out that perhaps we could learn languages through rhymes.  So long before rap ever came about, we were rapping in 1969, 1970 at St. Augustine High School [New Orleans, Louisiana], Spanish verbs, Spanish verb endings, Spanish grammar rules, vocabulary words.  And somehow--and now I realize it was the musicality of it all that I guess I, I could, could identify with.  I took to that, and I liked it, and I learned it.  And in my first year I got good grades in Spanish, and it wasn't that bad like people thought.  And I ended up at the end of the year going to a state competition for Spanish where I read a prose section, and I got a superior ranking for that.
Story_ID: 621640
Speaker 1: But then I had another little impetus that helped me.  It was a time when New Orleans [Louisiana] was seeing a lot of migration from Central America.  And catching the bus from that downtown 7th Ward neighborhood [New Orleans, Louisiana] where St. Aug [St. Augustine High School] was to my Uptown, Carrollton neighborhood [New Orleans, Louisiana], it took two buses.  And at some of those bus stops, at all--both of those bus stops, coming from Catholic girls schools were these beautiful young Hispanic girls.  And I was at the age where they just drove me crazy.  They were all colors; some were black, some were white, some were Indian [Native American] looking.  And, but something about that language and the way they moved and everything, I just was attracted to that.  So I wanted to learn that language and talk to these girls.  And luckily for me, it was also a time when a lot of Cubans started to try to invest in the business community of New Orleans.  And there was a grocery store on the corner where I would catch the bus by St.--to come from St. Augustine called Carn- Carniceria Latina [ph.], Latin meat market.  And I would go in that store.  I would talk to people.  There would be a lot of Cubans and people who couldn't speak English, and they were glad to talk to people.  Sometimes they'll try to ask you questions about how much the bus cost or if you had change.  Or, and I'd--I started practicing and practicing.  Eventually, I could speak to them.  I could go in the store and, and talk to the, the cashier in Spanish, and then I would talk to these girls at these bus stops and coming from these schools, you know, in Spanish.  And I--and sit on the bus and you would talk to the girls, or you'd talk to some of the people coming from the stores.  And little by little, I, I, by the time I finished high school, Spanish was a subject that I liked.  It was the only subject that I liked and I thought I could major in.  So, that's when I decided, okay, in college I'll major in Spanish.  I don't know if I want to become a Spanish teacher, or a translator, interpreter or whatever, but I figure I can decide later.
Story_ID: 621641
Speaker 1: So now you go to college.  Tell me about your, your years there.  And who were some of the, of your friends or classmates, and at the time who was the, the president of Xavier?
Speaker 2: Let's see, I entered--I took the test for Xavier University [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana].  Again, I wasn't a good test taker.  When I came to Xavier I took, I had to take a couple of remedial classes, reading and English.  I felt that I was deficient in math, so I voluntarily took the remedial math course, and that was all they had at the time.  Coming from the D class at St. Augustine [St. Augustine High School, New Orleans, Louisiana], a lot of people felt you didn't really have a chance to get out of college or you'd just get by.  But I figured out by this time that nobody really understood what was going on in my head, and I did.  And I would figure out how to get through college.  And I developed a system of studying and of learning in the middle of my freshman year, and I kind of refined it in my sophomore year.  And I finished from Xavier magna cum laude, 3.759 average.  The last two years I had straight A's, and I was able to get a partial scholarship.  I missed your question, now I'm kind of--
Speaker 1: Okay, well, before (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We're in college I know.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  But before I--I'm gonna repeat what I asked you before.  But you allude, alluded before about, I don't know whether you would say it's a learning disability, but you said you'd, you said that you knew in your mind that you had to find a way to, to get through this learning.  What do you think your problem was?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, that's easy.  I mean, you know, people address learning and education, or at least they did, in a general sense to the masses.  Well, there are some people that don't learn and think like the masses.  Sometimes you have to learn things in different ways.  Sometimes you have to explain things in different ways.  And that wasn't really being addressed in my earlier educational experiences.  So when I got to college, had so many different teachers and subjects, I just kind of took the reins.  I started to realize that I had different ways of thinking, and I started to try to apply the way I saw something.  I tried to learn material not necessarily the way it was presented in a book or a way the teacher presented it, but the best way that I would learn it.  So I would write or rearrange the book or notes in my own system in my own way, and it worked.  So I wouldn't say it was a learning disability.  I would say it was just a different way of thinking, a very different way of thinking, which, you know, I mean, I guess you could say it was just on another level, and people didn't recognize what level, what it was on.
Story_ID: 621642
Speaker 1: The other thing was, who was the--did we s- did you say who the, the president was at the time?
Speaker 2: No.  The president of Xavier University [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] when I came in, in 1972, was the same person that's still the president now, Dr. Norman C. Francis [HistoryMaker Norman Francis].  And so I've gone from seeing him when he was first appointed as president as a young man to being a student under his leadership and for the last nearly thirty years being a faculty member under his leadership.  And so, you know, when you say Xavier and Dr. Norman Francis, those go together.  It just seems like to me that's something that's always been and will always be.
Speaker 1: And who were some of your classmates?
Speaker 2: Well, I had a lot of--classmates at Xavier, Xavier was a very different experience for me because now I moved from being in the all-male St. Augustine High School [New Orleans, Louisiana] to being around girls again, which was a great thing (laughter).  And one of the things that happened, it was very different from Xavier--from, from high school.  When we came in during freshman orientation, one of the counselors told us, "You know, high school is very different from college.  When you're in high school you can be a big shot and you know, the leader of the pack.  But when you get to college that doesn't matter."  But what he didn't say was that in high school you could be nobody, and in college you could be somebody, or you didn't have to nobody, you could be whoever.  You didn't have to be, you know, ignored or whatever, you know.  So, that was a, that was a good thing for me.  I found a lot of freedom in college, and I found that generally people, you know, people were more mature than in high school.  People kind of respected each other.  Nobody bothered you too much.  You know, some people had issues, but that's the way it is in life, so.  I had a lot of good teachers at Xavier.  At the time, Xavier was known for having really dedicated, hardworking teachers, and the emphasis was on education as opposed to publishing and, and all of that that's associated with a lot of universities.  I went to school with a lot of people that went to St. Aug with me.  But also, there were people that came from Xavier Prep [Xavier University Preparatory School, New Orleans, Louisiana], the other, at that time, girls, black Catholic high school, St. Mary's [St. Mary's Academy, New Orleans, Louisiana], other local public schools.  And a lot of the people I went to school with, you know, became prominent citizens.  Some of them teach here now.  Dr. Kenneth Boutte [Kenneth Boutte, Sr.], who's a dean, he became a, a biology professor.  Brother Herman Johnson, also majored in Spanish with me, he is now the chairman of the language department.  There were some people I saw that I was in elementary school with that came to Xavier.  And some of them have, you know, acquired prominent roles in, in, in, in the city, city government.  One of the daughters of Elliott Willard [Elliot C. Willard], who was the principal at St. Augustine, became--she went to Xavier.  She became a city council person.  We've had several people from Xavier serve in city government and do well in the private sector.  We've had many people in pharmacy, many people in medicine, many people in education, and business from Xavier that have done very well.
Speaker 1: John Ware, Dr. John Ware [John E. Ware]?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Dr. John Ware was in school with me.  He, he, I think he graduated, actually graduated the year after, 'cause the music program I think at that time was pretty extensive.  And I think it took them five years to get out.  But he came in with us I remember in 1972.  And so he's another, he's another one I came in with, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Who's on the faculty here.
Speaker 1: And I think Regina Benjamin was after you.
Speaker 2: Yes, Regina Benjamin came after me.  And let's see, we've had--of course, there have been a lot of prominent Xavier grads.  I, I'm trying to remember her name right now. I'm--I have so many names and things going around in my head right now, but she was very high up in the, was it Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] administration.  Oh (shakes head).
Speaker 1: It'll come to you.
Speaker 2: It'll come to me later, yes.
Story_ID: 621643
Speaker 1: You said about the teachers, but you never mentioned any of the instructors, or professors.
Speaker 2: Well, let's see, my major professor at Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] was Dr. Carroll Mace.  He taught me Spanish for four years.  And he inspired my classmates and myself to try to learn more Hispanic literature and to go to graduate school, which was something I hadn't thought of at all.  I was like, graduate school?  I'm not going to any school after college.  That's it.  But when I came in there were I think three or four very well prepared freshmen who were already speaking Spanish fluently.  And so we, we represented a sort of hierarchy in the language department.  They put us in advanced classes, and we started right away learning reading, and literature, and history, and culture in, in Spanish.  It was, was a guy named Robert Castille [ph.], a young lady named Deborah Garibaldi [ph.], Brother Herman Johnson, who's, who I mentioned before, and myself, and we learned quite a lot in, in that time.  And eventually, I think three of us did end up going to graduate school, two getting Ph.D.'s.  I had a lot of teachers who were influential at Xavier.  I remember a theology teacher who was a very prominent Catholic priest here for a number of years, Father Jerome LeDoux.  I remember my French teacher, Dr. Alfred Gilliam [ph.], who was a Xavier graduate who had come back.  He was one of the guys who kind of told me some of the realities of what graduate school would be like, and graduate school life, and that, that helped me a lot along the way.  I had some important, influential teachers in subjects like math.  I remember a nun I had, Sister Miriam Francis, who was very tough but very thorough.  And I seemed to have gotten over my phobia of mathematics through, through her.  I'm trying to remember (pause)--I had a couple of really good philosophy teachers that, that helped me to really kind of start thinking in the direction about existence and the meaning of life and different philosophies, studied the subjects like morality and issues like that.  So it got me thinking in a different direction.  I remember a professor--in fact, we had two really good Cuban professors in philosophy, Fernando Ferardo [ph.] and Martha Pilias [ph.].  Those two were very good.  I just had a lot of good teachers.  You know, they were, there was, there were many of them, many of them.
Story_ID: 621644
Speaker 1: I graduated from Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] in 1976, but I didn't feel like I was graduating because I was going on to graduate school.  I had gotten a Ford Foundation fellowship to study, and I chose to stay in New Orleans [Louisiana] and go to Tulane University.  Again, the idea of leaving New Orleans was impossible for me.  This time the main reason was because by this time I had become hopelessly addicted to jazz.  When I finished high school [St. Augustine High School, New Orleans, Louisiana] and I was in college, I wanted to find out what it was they were doing in New Orleans.  I used to hear, you know, traces of jazz here and there, and I used to think of it as some fast, crazy music where you'd just start dancing like you were crazy.  And little by little I started to find out a few things about jazz.  The problem was that most jazz in New Orleans was basically, at the time I came up, what you saw advertised, what was on television, and in the news was really kind of like white Dixieland.  And people thought that that's what New Orleans jazz was.  And what I discovered was something very, very different.  When I was a junior in high school, I was kind of hanging around the music department.  I joined the jazz band here, and I had started--well, actually, in my freshman year in college I started listening to what I thought was New Orleans music.  I heard, like I said, I heard Dixieland, and I heard a lot of other stuff, and something about it didn't quite reach me, and I started to listen to other things.  And I used to practice.  I was no longer taking lessons when I got to college, but I, I always played.  I used to practice playing melodies along with the radio, trying to hear things by ear.  And one of the guys I went to music school with was playing in a brass band, the Young Tuxedo Brass Band, was a clarinet player.  His name was Joseph Torregano.  And he was actually playing with the Olympia Brass Band and later the Tuxedo Brass Band, and he was into jazz.  And you know, I used to listen to--there was a radio show that used to come on WWL [WWL Radio, New Orleans, Louisiana].  It was only a half an hour, and that's the only time when you used to hear, sometimes hear, early authentic New Orleans jazz, and so I used to listen to that radio show.  But more often than not, in the early days I heard modern jazz, because most of the black musicians that were around were really kind of into modern jazz.  There used to be a show that would come on radio from this club, Lu and Charlie's [New Orleans, Louisiana], and you'd hear musicians like Ellis Marsalis [HistoryMaker Ellis Marsalis, Jr.] and people like that, that were playing, you know, just kind of modern jazz.  And then, I started to going to Jazz Fest.  I think I first went to the New Orleans Jazz and Heritage Festival in 1976.  I think I went to some of it at the end of my freshman year in college, and I started going every year since.  And there, I got to hear jazz that sounded very different from Dixieland and very different from the stuff I had been hearing, but I didn't know what it was then.
Story_ID: 621645
Speaker 1: One day at Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] I, I was hanging around the jazz band at Xavier, but the jazz band at Xavier was like a, like a big band.  And the director, like most band directors, didn't really know much about New Orleans jazz and really didn't like, didn't like it, and you know, kind of basically ignored me, for the most part.  But I would hang around the jazz band, trying to learn some things about music.  And one day there was this guy who played tuba in, in the jazz--in the--at Xavier in the music department.  And I'm trying to remember exactly what he played in the jazz band.  I don't think he played tuba in the jazz band.  I don't remember exactly what he played.  But anyway, his name is Big Al Carson [Alton "Big Al" Carson].  He turned out to be a great rhythm and blues singer, which he is today.  But I remember talking to him.  There used to be this old oak tree outside of the music building, and I remember we used to gather outside of there before band rehearsal and sometimes after.  And we'd sit down on the bench and talk about what was going on in life.  And I remember him saying, "Oh, I've been--."  "How's it going, Al?"  "Oh, I've been playing in these parades out here with this brass band."  I said, "Brass band?"  I said, "You play in one of those bands?"  He said, "Yeah, I play with this guy named Doc Paulin," I said--he said, "but it's, it's, it's a non-union band," he said, "that's the only non-union band; everybody else had to be in the musicians union."  So, I never thought, you know, I could play enough to even think about anything like a musicians union.  And, but I said maybe I'll give this non-union thing a try.  I said, "Well, look, if y'all ever need a clarinet, let me know, tell him about--."  He said, "Yeah, I'll tell him about you."  So, a few weeks later, I went to the New Orleans Jazz and Heritage Festival.  This was my junior year at Xavier, 1975.  And there was this band that Big Al Carson was in, Doc Paulin's brass band, Doc Paulin.  So I met Doc Paulin.  Doc Paulin was a Creole trumpet player.  He had a very thick French accent.  He was very, very dark skinned.  He had a strange, I thought at the time strange something about him.  I didn't find out until just a couple of years ago after his death that he was actually of Haitian descent.  I thought he was--I knew he was from Wallace, in the country in Louisiana, and I thought that's what, the way people sounded in Wallace, 'cause he sounded the way Creoles sound from other parts of Louisiana.  But at any rate, Ernest "Doc" Paulin was his name.  He was a trumpet player that was born in the early first decade of, of 19--1900.  He led a brass band for many years.  He played with a lot of legendary jazz musicians.  He made a few, a couple of recordings.  And I met him at Jazz Fest.  He looked at me, and you know, I'm say, I say, "Oh, hey, Doc.  You know, I'm the guy that Big A told you about, the clarinet."  And Big Al told him about me.  And he looked at me and he frowned, and he said, "All y'all young people ain't no good."  And it's like, I was kind of insulted.  So he said, "And if I call you for a job, you gonna show up on time?"  I said, "Yeah."  "You gonna wear the right uniform?  You know we wear black pants, your shoes gotta be shined and clean, you wear white shirt, clean black tie--solid black tie, not no stripes and not them polka dots."  He had a thick French accent.  "You know what I mean?"  "Yeah."  "We wear a white band cap."  "Okay."  So I gave him my phone number and figured I'd never hear from him.  Couple of weeks later I got a call.  "White [HistoryMaker Michael White], this is Doc Paulin.  I got a job for you.  Be at my house at such and such a time, and don't forget we wear black pants, white shirt, short sleeve white shirt, solid black tie, band cap.  You got a band cap?"  "No, but I'll get one."  And that was the beginning of, of my career playing with Doc Paulin.
Story_ID: 621646
Speaker 1: I was a junior--I was a senior at Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] after that summer, and I played with him [Ernest "Doc" Paulin] off and on throughout that year.  And then I also joined the Fairview Baptist Church Brass Band near the end of my senior year, because near the end of my senior year I had met a legendary jazz musician, Danny Barker, in a very, very strange way (laughter).  Xavier used to have in the library a room they called the black collection room, and that's where they had all the books about black history, black music, black culture.  And I used to kind of hang out there and read books.  I would read about jazz.  I became more and more interested in jazz and blues and gospel, and I would read about all of this stuff.  So one day I was sitting in the library in a swivel chair looking at a book about New Orleans [Louisiana] musicians.  And all of a sudden, I looked at this page, and it had this musician--a drawing of a musician named Danny Barker.  And I looked up; I felt something strange, and I looked up.  And standing in the doorway about twenty feet away, I thought I saw Danny Barker.  The guy I looked at in the book, he's standing in the doorsill.  And I'm like, he was just staring, not moving at all.  So I said no, this is not real.  I closed my eyes, I looked down, and I looked up again, and nobody was there.  So I said wow, I, I imagined--I looked this man and I conjured him up.  I'm looking at him in a book, and I conjured him up in my mind.  And so then I thought about it.  I said wait a minute.  I'm not crazy.  I saw Danny Barker.  So I went to try to find him.  I went all over the library, downstairs, upstairs, everywhere; couldn't find him, no Danny Barker.  I asked people.  You know, nobody could tell me anything.  Somebody said, "Well, there's a classroom upstairs in the very, very top of the building in this room where they show films and stuff."  So I went up there, and sure enough, there he was.  It was his first day of teaching this class called African American music, at that time Afro American music.  And that was a class I always wanted to take, but I never had time to take it.  It couldn't fit into my schedule.  So, I went and I audited the class.  I sat in on it, 'cause this time I could take it, but I had too many hours.  But I sat in on the class; I audited the class the whole semester, and there was this guy, Danny Barker.  Well, I knew--the only thing I knew about him at the time was he played banjo and guitar, and he was an older musician and thing--then, come to find out, he's a jazz legend.  This man has played with a large variety of musicians, probably the wide- widest variety and range of musicians in the history of jazz, and he was one of the wi- most widely quoted musicians in jazz.  He played with everyone from Jelly Roll Morton to Louis Armstrong to Cab Calloway to Dizzy Gillespie, Duke Ellington, Billie Holiday, Lester Young, Coleman Hawkins, and the list goes on.  So, he had come back to New Orleans, Danny Barker, and--from, after many years of living in New York [New York].  And he did a lot of things.  He worked for a jazz museum down in the French Quarter [New Orleans, Louisiana]; he started a band down here, and he wanted to try to help young black kids get into the music of their heritage, into jazz.  He thought that both that would be a way of teaching kids how to do something positive in life and also keeping them out of trouble.  So he talked to his pastor at the Fairview Baptist Church, Reverend Andrew Darby [Andrew Darby, Jr.], and he started a Fairview Baptist Church Christian brass band; that was the first original name.  And that was a band of kids, many of them were descendants of musicians, some of them from long time musical families that go back to the beginning of jazz.  And he got them together.  They would have rehearsals.  They became a real band in a matter of time.  And they started playing jobs and doing a lot of things.  The first generation of the Fairview band, when it got older, splintered off, and he started a second group.  When I came along, I was in the second group.  I was twenty years old, but I was a kid, (laughter) I was with the kids.  But at the same I was playing with Doc Paulin.
Story_ID: 621647
Speaker 1: So then I graduated from Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana], and I went to grad school at Tulane University [New Orleans, Louisiana] in Spanish, working on a master's [degree] at first and then on a Ph.D.  I spent that entire time playing, but playing very sparingly.  I was with Doc Paulin's [Ernest "Doc" Paulin] band.
Speaker 2: Now with Doc Paulin's band, you played alongside of some legends.  Who were some of them?
Speaker 1: Doc Paulin's band played in the black community for the most part for social aid and pleasure club parade.  Social aid and pleasure clubs and benevolent organizations were self help groups that formed, first, a lot of them after the Civil War and during Reconstruction and post-Reconstruction.  But they were self help groups that had an organized structure and widespread membership throughout New Orleans [Louisiana].  They offered a variety of social and--social aid and benefits, social aid in terms of giving money to the sick, helping someone that got laid off from work, helping out in the community, giving--getting discounts for pharmacists and doctors that were associated with the organization, and providing a cheap means of burial insurance.  They also provided social--not only social aid, but pleasure.  Pleasure meant picnics, dances, other social events, and for some of the clubs, annual parades.  And these parades were a very important part of, at that time, underground New Orleans.  These were the heart and soul of black New Orleans, these social club parades.  But you could grow up in New Orleans and not even know they exist.  You could be black, you could be white, and never know that social club parades exist at that time.  I didn't know they existed until I was in them, and because I was still living in the predominantly white neighborhood [Carrollton, New Orleans, Louisiana].  I was going to school in the neighborhood where these parades happened on Sundays, but on Sundays I wasn't in that neighborhood.
Speaker 2: Why were they called underground?
Speaker 1: Well, I call them underground because--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --'cause people didn't know about them.  They were advertised on the news.  They weren't on television.  And a lot of people, like I said, black and white, didn't even know they existed.  So I call them underground because, you know, they weren't promoted; the tourists didn't know about them, and they went on, if you will, like a, a, a separate thing that, you know.
Story_ID: 621648
Speaker 1: You also said that y'all did funeral parades.  Explain to me the, the meaning behind a funeral parade.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, brass bands in general, or marching bands, and they, we played jazz.  We played improvised New Orleans style jazz.  We played hymns, marches, blues, jazz songs, rags, sometimes old pop songs; things like that.  We--the main functions for a brass band were the social club parades, jazz funerals, and church parades.  Now the jazz funeral was a time honored tradition that perhaps was the most widely known use of brass bands outside of the city.  But most people didn't really understand what jazz funerals were about.  When you saw a funeral publicized it was for a musician.  But the majority of jazz funerals were given for members of social aid and pleasure clubs, dues paying members.  If your dues were paid up and you requested a funeral with music, that's what you got, and that became the jazz funeral.  That was a way of celebrating death and looking at death in a double way of viewing death in a unique way in New Orleans [Louisiana].  There is slow music at the jazz funeral in the beginning when you're coming out of the church or funeral home.  The band divides into two, and they have slow music as the processions be- begins to form, play slow dirges.  Now, nowadays and the days I started playing some of the old written standard dirges that were kind of improvised or--were no longer played, but people played slow hymns like 'Just a Closer Walk with Thee,' 'Old Rugged Cross' ['The Old Rugged Cross'], 'By and By' ['In the Sweet By and By'], things like that.  They would play in this slow dirge tempo, kind of almost crying tempo.  And that represented or highlights the sadness of a person's passing; they're gone, they're not gonna be with us anymore.  So the music sort of represents almost a, almost a theatrical representation of the emotions associated with death.  The band is playing.  The different instruments take on different roles, sort of like that of either the preacher or family members crying.  The clarinet is wailing up high like a, like a grieving widow, and that's what we played.  So you'd play those slow dirges coming from the church.  I need to be playing when I tell you this, 'cause I can do that (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 621649
Speaker 1: We were talking about the jazz parades, and you were going to show us what you meant, so.
Speaker 2: Yeah, in a jazz funeral, we mentioned the slow music, which represents and highlights the sadness of the event: the passing of a person, the fact that they are no longer going to be with us.  The good times that we shared with them were going, finished.  So that's very sad, and the slow sad music reflects that.  You know, we would play dirges.  And as I mentioned, the, the, the, the s- the somber mood of the band was highlighted by the fact that all of the instruments had a kind of different sound, but they all sounded like people moaning, different voices, male, female voices.  The clarinet would, would moan with a lot of vibrato, sort of like a weeping widow, up high.  And you know, if, if the clarinet would play like, for example, a melody of the song, clarinet normally doesn't play medo- melody, but if, if a clarinet played the melody of a song like 'Just a Closer Walk with Thee,' it would sound sort of like this: (playing clarinet).  But in reality, the clarinet would actually play around the melody, and so, around that sort of preaching like voice.  And would play things like this: (playing clarinet).  So, that's kind of what the clarinet would do in a jazz funeral.  And you could hear that blocks away, just kind of wailing and screeching and crying but very effective in the ceremony.  And that part of the jazz funeral, was, was usually very solemn.
Story_ID: 621650
Speaker 1: The procession would proceed along for a few blocks.  If the cemetery was close by, they would go all the way to the cemetery.  But if the cemetery was too far away from the church or a funeral home, they would only go a few blocks, an indeterminate number of blocks, and then they would do what is called--the part of the cermon- ceremony called cutting the body loose.  The band would dis- dis- divide itself into two on both sides of the street.  They would play one final slow sad dirge as the procession passed through (gesture) with the cars and the body.  And after the body got a safe distance away, a few blocks away, then they would start having up tempo, joyous music.  That up tempo, joyous music was the last part of the jazz funeral.  And of course, of those hundred, sometimes thousands of people that would come to the funeral, many who had no idea even who the deceased person was, they would dance joyously, do the dance known as the second line.  And that is kind of the right way to send people off in New Orleans [Louisiana].  That's celebrating the fact that a person is going to a better place.  They're going to union with God.  They're free of their earthly worries and burdens and difficulties.  So, like they say in the Bible, cry at birth, rejoice, rejoice at death.  You're rejoicing at death, because you're gone on to a better existence.  So, we're celebrating that belief that the person is now much better off; they've made it.  And so there's the joyous, up tempo music and the dancing.  And so you hear songs like 'Didn't He Ramble': (playing clarinet).  Need to do all of that over, but that's another story (laughter).
Story_ID: 621651
Speaker 1: So this was Doc Paulin's band.  And one of the other questions that I had asked was that there were some legendary jazz players that you played alongside of during those years.  Tell me who some of, of those people were.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, Doc Paulin [Ernest "Doc" Paulin] had a lot of work, because he was a non-union band, so he could charge lower prices than the union.  And for poor churches and struggling social aid and pleasure clubs, that was tailor made for them.  So, he used to have a wide variety of musicians of all ages that passed through his band because, frankly, because he didn't charge union prices, the pay was relatively low.  I think the first job I made for Doc Paulin, played for him, was a church parade in Marrero [Louisiana] in 1975, in May of 1975.  I remember it very well.  And I think it only lasted about an hour, an hour and a half, and I think I made fourteen dollars.  Thought I had money, because that was enough for me to get a little gas to put in my [maternal] aunt's [Natalie Forcia] car that I borrowed, go on a date, and go to Burger King, and still have a dollar or so left over.  So that was money in those days.  I remember that first church parade with Doc Paulin very well.  I also remember the first jazz funeral I ever played with him.  The first jazz funeral I ever played with Doc was for a social club member in Hahnville, Louisiana, which is a small community right across the Mississippi River, right on the other side, and I'll never forget as long as I live, as opposed to most of the jazz funerals I've seen, those for musicians or most of the ones they have today, which tend to be more like a side show than this sort of solemn ceremony with two, you know, sections.  Those--that first funeral that I saw was incredible.  I mean, first of all, they didn't have a large crowd of anonymous spectators.  There were just a few.  It was during a, a weekday.  Everyone in the organization was older.  They were dressed in black.  I'll never forget the guy who was leading the, the social club.  He was like a grand marshal.  He, he looked like something I, I've never seen before.  He had the--they, they wore these admiral's hats.  He had this long pointed sword that he had leaning on his shoulder.  He had this extremely serious look on his face, but yet there was a certain kind of reserved joy in, in his step, even during the slow part, but even in the fast part.  And that ceremony was really beautiful.  I remember hearing the music so clear and so pure on River Road.  It was just like kind of ringing through.  And we went from the church a few blocks to the, to the cemetery.  I remember that very well.  We also played a lot of church parades at that time.  Baptist churches would have parades for anniversaries, installation of a new pastor, building 'em a new church, or what have you.
Story_ID: 621652
Speaker 1: Doc Paulin's band went through a lot of people.  He, at one point, he had thirteen kids, so a number of his kids started playing.  But they really kind of started around the same time I did, so there were only a couple of them then.  But he had some older musicians, and some of them had been around a long time.  I remember he had a trombone player named Simon Broom, and he had been playing around for a long time.  He had a trumpet player named--an old man who was born in 1902.  His name was Eddie Richardson.  Eddie Richardson had played with the famous Eureka Brass Band, and he's on their records.  And he was an old trumpet player, and he used to love playing in those parades.  I remember listening to him.  He had his own unique style and sound, like, like they did in jazz.  Doc Paulin [Ernest "Doc" Paulin] had his own unique style and sound.  But I guess a lot of the people I remember the best from that band were some of the saxophone players that came through.  You know, it seems like every few weeks he'd end up with other saxophone players.  Well, you know, I was a kid just getting started, so that little money was good to me.  But I guess for an older, experienced guy that wasn't great money.  But he had musicians.  I remember one guy was on the first job I played named Curtis Mitchell.  He had another guy named Leroy "Batman" Rankin.  I remember him.  And there was a guy who worked with him for a long time named Joe Tillman.  And these guys had played rhythm and blues, and some of them had been on famous rhythm and blues records.  Some of them had played with all kinds of famous musicians, played with Ray Charles and Lloyd Price and Danny White and recorded with all kinds of legends, you know.  And some of them, you could hear them, them playing on records that, that played on the radio, and yet, there they were, out in the, in the parades.  So that was great to, to learn from and play with some of those guys.
Story_ID: 621653
Speaker 1: I need to say something.
Speaker 2: Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 1: What I didn't realize at the time, but was very important, was that the years I spent with Doc Paulin [Ernest "Doc" Paulin], 1975 to '79 [1979], nearly four years, was a very important transition period in the history of New Orleans [Louisiana] music.  Those were the last days that authentic traditional jazz was played by brass bands in the black community for predominantly black audiences.  Most of the people who, who followed social club parades were black.  Now the social club parade was a very special thing.  Those were the biggest events that had--that bra- brass bands played for and probably the biggest traditional jazz events in the world, because they could involve hundreds, up to thousands of people.  The social clubs would give these parades in the black community.  They would go through different neighborhoods, sometimes from downtown to Uptown [New Orleans, Louisiana] or Uptown to downtown, or they would stay in one part of town.  And they were very elaborate events.  The social club members--the social club parade consists of three parts.  And those, in effect, are, are transition and transformation of African traditions kept alive in New Orleans.
Story_ID: 621654
Speaker 1: So the social aid and pleasure club parades were very important events.  The social clubs would spend quite a lot of time and money planning the parades.  And they would get together and wear elaborate outfits.  Nowadays, it's not unheard of for a social club to spend thousands of dollars on outfits that they wear in one day.  In fact, I remember hearing of a female social club recently that spent over a thousand dollars on a pair of boots that they wore in the parade.  And I guarantee you at the end of the parade those boots would be worn out and not usable again.  So, but that's how seriously they take them.  I think one of the most important things to know about New Orleans culture is that it is a culture of very spirited people.  It is a culture of transformed African traditions that have been colored and shaped by various cultures and by a philosophy of the American experience.  That culture of New Orleans [Louisiana] that is so special is one in which African Americans found various ways of transcending normal everyday living, laws of life, and rules to find and create their own worlds, their own worlds in which they could compete, in which they could win, in which they could rule, in which they could gain respect, which they could move from being subjected to second class citizenship and invisibility.  They could move to positions of honor, respect, royalty, where their opinions counted, where their intelligence counted, where their individuality counted, where their heritage and tradition counted, where they could truly be equal, and find a certain measure of freedom; spiritual freedom, psychological freedom, and actual physical freedom, at least in the--at least temporarily.  And in New Orleans, things that represent that mindset are things like the Mardi Gras Indians [Native American], social club parades, and perhaps more importantly, jazz, jazz music.  All of those things incorporate various aspects of that philosophy of freedom and recreation and reinterpretation of existence in the world.  So the social club parade was a very important event.  People would spend money, a lot of money on these outfits because they were in their community.  They were being proud.  This was their day to shine, to show off, to have everybody recognize them, to gain, you know, importance in, in these clubs.  So, social club members would have several divisions.  Those divisions would form and have several brass bands, one, two, three, four marching brass bands that would accompany them.  In the old days the brass bands only played traditional New Orleans jazz.
Story_ID: 621655
Speaker 1: So the social club parade was very important.  There were dozens and dozens of social clubs in New Orleans [Louisiana] that involved hundreds of black people.  And they gave people strength; they gave them a sense of unity, a sense of pride.  And so the parade was the ultimate symbol of that.  So, these parades were very different from the more publicized and better known Mardi Gras parades.  In the traditional New Orleans social club parade there were no floats, no riders, no throws, no masks, or anything like that.  But people would be dressed in these elaborate costumes that would be bold colors, contrasting colors, colors that, you know, you might have somebody in colors you would not normally have.  You might see a man in pastel pink or light blue or lime green, or you might see people with colors like a deep orange and a deep blue at the same time, colors that would look--normally you would think of as clashing.  Or you might see people with five or six different versions of the same color.  They might clash if one person were wearing, but because everyone in the division has it, just that makes it work.  So you might see somebody with red shoes, or different color red socks, red pants, a different color red or pink shirt, a red tie, a red hat.  They might make their own fan to carry, a red fan, or an umbrella.  And what the clubs would do, is they wouldn't just walk.  They would dance.  It was like a big moving dance.  It was in a sense an American New Orleans version of African celebration.  Everybody would participate.  So the social club parade had three main components: the social club, with their different divisions, and sometimes they would have children's divisions of the club, male divisions, female divisions, et cetera.  The second component--and of course the, the social club was the principal sponsors.  They hired the brass bands.  They would get the, any poli- police permits or city permits they needed.  They were the sponsors of the, of the event.  They would pay for drinks and food at rest stops and things like that.  Social club parades used to last six hours.  It used to start around eleven and go to five [o'clock].  In modern days they've modified them to be like four hours.  They would always be on Sundays.  And those social club parades had the, the club, the second important part is the brass band, which I said there would be one or several of them.  Brass bands were always uniformed.  They would wear black pants, white shirt, solid black tie, a white band cap.  When it was kind of cold, they would wear a black coat, so they'd have a black suit on, white, white band cap.  That was in stark contrast to the bold color outfits of the social club.  But that has a symbolic meaning about incorporation and about democracy and about contrasting the African and the European, the black and the white, you know, the, the normal and the unusual.  It was a philosophy about creativity, about existence.
Story_ID: 621656
Speaker 1: The third important component, and you can't have a New Orleans social club parade without this, is the hundreds up to thousands of anonymous people that come from any and everywhere when they hear the music.  Some people know about the parade and are ready to come.  Some come from their houses, and they drop any and everything to become part of the parade when it comes by, when they hear the first beat of the bass drum or the first notes of the music.  You know, New, New Orleans brass band music is very distinctive.  It has a very distinctive rhythm that's really derived from West African rhythms.  It's a simplification of West African rhythms, but it's, it's a very prominent rhythm in the African diaspora.  You hear rhythms like (makes sounds), and that's the bass drum basic rhythm.  And then there are tuba rhythms and other things that go along with that.  And then there's improvised New Orleans jazz: marches, blues, hymns, jazz songs, old pop songs, et cetera.  But the people that come to the parade, it's not like Mardi Gras.  It's not like Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade.  You would go watch it and say oh, that's nice, and then you go home.  No, in New Orleans [Louisiana] you become part of the parade.  You follow the parade alongside and dance, cheer the whole way.  And so the dancing of the second liners, as they're called, the, the crowd of people that come from any and everywhere, is as important as the band or the social club.  And so it's like a massive moving party that never ends for hours and hours.  And you're, you're like you're hypnotized.  You, you march in this parade--I say march, but you dance in this parade, and then all of a sudden you find yourself like in a trance.  A few hours later it's over, and then you're mad 'cause you have to walk back all this way that you danced.  But when you're dancing and you hear the music, you don't, you don't feel it.  You don't feel the weather.  You don't feel how hot it is.  You could be soaking wet, sweating.  It doesn't matter 'cause you're having such a good time, and you're in a, in another place, like a spiritual place.  So those, those social club parades were very important.  And what I got to witness and participate in was the, the last days when authentic traditional New Orleans jazz was in, in the black community in that way.  By the late '70s [1970s] the band started to change into more modern brass bands with groups like the Dirty Dozen [Dirty Dozen Brass Band] and eventually the Rebirth [Rebirth Brass Band] and others.  And so you have, in a sense, you had a renaissance of the brass band tradition, but they were no longer mainly playing traditional jazz repertoire or style.  They were playing more modern songs, things they were making up.  So I got to witness those, those last days, and that was a, that was a glorious time in New Orleans.
Story_ID: 621657
Speaker 1: Before we go on anything--to anything else, you make reference to traditional New Orleans jazz.  Tell me what that is.  I mean, what actually makes that up?
Speaker 2: Traditional New Orleans jazz is a very important music.  I would dare to say that it's one of the world's great musics of all times, both for its musical content, for the variety of performance its produced, and because of the philosophy behind it.  Traditional New Orleans jazz is a music that was born in New Orleans [Louisiana] in the African American population during the late 1890s, the mid to late 1890s, starting with musicians like the legendary Uptown, New Orleans cornetist, Charles "Buddy" Bolden [Buddy Bolden] and others.  You know, New Orleans had always been, throughout its history, a very important music town with a lot of celebrations and events among all groups and classes and ethnicities.  At many times the--at many times there was more opportunity for musicians to perform than there were skilled, trained, reading musicians.  So, musicians of all levels could find work, musicians who didn't read music at all, musicians who were folk musicians, musicians who had high degrees of classical training.  During the late 1890s there were a lot of things going on in New Orleans, and one of those is the repercussions of the post-Reconstruction period.  There was an increase in anti-black legislation, racial violence, oppression against black rights, and the highly spirited people of New Orleans, the very varied people of New Orleans did not take that ly- lying down.  There was protests, of course, in other parts of America.  You had things like the Niagara Movement, eventually the formation of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  In New Orleans there was also legal action taken.  There were boycotts.  There were protests.  During Reconstruction there were incidents of violence.  Where protesting the rights to, to sit on the streetcar, blacks would take the streetcar and just take it over.  The famous Plessy v. Ferguson case [Plessy v. Ferguson, 1896] originated in New Orleans with a New Orleans Creole named Homer Plessy, to try to desegregate railroad cars.  So, and there were all--there's a history of, of many different kinds of legal battles, court battles to try to gain civil rights.  Well, that was one thing, but New Orleans found another way to respond to racism and that was that concept of transformation that I referred to earlier.  You had certain things form at the same time, certain social clubs that increased in numbers.  You had groups like the Mardi Gras Indians [Native American], which really represents another way of existing in your own world, in this world at the same time.  And then you had the birth and the spread of jazz.
Story_ID: 621658
Speaker 1: Jazz started as a combination of both the traditional New Orleans [Louisiana] need to party, to have a good time, to dance, and as a way of expressing what the African American population of America was seeking: social justice and equality in society.  Jazz in a sense is the ultimate model or metaphor for democracy.  It's a practice of democracy.  It's a living practice of democracy.  The values of early jazz became some of the values that were sought by the larger society.  So, early jazz occurred when musicians like Buddy Bolden and others started to use the black vocal style on instruments and improvised the playing of marches, rags, ethnic folk songs, blues, hymns, and dance music that had been popular anyway.  So jazz was not a repertoire but a, an approach or a philo- a philosophy of playing, a style of playing, that it can incorporate many different styles.  It's a way of loosening up or freeing up and reinterpreting existing songs and melodies.  Of course, new songs could be created with that as well.  So, early jazz music became popular in the streets with the black community because there was something about the music that drew their attention.  What the something was, was it presented freedom.  It presented possibility.  It was a democracy.  It had values that they sought in everyday life.  So the music became a parallel to the hopes, the aspirations, and the lives of the black community.  In jazz, everyone is encouraged to find, develop, and use their own musical personality.  If you play the trumpet, if you play the cornet, if you play the trombone, if you play the drums, the piano, the banjo, you want to sound like yourself.  You want to develop a musical personality that speaks about you.  That gives you presence; that gives you meaning, that gives you visibility; that gives you a measure of respect.  It is something that should be as personal as your voice, your facial features, your handwriting.  It should represent your real emotions, your real feeling.  So, it, it, it's a way of freeing your life up from whatever is going on in society around you, to give you another type of existence, and that existence could be shared with others.
Story_ID: 621659
Speaker 1: The main characteristic of authentic traditional New Orleans jazz is collective improvisation.  And that is where all of the instruments, and in particular the horns, engage in musical conversations, if you will, over a steady but sometimes varied rhythms, New Orleans style rhythms.  Usually the instrumentation in a traditional New Orleans [Louisiana] jazz band is drum, drum set, banjo, which is an instrument originally of African origin in the modern banjo form.  People think of banjo as associated with country music or hillbillies.  But the banjo is actually directly drawn from African instruments.  And there's a long standing tradition of banjo and banjo playing and of banjo type instruments that come from West Africa and that were recreated here in some cases throughout, throughout slavery.  The bass, which sometimes was a tuba or brass bass, but also the bass violin, the string bass, and in places where they had them, but they didn't always have them, the piano; those were the rhythm section instruments.  The function of the rhythm section was to hold and maintain steady beats that would provide a foundation for what else was going on.  What else was going happened in the front line.  The front line usually consisted of trumpet or cornet, clarinet, and trombone.  The cornet plays the lead or the melody but improvises the way he plays it, and that improvisation can come every time you play the melody you can play it, or you can find your own special way of playing that melody and keep it, or you can improvise your own special way every time you play.  The trumpet or cornet also plays a melodic lead.  If he's not, if he's not playing the melody, then he's playing something that sounds like a melody; that leaves spaces for conversation.  You make melodic phrases that are like statements that speak or like, or like sentences.  That leaves room for the trombone to fill in, to fill in the empty spaces and engage in conversation, and the clarinet to also engage in conversation.  And the clarinet and the trombone can have a variety of roles.  They can play rhythmically, that adds to the rhythmic intensity of the music, or they can play more or less engaging in that conversation with the trumpet.  The clarinet can play harmonies to enrich or thicken the sound, or the clarinet can play in a way that answers the trumpet, that continues what the trumpet says, that challenges what the trumpet says, that mocks what the trumpet says, that gives like an amen to what the trumpet says.  And that's some of the beauty of the music, because it's not like in some jazz styles where you practice certain types of scales, and you come on the job and you just play them.  In authentic New Orleans jazz, you--it's not premade.  You, you, you have an idea of what the melody is, and depending on your knowledge, you might know what the key you're in, and the structure of the song, the harmonic chord structure.  But once you start playing, you're improvising, because you feed off of what the other musicians are doing.  So the trumpet plays the lead; you have to answer that lead.
Speaker 2: Just like call and response.
Speaker 1: It's call and response.  Again, transformation of a principle that's very common in, in African music.  Call and response is very, very important, very common in New Orleans jazz.  And that's the way the music works.  So, in this music though, everyone that ever recorded, among dozens and dozens of musicians in the earliest period of jazz, has an identifiable musical personality.  No two cornet players sound alike.  No two clarinet players sound alike.  I've identified more than thirty early New Orleans clarinet players on record, and no two sound alike.  I can tell each one of them within two measures of music, I can tell who it is, because they all have a different sound, you know, a different tone, a different feel, a different presence, a different personality.  They've developed their own voice.  They've freed not only the instrument from the normal traditional limitations that are given to the idea of playing an instrument, but they've also freed what comes inside of themselves to develop a personality that can go beyond words, that can go beyond the normal, normal way of living.  So, that was very important.  So, in playing New Orleans jazz, it's like a living democracy.  You have freedom; you have freedom of expression.  Everyone, in theory, is in--potentially equal, equal to create what you want to create, equal to say what you want to say, what you might need to say or what you want to say, equal to express any wide variety of motions--emotions: happiness, joy, sadness, anger, fun; it's all there.
Story_ID: 621660
Speaker 1: What is your, your take on Dixieland, which most people think is traditional New Orleans jazz?
Speaker 2: Well, you see, since early jazz was largely instrumental and not vocal, the music could be interpreted by many people to mean many things.  And its primary use was as a fun dance music, and therefore it crossed many--it wasn't universally accepted.  There were people black and white that condemned jazz early on.  But it became popular enough to cross a number of lines and be universal.  There's a history of early jazz music being played, for example, for many different events, at colleges like Tulane University [New Orleans, Louisiana], where blacks were not allowed to go to school, but they played functions for Tulane students many times, on and off campus.  Jazz music was used in such a way that it filled an important void in life, and everybody was exposed to it.  You had jazz in parades.  You had jazz in funerals.  Jazz was spread--it was played at picnics.  There were weekend camps on Lake Pontchartrain, where people would go, and it was played out there.  Jazz was played in bars and clubs.  It was played in bars and clubs in Storyville [New Orleans, Louisiana].  Now, there's a myth that jazz started in the brothels of Storyville, the notorious red light district, but that's not true (laughter).  You read that in literature.  You read it in jazz history books.  You hear people repeat that myth over and over.  Jazz was born basically in Uptown, New Orleans [Louisiana].  It was played all over the city in a variety of events.  The brothels of Storyville rarely had music.  When they did, it was usually solo piano players.  The jazz bands didn't play in brothels.  They played in a couple--a few clubs in Storyville, but they also played in clubs all over the city.  They played for dances at dance halls.  They played in public parks.  They played--one of the ways jazz was spread was through advertising.  Jazz was played for sports events of all kinds.  They used to put bands on advertising wagons that would advertise a business or an event or politician or something.  And the bands would drive through neighborhoods.  And when two wagons would meet, sometimes they would tie the wheels together, and the two bands would do musical battle and try to compete to outplay each other.  Well, that would attract large crowds, and those large crowds would become the judges of who was the best band.  But that would advertise whatever event or candidate or whatever was going on, or business, so everybody was kind of satisfied for that.  But jazz spread outside of New Orleans into the white community as well.  And there were a number of white musicians that started playing jazz, in imitation of black musicians.  And in 1917, a number of Italian musicians from New Orleans went outside of the city to Chicago [Illinois] and New York [New York], and they made what became as the first jazz records.  And the name of that group was the Original Dixieland Jazz Band.  Along with making those records, they claimed that they invited jazz music.  So, part of the reason for the Dixieland name is this band their claim to having invented jazz.  But of course, 1917 is a long ways from the 1890s.  And, but African Americans didn't start recording jazz until 1922, and in large numbers, 1923.  That's when you had--
Speaker 1: Race records.
Speaker 2: Yes, King Oliver's Creole Jazz Band, because of course, by that, that time, you were in the era of race records, when you also had the, the heyday of classic jazz was also the heyday of classic blues, when you had mainly African American females like Bessie Smith, Ma Rainey, Mamie Smith, and, and many others recording blues music, which was the main staple of, of the race record market.  And then jazz came along--along with that as well.  But that's when you had King Oliver, Jelly Roll Morton, Clarence Williams, many others recording in large number.  And then the world kind of started to see where the music really came from.
Story_ID: 621661
Speaker 1: Then during the 1940s bebop era there was a revival of interest in jazz.  But when modern jazz started, at first they didn't call it jazz.  They needed a name.  So eventually when they called it jazz, to distinguish between the different styles, there was more widespread use of putting that label Dixieland on early jazz.  Now, in early jazz history, most of the time they distinguished the difference between New Orleans jazz and Dixieland as New Orleans jazz being the original jazz that evolved from black musicians, Dixieland being the white version or white imitation of black jazz.  But in later years, they didn't make that distinction.  They didn't want to call early jazz just New Orleans jazz because there were different variations like Chicago jazz, which is a variation, and you know, there was jazz out on the West Coast.  You know, and, and so they, they tried to find a name that would kind of fit, so they used the name Dixieland.  But of course, a lot of the older black musicians resented that name, because of course, Dixieland and Dixie is reminiscent of the Old South, slavery, racial oppression and so on.  Now some black musicians accepted and used that name because they thought commercially they would get more work in the white world, so, "Let them call it what they want; I just want to make money."  But some of the older musicians that I got to know later on and stuff were very much re- resented and rejected their music being called Dixieland.  They said this music is jazz; it's New Orleans jazz; it's traditional New Orleans jazz.  In the early days, they used to call it--sometimes they didn't have a name for it.  They used to call it blues.  They used--some bands called it ragtime.  It wasn't ragtime, but that's what they would call it, ragtime, blues, jump up music, ratty music.  They had a lot of things they would call it.  So that, that became a, a bone of contention because eventually, in the 1940s, there was the revival of interest in New Orleans jazz.  And that spread and created a movement around the world.  But in America, most of the revival of traditional jazz was--leaned in the Dixieland direction and became a music that's very, well, bland and bloodless, and sort of, you know straw hat, and plastic hats, and stripe vests, and kind of fast and loud and kind of corny.  It's very, very different from New Orleans jazz in terms of the sound and the feeling and the emotion.  New Orleans jazz can be fun, but it's also very spiritual music.  It's very serious music in the fun.
Story_ID: 621662
Speaker 1: I didn't realize it at the time, but the four years I spent with Doc Paulin [Ernest "Doc" Paulin] were like another education.  It was like another way of going to college.  I mean I had been New Orleans [Louisiana] all my life, and now for the first time I found out about a whole 'nother way of life that had been around me all the time but that I didn't really know about.  I was immersed in the heart of the black community.  I was immersed in the heart of surviving transformed African traditions.  I was in the heart of the, the community where jazz came from and where the original spirit of jazz and the meaning still existed.  And that was an incredible thing, because I found out that jazz, real New Orleans jazz was not only not Dixieland, it was not the music on Bourbon Street, it's not the music in the French Quarter [New Orleans, Louisiana] for tourists; it's a music that's done for the community 'cause it represents the spirit and a voice in the community.  If anyone else comes here and likes it, that's great.  But it's not some trumped up, fake thing that you just do to make a dollar.  In fact, you know, money wasn't a big part of my years in the, in the early brass band.  But after a while, those parades become very intense.  You know, you notice--you can never see all of the different types of second line dancing that goes on out there.  Second line dancing is one of the most incredible and creative things that you could ever see.  There would be people dancing on top of cars, under cars, on fences, on rooftops, dancing with other people, dancing on top of other people, on their shoulders, on their backs, dancing on anything, on the, on the, on the ledge of the rail of the interstate or a bridge.  That type of creative dancing was important, but the intensity and the crowd cover of so many crowds--I mean so many people in those parades, also became a breeding ground unfortunately for some people that had criminal intent.  And I saw a variety of things happen in some of those social club parades, crimes of different kinds: robbery, looting, auto theft, assault.  But sometimes, and with more frequency, there started to be shootings out at the parades.  Usually, some second liner shoots another second liner.  Sometimes it was revenge from prison.  Sometimes it might have been anything, drugs or god knows what.  But it seemed like every week it started getting intense.  And one Sunday, there was a parade by a club called the Jolly Bunch.  And during that parade, there were five different people that got shot and killed.  And this time, this happened--most of those happened close to the band I was with, with Doc Paulin's band.  And I had been in this before over the last couple of years every now and then.  But when somebody would say, "Gunshot," or "Gun," or you would hear something go, (makes sounds), you--there would be a stampede, and everybody would break out running, trying to duck, trying to get behind something, trying to get out the way.  You would step on people; people will step on you.  I remember seeing people with a white shirt on with a giant footprint on their back (laughter) and things like that.  But this particular Sunday in 1978, this Jolly Bunch parade, you know, I was talking to one of the guys that was in the crowd that got shot.  I heard a lot of gunshots.  I remember the stampede.  I remember at the end of the parade I was thinking, well, it's over now, so we can get out of this, and then we heard gunshots at the end of the parade.  And I saw a guy--the parade ended right near a hospital, and I saw some people carrying this guy into the hospital. And I remember he had on a white t-shirt and a small hole in his, in his shirt, and I'll never forget that look on his face.  So then it was time for me--I figured after that I didn't want to really be in the parades anymore.  I figured there must be something better.
Story_ID: 621663
Speaker 1: I quit Doc's band, and I joined the musicians union [American Federation of Musicians Local 174 - 496].  And when I joined the musicians union, then I was able to play with almost everybody else in, in traditional jazz that was out there 'cause they were all union members.  So I joined several other brass bands.  I played with the Young Tuxedo Brass Band.  I played with Ellyna Tatum's Second Liners.  I had a few jobs with the Olympia Brass Band.  And then I started playing with other bra- brass bands.  Now in the brass band, real traditional brass bands, you would play mainly ensemble.  You wouldn't have a lot of featured solos and things like that.  But in the smaller groups you had to play solos and things.  So that was a different kind of playing, and the variet- the, the repertoire was varied.  In the parades the brass beat is more or less a medium bright beat, and it's pretty steady.  In the funeral is the only time you really change the tempo.  But in the smaller jazz bands you had a variety of tempos, different song types, different volume, and you had to play solo, so that was very different for me.  I spent a couple of years trying to really learn more about improvisation.  And then I realized that some of the older musicians became very interested in, in jazz.  I was very taken by the music.  One--near the end of my tenure with Doc Paulin [Ernest "Doc" Paulin] we played a parade at the Mount Moriah Baptist Church [Mount Moriah Missionary Baptist Church, New Orleans, Louisiana].  It was an anniversary parade that we used to play.  Mount Moriah Baptist Church used to be Mahalia Jackson's old church when she was in New Orleans [Louisiana].  And that was a, a spiritual day for me.  I left that parade and I was going home, and I happened to stop at a record store.  And I saw a recording of this musician named George Lewis, an old black musician with a clarinet.  And I heard of him, but I hadn't heard really good things about him.  And I didn't know too much about him, but I remember something about their picture.  It said buy me, buy--so I bought the record.  I went home that night, put that record on, and that changed my whole life.  The, the music coming out of that record was like my whole life had been in darkness.  And all of a sudden, a big, bright light came on, and the light's been on ever since, and that light was that that music spoke to me.  It, it defined what life is like to be a New Orleanian.  It defined what life was like to be black in New Orleans.  It defined everything that I had been feeling inside but couldn't express in words.  So that music--and that was George Lewis, George Lewis' band, and that music just changed everything for me.  So, I fell in love.  I mean, I loved the music already, but I fell in love even deeper with it.
Story_ID: 621664
Speaker 1: And I had to learn as much as I could about the history of jazz and the people that played it, so I started buying books about jazz history.  I started to find out if any of these musicians were still alive, and I started to seek them out.  So I started to know that there were, hey, there were a number of old jazz musicians still living and playing.  I saw them at the Jazz Fest [New Orleans Jazz and Heritage Festival].  Eventually, I saw them at different clubs and different places.  I saw them in public concerts at parks, saw them at Preservation Hall [New Orleans, Louisiana].
Speaker 2: Who were some of these people?
Speaker 1: Oh, these were musicians like--well, the oldest musician I saw was the legendary trumpet player named Kid Thomas Valentine.  Kid Thomas Valentine was born in 1896.  And he lived in and came from Port of New Orleans across the Mississippi River known as Algiers [New Orleans, Louisiana].  He was a legend that started recording in the '50s [1950s], and he was known all around the world.  There are still people trying to imitate the way Kid Thomas would play.  He had a, a very unique style.  He could sound like he was talking or fussing, or he could sound like he was whispering or crying.  He could sound like a baby crying when he played a muted trumpet.  But he had a very interesting style.  In a sense he was sort of like a traditional jazz version of Miles Davis; he picked the right notes and beautiful notes, but he left open spaces.  He played a kind of sparse style, but his, his phrases were like short melodic statements full of meaning and full of life and that unique sound that he had.  But there were other trumpet players that I got to know, like Percy Humphrey, who I mentioned was born in 1905; Kid Sheik Cola [George "Kid Sheik" Cola], who was born around 1908; Andrew Anderson; Ernie Cagnolatti.  There were, you know, a lot of trumpet players and clarinet players.  I got to see a few of the traditional clarinet players that were still alive, Paul Barnes, who was born in 1902.  Paul Barnes had played and recorded with Jelly Roll Morton in the late '20s [1920s].  And I saw him a couple of times, got to talk to him.  I heard and saw Louis Cottrell [Louis Cottrell, Jr.], who was at one time the president of the black musicians union [American Federation of Musicians Local 496; American Federation of Musicians Local 174 - 496].  He was a great clarinetist with a unique sound.  I saw a clarinet player named Joseph "Brother Cornbread" Thomas [Joe "Cornbread" Thomas], who played with the famous Papa Celestin, and he used to sing this song called 'Marie LaVeau,' which he got from Papa Celestin.  And I got to see, of course, Willie Humphrey, the brother of Percy, who was born in 1900, who as a great clarinetist, at one time went to Chicago [Illinois], played with King Oliver.  He was, he also had a beautiful liquid sound.  On one occasion I got to see the great Barney Bigard, who played with Louis Armstrong and Duke Ellington, who was a master of, of New Orleans [Louisiana], Creole clarinet style.  I got to see a guy named Raymond Burke who had a beautiful sound and unique expression.  I got to know people that played saxophone.  There was one guy who played a New Orleans style saxophone named Emanuel Paul, he played in the Eureka Brass Band, but he also played with Kid Thomas, and he had a beautiful sound.  Trombone players, there was Preston Jackson who was, who was born around 1902.  He had grown up in Chicago listening to King Oliver and Louis Armstrong, but he was from here.  Eventually, he played and recorded with legends like Sidney Bechet and John Dodds [Johnny Dodds], and he told me what that was all about.  There were musicians like Louis Nelson on trombone, who was born in 1902, big, tall black man with a lot of American Indian [Native American] blood.  And he was famous during the New Orleans revival because he had played with George Lewis, and he made a lot of records.  And Nelson, there are--were and still are a lot of trombone players that imitated his style.  And he traveled a lot around the world.  There were other trombone players I got to know like Clem Tervalon [Clement Tervalon].  And there were banjo players like Emanuel Paul, "Father" Al Lewis, Danny Barker, Narvin Kimball.  And one of my best friends of all was a bass player named Chester Zardis.  Chester Zardis, there's a picture of him in 1920 playing in a band with, with Edmond Hall and others.  Chester Zardis had one of the most incredible, pure sounds and spirits, musical spirits I ever had the honor of hearing and playing with.  It wasn't volume.  It was presence.  There was a presence in his sound and in his sense of rhythm that just kind of went all through you.  It was just an incredible sound.  He told me a story about one time he sat in with Count Basie in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], in Philadelphia, and Count Basie wanted to hire him on the spot.  There were other great bass players that I got to know and hear.  Piano players, I played with Sweet Emma Barrett.  Sweet Emma Barrett was the second oldest New Orleans jazz musician I knew and eventually played with.  She was born in 1898.  And by the time I knew her, she was crippled, in a wheelchair, had been paralyzed from a stroke, and she could only play with her right hand.  But what she played with that right hand and her singing was just magic.  And so, I got to see it and know more than three dozen of these kinds of people, and eventually I started out just kind of watching them from a distance.  But eventually I got to meet and know them, talk to them, and with time I eventually got to play with them, first sitting in and then being a hired musician.
Story_ID: 621665
Speaker 1: I ended up being a regular with Kid Thomas Valentine's band for many years, and I played with all of those older musicians.  Kid Sheik Cola on trumpet was very important in sort of bringing me out and introducing me to a lot of musicians.
Speaker 2: How did you meet him?
Speaker 1: Well, I used to see Kid Sheik Cola playing at Preservation Hall [New Orleans, Louisiana].  And one day I had a job playing in Jackson Square [New Orleans, Louisiana] in a large band that included Emanuel Sayles, the great banjo player who had played with George Lewis.  And from that first George Lewis record I heard, there was a song called 'Burgundy Street Blues.'  And I remember it had a very haunting sound.  And I, I remember staying up all night until learned how to play that song note for note.  It was sort of like (playing clarinet).  And I, I learned that song, and I used to play it, and I wanted to play it.  And so, when we played this job at, at the park, there was mixture of musicians, younger, older, black and white.  And we played at Jacksons, Jackson Square.  And Kid Thomas Valentine was on the job, and Emanuel Sayles.  And Emanuel Sayles, they asked me if I wanted to play a feature song, and I said, "Well, I'd like to try that 'Burgundy Street Blues.'"  So they were like, "What?"  You know, because at that time, there were no younger black musicians seriously looking into the older style of New Orleans jazz.  There were guys out playing, and there were good musicians all around, and some that were playing traditional music, but not really looking back into those older musicians and that real authentic old style.  So, I remember I started playing 'Burgundy Street Blues,' and the rhythm on the banjo and the bass--I think the bass player was Chester Zardis at the time.  He had played and recorded that many times with George Lewis.  And the rhythms were just like heaven to me.  It's like what I was hearing on the record was there, and it was there for me to play.  So I started playing 'Burgundy Street Blues,' and I tried to play it as well as I could.  I'd just got into it, and all of a sudden I felt something hit my head, and then something else hit my head, and it was wet; it was rain, and it started raining.  And I was like, no, no.  And as I got halfway through the song it started harder and harder, and I kept playing, I was--and then it got harder and harder, and finally we had to stop.  So I was very disappointed because I figured that would be my only chance ever to play 'Burgundy Street Blues,' and I got rained out.  And it wasn't any consolation when, when Emanuel Sayles or somebody said, "See, you made the sky cry."  But he did shake my hand, and that was a great compliment.  But what I didn't know was trumpet player Kid Sheik, George "Kid Sheik" Cola, was a couple of blocks away.  And he said, "I heard--," he used to smoke a cigar, so he had a certain way he would talk when he had that cigar in his mouth, "I heard that 'Burgundy Blues.'"  I said, "Who is that playing that 'Burgundy Blues'?"  Because, nobody was really playing that in New Orleans [Louisiana] after George Lewis, I mean, and George Lewis died in 1968.  Here this was around 1980.  And he said, "Man, I heard that song, and I came running to see who that was."  And so that's how--and he came, and he gave me a compliment after that, and that was Kid Sheik.
Story_ID: 621666
Speaker 1: So he told me about a jazz party that some friends were having a couple of days later.  He say, "White [HistoryMaker Michael White], I want you to come and play that 'Burgundy Blues' ['Burgundy Street Blues']."  So, I went to this jazz party, and there were people from all over the world that were fans of New Orleans jazz, people from Belgium, people from Australia, from Germany, from Japan, from England, from Scandinavia.  And I was like, why are all these people listening--people love traditional New Orleans jazz.  So there was this party, and a lot of old musicians were there.  Kid Thomas [Kid Thomas Valentine] was there, and he--I remember instead of playing trumpet, he played drums.  Kid Sheik [George "Kid Sheik" Cola] was there and some of the older musicians.  And we were at the party, and at one point he said, "White, play that 'Burgundy Blues.'"  And I was scared to death.  I closed my eyes, and I played it.  And there was total silence, and people were in shock and awe because you, you just didn't have younger black traditional jazz people; that was like something that didn't exist.  So, all of a sudden--not, certainly not playing that kind of stuff.  And all of a sudden, I finished the song, and everybody started clapping, and they made me play it again.  So, I met a lot of people, and in a sense that was sort of like my introduction into the world of the older black jazz musicians.  And from that point on, when I would show up around their jobs they were always friendly toward me.  They were always encouraging.  They would tell me things.  And so I became sort of like an apprentice, which I guess you could say I was under Doc Paulin [Ernest "Doc" Paulin], and then I was an apprentice in a sense under a lot of these older musicians.  So eventually, I started playing with some of the musicians on jobs.  They started to hear me in different contexts.  And people like Kid Sheik and Percy Humphrey would, would hire me when they had jobs, like public concerts or you know, small events.
Story_ID: 621667
Speaker 1: Two things: the first is, now you belong to the union, so you're getting paid more.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Tell me about what the union was like at that time.  How much were the dues, and what benefits you received (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, at, at the time the musicians union was very strong.  When I joined the union, I joined in late '79 [1979].  I always say 1980, but it was really late 1979 I joined the musicians union.  Membership dues then at that time, I don't think they were that expensive.  I think they were about thirty, thirty-five dollars or something like that annually.  But there was also an initial membership fee, which was more, something like seventy some dollars or something like that.  When I joined the musi- musicians union, musicians' scale for a two hour job was thirty-six dollars.  I remember that.  Of course, you could make anything you wanted above scale, but you had a contract, and you were supposed to work, you know, at least for scale.  The musicians union in New Orleans [Louisiana], there were two musicians unions at one point, a black union [American Federation of Musicians Local 496] and a white union [American Federation of Musicians Local 174], and the two unions merged in 1966 [to form American Federation of Musicians Local 174 - 496].  And they, the black union had a lot of benefits and assets, and they turned all of those things over.  And they retained some membership on the union board.  I think the vice president was the former president of the black union, and there was, there were always one or two blacks on the, the, the board of the union.  So, at that time, the union had a lot of rules and laws about performances.  Like if you played in hotels and clubs, you had to have cert- a certain number of musicians on the job.  If you had a brass band, you had to have ten or eleven pieces.  If you played in hotels, you had to have so many musicians, or they at least had to pay for it.  If you had five musicians, they had to pay you for the ten in a brass band.  So you had the ten, and the brass bands had their standard size and standard brass band sound.  You paid musician dues quarterly, or you could pay them out for the year.  I always pay them out in the beginning of the year to get that over with.  A lot of musicians kind of pay quarterly because, you know, they didn't really see sense in paying the whole amount at one time.  So then if you get behind, then you get fined.  And if you get too far behind, you get put on a list, and other musicians u- musicians are not supposed to hire you or play with you if you're on that list and that kind of thing.  But during that time, was, was the early stages of the, the right to work law, and so that started to change everything.  Non-union musicians started working in hotels a lot more.  The sizes of bands started to change to fit more commercial purposes.  You didn't have as much power in the union as, as you used to have.  So they lost a lot of power over the years, and, and it diminished quite a lot.  But you used to have membership benefits that were really good.  They didn't get work for you, and you didn't get a lot of work out of the union, except they used to have what were called green sheet jobs.  Those were usually public concerts where the national union would pay half of the money for the job.  And whichever organization, a hospital, a school, or whatever, would pay the other half.  And I used to do a lot of those concert jobs, just 'cause I liked to play, and I would play a lot of those jobs.  The union used to have a death benefit.  I think they used to give you a thousand dollars toward a death benefit.  And of course, you had benefit of having a membership directory with all the musicians and the instruments listed, the names and phone numbers.  So if you had to hire people or whatever, you had a convenient way of doing that.  You also had standard American Federation of Musicians union contracts, so when you did--someone hired you on a job, you had a professional contract that you could send to people, let them know that you're in business, and it's serious, and it's a legally binding document.  The union always had meetings, elections, used to kind of had, had to vote in the elections or else there was a fine I remember.  And you would elect offices and different things like that.  And, but like I said, over the years, gradually the strength and power of the union was kind of defeated in a sense by the law, and more and more non-union musicians got into playing, and especially in like the younger brass bands and stuff, most of the, those musicians are not in the union.
Story_ID: 621668
Speaker 1: Being in the union [American Federation of Musicians Local 174 - 496] allowed me to play with all these older musicians.  And a lot of those guys were contemporaries of Jelly Roll Morton, King Oliver, Louis Armstrong, and some of those musicians had played with them.  Danny Barker had played with Louis Armstrong.  Preston Jackson played with Armstrong, recorded in his band.  Preston Jackson played with Johnny Dodds, Sidney Bechet.  He told me about what they really sounded like, what their personalities were like.  A lot of those musicians told me things about, you know, playing the music, what the clarinet does, and you know, working on your individual sound, and they gave me all kinds of encouragement.  And they filled my imagination with many stories about the music that you didn't see in history books, people telling me things about what it was like to be on an advertising wagon, and, and to compete with a band, or to play in the old dance halls, or what certain individual musicians were like.  Those things just kind of fueled my desire to be in this music more and more, and I became--when the musicians found out that I was related to Papa John Joseph, that sealed the deal.  I was like a member of the family.  Papa John Joseph had been a popular musician.  He was the oldest living jazz musician when he died.  He had helped a lot musicians in his younger days.  He represented the best values of musicianship in terms of performing and in terms of appearance, and so they, they, they respected Papa John.  And he actually died a, what I consider, a very noble death.  He died while playing at Preservation Hall [New Orleans, Louisiana] in 1965.  He was playing a solo on 'When the Saints Go Marching In,' and he really got into it, and the audience was cheering.  And he turned to the piano player and he said, "This number just about did me in," and then he fell over and died on the spot.  So, a lot of those musicians knew Papa John.  They loved him and respected him, and you know, they accepted me as member of the family.  And it was strange at the time because I didn't realize it, but there was a big gulf between generations of black musicians playing traditional music.  A lot of the guys that came up in the big band era, the rhythm and blues era, modern jazz era, rock and roll era were not into traditional music.  Some of them were there because they couldn't find work in, in those other areas sometimes, but they weren't really playing the traditional style and the authentic traditional repertoires.  You know, they were, they were playing, you know, like, trying to force more modern styles and different things into the music that were very different from the way the older players were playing.  So, to have a young black person coming along continuing that tradition, you know, they thought it was a dying tradition.  They thought it was gonna die out.  And to see people like me coming along was like, it, it was like hope for them.  So they really--most of those more than three dozen musicians were very encouraging, and they became like friends, family members; some I would call on the phone, visit at home, give rides home, you know, establish real friendships with.
Story_ID: 621669
Speaker 1: So you felt that you were bridging a gap between the generations.
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't realize it at the time, I mean, I was just doing what I was interested in.  Because of the way I had come up, I mean, the things that people my age were doing didn't really do it for me.  But what I found with this music, it, it really did.  It gave a certain kind of meaning to my life, and I really enjoyed it.  And so those older musicians became my friends, I mean, you know, more--much more than people my own age.  So I didn't really deal with, you know, people my own age and in the next couple of generations older.  I seemed to have a synchronicity with those older musicians.  We seemed to have a similar mindset, so I was like one of them and then not at the same time.  So that was, that was a great thing for me to be part of that, 'cause instead of like a, a jazz fan that likes music, and he goes back to try to play this music that doesn't exist anymore or whatever, or that he's not close to, I was around.  And this was the second important thing that I got to see, witness, and be a part of, the tail end of that important second generation of New Orleans jazz musicians, the generation of Louis Armstrong, the generation of Sidney Bechet, of George Lewis, of, of Kid Thomas [Kid Thomas Valentine], of Johnny Dodds.  I got to see that generation, the people that were still playing that music.  I got to be part of that and have them sort of pass the mantle of that music on to me.  So, it wasn't like I was trying to play a music that had stopped existing; I was playing a music that was still continuous, and I was playing with the musicians that, some of them that helped to develop that style and who were passing the torch of playing that directly to me and a few other guys in my generation.
Speaker 1: Who, who were the other few?
Speaker 2: The other guys, well, like Gregg Stafford, who's a, who's a good friend of mine, works with me to this day, and I work with him and his groups.  He's a trumpet player who grew up and lives in the neighborhood of Buddy Bolden, grew up Uptown [New Orleans, Louisiana] in--as a kid, listening to social aid and pleasure club parades and church parades and jazz funerals.  Lucien Barbarin, who's a, a member of the, the famous Barbarin family who plays trombone.  He's a relative also of Danny Barker.  He learned how to play traditional music.  And there are a few others in, in that generation, Shannon Powell on drums and you know, Wendell Brunious, a trumpet player that came from a, a traditional jazz family as well, and a few others in that generation.
Story_ID: 621670
Speaker 1: You were talking about the younger generation that would still carry on the traditional New Orleans jazz.  And Wyn- Wynton Marsalis is someone who is in that younger generation.  Tell me about how you met him.  I know that you all lived in the same community, but you didn't know each other growing up.
Speaker 2: Well, Wynton was of a younger generation.  He's about seven years younger than me.  And he wasn't really a part of the, the circles, the musical circles that I was around.  I think in his younger days he was playing in a, in a, in a R&B/rock type group I think called the Creators or something like that and you know, studying trumpet and probably taking lessons and playing classical music as well.  But we all knew that, you know, Ellis Marsalis [HistoryMaker Ellis Marsalis, Jr.] was a great piano player and a great teacher, and that he had, you know, in, in, at Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana], I knew that he had some sons that were playing music, I had heard, 'cause Ellis taught at Xavier at one point.  He taught the same class that Danny Barker taught, African American music, which is the same class that I teach today, which I've been teaching for about twenty-five years.  But I didn't really know Wynton in New Orleans [Louisiana].  I saw him twice.  I saw him once when he was leaving a, a band rehearsal at Loyola University [Loyola University New Orleans, New Orleans, Louisiana], and I saw him perform once in New Orleans with his father at a concert they did at Xavier.  And I think he was--well, let's see, I was--he was about fourteen years old at the time.  I remember the trumpet players from Xavier's jazz band saying, "Oh, he doesn't have any range yet, but when he does, he's gonna be great," you know.  I remember that they were students, Wynton and Branford Marsalis were students at NOCCA [New Orleans Center for Creative Arts, New Orleans, Louisiana], studying under their father, and there were other musicians.  There was a drummer named Stanley Stephens, who eventually played with me for a long time.  And they were all students of Ellis Marsalis' at NOCCA, and they came and they played a concert at Xavier.  And that's, that's the only time I ever saw Wynton in New Orleans.  The next time I saw or heard of him at all was one night by accident I turned on the--flipping the television and turned on 'The Tonight Show' ['The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson'], and the guest host was Bill Cosby.  And near the end of the show, he went--he said, "I'd like to introduce, and bring out this young trumpet player, the sensation, and got a new, has a new C--," or, "a new recording out called in his own name, Wynton Marsalis."  And I was like, that's Ellis' son.  And then he came on with this band, Branford and his five piece band, and he played up a storm.  And I was--people in New Orleans were proud, and a few days they talked about it, and that was like a sensation, wow.  Ellis' son made it to 'The Tonight Show.'  That's a great thing.  (Laughter) And then, then we started to hear more and more about Wynton Marsalis and jazz, and you know, he was making headway with these records.  And then the next thing you know, in a couple of years he, he started getting these Grammy Awards or whatever.  And then I saw him at a festival, because by this time I had started traveling with bands playing festivals coming out of New Orleans.  And we played a jazz festival in Jacksonville, Florida, which was a large free jazz festival at the time.  And they had all kinds of legends there: Dizzy Gillespie, Louie Bellson, Sarah Vaughan was there, Art Blakey, I mean, just, just incredible.  And he was there, and Wynton played.  And I remember there was a trumpet battle and this kind of stuff.  I saw him there, but again, you know, we didn't get, we didn't get a chance to speak or anything; he wasn't close.
Story_ID: 621671
Speaker 1: And then I played a party with Gregg Stafford for Essence magazine in New Orleans [Louisiana], and Wynton [Wynton Marsalis] came to the party.  And I remember that party 'cause there were all kinds of celebrities there.  [HistoryMaker] Marla Gibbs was there, and the guy Ron [Ronald Townson] from The 5th Dimension, and Oprah Winfrey was there, and a lot of celebrities.  And we--Wynton came in, and he wanted to sit in with the band and play.  So he borrowed Gregg's trumpet, and he sat down next me.  And he looked at me and he said, "What should I play?"  And I was like, what?  And so, you know, he was this major star.  He was living in New York [New York], had been out of New Orleans for years.  In many public interviews where he was outspoken, he had condemned jazz in New Orleans, old jazz in New Orleans.  He had talked bad about Louis Armstrong, an Uncle Tom, and that's Uncle Tom music, and blah, blah, blah, and--which was a typical attitude that a lot of younger and more modern oriented jazz musicians had at the time.  But not everybody expressed it publicly, but he did.  But he sat down, and he sat in with us at the party.  I remember we played things like Paul Barbarin's 'Second Line' and a few traditional songs.  And you know, he wasn't exactly sure of what kind of stuff the trumpet would, would play and all of that, so I told him a couple of things.  And I remember giving him my card and telling him call me up.  And at some point, and I'm not exactly sure when it was, I had a, actually had a dream that this guy who was living in New York, who was musically, physically, and spiritually as detached from New Orleans as you could be, I had a dream that he was going to play traditional New Orleans jazz some kind of way and that I was going to be a part of it and be playing with him, which sounded ridiculous.  But it all came true.  As the spirits would have it, we started meeting up by accident in airports going to one place or another, going to one festival or other, sometimes at festivals.  And for whatever reason, I would talk to him, just start talking to him about the glories of New Orleans jazz, of King Oliver and what--the Armstrong Hot Five [Louis Armstrong and His Hot Five] and Seven [Louis Armstrong and His Hot Seven] and Jelly Roll Morton, and he'd look at me like I was crazy.  Well, you know, playing traditional jazz music, I remember some of the older modern jazz guys.  They hated the idea of me trying to play traditional jazz, 'cause they thought that was a way of pulling music back or, or, or, or repeating the past or something, and they just--even though I was always trying to be creative, create, you know, my own expression and ideas in the music.  But I remember one of the older, more modern oriented musicians, you know, told me he, he didn't know me, and he heard me playing like that.  He thought something was wrong with me, you know, that kind of thing.
Story_ID: 621672
Speaker 1: So Wynton [Wynton Marsalis] was like, you know, "King Oliver, Jelly Roll Morton?  What are you talking about," you know?  But, eventually with time, at some point he listened.  And I think what started to happen was two things.  One was he told me that people all around the world that were asking him had he heard of me, and had he played traditional music, and he was always like, no.  And he said he'd go everywhere, and they'd say, "Well, you're from New Orleans [Louisiana].  Don't you know this music, and don't you know this guy?"  And the second thing is, he became a great admirer and fan of Duke Ellington, Duke Ellington's music.  And at some point, he realized that Duke Ellington always had a, an affinity for New Orleans jazz, and used and borrowed concepts from New Orleans jazz, and expanded some of those concepts throughout much of his career.  And that when Ellington's bands first recorded and started, they were very much influenced by and imitating the music of King Oliver and Jelly Roll Morton.  He realized that at some point Duke Ellington used New Orleans musicians to try to get the flavor and the spirit of New Orleans.  So he, you know, at one point, Duke Ellington used a bass player called Wellman Braud.  He had the liquid tone, the clarinetist, Barney Bigard, in his band.  He used a, a cornet player named Bubber Miley [James "Bubber Miley] and then one named Cootie Williams, who were not from New Orleans, but they were imitating the growl, cornet, and trumpet style of King Oliver.  At one point, for a brief period of time, he had Sidney Bechet in his band.  And he, his main soloist, Johnny Hodges, who played alto saxophone, was a student of Sidney Bechet's, who, who loved Sidney Bechet's music, and learned things from Bechet.  So Ellington admired New Orleans music, New Orleans musicians, and New Orleans concepts.  And so when Wynton really kind of understood that, he said well, I need to get back to the root of the music.  So, there was this one young black guy out there who was talking about jazz history and who knew something about the music.  By this point, I had spent a lot of time in Tulane's jazz archive [Hogan Jazz Archive, New Orleans, Louisiana].  I had started collecting jazz history books.  I had started interviewing older musicians.  I read as much as I could.  I had collected dozens and dozens of early jazz recordings and familiarized myself with the repertoire.  So, you know, I was learning about jazz history and certainly willing to talk about it with people.
Story_ID: 621673
Speaker 1: Eventually, about another year passed and, and Wynton [Wynton Marsalis] called me, and he said, "You know, I want to understand about the brass bands," he said, "send me--you got any brass band--?"  I said, "Yeah, I have brass band music of all eras from the earliest brass recordings," which didn't really happen until the 19--really the '50s [1950s], "to the more modern brass bands like the Dirty Dozen [Dirty Dozen Brass Band] and Rebirth [Rebirth Brass Band]."  So I sent him tapes of that.  I sent him tapes of King Oliver and other stuff.  And we, we'll talk on the phone or when we met up sometimes about the music, and eventually he called me with an idea.  He said, "You think if I, I put together this thing that's kind of influenced by New Orleans jazz brass bands that you, that we could get some guys to come up and, and play on a record?"  And I said, "Yeah."  So, he asked about Danny Barker on banjo; and Teddy Riley, who was a, a trumpet player that had played a lot with Ellis [HistoryMaker Ellis Marsalis, Jr.] but who played traditional music and modern music, and a trombone player in my age bracket named Freddie Lonzo [Fred Lonzo], who had been around for a long time and playing since he was a young man, the great tailgate style.  And he asked me about those guys, and I said, "Yeah."  And then he said, "And you."  I said, "Me?"  (Laughter) And so, we all went up to New York [New York].  We didn't have a fixed idea of what the devil he was going to do.  We went into a recording studio.  We spent about eleven to twelve hours in the studio with a couple of breaks.  And that was what became the main body of the first recording in which Wynton kind of demonstrated not only a use of earlier jazz but a more soulful approach to playing and use of, use of tone.  That was his recording, 'Majesty of the Blues' ['The Majesty of the Blues'], from 1989.  I remembered so many things in that, in that studio and recording session.  I remembered it felt like we were being part of something special, because the first time I had actually met Wynton actually was a concert at Wolf Trap [Wolf Trap National Park for the Performing Arts, Vienna, Virginia].  I played at, I was playing at the Smithsonian American--Festival of American Folklife [Smithsonian Folklife Festival] with Gregg Stafford for a week or two weeks.  And there was a concert at Wolf Trap, and a cousin of Wynton's was one of the programmers.  And he had a couple of tickets.  And I don't know how, but I became one of the three or four people that got a ticket and went to that concert, and that's when we actually met.  I had a picture from that, which got lost in Katrina [Hurricane Katrina].  Gregg Stafford might have a picture.  But he didn't know me from Adam at that time.  That was around 1985.  And so by 1989, this thing that I had this dream about came true and you know, very much the way I had the dream.  And there he was playing this music, and, and I could hear the influence of King Oliver and early Armstrong [Louis Armstrong] and all that in his playing.  And I remember, you know, we were playing the music, and that was fine.  And then at one point he said, "And I got this part with this speech."  I said, "Speech?"  "Yes, my friend Crouch," [HistoryMaker] Stanley Crouch, "Stanley Crouch wrote this speech, and we got this fire and brimstone reverend that's gonna come in here and shake it up."  I'm like, what're they talking about?  So I remember seeing this guy come in, and he didn't look like a fire and brimstone reverend to me.  I mean, I had seen, you know, down hard, southern Baptist preachers and Sanctified preachers, you know (makes sound) you know, really let it out, you know, and have the spirit.  (Clears throat) My voice is choked up, so I can't really get to it.  I can do, but I can't do it right now.  But, so I remember we played this music behind this sermon.  And Wynton and I quoted, you know, like, people in the congregation saying amen here and there, improvising quotes, at sometimes hooked up in a interestingly strange way for improvisation.  And I remember hearing the, the speech.  I was looking at the, the guy doing it, and I was thinking to myself, well he sounds good, but he doesn't sound like a real down home Baptist preacher to me.  And I'm thinking, you know, he was kind of mild compared to the guys I knew well.  Come to find out, that was Reverend Jeremiah Wright [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Jeremiah A. Wright, Jr.].  Wasn't that mild.  And when you listen to the speech, he does put a little fire on it.  But, you know, that was my thinking at the time.
Story_ID: 621674
Speaker 1: But I remember doing that and feeling like part of something special.   And you know, after that, Wynton [Wynton Marsalis] started promoting the record 'Majesty of the Blues' ['The Majesty of the Blues'].  And he couldn't bring up everyone, but the clarinet kind of had a unique part of, you know, loosely improvising around the melody of--doing call and response with the melody.  So, he would invite me up to play concerts at different places.  I remember, he did have the whole group the first time we played.  We played at the New Orleans Jazz and Heritage Festival.  It was a double billing for an evening concert.  It was Wynton's group first and then Miles Davis.  And you know, they had, by this time, they had had this media type animosity between Wynton and Miles over, over what's jazz and what's real jazz and what Miles should be playing like he used to play and this and that and the other.  But I remember people that were into modern jazz came to this concert, and they had no idea Wynton was fooling with traditional music.  The record hadn't come out yet.  And he played his modern jazz concert, and people were going wild.  Then he brought us on, the--Danny Barker, Teddy Riley, Fred Lonzo, and myself.  And he pulls out this, this "Death of Jazz" ["The Death of Jazz"] and, and "Happy Feet Blues" ["Oh, But on the Third Day (Happy Feet Blues)"] and people went completely wild.  They started dancing, second lining.  They had no idea this was gonna happen; it caught them by surprise.  And that just tore up the tent.  And I remember after that was over, Miles came on and he did about one number, and about 75 percent of the audience left.  And I'll never forget that.  But after that Wynton started calling me to come out and do shows with him.  So I played a lot of jazz festivals and concerts.  A couple of times there were places where Miles played too.  They duplicated that kind of thing.  And I remember going to places like Boston [Massachusetts], playing in New York at the JVC Festival [JVC Jazz Festival; Newport Jazz Festival], Boston Globe festival [Boston Globe Jazz Festival], some other places.  And that was, that was great for me.  It was interesting.
Story_ID: 621675
Speaker 1: And then after that, I went to a few clubs with him, played in Texas, other places.  Then after that he got an idea.  He said, "Would, would you like to do some of the music of Jelly Roll Morton?"  I said, "Yeah."  He said, "Well, I, I have a chance to do a concert at Lincoln Center [Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts, New York, New York]," he said, "it could be Jelly Roll Morton, and I'd like you to be the musical director if you think you can put that together and handle it."  I said sure.  I've always, you know, played that kind of music by myself.  I played it with a couple of bands.  Not many people played the early 1920s jazz in New Orleans [Louisiana] anymore, but you know, I used to practice that stuff at home.  I said, "Yeah, I'd love to do that."  So, I became--that was the first in a series of times when I was the musical director for a show at Lincoln Center.  And that was in the early days, before they became jazz at Lincoln Center and a separate constituent.  And we played a concert of authentic Jelly Roll Morton music, which was probably the first time that a predominantly black band played Jelly Roll Morton's music since Jelly Roll's time.  So since that point, Wynton [Wynton Marsalis] and I became very close.  We're like brothers.  And we've had a musical association that has lasted for a number of years.  From time to time, I still play with him at different events.  I've played on, oh, about four, five, five or six records, recordings with him.  He's played on a couple of my recordings.  I played for many years in New York [New York] with my band at the Village Vanguard.  Several times he would come and sit in and you know, things like that, so.
Speaker 2: So this, this, Jelly Roll Morton, this was 1993.  I'm just trying to get some--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --okay--timeframes here.  And then you go back again in 1994 as the musical director for 'Cornet Kings Before Armstrong' ['Cornet Kings Before Armstrong: Music of Buddy Bolden, Freddie Keppard and King Oliver']?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yes.  So, the concert went very well, so we, we tried to do that.  Those concerts were very difficult for me because at the time, you didn't have musical transcriptions, or you had very few musical transcriptions of that music.  So, you know, I learned how to play that music by ear, basically.  And it was hard to find music and to commission people to, to transcribe and to find the right people to learn that music, 'cause they hadn't been really listening and playing.  Even traditional musicians in New Orleans hadn't really been dealing with, like I said, the early '20s [1920s] jazz: King Oliver, Jelly Roll Morton, Armstrong Hot Five [Louis Armstrong and His Hot Five] and Seven [Louis Armstrong and His Hot Seven], Sam Morgan, Johnny Dodds, Sidney Bechet.  That, that was a different, in a different league.
Story_ID: 621676
Speaker 1: I just want to go back a little bit to--because you are still in school.  Or I want to go back to the time sort of so that we can put in that you, you get your master's [degree], and then you get your, your doctorate.  And what year was that?
Speaker 2: Let's see, I got my master's in Spanish from Tulane [Tulane University, New Orleans, Louisiana] in 1979, and I received my Ph.D. from there in nineteen eighty--'83 [1983] actually, but I marched in '84 [1984].  And, and it's really strange: I didn't make or establish a connection between my graduate studies, which were very arduous, and jazz.  But I realize in retrospect that my years at Tulane were very important in my jazz career because, first of all, they had the William Ransom Hogan archive.  And the, the jazz archive was part of the Tulane library [Howard Tilton Memorial Library].  And there, they had an enormous collection of jazz everything: recordings, photographs, books, literature, sheet music, articles and essays, memorabilia, instruments, everything.  So, I spent quite a lot of time familiarizing myself with the archive and their holdings.  And that's where I really got to hear for the first time in any extensive way, the music of King Oliver and some rare and obscure recordings that you couldn't find in stores or whatever.  And then some other things happened at Tulane that were important in my career.  The Tu- Young Tuxedo Brass Band played for a spring festival at Tulane.  And I was coming out of class, and by accident I heard the brass band.  And I went and I saw them there, and I saw a couple of guys that I knew.  I had been playing with Doc Paulin [Ernest "Doc" Paulin].  I remembered seeing Gregg Stafford, Joe Torregano [Joseph Torregano], and then I met the guys in the Young Tuxedo Brass Band, that I didn't know.  And the next year I think, when they had the festival, they asked me to come and play a couple of numbers, and I sat in with the band.  And let's see, there was a record producer there from England, and eventually that led to my making my first recording under my own name.  And--
Speaker 1: What year was that?
Speaker 2: Oh, that would have been 1981 I believe, '81 [1981] or '82 [1982], something like that.
Speaker 1: Is that before or after you, you form your own--the original--
Speaker 2: Oh, that was before.
Speaker 1: Before?
Speaker 2: I hadn't really thought about being a bandleader in the early days at all; I just kind of fell into that role.  But another very important thing happened during my graduate years at Tulane, which is really strange, I mean--.  I was sitting in a Spanish linguistics class thinking about medieval Spanish, which was very tough at the time (laughter).  We did not have air conditioning in the room.  It was very hot, and I felt faint.  And all of a sudden, I thought I heard a brass band funeral dirge faintly playing in the background.  I'm like, I'm about to pass out, or I'm about to drop dead, and they're coming to get me.  And I said no, that's my imagination.  And then I heard it again, very faint.  And when the class ended, I left, I went outside.  And there on the lawn of Newcomb Hall at Tulane, there's a chapel they had built, and there was the Eureka Brass Band playing a funeral for a Tulane professor that had requested they play for his funeral.  That was the last job, the last funeral, where the Eureka Brass Band played.  The, and the Eureka Brass Band was the most famous and most important brass band of the 20th century.  It had with it at the time, Percy Humphrey, Willie Humphrey, Emanuel Paul, Louis Nelson, and some of the other old--Kid Sheik Cola [George "Kid Sheik" Cola]--some of the older legendary musicians.  And they were sitting down on this open section of the chapel, and they were playing these beautiful dirges, and they were reading the music.  And I believe that that's the last time an original New Orleans jazz band read music for a funeral dirge, one of the older bands.  So that was an, an important moment in history, and I got to see that because I was a graduate student in Spanish at Tulane.  And that, and the exposure to the Tuxedo Brass Band, and having access to the Hogan Jazz Archive were very, very important in my learning more about the sound and the history and the style of New Orleans jazz.
Story_ID: 621677
Speaker 1: What was the name of your first recording?
Speaker 2: My first recording was the name of one of the songs that I usually open up my sets with, called 'Shake It and Break It.'  'Shake It and Break It' is an early jazz dance hall song and was a favorite of a lot of the revival style bands like, that played and recorded in the 1940s.  And they played that song a lot at Preservation Hall [New Orleans, Louisiana], and other places where the older musicians play.
Story_ID: 621678
Speaker 1: So, when do you decide that you would like to be a bandleader?
Speaker 2: I never decided I wanted to be a jazz musician.  I never decided I wanted to be a bandleader.  It just kind of evolved; it just kind of happened.  What really kind of started that out was, I was teaching at Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] in the language department.  And a colleague of mine was hosting a regional conference, humanities conference, and he wanted to have some kind of entertainment.  And he said you know, people around here started to know--a few--that I played jazz.  And he said, he said, "Would you like to--can you find me a traditional band to play?  I'd like to have an evening of, of New Orleans jazz and a little discussion about the history of the music."  And I said, "Yeah, I'll do that."  So I talked to one of the guys at, whose band I play with, think it was Teddy Riley.  And he said, "Well, that's your job; you handle it."  I said, "Me?  I don't know anything about putting together a band."  He said, "Well, just call some people."  So, I called some musicians.  I think I had Clem Tervalon [Clement Tervalon] on trombone; I had Teddy Riley on trumpet; Jerry Green on, on the bass.  I don't remember who else I had.  I might have had Danny Barker, and, and I played.  And I had, I wrote an outline of the history of jazz.  And I presented that and with the music in it, and that became the first time I did a program.  And since then, I've done dozens, maybe hundreds of those programs, and I've refined the programs in which we talk about the history of jazz, the meaning.  We give musical examples of how jazz is constructed.  We talk about how jazz was used, its social significance, the spread of jazz, the important figures in the music; all of those things.  So that was the first time I had to really become a bandleader and also speak about jazz history.  And after that, it just seemed like a natural.  What happened after that was, a very conscientious lady who worked for the jazz festival, for the New Orleans Jazz and Heritage Festival, Dodie Simmons [Dorotha "Dodie" Smith Simmons] had started trying to--she used to book the traditional jazz music, and she tried to find younger people that were playing the music.  Well, there I was, so she booked me for a quartet job.  And I put together my first quartet.  I had--well, first it was a trio.  I had a piano player, Steve Pistorius, and drummer Frank Oxley; and then eventually I had a quartet.  And I started playing at the Jazz Fest, I guess, with my own group around '80 [1980], around '81 [1981], so that was right before the other thing happened.  And I've been playing, you know, ever since.  From there, I started getting jobs.  And you know, when the, when some of the older guys died out or when I wanted to have programs at Xavier and other places, then I would get my own band.  And I'd got the idea--I was living at that time on South Liberty Street.  And I realized that Liberty Street was an important street in the history of jazz.  Buddy Bolden used to live on the corner of Liberty and First [Street].  My cousin's barbershop was on, on Liberty and First.  The Humphreys used to live on Liberty Street.  Their father [sic. grandfather], Jim Humphrey [James Humphrey], who was a music teacher, and grandfather [sic. father, Willie Eli Humphrey], they lived on Liberty Street.  The park where my mother [Helen Forcia White] used to hear jazz was on Liberty Street.  My cousin, Willie Joseph, who played clarinet and recorded in the late '20s [1920s] was buried on Liberty Street right near my house.  A lot of parades crossed or passed on Liberty Street.  So, I called my band the Original Liberty Jazz Band, with the idea of freeing jazz from some of the stigmas associated with it.  And at first I used a lot of older musicians.  I used Chester Zardis and all the older guys as much as possible, and then I used a couple of younger guys like Gregg Stafford on trumpet and Stanley Stephens on trom- on drums.  So as time passed and the older musicians died out, I used, you know, other older musicians.  And then I realized I had to try to find newer people, so I developed a series of what I call converts (laughter) or people that, you know, didn't necessarily play the style or understand it but kind of were willing to learn and had the ability to do it.
