Story_ID: 578147
Speaker 1: Okay, my name is Julieanna Richardson, and I'm the interviewer.  And Racine Tucker Hamilton is observing, and Edgar Carey Lane is the videographer.  And I'd like to have you start out, we're gonna slate the interview and I need to have you start out by stating your name and spelling it for us.
Speaker 2: I'm Doug Wilder, and D-O-U-G, W-I-L-D-E-R, L. Douglas Wilder
Speaker 1: You have to give your whole name.
Speaker 2: I just did.
Speaker 1: Okay, Lawrence.
Speaker 2: Lawrence Douglas Wilder, okay.  L-A-W-R-E-N-C-E, D-O-U-G-L-A-S, W-I-L-D-E-R, all day long.
Speaker 1: And your date of birth?
Speaker 2: 1/17/31 [January 17, 1931].
Speaker 1: Okay, and today's date?
Speaker 2: I think it's the 23rd.
Speaker 1: Of July.
Speaker 2: July 19, 2004.
Speaker 1: And your place of birth?
Speaker 2: Richmond, Virginia.
Speaker 1: And our location today?
Speaker 2: Richmond, Virginia, Virginia Commonwealth University.  The, the Honorable L. Douglas Wilder School of Government and Public Affairs [L. Douglas Wilder School of Government and Public Affairs].
Speaker 1: And your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm presently occupied as a professor here, as they call it, distinguished professor.  Took me all of my life to be distinguished.
Speaker 1: Well you're a lawyer and politician--
Speaker 2: I haven't practiced law in a long time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I'm not actively in an elective office now.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  But soon.
Speaker 2: Maybe.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Story_ID: 578148
Speaker 1: So we ask five questions of everyone, they're a little People magazine-ish, so just bear with me, and very short answers.  I'd like to know what your favorite food is?
Speaker 2: I don't really have a favorite food.  If you had to say what it is, it's probably something that is filling and not fattening.
Speaker 1: Okay, time of year?  That's good.  Most people would say they like something fattening and filling.  Okay, but time of year.
Speaker 2: I, I, I like all the, all the seasons.  I think to the extent that you--and that's one of the things I like about Virginia, it's--it has changing seasons.  I like the summer, the winter, the fall, the spring.  It's just--the beauty is to be alive at all of those times and to enjoy what each brings.
Speaker 1: And a favorite, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: It used to be blue, and as you see I have nothing on blue.  But I don't even have a favorite color.  I think it varies.  Today you might wanna wear brown, tomorrow you might wanna wear blue and the next day gray.  What you look in is not important as, as to how you feel.  And I feel wearing any color is okay.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite place to go on vacation?
Speaker 2: No.  I don't have any favorite place to go on vacation to the extent that it's your time of the year.  If you wanna go to some warm place, you do that.  If you wanna go to a place with more brisk, autumn-like atmosphere, you go there.  If you wanna go to Jackson Hole, Wyoming or wanna go to Jamaica.  So it's--there again, the beauty of life, the choices that are available to you.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes, I do have some.  But one of them is that I never succumb to flattery because then criticism would crush me.
Speaker 1: That's okay, I haven't heard that one before. That's good.
Speaker 2: I would hope that you hadn't.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: 'Cause it's mine (laughter).
Story_ID: 578149
Speaker 1: Okay, can we start out, I'd like to start out talking about your father [Robert Wilder], and his side of the family.  If you--I know you have a very rich background as it relates to that, but can you review some of it for us?
Speaker 2: Well my father was an insurance salesman.  He made--I think the top, top salary of his career was about fifty dollars a week.  He was one of thirteen children, and a couple died a long way, but he was the youngest.  And consequently, that's why his direct involvement--my direct involvement with slavery would be through him because his parents were slaves and they were not slaves when he was born, but obviously his sisters--he had sisters and brothers who were slaves.  So I had aunts and uncles who were slaves.  I never knew any of the grandparents.  My father was a very disciplinary man and he believed in community involvement and was involved with a great number of things.
Speaker 1: Did he share any stories with you of your--you know about his growing up?
Speaker 2: Very little.  My mother [Beulah Olive Richards Wilder] would make him do it.  She would have to force him to do it.  He had a tough time and I think as we discussed prior to the airing, so much of what he and others like him went through, were painful things and experiences that they wanted to spare the children.  But my mother would prompt him to say things.  And I would take the prompting and carry it further.  But he had a very tough, tough time.  It was nothing in terms of great sons and his was almost a utilitarian society.  You use whatever was there, you did what you had to do, and you wasted absolutely nothing.  And respect for parents, obviously.  He was a church man.  He was a deacon and a trustee.  His father was a deacon and a trustee, and he was disappointed that I was not a deacon and a trustee.  And I told him that, "I think you might have to find that in some other members of the family."
Speaker 1: Now what church did he belong to?
Speaker 2: First African Baptist Church in Richmond, Virginia.
Story_ID: 578150
Speaker 1: And your mother, can you give her name and talk about her?
Speaker 2: Beulah Olive Richards [Wilder], and she was a native of Charles City [County] in Virginia, where I was living until about a month or two ago when I changed residences for legal purposes, for being able to run for elective office here in Richmond [Virginia].  But she then went from Charles City to be reared as a child in New Jersey, and went to high school in New Jersey and pretty much was in a white society in that regard in terms of the high school she went to.  But then came back after her mother died and came to live in Richmond with her, with her aunt.  And was a very, very keen on making certain that education would be something that we had to focus on in our homes.
Speaker 1: Now did she share any stories about her growing up with you that you remember?  Any--
Speaker 2: Well she was an only child, and she never remembered her father.  Her mother married another person who reared her as a stepfather.  But when her mother died, she came back here to live with her aunt.  And she shared the experience of learning.  She would have been in my judgment, a very keen advocate of furthering education.  But by having all of the children she started having, or they started having rather, it cut her educational aspects off and cut her social involvement off until she was pretty much more closely aligned to family, living with family and making certain that those of us who were coming would have a better opportunity than she did.  But she did say that we shouldn't complain about what we don't have, but just try to make it better.  And to the extent that we complain about it, make it better.  And then compete.  But the competition was always gonna be there.  And that you never had to be concerned with the fact that you might not make it and give up because that was the plight for many African Americans.  At the time they were called colored people.
Story_ID: 578151
Speaker 1: Now your siblings, can you give how many, you know, children there were and their names?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there were ten of us, but the oldest girl died when she was about three.  And then the--there was another male who died when he was about, about a week, pretty much infant death.  And then the oldest siblings that I knew of were my sister Naomi [ph.], and Doris [ph.], and then my brother, who was the only brother that I had.  He was a junior, Robert Judson Wilder, Jr. [ph.]. And then there was another sister Olga [ph.], and then Agnes [ph.], and then Berthell [ph.], and then I came, and then a younger sister Jean [ph.].
Story_ID: 578152
Speaker 1: Do you have a earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah.  I used to always say that I wondered when the--my real parents were gonna come and get me.  And take me away from this situation that I found myself in because I used to ask my mother [Beulah Olive Richards Wilder], I said, "Where did I come from?  And she said, "The stork brought you."  And I said, "Does the stork sometime make mistakes and you know, drops us off at the wrong place?"  So I would tell my younger sister, I said, "You know I think he may have made a mistake," 'cause we didn't have too much, you know.  I thought maybe I should have had a little better opportunity than existed.  "Are you sure he dropped me off at the right place?"  My mother didn't like that at all.
Story_ID: 578153
Speaker 1: So what were you like as a young child, sir?
Speaker 2: Troublesome, always asking questions.  I never really doubted myself.  I never--I always thought that I was--I never had any illusions about anybody, anybody being better than I was in terms of acumen, in terms of attitude, in terms of just being.  And that's why I, I guess I was saying why am I limited?  When I was a five year old kid, I remember my mother [Beulah Olive Richards Wilder] would, would take us--I was living at the end of the streetcar line.  And so when we'd get on the streetcar, it was empty.  And we would be moving toward the middle of the streetcar.  And I would say to my mother, "Why don't we sit here on the front?"  Say, "Oh, just come on, I'll, I'll explain it to you.  Come on in the back."  The sign was up and I could read, colored.  "Well what does that mean?"  "Well that, I'll explain what that means."  "Why can't I sit here?"  And just, just--I couldn't understand it.  And, and she would say things like, "That will change, just sit here for a while, and we gone get off after a while, just come on."  Then I couldn't understand race too much because I had sisters, I had--I'm fine, the water won't help.  I had aunts who were very fair that I--first one aunt I thought she was white.  Then I had another aunt that was--she looks like just like an Indian, jet black hair, bronze skin.  And so race didn't mean that much to me in terms of if we were all family.  The fact that others were lighter or darker or hair different texture, it meant absolutely nothing to me in terms of why any of us had to be treated differently.  And that, that has always stayed with me, I have never looked at myself racially.  I've always looked at myself as a human being who would be entitled to the same rights and privileges as other human beings.  And I always tell people that whether it was intended by Thomas Jefferson or not, one of the better things that I ever could discover and learn was that the Declaration of Independence.  And I would ask my mother, I said, "Well now what does inalienable mean?"  You know that we have all of these rights which are inalienable.  She says, "That means that no one can take them away."  I said, "Well that takes care of it."  And then I'm entitled to those rights, privileges and the pursuit of happiness.  And I think that's never left me.  I never consider myself a second class citizen.  What--notwithstanding what the law says, I never have considered that whatever that was available for others, wouldn't and shouldn't be available to me.  And I let no one tell me differently.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: And my mother really instilled that in me.
Speaker 1: Did--were there any members of your family that you ever heard of passing?
Speaker 2: Oh, of course not, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, none of that--
Speaker 2: That was the whole point.  It was no--pass for what?  We were what we were.  There was no need to pass.  We never knew people--I had instructors in high school [at Armstrong High School, Richmond, Virginia] that I thought were white in some instances, but they were not.  They never tried to be anything other than what they were.  You've known that situation.  And what I'm saying is symptomatic of so many Americans of African descent in terms of who we are and what we are.  We've had--we got same families--some people dark skin, light skin, brown skin, straight hair, other kinds of--what difference does it make?  That's genetic.  And we see it cropping up.  And the amazing thing is those people who, who may say that they're African American, they have to almost prove it, prove it because they don't look it.  Noses and the lips and things are not necessarily comporting to that description.
Story_ID: 578154
Speaker 1: Now can you describe the Church Hill [Richmond, Virginia] neighborhood you grew up in?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was--I liked it.  It was almost like a city within a city because it--everything that was necessary to be there, was there.  The movie house.  I lived on the corner right across from a church which wasn't our church, but we would go there when we were late.  Right across the street diagonally was a hardware store, which had everything in it.  Right across the street on that same corner was a print shop.  Two doors from there was a sawmill.  Right behind the print shop was a blacksmith shop that people would bring the mules and horses to be shod.  My father [Robert Wilder] would send me over with pieces of iron that he would want to be bent and to be shaped into whatever he would want it.  "Just tell Emmitt [ph.] to shape this like this," and he would draw it.  Up the next block would be a bakery.  Two or three cleaners, a pharmacy, a butcher shop, ice house on the--everything, movie house around the corner, pool room at the corner.  Everything imaginable, department store.  Not the top line department store, but department store two or three blocks away.  So you became conversant with everything.  And there were any numbers of minority businesses in there.  The barbershop right behind me, the shoeshine shop right across the street, the little restaurant across the street.  A nightclub right behind, a block away.  So I could go to find most things that I wanted, a lumber yard four blocks away, fire house three blocks away.  You knew what city life was like, and yet I had a cousin who lived not that far away, to me it seemed a long ways then, that had a big expansive farm with farm animals, cows, pigs, horse.  I'd go over to pick the greens for--my mother [Beulah Olive Richards Wilder] would send me.  I'd get this bag of greens and put enough greens in there by the time they cooked down, for nobody.  And my mother would be so mad.  She said I sent you to pick some greens and they gave them to you, and you bring those things back.  Well you know I just fluff--I wouldn't even push it down tight.  So she didn't like it.  So it was a very rich experience for me to become conversant.  So as a kid, I knew what smelting of iron was and I knew how horses--I couldn't understand, "You gonna drive these nails in these horses' feet?"  And not knowing that they were actually in the hoofs to the extent that they would go through.  And I learned.  I became interested in printing and I eventually worked on a print shop to know how to set type.  I started shining shoes at the place across the street.
Story_ID: 578155
Speaker 1: The barbershop was a place that was my forum.  And the older men would listen to me because they said the kid might know what he's talking about because I would come and argue with them, fuss with them about what I knew and what the encyclopedia said.  Well I know--and I'd run home and bring the encyclopedia back, said this is it.  So the men started betting on me in terms of the kid knows what he's saying.  And it was I guess the first opportunity I had to engage in public speaking, in the barbershop, as most people do.  Most neighborhoods.  But I wanted to make certain that I knew what I was talking about.  And if I didn't, checked it out and find out why I didn't.
Speaker 2: Who were some of the characters in that barbershop, the regular patrons of it?
Speaker 1: Well you had the know-it-alls, you had people who pretty much were into--one of the things that I did experience in that barbershop when--as well as in the shoeshine parlor.  People who didn't have education didn't diss it.  They encouraged young people to get a better education.  They would say look, "Listen to this kid.  He's, he's in school and you didn't finish, you didn't--why don't you learn?"  And say, "Well I don't need to, I"--wait a minute.  And they would provide opportunities for me to speak.  Then you had those who knew everything about sports, they thought.  And I was a sports enthusiast too.  I could name all of the batting averages for all of the ballplayers.  And I had favorite teams myself.  And the, the characters were--they, they, they ran the gamut between those would come to speak of their sexual exploits, and those who would come to--and you learn gambling across the street at the shoeshine parlor.  And you would know what shooting dice were and what craps were.  And it was a, a very rich experience.  You learn when the preacher would come in, no cursing.  And no one would curse.  And I guess it was one of the things that stopped--early on, I had six sisters.  One of the things I hated was to hear the men talk about their exploits, as I've described them.  Even naming the women, "Oh yeah, I know her."  Oh my God I knew I would choke somebody if they ever said that about any sister of mine.  So it was good for me to learn early on that you can't respect your community, nor womanhood, if you wanna do that.  And it--I learned to be a bit more private too, in whatever it is I said because it'll spread and go everywhere.
Story_ID: 578156
Speaker 1: Now what were your favorite teams, baseball teams?
Speaker 2: St. Louis [Missouri] Cardinals baseball and [University of] Notre Dame [South Bend, Indiana] football, and most amazing thing, Notre Dame didn't have anybody of African American color--descent on the team.  And as a kid, the guys in the barbershop said to me, he said, "You wanna go up--we're gonna ride up to see Jackie Robinson play."  This was the first year that Jackie came into the league.  I said wow.  They said, "You wanna ride up with us?"  Yes, goodness.  So we all crammed in that--it wasn't enough space in the car for us.  Since I was so small, I think I was about sixteen maybe, maybe not, maybe not.  But in any event, we got in the car and went up.  And they [Brooklyn Dodgers] were playing the St. Louis Cardinals.  And that was the time when, you know [Enos] Slaughter who was the right fielder for the, for the Cardinals, purposely spiked Robinson and Robinson was playing first base at the time.  And he was stretching, you know, to get the ball as a first baseman does.  Slaughter purposely took his spike and cut him across the leg.  And it was almost a riot.  And I was a Cardinal fan.  Boy that thing just, just--I lost all of the respect that I had for the Cardinals after that.  But the players for the Brooklyn Dodgers came out of the bullpen as you see them now when they run out on the field to, to protest a brush back with a pitch.  They didn't do that, that day.  They came out with their baseball bats, everyone had drawn bats.  And then calm prevailed and it was over.  But they were my two teams, the Cardinals and the, and the Notre Dame football team.
Story_ID: 578157
Speaker 1: Did you ever yourself want to play baseball professionally, was that ever--
Speaker 2: No, football.
Speaker 1: Football.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I wanted to be a quarterback.  I tried to--I went out for my--I was too small in high school [at Armstrong High School, Richmond, Virginia].  And but when I got to Virginia Union [University, Richmond, Virginia], I was still too small.  But I said I, I don't care, and I went out.  So I made what they call the taxi squad, which means you don't qualify for a uniform.  Well that wasn't good enough.  And I went then and--'cause I was about sixteen.  And I went then and started playing.  When I got about eighteen I started playing with a--what they call a semi-pro team.  They called it semi-pro because it was given--if you won a game or played in a game, they may give you five dollars to play.  So that means you were paid.  So it means you weren't professional, but semi-pro as such.  And my mother [Beulah Olive Richards Wilder] said, "I think that's terrible because if you get a leg broken"--they had no insurance or anything.  If we got anything broken-"Who is gonna pay for your hospital bill?"  Don't worry about it.  And I, you know--got beat up and bruised all the time.  But I liked it.  And I was as good as I could get, but I probably would never have been a regular football player on anybody's team, first string.
Speaker 1: What did you like about it?
Speaker 2: Well I, I wanted to be quarterback.  And I liked directing the traffic.  I liked to--and I liked to pass, I was a pretty good passer.  And I liked the competitiveness of it, I liked the roughness of it. And I--my brother, my older brother who was ten years older, he really helped me so much in terms of making me tough.  He would take a baseball and I would--he had--we had a catcher's mitt.  And he would use the mitt and I would throw it as hard as I could.  I would fight, you know, boxing in the neighborhood.  And we, you know, used the great big, heavy gloves, boxing gloves.  And just the weight of the gloves would be enough to knock you out.  And the guys that I'd be fighting were pretty much, sometimes either older or maybe bigger or taller.  And even if I won, I, I wouldn't have looked like it.  I would come home, nose be blooded and eyes all blue.  My mother would just, would swear that my brother put, put me up to it and I said, "No, he didn't."  'Cause I thought he was--she say, "You think he's Jesus Christ," and she was right.  He would say do something, I'd do it.  He would say jump off this thing, you're not gonna hurt yourself.  I'd jump right on off.  And he, he wouldn't--he would never allow anything like that to take place because he wanted me to be tough and because he knew I was gonna be confronting--'cause we had gangs.  We had people who--it isn't--the only difference between now and then is this--there weren't any guns.  There were knives--and you had to compete.  You had to be able to com--handle yourself, going back and forth to school or, and if you couldn't duke it, you had to, you had to deal with it.  I saw a guy last night for instance, and he said, "You know I tell people all the time," say, "You know Doug Wilder is not just something that you just shove around."  He said, "You know, that guy can--he's a pool shark."  I said, "You shouldn't tell people that."  I said--I, I used to like to play pool and I, and I had a pretty decent game at the time.  And sometimes I pick up a stick now once or twice.  But in that atmosphere, it's, it's--everybody is the same.  And there is a bit of envy in terms of that person who might be moving up the ladder educationally.  Not from their parents or the adults, but from your peerage, from people who would think you are trying to leave them.  So you gotta pay a price for it, you gotta be able to duke it.  And that's the same thing we have today.
Story_ID: 578158
Speaker 1: Now, what was it like growing up in a household with so many women, though?  You have a lot of sisters.
Speaker 2: It was terrible.
Speaker 1: And I was just wondering were you favored?
Speaker 2: Favored.  No, my mother [Beulah Olive Richards Wilder] would get after me because she would say, "You cannot fight my girls."  And I would say, "But your girls are ganging up on me."  And they would.  My older, my younger sister and the sister older than I, they would--we were pretty much in the same level.  And I had--I did get involved with them.  And the other two, every now and then something were to happen, I would.  But I got sick and tired of hearing all the girl talking. This kind of dress and chemise blouse, I didn't want all that talk, you know.  And my brother--I couldn't wait for my brother to come home from where he was.  And I had chores, we all had chores.  My sisters, my older sisters were very--they were almost like aunts because of the age difference.  And they would be very deferential, they liked to take me with them like I was a little toy sometimes, I didn't like that.  You know, "All right Douglas, come on, we gonna carry you."  I don't wanna do that.  I wanna go out and do my thing with the, with the guys in the street.  There was--and I was not a model in the house at all.  I was troublesome.  There was--no, nobody in my house was spoiled, there was no space for it.  But my mother by only having two boys and knowing--and then you gotta understand you talk about women's rights.  Women weren't looked upon to be able, able to be the breadwinners of the family, or to be those who were going to provide opportunities in the future.  So people were making certain that the, the males in the family were having the grist and the grit and the determination to deal with what they knew were gonna be confrontations in life.  So my mother did spend a great deal of time making certain.  But we all were required to do things like my--her aunt, my great-aunt, used to like to put on these silver teas.  So you had to go out and recite.  My sisters would sing and you had to play the piano or something.  And I like to describe our household as one of genteel poverty because we all would take music lessons and we all had to show some degree of proficiency there.  And we all had to show some presence of being able to speak, to account for yourself.
Story_ID: 578159
Speaker 1: Now I wanna take you a little bit back to--
Speaker 2: Carry me on back (laughter).
Speaker 1: --your Aunt Katy's [ph.] tea parties where you were learned your oratorical skills. Or your mother [Beulah Olive Richards Wilder] was dragging you along, you said.  But you know, you also--I read about the, the sessions that your father [Robert Wilder] would have on the, on your front porch, you know and the music that was, you know--
Speaker 2: My father fashioned himself as a, as a person, a leader of the community.  And he, he, he was psychological in the way he would do it.  On the back porch, he wasn't--some--every now and then he would tell the people to come up and sit in the swing on the back porch.  But he liked to be on the back porch smoking his pipe, cigar, and they'd be down on the street.  So they'd be looking up to him.  And he was a slight man, like myself.  I believe I may be a little taller than he was.  And he would do things--but "Yes, that's right, fine."  And they would come, you know the expressions they would use during that time, they would refer to each other in such noble terms, "Your grace, how are you?"  "Fine my lord, and yourself today?"  And they, and they would do it to the extent of showing an appreciation for each other.  And they would discuss world affairs as they saw them.  Then on the front porch my father would always position himself on the top step.  And then they would be on the side.  You know it was almost like you're passing by, but he knew how to do it so as to always have himself in a position of talking about things, and I would listen.  Never to interfere, but I, I--no, no, no.  That was their conversation and--but I, I did--he, he liked to--in church he was the chairman of the finance committee.  He was on the deacon board and he would like to get in church and make his pitches and thought he was a--and he was a good speaker.  And, and yet this was their limited opportunity to be a part of society, and it was very limited, you gotta understand.
Story_ID: 578160
Speaker 1: One of the things that I was so impressed with though when I was a kid, my father [Robert Wilder] worked at this insurance company, the Southern Aid Life Insurance Company.  It was one of the--I think it was the oldest life insurance company.  And it was in this beautiful building, great stone columns.  And the elevator.  African Americans owned the building.  People operating the building were not--no whites in the entire building.  The president of the company would wear cutaway coat, hickory striped trousers, patent leather shoes, spats.  You know for a little kid to see that, brass on the elevators juts shining and bright and the place immaculately clean.  Well that was the closest I could come to corporate involvement.  And it said to me then though that African Americans can arrive to this.  My mother [Beulah Olive Richards Wilder] would always complain as to where my father, father hadn't joined another breakaway group and gone and formed another company.  But he never would respond to it.  But his thing--well I guess with eight kids, he didn't have the opportunity, nor the money, nor the investment.  Well I was impressed with the fact that he did build his own home.  I, we never lived in anything other than homes that were owned.  And he built it.  As--took the house that his parents had and tore that down and built his own home.  And though he was the youngest in his family, he was a source for other members of his family to--for support and, and help.  My mother would say yes, so-and-so, you, you do for them when we feel that he ought to do some other things.  His thing was though education to high school is as much as I can guarantee.  After that, you're on your own.  And you either get a job or if you gotta go to college, you gotta do it yourself.
Story_ID: 578161
Speaker 1: So my mother [Beulah Olive Richards Wilder] was the one that said well we're gonna do it certain ways.  I said well, I don't wanna go to college and scramble (unclear), I wanna finally buy some clothes and get a job and I wanted to go into the [U.S.] Navy 'cause my friends were going into the Navy.  They were finally getting good checks, coming back, girls, look at the guys in the Navy.  Mother, "No, no, you gotta go to school," and I didn't have the money to go.  So she said, "Why don't we do it this way?"  I would carry mail during the Christmas rush, and I'd be waiting tables, and she would piece together a little bit.  Virginia Union [University, Richmond, Virginia] tuition was little or nothing.  And if you made a C average, you'd get one third of the tuition cut.  And the tuition was only $150 a year.  And the president of the school, look if you didn't have the money, they'd work it out with you.  And those are the things that, that prompted a great deal of it. Now--
Story_ID: 578162
Speaker 1: In terms of my father's [Robert Wilder] piece, he wanted to go into, he wanted to be a lawyer.  And the understanding was that his brother who was a doctor, they had supplied, they had sacrificed to send his brother who was older than he, just older than he, to medical school.  Then his brother was to come out and help him go to medical--law school.  Well his brother died so young, he was in, in his early thirties, that his dreams faded and he became very, very disenchanted and disillusioned.  And for his own advancement.  And so then after that I got all these kids, I gotta keep my things going.  He never had any excess money and didn't waste any money.  He didn't even--my father would cut his own hair, wash his own clothes and press them, shod his own shoes.  Things that we take for granted, he wouldn't, he wouldn't, he would do.  We had opportunity, we had chickens in the back yard for eggs.  A guinea [fowl].  We had a couple hundred, at one time, homing pigeons that he just liked to be able to sell to people, pair out two at a time.  So I became converse to what the squabs were.  Nobody in my family would eat the squabs other than my, my, my father and myself.  Chickens.  So it--he was a, as I said a utilitarian guy who didn't have much.  Never complained that much, very taciturn and never wanted to talk too much about denial.  Very distrusting of society as it existed, but felt it was almost his lot.  Okay I'll deal with this.  But my mother [Beulah Olive Richards Wilder] on the other hand, was more positive.  And she was like, "This can be better.  You need to improve this."  And, and it caused you to be a bit more assertive and my father somewhat resented that because I was assertive.  And my mother would say you know if you believe something is right, you just stand by it.  And if somebody says it's not, then don't worry about what they say about it.  And it didn't hurt me too much.
Story_ID: 578163
Speaker 1: And your fa--your mother [Beulah Olive Richards Wilder] was distrusting of politicians, but she wanted you all--she wanted--
Speaker 2: No, she didn't want me to go into politics.
Speaker 1: Politics, she want, but she wanted you to be a doctor, or medicine--chemist?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  I wanted to be a--she wanted me to be a minister or an undertaker.  I wanted to be a policeman or a fireman because--I'm talking about when you're a kid.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Because they were the people that had the uniforms on and they had the authority.  And there weren't any African American policemen or firemen when I was coming up.  And yet the preacher and the mortician in the community--they were the ones with the hickory striped pants, the spats, the patent leather shoes.  And they had respect in the community.  So then my mother was in essence saying I want you to be someone who has respect in the community.  And I was saying (unclear) I wanna be somebody who has authority in the community.  I want the badge of, of showing.  And we were saying the same thing in different terms.
Story_ID: 578164
Speaker 1: Now if we take you back to your neighborhood in the Richmond [Virginia] of those days, can you tell me what sights, smells or sounds remind you of growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  It was a burgeoning community, everything was alive all the time.  There was--you did a lot of walking to wherever you wanted to go.  Confined neighborhoods that were almost districts.  This was the quote colored area.  If you went over to the other side, why are you over here?  And walking, particularly.  Street car, no problem.  But if you're walking over past a certain boundary line, you need to be prepared to be confronted with would be gangs.  Now that doesn't mean they were just white gangs.  For instance if you went to the east side of where I was coming up, down in the Fulton [Hill, Richmond, Virginia] area, those guys--we wouldn't let them come up the hill, they wouldn't let us go down the hill.  So the, the neighborhood as such was one of excitement.  And you gotta understand when I was coming up, this was shortly after the [Great] Depression, so things were down.  I mean you just--there wasn't a great deal of money, there wasn't a great deal of anything.  And then right after World War I [sic, World War II], you came to the recession.  Which says if you didn't have a lot, but during the war, that's when the soldiers were coming and he money was flourishing and you saw them coming to the nightclubs, shining the shoes in the barbershops or in the shoeshine parlor.  And you learned a great deal of what was taking place.  You learned a great deal of what the guys were saying took place overseas, whether it was in France or in Italy or the Philippines.  My brother had gone to the Philippines and then to Hawaii.  And you got a chance to, to experience vicariously what was happening in the rest of the world.
Story_ID: 578165
Speaker 1: Let's just go over your schooling real quickly.  You went to elementary school--
Speaker 2: George Mason Elementary School [Richmond, Virginia].  It was--part of it had outdoor toilets.  There were no caf--, there was no cafeteria, there was no auditorium, there was no library.  The books as you would imagine would be passed down.  But the teachers were of the highest quality.  They didn't make the same salary that the white teachers made, but they were zealous in regard of those who were entrusted to their care.  And it was--I can't think of a bad teacher.  When I say bad teacher, one that didn't really teach.  This is what I said.  I had to speak the other week at the University of Richmond [Richmond, Virginia] for what is called the Teacher of the Year, or Teacher's Day, and it was the Governor School [Maggie L. Walker Governor's School, University of Richmond, Richmond, Virginia].  Teachers from all over the state.  And I said the paradox is that I don't think too many people would argue that I would not be a person to be considered to have had an education.  But where did that education come from?  Segregated school in elementary school.  Armstrong High School [Richmond, Virginia], segregated.  The Junior Union, segregated to the extent that it was an African American school.  And yet the instruction and the, and the quality of the education was so intense, that I could not ever have to apologize to anyone.  And to be able to compete at whatever levels.  We've had people to come through that same rank, to have been great doctors, great scientists, great scholars, from around wherever we are.  And so the real question then becomes what does it take to get into that competitiveness?  What does it take to provide that opportunity?  And that's very troubling to me today as I see the resources far more plentiful in terms of dollars and in terms of physical.  But the intent of--the, the, the intensity of challenging that individual, not to be tolerating the mediocrity.  I don't think we ought to be telling our kids that you need to go to school to get a better education, to get a better job.  That's maybe incidental.  You go to school to better get an education because that's intrinsic, that's something no one can ever take away from you.  And that was what we had.  They, they really forced us to respect education for its sake in itself, the intrinsic quality, rather than it being--and the older people in the society who didn't have the education, they respected it.  And they would say look, you go and do what we didn't do.  We don't have an education.  These--I'm talking about people who didn't have high school educations.  And that's why it's almost unforgivable today that we've allowed that situation to become what it is now.  Well I may or may not go to school.  Even in my city of Richmond [Virginia], 50 percent truancy rate, 50 percent, unforgivable.
Speaker 1: So the community essentially raised everyone, everyone was raised--people were chosen.
Speaker 2: Yes, but that community had its genesis at home.  The community didn't adopt the children.  The community wasn't a village that said hey look, we will take you over.  No, no, no.  That, that--I don't wanna leave that misconception.  The community was one where the, the germ of what was necessary was planted in each household.  And it, it very unusual, very unusual to find a household that didn't have a parent.  And most of them had parents.  When you found single parent households, they were usually occasion as a result of widowhood or death.  Not because the father didn't marry the mother, no, no, no, that did not happen.  If there was a mother there, there was a father there.  And they--and the respect in the neighborhood was something that you just--you did what your mother and your father said.  There wasn't a question about it.
Story_ID: 578166
Speaker 1: Now, so you went to George Mason Elementary [Richmond, Virginia] and then to--
Speaker 2: Yeah. Armstrong [High School, Richmond, Virginia].
Speaker 1: Armstrong.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But you were--what was it you were twelve and they skipped you, or--
Speaker 2: No I was at--that was in, yeah, that was in elementary school.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: That skipped the one grade.  Whatever grade it was necessary--fourth or fifth grade.  And then went to Armstrong at the mid-semester, and then finished the--actually about three and a half years in high school.  And then came out at what, sixteen.
Speaker 1: Was that a--was that usual?
Speaker 2: Well four years was the usual.
Speaker 1: You grad- but you graduated early, sixteen.  People weren't graduating at sixteen.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: They were?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I have any number of us who finished, finished at sixteen.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The usual rate was seventeen and eighteen.  But many of us were graduating at sixteen.  But I was skipped along with four or five of us.  But I loved school.  I never did homework because I did it in school, you know.  In other words, what you were required to learn, you learn it in school and you, you, you just did it.  And I loved it.  I would--and I did it all the time.  So it wasn't a matter of saying well you gotta get your homework.  I mean you know you, you do it.
Speaker 1: But you were a quick study don't you think?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I, but I think a lot of it had to do with training at home.  My sister, my older sister finished what was called normal school, which qualified people to teach.  And she was bright.  She was I think the brightest in my family.  Sharp, I mean sharp, sharp.  And encyclopedic in terms of her awareness as to what was taking place.  And she helped all of us, by my mother [Beulah Olive Harris Wilder] having her assistance, and then my older sister being a teacher herself.  None of that was wasted.
Story_ID: 578167
Speaker 1: Now do you remember when [HM] Oliver Hill was, you know at the time--were you aware of the things?  Like when he--the Brown versus [Brown vs. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954]--no, no, he became the first black legis--of [Richmond] City Council.
Speaker 2: In 1948, yeah.
Speaker 1: Forty-eight [1948], but do you, were you aware?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes.
Speaker 1: Because that was a big deal wasn't it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a very big deal.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A great deal of controversy in terms of whether it should happen, should not happen.  And Oliver was elected to one two year term.  And then there was controversy in the African American community.  You know things like well is he with them?  Or has he gone over to the other side?  And so the next time around, rather than to concentrate their efforts on electing Mr. Hill, they said well we'll, we'll, we'll spread it around and concentrate our efforts on electing nine people to the council, and he lost narrowly.  And then subsequently tried to run for the [Virginia] House of Delegates.  And then that was the last time he, he ran in the [Virginia] General Assembly, that's the last time he ran.  Yes, I very familiar with it.
Story_ID: 578168
Speaker 1: So there were several firsts occurring even in the '40s [1940s].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: In Richmond [Virginia], it was starting to change a little.
Speaker 2: It was starting to change.  The thing that I was always aware of--why weren't these people working together, and what is it?  I didn't particularly like politics.  At the time as you may know, I was in school [at Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia].  My chemistry major.
Speaker 1: Well where did the chemistry major come in?
Speaker 2: Well because it--when I was coming up, everybody--you wanna be a doctor or, or dentist, something.  That was the thing.  And I didn't wanna be in law or politics.  So I'm gonna go, I'm gonna be a dentist.  I'm gone be a doctor.  So I majored in chemistry.  Actually I really majored in biology.  And I didn't like the biology teacher, so I switched to chemistry.  And then felt I got just I got in it, oh my God.  It's okay, but it wasn't my natural longing.  And I was always attracted to the social sciences.  I would get into science classes and spend more time talking about world events and what was happening.  And my classmates loved it because it would take the teacher's time away from focusing on the assignment for the day.  And meant, meant that--none of us were doing too well in where we were going.  And when I finally did get out of school with the chemistry major, I didn't want to--I didn't wanna necessarily pursue it.  I was draft eligible.  So I couldn't get a job--any, anybody my age couldn't get a job.  And then even if I weren't draft eligible, you couldn't.  I went down, I never will forget, to get a job at--on the [Virginia] State Capitol [Richmond, Virginia].  And 'cause that's where the employment office was.  And they said they didn't have any vacancies for anything.  I said, "Nothing at all in the whole state?"  They said, "This is 1951."  Said, "No, don't have anything at all."  Then say, "But I"--I said, "but I, you know I've got a degree in chemistry."  "Well we understand that."  Say, "We have one vacancy but you might be interested in and I think you ought to consider it."  I said, "Well what is that?"  They said it's out at the Hanover School for Boys [Hanover, Virginia].  It was a state facility for delinquent boys.  And I said, "Well what's that position?"  They said, "A cook."  I said, "I don't have any experience cooking."  They said, "You can learn it."  Now that building was at the, what they call the old finance building of the state capital.  And it's still existing, still in the old building, but it's--down the hill from the governor's mansion.  And so on occasions I've had youngsters--we walk along, we talk.  I say, "That's where I went to try get a job.  They told me the only thing they had for me was a cook's job."  I said--"Now I live over here in the mansion."  And the symbolic message isn't wasted on them.  They understand exactly what you mean when you say that.  In other words, that was then, this is now.  And don't let what was stop you from moving ahead.
Story_ID: 578169
Speaker 1: Now did you like Virginia Union [University, Richmond, Virginia]?
Speaker 2: Did I like it?  I liked it yeah, in terms of being there.  I didn't wanna go to college--'cause I jus' didn't--I was tired of piecing together nickels and dimes.  But once I got there, the veterans came back from the war [World War II].  And there was a different dynamic. I started learning, doing some things that I hadn't been doing at large scales, joining the fraternity.  And I opted being with older people, older guys.  Some--one of my best friends was--he was older than I even thought he was.  He died several years ago and I didn't know he was that much older than I was.  But we, we had a--Virginia Union [University, Richmond, Virginia] was a place where I could exercise what I thought was the exploration of the mind.  And there were any numbers of things philosophically that I could express.  Treatises or pieces from someone else's reading that I never would read.  But if you read it and you recite it and recite it, let's go over it again.  And we'd stay up sometime half the night in the, in the frat room.  And it was that type of discourse that showed me that we could do whatever we wanted to do if we had the chance.  So there were instructors there, same thing, who could have gone to other places.  But they chose not.  I had one professor--I never had a course under him.  But he was one of the most brilliant minds there.  His name was Dr. Lymus Dunlap Wald [ph.].  He was one of the first persons to receive a Ph.D. in bacteriology from University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan].  But he was a fraternity brother.  And he'd come to the frat room and talk to us and sometime we'd be walking back over.  Just he and me, he'd come to campus, going over to his house.  And he'd be still lecturing.  He would say, "Oh, how the ways of knowledge beat upon the rocks of ignorance."  And I'd say I guess I'll be the rocks (laughter).  But he would take the time for guiding, lofty.  Then I had a chemistry professor the same way.  I would go to his home sometime on Saturday mornings and sit.  We would talk about all kinds of things.  There was one white professor there, his name was Wesley Stevens.  And, and he would say to us, he said--and I'll never forget it.  He said--and he was in mathematics.  He said, "Next to the mastery of the mother tongue, mathematics is going to be something that you have to learn because everything else revolves around it.  Its life is a matter of addition and subtraction.  Exponential from where you start."  But what always struck me was how he put it in the first instance.  Next to a mastery of the mother tongue, whatever it is, whether in Spain or in Italy or wherever.  Unless you can comprehend and articulate, you're not gonna get there.  And it wasn't ra--he didn't have to say that to me too many times for it to, to, to (unclear).  So to that extent, Virginia Union provided not only the instructional aspect, but the people that they would have to come to speak at our chapel.  As you know it's compulsory to go to chapel.  These people weren't getting any money as such.  They weren't getting any big bucks.  Maybe bus fare, not plane fare, maybe train fare, and maybe opportunities to stay in the president's home.  But boy, I mean some of the speakers, I mean just enthralling to hear them and to know that you could be that next to greatness.  You'd hear people like Benny Mays [Benjamin E. Mays] and Belford Lawson [Jr.] and McBride (unclear).  And I'd just sit there and--as someone said [Jawaharlal] Nehru at the feet of [Mahatma] Gandhi.  Just listening to you guys and saying--and my buddies--and then we would go and emulate them at the fraternity house and take different views and debate things half the night and drinking whatever we chose to drink, not necessarily soda.  But it was the first real exercise past the barbershop stage that you were adding another layer of intellect to understand what was necessary.
Story_ID: 578170
Speaker 1: Now what fraternity?
Speaker 2: Omega Psi Phi [Fraternity], yeah.
Speaker 1: Was that the one--was that the most popular one on campus?
Speaker 2: No, no.  Richmond [Virginia] was a Sigma [Phi Beta Sigma Fraternity] town, and I guess next to that was Alpha [Phi Alpha Fraternity].  Washington, D.C. was noted for, for Kappas [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity].  Omegas on my campus [Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia] were noted for other things.  They were noted for being more macho types, you know, and I liked that.  Some of these guys that would come from the service who, who really impressed me in that regard.  But in terms of whether--it terms of the--and let's not beat around the bush on that.  During that time, there was a great deal of physical involvement in the fraternities, and thank goodness it's gone and it's changed considerably.  But I, I--
Speaker 1: You're talking about hazing.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  But the Omegas were well-respected on the campus, but most people thought that I was gonna go Sigma.  Lot of my friends did, but obviously most of my chosen friends went Omega.
Story_ID: 578171
Speaker 1: And now you, okay so you finished Virginia Union [University, Richmond, Virginia].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You had originally said that you had wanted to be even drafted in the [U.S.] Navy, you know before--
Speaker 2: No, I wanted to volunteer.
Speaker 1: Volunteer, I mean not, I'm sorry you wanted to volunteer.
Speaker 2: Yeah, my mother [Beulah Olive Harris Wilder] said I will not sign for you, and my father [Robert Wilder] said--I don't think he really cared, but I think he said I'm gone leave that to your mother 'cause she knew--he knew he had to live with her if I did go, and she said, "I'm just not gonna sign for you."
Speaker 1: But you ended up going into--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Well I was drafted.
Speaker 1: Drafted.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: In the Korean [War], right.
Speaker 2: Into the Korean War, yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.  So can you just talk about that experience?
Speaker 2: Well the first thing about it was I was drafted.  The place for the induction was right up the street from Virginia Union.  And this was about a year after I finished, March of that year, '52 [1952] I think.  And the bus taking us to Fort Meade, Maryland, had to pass the campus.  And it was the first day of spring.  All these people sitting out on the campus, girls looking as pretty, looking prettier than they ever looked in life.  And I'm going to--I hated it.  Why am I going up to this place?  For what? (Laughter)  and so I got there, Fort Meade was a different thing.  When I say Fort Meade was a different thing, the [U.S.] Army was a different thing.  It was a disciplinary piece.  Looking back on the Army experience, it was a good thing for me because I was not as disciplined as I needed to be.  But that discipline attached to certain things.  Like you make your own bed.  If you need to, you cook your own food.  You make certain your dress is as it ought to be.  And you learn what leadership is.
Story_ID: 578172
Speaker 1: Okay. I want--at--when you were in the service, you met--was it Bill Watson?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, and you guys, even though you were sort of different--
Speaker 2: I tell you we met, I tell you we met--we were at Breckenridge [Camp Breckenridge, Morganfield, Kentucky] together and we met there.
Speaker 1: Is that the train--
Speaker 2: In Kentucky.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Fort Breck -Camp Breckenridge.  We were at different camps, but we'd see each other every now and then.  But we really met on the boat going over.  And then after we got over, he was in another outfit.  I was in the seventeenth regiment, he was in the thirty-first [regiment] I think.  But we would keep in touch with each other.  And then he got wounded on his shoulder, a grenade pretty much messed him up and--not the shrapnel, but the concussion shook it a-loose, and we came back on the ship together.  So--and then we kept in touch.  We don't see each other as much as we should, but he's in [Washington] D.C., retired from UDC [University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.].  And smart guy, and there again we took up from discussing things on the ship, or in the context of what we needed to do.  It was amazing that we would write each other and, and I guess people would think we were almost incendiary because this was the time when the Mau Mau [Uprising] was in full bloom in Kenya.  And we were following the activities of Jomo Kenyatta who ultimately became the first African president [of Kenya].  And we would sign our letters, The Burning Spear, you know.  If somebody would see that now, they would say God, these guys are, are the precursors of the Black Panthers.  But Bill's a very smart guy and he's a very, very good friend.
Story_ID: 578173
Speaker 1: What made you interested in things outside the United States?  I mean were there, I mean what, I mean you know the things, the developments that were in Africa?
Speaker 2: Well I remember as a child, not a young man, really, Wendell Willkie was a Republican who ran against Franklin [Delano] Roosevelt president, for president.  And he gave him a tough, tough race.  But Roosevelt was Roosevelt and he, he was almost unbeatable, and he was unbeatable for that matter.  But after that, he wrote a book called 'One World' [Wendell Willkie].  And it, it made you understand how today we see it, but he was writing this in the '40s [1940s], that we are not isolationists to the extent that the Monroe Doctrine [1823] prevails or that we are separate and apart, or what takes place in one part of the world doesn't take part in another.  I guess what got me interested so much in what was taking place in Africa was that if this is where people are saying send them back to Africa, well what's in Africa?  What's happening in Africa?  Why doesn't Africa run itself?  And my concerns were, particularly when I was in the [U.S.] Military, why am I being called upon to go to Korea, ten thousand miles away from home, to fight for the freedoms of people in that country, when we don't enjoy them here?  Now if you look at the paradox of it in terms of saying you're gonna go to fight for freedom.  What is freedom?  In what context is it expressed, and is freedom in Africa?  [Jomo] Kenyatta won.  In Ghana you, you had Kwame Nkrumah who lived in this country, went to Lincoln University [Jefferson City, Missouri], a scholar.  The NASA [NSA, National Security Agency?] involvement with Egypt.  Adam Powell's [Adam Clayton Powell Jr.] being at the Bandung Conference in Indonesia when it was so necessary to show the involvement of America's policy and daring the UN [United Nations] to other entities to confront the problems here.  So it was a time when communism was a, was a threat, but American security also could have been torn asunder if we didn't address some of the concerns within our own country.  So if you look to--all of it together, if you weren't interested in what was going on in the rest of the world, you couldn't be interested in what was going on here.
Story_ID: 578174
Speaker 1: Now I read also that you were interested in chemical warfare, or you were gonna be assigned--
Speaker 2: Well, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: What happened was like a fool, I--when I got to Korea, because of my degree in chemistry, they said well you can, you can be in chemical warfare if you want to.  That's off the line.  You don't have to go to the front line.  You, but you only get two points a month.  Which means you'd have to say--and you have to have thirty-six points before you could come back, see.  I said that means that's eighteen months in Korea.  No, no, no.  I don't want to do that.  And then on the ship I had started singing.  And because the--you know anything for enjoyment.  Well not really, I started doing that in Breckenridge [Camp Breckenridge, Morganfield, Kentucky], and singing and having a good time and so I could have gone into Special Services.  But there again, you would draw maybe less than two points a month, I think maybe one.  No, I don't wanna do that.  Then I got over there, they asked me about chemical warfare and I turned them down.  And I ran into some guys who told me that they were on the front line, and that things had been so quiet.  These were guys from, from Virginia, so quiet, everything was just smooth.  And they were drawing nine, I mean four points a month.  I said you mean just nine months?  Yeah.  Told the man I, I'm going up to the front.  Like a fool.  So I got up there and I had been up there about maybe a week, no maybe, no, three weeks.  And the Chinese hit what was then similar to what the Tet Offensive was in Vietnam.  They hit all across the, the, the line.  I mean it was horrendous.  And that was my first real exposure because things were so quiet, and we were on the DMZ, which is the Demilitarized Zone--the MLR, the Main Line of Resistance, and there was nothing.  I mean every now and then an occasional mortar fire.  Every now and then some pot shots with snipers.  I said this is a piece of cake.  I wrote my mother [Beulah Oliver Richards Wilder] back, I said everything's smooth, be back home soon.  And, and then when this thing happened, I went to the company commander.  I said, "Well you know they've asked me to consider being in chemical warfare."  And I, I think I'm gonna do that.  He said, "I know how you feel.  I would like to go back there too.  I have some bad news for you old buddy, this is it."  So I was ready to shoot those guys when they told me how quiet things were.  That was the last I ever heard of chemical warfare, or my involvement.  No, it just wasn't gonna happen.  But it would have been a small, small duty and it would have been better, better to one extent.
Story_ID: 578175
Speaker 1: But I have a far greater appreciation for war and the ravages of war and that's why today it's--I'm, I know that the people who are plotting America's course have no real idea about it.  I served on a board with [HM] Colin Powell and I consider him a friend, and I do know he knows what war is like.  And I think his original countenance to the President [George H. W. Bush] was hey, look, do you really understand what this is, man?  This is war.  And war is to nobody's advantage, nobody.  That's why when President [Dwight] Eisenhower came back and even was president, he warned against the intrusion of the industrial military complex [sic, military-industrial complex].  And what he meant was those civilians who plan and plot the war for industrial purposes, meaning money, beware of them.  And that's what we have today.  How many people do you think would be in war if they had to go, or if their sons and daughters had to go?  I remember we were in Korea and there was this plan to show American, showcase what we were involved in.  And they called this thing Operation SMACK.  We were supposed to go and take a hill and our hill was the smaller hill the Chinese hid behind.  The Chinese had the bigger hills. They were always a little bit over us. You know we here, they're there.  Which means that's an advantage 'cause they look down on you.  The advantage is that their mortar shells could find more opportunities and their artillery could train right down on you.  And so they had constructed a concrete bunker for the generals and for others to come to view us in the invasion aspects of it.  And it was almost suicidal if we had to follow through with taking this particular hill under these circumstances.  And as it turned out, the Stars and Stripes, that was the military newspaper, got a hold of it and exposed it.  And it was cancelled.  But cancelled only at the last moment because we were already prepared to go up this hill.  And I was trying to figure out a way then how not to do it.  Because I knew it was suicidal.  Said god, am I--how can we--and I--it was almost sim--similar to what's taking place when you hear--last night listening to the secretary of defense talk about, "Well you know I have great sympathy for the people who lose and, and lose people in war, etc."  And then he moved to the next subject.  It takes no more than fifteen or twenty seconds of regret for that loss, and that loss is forever.
Story_ID: 578176
Speaker 1: You, you talk about people who are wounded in the [U.S.] Military as if well you know, they weren't killed.  But what does wounded mean?  Two arms off, blinded, mind just shocked to the extent that you have no reality of, of--go to a veterans' hospital on Memorial Day, July the Fourth when they start playing 'The Star Spangled Banner.'  Tears well up in the eyes of these soldiers and sailors and [U.S.] Marines and have people--they can't even express what they feel, but it's, it's almost an emptiness.  The, the psychological damage in war to the families, to the individuals involved, and nobody wins in war.  Remember what [General William Tecumseh] Sherman said in the Civil War, "War is hell."  And this is what he (unclear).  He said yes, I know what has to be done, going through the South.  And that's the thing that many Southerners will never forget about Sherman's March [to the Sea] through the south, the ravages of war.  This country has never seen that but one time.  Hopefully, they'll never see it again.  But to the extent that it's visited upon others is--impishly as it is with little more concern that it is.  We cannot afford to commit ourselves to those kinds of things unless it is for the absolute defense of our country.  That's for sure.  I'm all in favor of finding Osama Bin Laden, let's do that rather than to invent pretexts and to invent excuses for trying to--for not having found him.  I'm, I'm putting Saddam Hussein on the side.  The question is are you prepared to commit yourself to doing what you send and ask others to do?  And that's what bothered me in Korea, bothered me when they said I'm here fighting for freedom to come back and not be able to participate in the freedoms that others did?  And that's why Brown vs. Board of Education [of Topeka, 347 U.S. 483] did more for me than you can imagine.  'Cause my mind was gone in terms of believing in, in this country.  I was ready to do some of the things that others were doing around the world.  That's what [Bill] Watson and I used to talk about.  It's just no--the system isn't going to work.  The, the only course that might be available to us might be that ultimate course of resistance.  And when nine, when nine white men belatedly said that--what they had decided--that court had decided some several years earlier, fifty-some years earlier in Plessy vs. Ferguson [163 U.S. 537], when they said that was wrong.  I said there's an opportunity here.  The system just might work.  So the [U.S.] Military service helped me a great deal.  One, it, it showed me how short life is and how short life can be, and that's why maybe some of the answers I gave you originally in terms of what colors, what season.  They're so insignificant in terms of do you wake up alive?  Do you wake up whole?  You enjoy it.  You can choose to do and go and be whatever you wanna be if the opportunities exist in this country.  And to the extent that we don't provide those opportunities for your youngsters at every level and to the extent that we--unite with those things that we agree with, and not to allow those things that are so insignificant in terms of why we don't agree to divide us.  If we continue to do that, this country won't fulfill its creed, it won't be available for all of us to have that pursuit of happiness.  And that's our commitment.  That's one of the reasons I got involved in politics.  Not because I wanted anything with politics.  I wanted--I had a great law practice.  I love the practice of law.  Finally somebody in my family was being in a position to have some of the things that I felt that I should have had when I was a little kid when they didn't come to get me and rescue me.  But you can't criticize and argue and fuss unless you're prepared to pay a price, and the price is what you--as, as my friend Muhammad Ali says in public services, the rich you pay for your, your, your public services.  You rich, you pay for your, your service here in life, on earth.  And I agree with that.  And that's, that's why I got in politics.  And it's like quicksand.
Speaker 2: What is like quicksand?
Speaker 1: Politics.
Speaker 2: Politics. You mean, you can't--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  It was to me.
Speaker 2: What do you mean by that?
Speaker 1: Well you take a step, and you take another step, and then you in it.  You get deeper in it, before you know it, and I know I'm--
Speaker 2: It's part of you.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Well, a part of what you're doing, you're right.
Story_ID: 578177
Speaker 1: Now you won a Bronze Star [Medal].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Over in Korea [Korean War].  Could you describe the incidence that was--
Speaker 2: I will briefly 'cause I don't talk about it that much.  The thing that I believe this is that people who really deserve medals, never get them.  There are people who--I, I've known far better soldiers, far more heroic, far more disciplined.  Never get mentioned for anything.  I know--all right I give you an illustration of what I'm talking about.  We were on Pork Chop Hill [Korea], and there were, I thought that we had the hill.  I thought it was our hill.  To discover that Chinese had half the hill and we had half of the hill and I didn't know it.  So we were moving up the hill.  And I was a section leader at the time in mortars.  I had been in infantry, rifle, but I wanted to be in mortars which supposedly behind the line a little bit.  But then the mortars got pulled on the front line.  So a fellow named Wyatt [ph.] from New Jersey, a fellow--and a Korean named Wu [ph.], we were together moving up the hill.  And lo and behold, we started encountering some small arms fire.  Well Wyatt pointed it out, said it's coming from that bunker over there.  So we checked it out and sure enough we decided that he would go around and pry holes in the sandbags and push thermite grenades in, which would cause that person to come out, whomever it was.  And then I would cover the aperture, the opening, and they would come out and put them under surveillance.  In the meantime, Wu got cut down, they just riddled his body and he got killed in the process.  And when they started coming out, I thought, we thought it was one or two and it turned out it was about twenty.  And firing and take, everything is taking all over and had they known that there were only just the two of us, we couldn't have been able to do anything at all with them.  But luckily, we were able to get them down to the bottom of the hill.  And I'm skipping over a lot of that stuff.  When we got to the bottom of the hill, they had twenty, I had called up and sand piles coming down, we got twenty prisoners.  And in the meantime we had so many of our guys had gotten all messed up.  We had to stop, aid some of them, aid--and pull them back to keep from being further wounded and killed.  When we got to the bottom of the hill, I told the Company Captain Wyatt, after he'd gotten--at the bottom of the hill, we had all of our people and they all running and grabbed the prisoners, etc.  And I told the captain, I said, "Wyatt deserves the Silver Star [Medal] and I'm gone put him in since I was the corporal at the time for, for this award."  This guy went to that handbag, he put everything in, did all this other stuff.  He said, "Yeah, take care of that, no problem."  That was the end of it I thought.  When I got back to Fort Meade, Maryland, then I got this message that they were having a, what they call division review.  The fifteen thousand troops are coming out on--for the whole entourage for certain awards and certain presentations, and my name was listed as one of them to receive the Bronze Star.  I said well oh that's fantastic.  And then I learned that Wyatt got nothing, and guess who got a Silver Star?  The captain that we turned the prisoners over to, Robert Alves [ph.] was his name, from California, who did absolutely nothing.  So when people say what did you get the Bronze Star for?  I said nothing.  Because it doesn't mean that to me.  It means that so many of the people who should have been recognized, never got recognized, it's not unusual.  And for--during that time, you know, for an African American to get any recognition at all, would be stupendous.  And that's as much as I usually say about it and I think it's enough.
Story_ID: 578178
Speaker 1: Now you come back and what prompts your decision to go to law school?
Speaker 2: Brown versus Board of Education [of Topeka, 1954].  (Unclear). This was African American lawyers.  There's a lot that needs to be done. So I started working then again now in chemistry with the--in toxicology, which is the science of poisons.  And I worked in the chief medical examiner's office and it was a very interesting job.  I enjoyed it a great deal, but I didn't love it.  And the medical examiner, in addition to being the doctor, this one happened to have been a, a lawyer too.  He'd finished the University of Saskatchewan in [Saskatoon, Saskatchewan] Canada and he--and my immediate boss, Sidney Kaye who's living in Puerto Rico, he's about ninety-five now.  And I've exchanged communications with him.  He was always--he and I would always engage in other kinds of things not relating to science.  Not relating to toxicology.  But why can't we do a better job with what's taking place in this country?  And I said this--I have to put this behind me now.  I've gotta go into being involved in something that I want to be involved in because I had started to get a master's degree in chemistry.  I said well it would be okay, it would be good and you make a good living.  And maybe even move up eventually to get a Ph.D.  But did I--was that me?  No, that doesn't define me.  So I wanted--I say I wanna be a part of this social change that's taking place.  So that, that prompted me to do it.  I was very leery as to whether my preparation, background was such to be--had me accepted to a law school.  And I knew I couldn't go to law school in Virginia.  And luckily Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] took a shot, took a chance with me.  And that's why when people say do we need black colleges?  Do we need them?  Where would I be without any of that?  So that is what really prompted me.  And then it was just a natural fit after that because law is pretty much about the sum total of all human experiences expressed one way or the other in terms of observance, breach, regulation, or requirement.  And I wanted to be a part of that.  I said, I wanna be a part of making the law to the extent that it governs us.  If I'm to be governed, why can't I be a part of that which governs?
Story_ID: 578179
Speaker 1: And when I got to law school, goodness, you can imagine being at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], having the guys come down to--in moot court to prepare their cases and Thurgood [Marshall], Spott [Spottswood William Robinson, III], [HM] Oliver [W.] Hill, George E.C. Hayes and [James] Jim Nabrit, Herb Reid [Herbert O. Reid, Sr.], Bob Ming [William Robert Ming, Jr.] from Chicago [Illinois], Louie Redding [Louis L. Redding] from Delaware, you could go on.  I said God, I've been reading about these guys all my life.  And so there was a bunch of them in law school just sitting around like, like [Nawaharlal] Nehru at the feet of [Mahatma] Gandhi.  And so it was so inspirational, and yet they were never motivated by money.  They were never motivated by how much money they could make.  Herb Reid, one of my revered instructors, finished Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  Could have been on a, a big law firm in New York [City], had he chosen.  He chose to come to Howard and teach.  He loved to teach.  And he would tell me, he said, "I'm gonna fail you."  I said, "But I'm doing pretty good."  He said, "That's it, you're just doing pretty good.  Saw you last night down at the club, having the ladies with you."  I said, "Were you looking at the ladies or looking at me?"  "See, that's why you gonna get a F."  He said, "You know, you're making a C isn't good enough.  If C is the best you can do, then it is good enough.  But you can do better than that."  He said, "You keep going"--I said, "Well you sent me enough message."  So the first year I almost flunked out 'cause I was doing, I was working at Bowling Ethel's Base Officers Club [Washington, D.C. ph.].  I had my GI [government issue] Bill money.  I had my little car that I had bought from savings that I made from Korea.  And I was making good money at Bowling, and I was--all of a sudden in [Washington] D.C. when it was something else.  I mean you could walk the streets three, four o'clock in the morning, no crime, nothing.  And everything was concentrated in an area.  You had the Hollywood [Theatre, Washington, D.C.], you had Abbots [Theatre, Washington, D.C. ph.], you had Evelyn's [ph.], you had Cecelia's [ph.], you had Howard Theatre [Washington, D.C.].  And then after that, the after hour joints that were really like clubs.  I mean literally like clubs.  So it was a brand new experience on this guy who'd been in the South pretty much all of his life and then overseas.  All of a sudden to be turned loose in a city like [Washington] D.C., study what?  And so I finally got my act together after that and recognized that this is what I call the second chance.  First chance was being lucky enough to come back from Korea.  Now I said anybody who's lucky enough to come back from there sane and whole, that's--you're lucky, you know.  You gone blow this second chance you got fooling around?  I never will forget, I was walking up Georgia Avenue [Washington, D.C.] one day, past the law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.].  And I saw some men doing honorable work, digging a ditch, repairing a gas line or main, main that had broken.  I said you know, that's where you're gonna end up, in that--digging a ditch in that hole.  And it's metaphorical I know, but it's something that has never left my mind in terms of do you wanna be down in that hole?  No, no.  I was on my way up to the Kenyan bar, to do my usual watering.  I went up there, I wasn't too conversant that day.  I said I'd better get on back and--'cause we had just taken final exams.  And I was concerned that I hadn't made it.  I said if I ever get by this year, you'll never have to worry about me anymore.  This is it.
Speaker 2: So that took you to be motivated.  I just wanna make a clarification.  When you mentioned Spot, you're talking about--
Speaker 1: Spottswood W. Robinson [III], one of the most disciplined legal minds you'd ever encounter.  I was lucky enough to finally get a chance to work with him when I came out of law school.
Story_ID: 578180
Speaker 1: But can you just tell your favorite Spottswood Robinson [Spottswood W. Robinson, III] story, do you have one?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I do.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: I never will forget my oldest daughter was a baby, and my wife and I, ex-wife and I were asked to come to Washington [D.C.].  Spott had just become the dean at the law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.], and something I really told him.  He said, "What do you think of me being dean of the school?"  I said, "Well if that's what you gotta do, fine."  But I hated him leaving 'cause I had just started to practice law and I loved being with him.  So I'd come up to work on a few cases that he had entrusted with me to, to, to work on.  When I got there, found out that the letter that he wanted me to write, he made me write that letter five to six times.  A simple letter to the judge explaining some aspect of it and I didn't think I was extremely lack of verbosity, lacking in it.  I didn't think that I couldn't express myself.  I got to the process, I almost wanted to say you write it.  But what he was trying to tell me was choose what you mean to convey.  Like he would say, "Doug, let's get another word for this."  Get me another--driving me crazy.  But I came to respect exactly what he was trying to say.  Then I came to know him as well as anyone in terms of his dispatch, his discipline, his adherence, and his extreme high qualification.  No one, you will never hear anyone tell you he was not prepared.  No judge, no lawyer, I have never heard anyone say anything disrespectful in that regard.
Story_ID: 578181
Speaker 1: Tall, handsome man and he [Thurgood Marshall] carried himself with that (unclear)--light the cigars, light the--I liked him because he was pretty much like I was.
Speaker 2: A normal person.
Speaker 1: He liked to have his good times.  Yeah he would, he would take his drink, he would--he used his language as he chose to, you know what I mean.  And he didn't suffer fools too bad.  But he was smart as he could be.  I mean he was--they respected him.  And, but he also respected--he never was able to get over to a lot of people, look I'm not here by myself.  I've got this army of people.  But the army of guys around him liked him because they knew that he delegated, and that if he said--Thurgood [Marshall] wasn't making a lot of money.  By today's standards, it was nothing.  And yet that's what he wanted to do.
Speaker 2: Well he's viewed a giant of a man.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And did you--did you ever hear them talking about Charles, Charles [Hamilton] Houston.
Speaker 1: Yes.  So much so that I wanted, I felt cheated.  I met his grandson.  I spoke at the--Thurgood Marshall Foundation [sic, Thurgood Marshall College Fund, Washington, D.C.] this year.  And his grandson was there, but he also came to the event at the County--at Constitutional Hall [sic, Constitution Hall, Washington, D.C.] with Brown vs. Board of Education [of Topeka, 347 U.S. 483].  Charlie Houston was a, a brilliant man.  Saw what needed to be done, tailored it, disciplined the movement to understand that education had to be the key, not public accommodation, not some of the things that people felt was gonna lead to miscegenation and all of that sort of nonsense.  But let's open this door first, and then let's see what that does in terms of opening more doors of equality and opportunity.  Believing, and justifiably so, that if you can make education equally accessible, then the rest should come more easily.  And that's why I think we need to access what the last fifty years have wrought as it relates to Brown.  And it's not fair to measure it by fifty years because when you consider the years of defiance right here in my own state [Virginia], interposition, massive resistance, nullification, millions and millions of dollars spent to thwart and stop things from happening all over the state, that it's--where we are in American achievement is almost miraculous when you consider from whence we've come.
Story_ID: 578182
Speaker 1: Now at, at Howard [Howard University School of Law, Washington D.C.] you also--well, you got married.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: The first year.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And then you met also Henry Marsh [HM Henry L. Marsh III].
Speaker 2: Well, yeah.
Speaker 1: Which was--
Speaker 2: It was the most amazing thing.  And I met Henry in law class.  He was sitting in front of me and Henry has still this tendency, I used to call it the, the tsetse fly disease.  I say 'cause you know he, he'll do that.  And so he, he does it now.  And he was sitting in class and I said--I kept kicking him in his Achilles tendon.  Get up wake up.  So outside the class I said, "You know you, man you getting ready to punch out of here, you sitting up sleep."  He said, "I wasn't sleep."  "Don't tell me you weren't sleep, I'm sitting behind you."  "Yeah, I wasn't sleep."  I said, "What's your name?"  "I'm Henry Marsh."  "Where you from?"  "Richmond [Virginia]."  "What, what Richmond where?  Where do you live?"  He said, "Church Hill [Richmond, Virginia]."  "Church Hill?"  "Yeah."  "Do you know me?"  He said, "No."  "You live in Church Hill in Richmond and don't know me?"  You don't--what had happened--and we lived amazingly, one block away.  I lived in the 900 block of 28th Street, he lived in the 900 block of 29th Street.  Well Henry came there when he was about--I think there's only a year or two separating our ages.  But he came to Richmond from Smithfield, Virginia.  I think he was about thirteen when he came, so he was not a part of the group that I came up with, even though he was there.  I went to Armstrong High School [Richmond, Virginia], he went to Maggie Walker [High School, later, Maggie L. Walker Governor's School for Government and International Studies, Richmond, Virginia].  I was ahead of him when he went to--I went to Union [Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia].  So our first actual meeting was in law school in the--and we then became roommates in the dormitory.  And then he convinced me that we should get an, an apartment.  I said, "Well you know I don't need an apartment."  Most of my friends had their own places already.  "Yeah I know but I, I want an apartment," 'cause his present wife was coming up to go to dental school the next year.  I said, "Well I'll think about it.  I think maybe we should get an apartment."  He said, "Well--I just happen to have already found a spot."  I said, "You have?"  He said, "Yeah."  He didn't have a job, he didn't have any money.  I'm still working over at the club [Bowling Ethel's Base Officers Club, Washington, D.C.], you know.  I said well we go to--we go and look for it, looked at it.  I said well, "How much is the rent?"  He said, "Well I'm gonna be working in the post office this summer."  I said, "Yeah?"  "And I think I, I'm gonna be in a position then to pay you back the rent."  I said, "Well we'll work that out."  And I said we gotta go buy some stuff here.  "Well yeah I think we should go to this place."  He was way ahead of me in terms of what we had to do.  And I enjoyed it and, and he was a heck of a cook.  And I didn't do too much cooking then.  I like cooking now.  I love it, as a matter of fact.  And so we had a good time.  And then we would study together and I would say, "Well, when I come back from what I would call the, the club, you will have briefed the cases and I can just see what it is."  You have to have three cases a day in law school briefed.  And, and I'd see him pen out, fallin'--he'd already gone to sleep.  I said, "You haven't briefed!"  "Oh yeah, I'm straight."  "(Unclear) that doesn't help me at all."  But it was a good experience--
Story_ID: 578183
Speaker 1: Now, think about the law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington D.C.] experience.  How did it change you, you know in any way?  I know you said aft--you know, your first year, you were a little nervous about passing.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you know and you wanted to take it seriously.  But what about the law school training and environment?
Speaker 2: Well first of all, the first thing that I noticed was the freshman class was a big room.  The sophomore class was smaller, the middle class was smaller, and the senior class was smaller.  And I said my goodness, this is telling me something right here now.  Somebody is not going to make it.  But I tell you I found that the training I received there was as good as you could get anywhere.  And I found out and I came out and I wasn't able to--I didn't have the money to go to a bar review course.  And I knew that the record in Richmond [Virginia] would be that you--in Virginia rather, that we're not gonna pass a bunch of people.  So they had a record of one a year, maybe.  And [HM] Henry Marsh [Henry L. Marsh III] I think was one a year.  My predecessor Al Smith [William Alfred "Al" Smith] who was in law school from me--who originally from Richmond, lived in Hampton [Virginia].  He was the only one that passed.  So they said--so I said well if it's gonna be one in my class, then I'll have to be that one 'cause I can't afford to take it but once or twice.  I had a wife and kid.  And so I went to Newport News [Virginia] to work in a law office there, I think thirty-five dollars a week, maybe forty, prior to social security being taken out.  But the man had come--he was a Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] grad, and he had come to Howard to ask them--and they recommended me to come down there.  And I wanted to learn how to run an office.  How do you run an office, 'cause I had in mind I wanted my own office.  I wanted to do it myself.  I didn't mind working for somebody, but I never intended to, but for so long.  So when I went there, I--and I came and worked in his office from say the time I finished, June to about September or so.  And I told him I'm gonna have to leave and go home and study for the bar.  And I'm not gonna be able to go to the bar courses.  They didn't have--you couldn't go to--the bar courses were at the University of Richmond [Richmond, Virginia], but you couldn't go to.  And the only one that was available that you could go to was up in Arlington [Virginia], Newlands Bar School, Bar Review Course [ph.].  But it cost a hundred and some dollars.  Now that's a lot of money back at that time.  When I'm telling you I'm making thirty-five dollars a week, you can imagine what one hundred dollars would be.  So I came back and got some notes that they call Woodbridge Notes [sic, Virginia Bar Notes], the man who was the former dean of the law school [Dudley W. Woodbridge] at the--at William & Mary [Law School, Williamsburg, Virginia].  And was in the process of studying those notes.  And I would just stay in, stay in.  I stayed in say maybe from October till December just totally away from, from everybody, society.  Wouldn't go out.  Only place I would go would be down to the pool room, and every now then shoot a game of pool for relaxation, and then try to get a little moving money.  Some gas money.  But by that time I'd already sold my car 'cause things were a little tight.  And, but that training then started telling me yeah, look, I know these answers.  I know what the responses should be.  I, I've been trained.  I, I've had the course, whether it was taxation, whether it was criminal law, whether it was commercial law or real estate.  I didn't doubt it at Howard, but I came to appreciate it far more after I got out.  Particularly when you started seeing people who weren't passing the bar, who had gone to far more prestigious law schools, by name.  So which means the only thing it could have meant was that I was exposed to as good a legal education as you can get, and that's still the case today.  Howard University has as much to offer as any place in terms of education.  Not just to African Americans.  I can show you it's not just to African Americans.  As you know I'm privileged to be on the board down there.  You look at the makeup of the class in terms of the numbers of persons from the other races that come to study at Howard.  It's not the place of last resort.  It's a place of first resort for a lot of people.
Story_ID: 578184
Speaker 1: You know what is amazing when--I mean I know Howard [University School of Law, Washington D.C.].  People consider the time that you were there sort of the halcyon days.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I mean of the law school.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Because you had really some of the best minds that, you know could be--legal minds.
Speaker 2: No question.  Well look, look how lucky a guy like me is to be able to come there to be that conversant with these, these, these legal giants, these great historical figures.  They were the judges in our moot court observations, and they were just as hard on us as you could be.  I mean they, they tempered you so that you would know what to expect in a, in a courtroom.  When you prepared a brief, they'd correct it and throw it out like it was a piece of trash if it was a piece of trash.  So they were saying to us look, you know where you're gonna go, you know what you're gonna do.  You're gonna be measured.  You gotta be good.  The one thing they did strike in us though, that if you're gonna be involved in what's necessary to change the fabric of American life as it relates to people you say you identify with, don't be mediocre.  You've gotta be as good as good can be.  Charlie Duncan [HM Charles T. Duncan] taught evidence, died this year, and finished Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Dartmouth [College, Hanover, New Hampshire].  Smart man, I mean these were people, they weren't there because they had no other place to go.  They were there because they felt a call and a commitment and you're absolutely right, they were the halcyon days.  I was--when you consider how lucky you are with opportunities like that, you wished that you could transcend it and relate it.  That's why I say this now that your program, your experience with what you're doing is such that you are preserving opportunities for so many, many people who would never have that firsthand experience.  Yet the best they can do it is vicariously to the extent that you preserve that.  You're to be commended.
Story_ID: 578185
Speaker 1: Now when you--you know the other thing that's striking is for you to--that Virginia, the state that elected you governor, but one black person--I mean we think that's not that long ago, but one black person being able to be admitted.  So there weren't that black people as, as lawyers here.
Speaker 2: No.  My goodness, when I came here, there were only sixty African American lawyers in the whole state.  The entire state.  And they told me--and they only had sixty in Richmond [Virginia].  And they said well you know it's already crowded.  Crowded?  You're gonna have a tough time.  I said I'm not gonna have a tough--somebody else is gonna have a tough time because they're gonna have to draw the line after me.  I'm not gonna--I, I wanted to be measured by being--or measured against the best.  You know a better trial lawyer, then get him.  But I'm gonna be as good a trial lawyer as you can find.  And I want to have the reputation of being able to go into a courtroom where the judge is white, the jury is white, the prosecutor's white, everybody else is white, and walk out there with my client.  Whether it's a civil case in which we were asking for damages, winning.  Or if it's a criminal case, wherein we were accused of something, winning.  And that race would have no part in that decision-making.  And it's my job as a litigator, as an advocate, to convince whomever was in the environment, to understand that we're not here talking about race, we're talking about justice.
Story_ID: 578186
Speaker 1: And you were very effective that way.  Now you passed the [Virginia] bar exam December 1st of 1960, right?
Speaker 2: Right, good.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.
Speaker 2: That's very good.
Speaker 1: And, but you came in--
Speaker 2: Fifty-nine [1959], really.
Speaker 1: Was it '59 [1959]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I was admitted to the bar in '60 [1960].
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, '60 [1960], sorry.
Speaker 2: That's all right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But, but you--so can you describe the environment you came in, you know the legal environment?  You know I mean no, I'm just saying, you know setting up practice.
Speaker 2: Well it's amazing.  Yeah when I came here, the--you had separate parts of the courtroom.  The--and the lawyers were supposed to sit--African Americans sit on one bench, white lawyers sit at another bench.  I always sat at the other bench.  I never paid any attention to that.  I'll wait till somebody tells me to move and I'm not gonna move.  If I'm gonna be a lawyer in a courtroom for justice, how can I act as if I don't believe in it?  And no one ever did, said you can't sit here or you can't be involved in--they thought I was crazy.  And the environment was such that I couldn't wait to be a part of the group that I spoke of.  But that group--we couldn't be members of the white bar.  And the black bar hadn't met in six years.  I said wait a minute, it's not but sixteen guys here.  So I talked to some of the younger, more youthful members of the bar, younger members.  When are we gonna meet?  I'm here.  I want to see where everybody is, man.  Where is the action?  So they said well haven't met yet.  So I wrote a letter to everybody, said we gotta do it now.  And they didn't like it.  Some of them said my, my phrasing was such.  I think one of them said your words trigger defensive mechanisms in people and thwart that opportunity rather than to enhance it.  And one month after the letter, they started meeting, and they've met ever since.  Once they started meeting, we started saying we're gonna belong to all of the bars.  And it doesn't make any sense to be a part of--so we had two bars.  You had what is called the, the Virginia Bar Association, and the Virginia State Bar.  They referred to it as the integrated bar.  That was--you had to belong that one because how can they discipline you unless you belong?  How can they say what you're doing is wrong if you're not a member?  So they did things like trying to disbar Sam Tucker [Samuel Wilbert Tucker] because he was an advocate for civil rights.  They tried to disbar his brother, Otto Tucker.  Sam was from Emporia [Virginia] and ultimately came to Richmond [Virginia] eventually.  Otto was from Alexandria [Virginia].  They formed what was called a Committee on Offenses Against the Administration of Justice sponsored by the bar, to be able to go into lawyers' offices and disrupt their files and to determine who they're representing.  They made the persona of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] persona non grata.  It was just oppressive.  And yet the weight of that oppression, most of us resisted it.  Said we're not gonna pay any attention to that nonsense.  And so we would just resist it, resist, resist it.
Story_ID: 578187
Speaker 1: When Spottswood [Spottswood William Robinson III] got called to be the dean of the law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington D.C.], he recommended to Thurgood [Marshall] that I take his place as the registered agent for the NAACP Legal Defense [and Educational] Fund, which I readily accepted and liked it and loved it and stayed in that position until 1985 when I ran for lieutenant governor [of Virginia] and pretty much because of the--maybe potential conflict, gave it up.  But it was not, it was not good, but it presented the challenge.  And then that further challenge came in terms of showing that you can take any kind of case and go into the courtroom and win it.  And we did.  We were able to expand to show what could take place and how it took place.  But none of it could have happened unless we had the training, the resolve, and the examples previously set by Thurgood and those guys, and Spott too, make certain that hey look, you challenge.  And that's why today the fight is never over, never will be over.  Thurgood, Spotts, [HM] Oliver [W. Hill], Sam Tucker [Samuel Wilbert Tucker], those guys did all they could at their time.  Subsequent generations come, did what we could at that time.  Our charge is to inspire others to meet the challenges today in their time, and to pass it on to generation and to generation and to generation.  One of the things I, I do like about way, the way Jews do many of the things relative to make certain that generation after generation, when they said lest we forget, never forget.  And it's not a matter of fixing blame.  What, what they're saying in essence is we're not gonna go through this mess with anybody anymore.  And that's why we, I think sometimes miss the boat by not allowing our youngsters to know that they have a responsibility to do something, not to receive.  Not to always be beneficiaries.  Not to be a part of that momma mentality that says what can we do for you, what do we want, what do you want us to do for you?  You do for yourself, we'll help you do for yourself.  And I think it's sadly missing.  And that's why I'm afraid that that interruption may occur where the Civil Rights Movement moved from what we saw with Plessy vs. Ferguson [163 U.S. 537] to Brown vs. Board of Education [of Topeka 347 U.S. 483], no bell is gonna ring again.  No Supreme Court [of the United States] decision is gonna come again.  No court edict is gonna come again, no congressional action is gonna come again to transcend that entire race of people to a consciousness and an awareness that is necessary in my judgment, to move us further ahead.  We can't rest on those laurels.
Story_ID: 578188
Speaker 1: Now can you describe the practice that you--'cause you were pretty aggressive in your practice.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you had a myriad of things, you know.
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.
Speaker 1: From, you know sort of petty crimes--
Speaker 2: Yeah, for everything.
Speaker 1: To--
Speaker 2: General practice was what I called it and what we did.  I--it ultimately reduced itself though to criminal and personal injury work, suppose I did--I, I, I wasn't good at estates.  I spent more money out of my pocket handling the estates 'cause I didn't handle any estates.  You know people would die and say I want my chifferobe to go to such-and-such a person, and my chest of drawers to go to this person, my silver to go to this person, my linen.  I'm not making this up.  You think I'm joking.  And you could write it up and you figured it all up, the clerk figured it and say what value do you put on it for purposes of exacting a bond of the executor, five hundred dollars.  So my charge was then to, in a courtroom, master the skills of a litigator to the extent that you could--you knew you had to deal with a, maybe a white jury.  Then you started seeing if you can win cases there, if you can win verdicts with a jury in a civil case, then I started having white clients come.  Hey, wait a minute, we saw this guy in court and we started seeing things that he could do.  Hey look, you gonna represent, represent us.  And I got to a point where I felt comfortable.  Courtroom to me was just like that barbershop that I described earlier.  It was my forum, it was my theater, it was where I felt so much at home because an advocate should never feel that he or she is a part of the process other than pushing for the best that your case and your client has.  And if there's anything that stops you from feeling that you can do that, then you're giving hostages to defeat, and you can't afford to do that.  So the atmosphere I think changed.  I was--I've been so impressed through the years to see lawyers, particularly white and, and black, say that we like the way you did and we, we, we're impressed.  And just this year I was at a unveiling for a judge of a portrait in one of the courtrooms.  And I went because he was a prosecutor at the time that I started.  And I had asked him, said look, we don't have any African Americans in this office.  That's gotta stop in terms of prosecutors.  He said all right, fine.  So I recommended somebody, the person got the job.  Subsequently when I got into the legislature [Virginia General Assembly, Richmond, Virginia], I said we don't have any African Americans judges, none, across the entire state.  That's gotta stop.  And so I got a coalition together in the senate and we produced that, and we didn't have anybody on the circuit bench.  We changed that.  And once you saw how you could do those kinds of things, it came as a result I think of the mutual respect that you built through the years.  And so when somebody would say in the courtroom at the unveiling that you know, some of us used to come in the court and watch him try the cases, because I lived them.
Story_ID: 578189
Speaker 1: I really, literally lived my cases through you.  And if you told me the wrong thing, it's your fault, not mine.  And I never--my job was never to determine whether you were guilty or innocent.  My job was to see that whatever you said was such that it would get the fullest, fairest airing in a, in an atmosphere.  Did I have problems with judges?  Yeah, some judges, "Here he comes."  Didn't bother me at all because I'd already gotten into that judge's mind.  'Cause he knew if I was coming, wasn't gonna be any nonsense.  Judge would say, "Don't ask that question."  I'd say, "Well what question would you have me ask?"  "Anyone you want, but don't ask that one."  "Okay," I'd ask the same question.  "I thought I told you to not ask it."  I said, "You told me to ask any one that I wanted, and that's the one I wanted to ask."  "So you're just gonna be defiant."  "No, I'm not gonna be defiant."  "You're gonna force me to hold you in contempt."  I said, "I didn't know I could force you to do anything.  If I could, I would choose something else to do."  "Let's take a recess."  "See me in my chambers.  What's the trouble here?"  But see out of that came a respect.  I'm not there on trial, don't put me on trial, I have a client.  But as a result of it, African Americans particularly sitting in that courtroom say wow, we are not gonna be sold down the river here.  We know we're gonna get a fair shake if he's demanding it.  And it didn't have anything to do with money.  Lots of times people paid you, sometimes they paid you a little.  Sometimes they would pay you a little at, at a time.  My secretary now has some roses on her desk and I said, "Where did those roses come from?"  And she said, "Russell Smith [ph.]."  Now Russell Smith was a boy who could hardly talk too well, very difficult speech pattern, always in trouble.  But his mother was working with him and others.  And I would always represent him and she'd pay me with her little money.  Sometimes she'd have to go into her bosom pull a little money and pay me a few dollars.  But to the extent that I was always there for them, he's never forgotten Ruth [ph.], see because Ruth was a part of the secretary thing even back then.
Story_ID: 578190
Speaker 1: Now what about Curtis Poindexter?  Wasn't that a important case for you because--
Speaker 2: Yeah, this young man killed a judge in Caroline County [sic, Louisa County, Virginia].  Literally killed a judge [Stewart A. Cunningham].  Walked in the courtroom with a trench coat on with a shotgun pushed down behind it.  Judge was trying a case.  He pulled the shotgun out.  The judge rather than to crouch, stood up and Poindexter shot him, killed him.  The deputies ran to him.  He shot a deputy.  Sheriff came out, he shot the sheriff.  And then just went on down the hall.  Never in trouble before in his entire life.  And I knew his family, knew his, his, his cousin, his first cousin was a lawyer and a friend, and he asked me to, to take the case, and I did.  And when I--you can imagine the, the climate of the--they were ready to take me, him and everybody else away.  And I carried my son up to the trial.  I said I want you to just you to come up here.  So they had guards standing up on top of the courthouse, state troopers and--literally standing on top of the building because it was supposed to be they're gonna--they were so upset.  Turned out the boy was absolutely out of it, just snapped.  He had, he had no recollection of it.  Didn't know why he did it.  And if you talk to him, it was a pitiful situation.  I talked with him, he was just crying and weeping.  He'd gone through a lot of changes.  Some social, some religious.  And his parents were some of the most respected people in the community.  The sheriff even testified to that.  So we tried the case and I got the services of the psychiatrist up there to--and we convinced the jury that it was--well we tried to convince a jury that this guy was just out of it.  And the jury was unable to reach a verdict.  And said no, couldn't find a verdict, couldn't--the prosecutors said we're gonna move this trial.  They carried it from Caroline County [sic.] to (unclear).  Tried him and they said that we wanna make certain that everybody gets a fair trial.  So we went up there and the jury found him guilty and gave him a life sentence.  But the unfortunate thing, it's, it's like alternating current.  Talking with him, he could have the clarity and the perception that was normal.  I wanted the case because, I took the case rather first of all, because I knew the, the guy.  But secondly, I also wanted to be a part of showing that justice still could pre--I had some very interesting cases, the heart transplant case.
Story_ID: 578191
Speaker 1: That was a man [Bruce Tucker] that his brother [William Tucker] called me one day and said, "I want you to take a case."  I said, "What is the case?"  He said, "I got a call from the undertaker that said my brother was buried, but he doesn't have any heart in his body."  I said, "What you mean he doesn't have any heart?"  He said, "That's what they said."  "No heart?"  "No, it's been removed."  "Who took it out?"  "I don't know."
Story_ID: 578192
Speaker 1: What happened we found out that the--this man's [William Tucker] brother [Bruce Tucker] was sitting on a wall, a brick wall like.  And had been drinking and he fell and damaged his head and when they carried him to the hospital [Medical College of Virginia Hospital, later Virginia Commonwealth University Medical Center, Richmond, Virginia], he was in very, very bad shape.  So they pretty much pronounced him dead as such.  But they said they tried to contact his next of kin and he had--there's no record of it at all.  And they had taken his heart out of his body and put it in another man's [Joseph Klett] body in terms of a transplant.  And I filed the lawsuit on behalf of the family alleging any numbers of things, mutilation of the body, secondly deprivation and harm and all that kinds of things associated with civil redress.  And the trial was set at a time when the heart transplant surgeons of the world were gathering at the Medical College of Virginia [later, Virginia Commonwealth University Medical Center, Richmond, Virginia] for a meeting, so you had all of the expert witnesses around.  And it was a curious thing because this case led to the first American case to determine what was the legal definition of death.  And prior to that time, the legal definition had been when all vital signs are gone, pulse, heart, brain, all those types of things.  This was the first case, and this was the case that led to the legal determination being brain death.  And so now we have that.  And the judge [A. Christian Compton] was torn as to whether to go along with us on that.  And he indicated such over the weekend.  And we got a serious problem here.  And Monday when we resumed the trial, that part changed.  We were obviously short of money and everything else, but we were not able to win the case in terms of--on behalf of the family.  They were saying well there was no sustaining of malice.  Secondly, the mutilation aspects wouldn't show.  And then moreover, he was really dead.  I was saying that he wasn't dead.  And by legal definition at the time, he wasn't.  I would have liked to have been able to pursue it ultimately.  And I'm not saying that it would have changed anything in terms of the final result, but it was one of the cases that I know contributed much to the (unclear) jurisprudence as far as what a legal definition of death was.  But it also made people say that look, you just can't do with people like you used to do when they come in here.  And I told stories about how when I was a kid coming up, at the church that I belonged, which was right across the street from the hospital, people would say if you don't behave yourself, the student doctors will get you.  Means they would operate on you as a cadaver.  So they were some of the cases.  And I've had some horrible cases that--serial murders--people represented--two brothers, one of--I represented one, the other guy represented the other.  They killed about twelve, thirteen people for nothing.  And not at one time, but--and it just was amazing in terms of what happened and I got a hung jury on one of those because it was right after the Escobedo decision [Escobedo v. Illinois, 378 U.S. 478] in which the rights of the defendant have to be read to them.  This was prior to Miranda [rights].  Miranda came a little after that.  So I've had a very, very interesting career, legally in terms of the kinds of cases that I've been involved with.
Speaker 2: Now who was the name of the heart case, what was the--
Speaker 1: Bruce Tucker.
Speaker 2: Bruce Tucker, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Bruce O. Tucker versus Medical College at Virginia, et al. [Tucker v. Lower, 1972].  Everybody else that you could name as defendants.
Story_ID: 578193
Speaker 1: Now in this time--you, your father [Robert Wilder], he had always wanted to be a lawyer.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What was his--I mean was he extremely proud of his son?  I mean was this sort of like a--
Speaker 2: Yes, but he never would say it, you know.  He, my father at that time had gotten to a point where he--blocked out a lot.  Not--he hadn't got to a point of senility or anything.  Later on he did get a bit of what you call Alzheimer's.  But he would say things like, "You know, I never had any trouble with that boy."  He used to whip me almost every day.  But so when he got to that point, but he would, yes he was very proud.  He would not say it to me, he would say it to others.  That same group that would come under the porch or at the fence.  "Yeah, Douglas is down there"--see my office was only three blocks away.  Mine was the first law office ever located in Church Hill [Richmond, Virginia].  Quite all otherwise, doctors, dentists, but no law office.  And I was told not to put it over there.  That's the best way to get me to do something, tell me not to do it or you can't do it.  Well I knew so many people.  Half of the residents almost by their first name.  I said if I don't open, if I don't set it up here, where would I set it up?  So he liked it.  And my mother [Beulah Olive Richards Wilder] liked it.  My mother wasn't that happy about me going to law school, though, when I first said I was going to go because she wanted--I'd come back from Korea.  And she--I had a good job and she thought I should stay there for a while and, "You going up there, you just got here, you just got back."  And, and I had--was semi-engaged to a lady that ultimately didn't end up marrying.  "But what about her?" I said, "But what about me?"  This is my career, you know.  But yeah, he was proud, yeah.
Story_ID: 578194
Speaker 1: Now around this time, you know, Brown versus Board of Education [of Topeka] came out in 19--
Speaker 2: Fifty-four [1954].
Speaker 1: Fifty-four [1954], and then there was, you know the--with all deliberate speed.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So it took deliberate speed here.  So talk about the fact--you know the schools got, I mean was that around the time that you know with the schools, weren't they closed for a period of time?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Well the schools were closed.
Speaker 1: And was it, was that the time you were active with NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]?  No, or was it different?
Speaker 2: I was with Spotts [Spottswood W. Robinson III], yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but the schools were closed in Prince Edward County [Virginia].  And they were closed for--from 1959 to 1964, almost a five year period.  Just closed.  Closing a couple of other-Charlottesville [Virginia], they were closed too.  And there was then put in what I call this doctrine of massive resistance, where the State [of Virginia] said--and Harry Byrd, the then senator from the state, had signaled the course for the rest of the South to follow.  And that was when they were trying to get a Southern manifesto signed by all of the senators to show the Northern senators that they were not going to go along with this.  Senator Richard Russell [Jr.] from Georgia, Senator Strom Thurmond from South Carolina, and Harry Byrd from Virginia.  They were the leaders of the so-called Southern manifesto.  Then you had a doctrine of so-called nullification and based pretty much on the, the Tenth Amendment to the United States Constitution, or rights not specifically spelled out in the Constitution for the states or reserved to the states.  I meant not re, re--spelled out for the people or reserved to the states.  So that's when the argument states' rights was reasserted.  And it was a very, very difficult time in Virginia, very difficult.  That's when you saw the billboards and the signs saying impeach [Chief Justice] Earl Warren. Why?  What did he do?  He was the justice that wrote the opinion, that's all he did.  But as a result of it, impeach him.  That was when you had people--prior to that time you recall in 1948, people left the Democratic [National] Convention because Harry, I mean [President] Harry Truman dared to say that he favored federal programs and equal employment opportunity programs and efforts to desegregate the [U.S.] Military.  What?  The Democrat--and they literally walked out of the Democratic Party in protest to what Harry Truman was doing.  So in that backdrop, you had state monies, tremendous amounts of, of--no one really knows how much.  But we know millions of dollars.  And so the people in Prince Edward County and other places where the schools were shut, whites as well as African Americans, some have never recovered.  I went to speak up to one of the sessions this year.  And one of the men who was involved told someone that yeah, you're giving us these honorary diplomas now, and I still can't read it.  So what does it mean to us?  It's an empty gesture.  And when you take education from someone, that's why I keep pointing it out.  Education is not to get a job.  He had a job.  Could he get a better job?  Yeah, but it's intrinsic.  Education, you can't take that away from him.  Take the job away, but not education.  So yes the state has a moral responsibility, almost a continuing obligation, to recognize that what it did was not dead wrong, but has to be remedied.  That's they make, they make some piecemeal efforts on occasions to act as if we're going to do something and they've set up a scholarship fund now, a two million dollar scholarship, which is pittance, to allow students of some of those people.  Then they have to determine who these well deserving people are.  It's an endowed policy, which it'll help.  But it still won't go to the point of removing the visages or the scars, the damage, the infliction, the, the hubris associated with it, the lack--I'm not, forget that part.  You don't have to apologize for wronging me, you just have to cease doing it and to understand that that's never gonna happen again to me.  If you do so, you do so at your peril.  Because there'll be different responses than have been the cases in the past.
Story_ID: 578195
Speaker 1: Now--you have a very successful firm, you've sort of shot up, your lifestyle's improving, you know in many ways.  And why do you decide then to run for the state senate [Virginia General Assembly]?
Speaker 2: Because I was criticizing everything.  Didn't like the way this was going, didn't like the way that was going, didn't like the way these were doing things.  And there were people who would say why, why don't you get involved?  They didn't mean, they weren't encouraging me.  Shut up, put up or shut up, well I'll put up.  The only people who had been in the state senate were those who were in that two year period of Reconstruction that were there as a result of federal troops being there.  So when they were pulled out with the compromise, the registration efforts, the decimation of the vote was such that that presence was gone.  And how can you have a society comprised of one fifth of the population being totally underrepresented, unrepresented?  And to expect to know what is appropriate and right and proper in terms of the dispensation of state resources.  And so I decided to run for the senate.  I didn't wanna run for the house because it's--didn't wanna run every two years for anything.  I didn't really wanna run for that, you're right.  But I, I knew that if I weren't gonna do that, then I needed to stop talking about and stop being critical about it, so I got in it.  I called--I say sometimes I had a dream and went crazy.
Speaker 1: So there was opening because of this--was it Senator [J. Sargeant] Reynolds?
Speaker 2: Yes, Senator Reynolds.
Speaker 1: He was gonna run for lieutenant governor.
Speaker 2: Yeah, very, very bright young man, family name, Reynolds Metals [Company, later part of Alcoa] based here in Richmond [Virginia].  As soon as he announced that he was gonna run for the lieutenant governorship, I announced that I was gonna run for the senate.  I knew he was gonna win.  And I didn't--some people became a little upset with it because I didn't wait to be anointed by the party elders, nor the leadership in the African American community, political leadership.  I said I'm just gonna do it.  Why?  'Cause somebody should do it.  And in the process there were efforts to derail it of course.  And I never considered it personal.  I've always considered it opportunistic.  We hear the slogans attributed to--and the words attributed to Frederick Douglass, that power can cease nothing, or demand.  And, and I understood that.  And I understood also that I was challenging the power.  But I never, you know I, I felt this.  I came to see this, though you can't, you can't argue about the slice of the pie always as to whether it's equal, whether it's proper, whether it's just unless you are willing to say let me put my hand on the knife that cuts the pie.  And so I wanted to be involved with how the pie is gonna be cut to the point I'm gonna cut it.  Or if you're gonna cut it, I'm gonna hold your hand and say wait a minute, move it over a little bit.  And that's, that's why I--so it--I saw it and I said the thing that I wanted to do then was to be a bridge between young and old, black and white, and rich and poor.  The unfortunate thing is that's still the case.  You need that bridge and there aren't that many people who are able to establish that fulcrum for others to walk across.
Story_ID: 578196
Speaker 1: Now your timing was really critical though in this election because there was the issue of annexation going on, and that was sort of a critical thing in terms of time, besides the fact, you know, I mean that your election would have some issues, you know, both in the black and white community.
Speaker 2: You've done your homework, I see that.  It was very, very crucial.  The annexation was to take effect January of 1960.
Speaker 1: Can you explain the annexation though?
Speaker 2: The law at the time permitted annexation--Virginia is the only state that has independent cities.  No city is in a county.  And so cities have the authority to annex counties.  Counties can surrender, the county can ask for a charter and become a city, but then that was what some of them did like Chesapeake [Virginia], like certain other areas of the state that decided we're gonna be cities.  In that process, what Richmond [Virginia] did was try to annex a portion of Henrico [County, Virginia].  They should have proceeded with it because it was the, it would have brought in a better economic base, but they balked at the price, the price was paltry by any standards, even then, standards then.  In rejecting that, then they said well we'll annex a portion of Chesterfield County [Virginia], which is the southernmost annexing part of Richmond.  And in doing that, they brought in about forty-some thousand whites for the sole purpose, which was documented, of diluting the black vote.  Well the dilemma for me was if I said hey look, I'm gonna be the guy standing out there saying you shouldn't do this because it's wrong, then that would make the people in the city say well goodness, he doesn't wanna help the city.  If I said we should do it, that would make the people in the newly annexed area upset because they would say wow, he's for taking us in.  So they all would have voted against me, and those inside would've said one thing.  So I pretty much played the role of the coward and did nothing.  However, I did speak to people in the--what I call the leadership as to--'cause I was just a candidate as to look, this thing is diluting what's gonna take place.  Well and no one chose to, to do anything about it.  The governor [James Lindsay Almond, Jr.] ordered the election to be held in December, prior to the date of the annexation.  Not to help me, but to help the lieutenant governor, who had lost the race for governor and to that extent, the issue was decided that the only people who would vote would be the people in the actual city of Richmond because annexation would take place later.  So that did take place, and then one of the losing candidates in the [Richmond] City Council race brought a suit, Curtis Holden [ph.].  Which was ultimately victorious, but the court didn't void the election, the court said what we'll do is eventually decide to divide the city up into districts, which is what we have now.  I did assist and participate in the five four that we came up with, the five majority African American districts, and the four white districts.  That's been enlarged somewhat now by demographics to six and three.
Story_ID: 578197
Speaker 1: Now when you won, I mean this was historic.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: There had not been a black in the senate [Virginia General Assembly] since Reconstruction.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Was named Nathaniel Griggs [sic, Nathaniel Grigg]?
Speaker 2: That's correct, Griggs, Griggs.
Speaker 1: Okay, Griggs, Griggs, Griggs.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And, and so this is historic now.  A lot of people, I mean this is your first time in politics.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And sometimes you know neophyte politicians make a lot of mistakes, but didn't seem--I mean I don't know if you made mistakes, but you--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You had some good advice though, too.
Speaker 2: I made some mistakes too.
Speaker 1: Okay, well--
Speaker 2: As some of them thought.  But go ahead.
Speaker 1: But I mean you had, you befriended some white law--I mean you had that--some white lawyers.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, it was Butcher--
Speaker 2: Bob Butcher [ph.] was my--well he was a great friend of Sarge Reynolds [J. Sargeant Reynolds].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And Bob Butcher was my campaign manager.  And he was very instrumental in having people recognize that bridge I wanted to be, could be established.  And it, and it pretty much was.  I was lucky to have a law partner and a business partner, Charles Sutton [ph.] who is a doctor who's passed now.  But we had a tremendous campaign headquarters because it was a building that he and I had bought right at 2nd and Gray Streets [Richmond, Virginia], which is now the place that we ultimately sold to the Richmond Chamber of Commerce [later, Richmond/Spring Grove Chamber of Commerce].  But we could showcase it.  We even allowed the governor who won the election [Albertis S. Harrison, Jr.] to use it as his campaign headquarters.  So it was an excellent showcase to see people of both races and they're working together.  And you're right, and the climate that existed prior to that time was pretty bad.
Story_ID: 578198
Speaker 1: After I got in the session, we got into the state song, which I never knew was the state song.
Speaker 2: You didn't, okay.
Speaker 1: I never knew it.
Speaker 2: Okay, before that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, never knew it.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Knew the words, yeah, but everyone's forced to do it as a kid.
Speaker 2: The state song, though is 'Carry me Back to Old Virginia [sic, Virginny].'
Speaker 1: 'Carry me Back to Old Virginia.'  And many people thought that I objected to it because of the words, "There's where this old darkey's heart am long'd to go."  And it wasn't the, the reason I objected to it.  I objected to it because in addition to those words, if you get to the second stanza of the song, it says that that's--the slave is singing the song, see and he's lamenting the fact that his master and missus had passed.  But when he dies, he's gone join them and they won't be separated anymore.  So even in slavery, even in death, he wants to be a slave.  Even in death he wants to be.  So I said, "How can you cut this, the, the pie if you can't get past the crust?  The social crust is so encircling and hard, that you'll never be able to penetrate what's taking place."  This was three weeks after I'd been elected, my first speech on the floor of the senate [Virginia General Assembly].  They said my god, that's the end of him.
Speaker 2: They felt you had betrayed him, [Bob] Butcher [ph.], right?  And some--was he upset about your speech?  Did he feel--
Speaker 1: He wasn't happy.
Speaker 2: He wasn't happy, okay.
Speaker 1: Butcher said, "My god after you'd been getting along so well with those old men."  I said I hadn't been getting along that well with them, they were tolerating me I guess, they were speaking.  Said hello and how are you?  And what happened though was in researching it, I, I became even more upset because if you look at the preamble to the resolution, which was only adopted into the, in the 1940s, this song was only adopted in 1940 in the administration of Governor [William M.] Tuck, who was certainly never considered moderate by any standards.  So you can imagine he couldn't be considered anything leaning toward the rights of African Americans.  And in the preamble it says in order to foster pride in the people of the Commonwealth [of Virginia], more importantly to foster pride in the young people, we hereby adopt this as the official state song and the Alliance Club had gone out to the gravesite of this man James Bland who had written the song, and they pointed did you know that he was an African American?  I said so what?  I said, "Do you know what else he wrote?  He wrote 'In the Evening by the Moonlight' and 'Oh! Dem Golden Slippers.'"  I said, "He was a smart, educated man, but he wrote what he could sell.  So I don't knock it that he wrote it.  You could tell me that anybody of color could have written it, it doesn't make a difference."  I said, "But you think this promotes pride in the people of the commonwealth?"  "But it's such a lovely song.  What words would you like us to change?"  None.  So I introduced a bill to say repeal the state song.  They came to me and they said, "Are you gonna force us to vote on this?"  I said, "No I'm not gonna force you."  Same thing I told the judge.  I'm not trying to force you to do anything.  If I felt I could force you to do something, it would be just to say, it's repealed.  I knew there wouldn't be not--there would be not a single vote along with mine.  But that isn't the real story.  The real story is that when I did that, I was criticized all around the world.  Letters came from all over the places, Maryland, I mean Ireland, Germany, Mexico.  People who'd lived in Virginia, come back to Virginia.  "How dare you do that?"  How--and yet so many of the letters came that understood exactly what I was talking about.  Now this is--you gotta remember, what, 1960.
Speaker 2: 1969.
Speaker 1: Yes, 1969.  They understood exactly what I was talking about.  And stated so.
Story_ID: 578199
Speaker 1: But the criticism that came from the African American community, "He's down there fooling around with some song [Virginia state song].  We didn't want him to go down there to talk about some song."  And it came from leaders, leaders.  No need to go into their names.  But today they would be ashamed if I were to even mention that they didn't understand what it meant.  It taught me something, though.  It taught me what I thought I knew.  It taught me that leadership is a totality, it means to lead.  You don't talk about it, you do it.  You can't wait to be a leader of the people, you lead the people.  And that's--you pay the price for that.  You don't complain about it.  They wrote letters to the editors for three weeks continuously in the newspaper, three weeks continuous, maybe a month.  My kids said, "Daddy, what did you do?"  They would, they would go to school.  I said why--this in every, every day somebody's like you know who her daddy is.  Or, "You know who his daddy is."  You would have thought that I talked about assassinating the president of the United States.  But I knew I'd struck a nerve.  And they predicted that would be the end of me.  "You're not gonna survive, you'll never make it because," "You're right, he has betrayed us."  Now what was the betrayal?  To an extent that that subsequent--that event did more for me than people realize because it did, it marked me as independent.  People refer to me--I said by the three Ms, they called me maverick, they called me Machiavellian, and they say I might even be a Mephistopheles.  And I probably plead guilty to all three and without apology.
Story_ID: 578200
Speaker 1: Well you know, what's interesting, you were admitted to the [Virginia] bar--December 1st of '60 [1960], and then just nine years later you, you know, make this historic win on the same day.
Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: But you--and so the black community is not sure, are they sure how they feel about you?  They're proud, but you know but you have put your campaign--
Speaker 2: You mean then?
Speaker 1: Yeah, your campaign office you had even put in the white community, though.
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  I put it in my building.
Speaker 1: You put it in your building, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: My building.
Speaker 1: I see, okay.
Speaker 2: You see, this is what I'm saying to you.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: They didn't like it.
Speaker 1: Okay, they didn't like that, okay.
Speaker 2: They didn't like that.  They said, "Wait a minute, he's got his building."  So what did I do?  I moved, I put another campaign office four blocks down the street, and then I put another office over in Church Hill [Richmond, Virginia].  So I had three campaign offices, bearing the expenses for all three, paying every poll worker for all of it.  First time that's ever happened, and this happened, it hasn't happened since in terms of the, the candidate in the African American community.  But I was trying to send another message, and that is yeah I want your support, I want your help.  But I'm gonna pay for it if I have to.  I want your contribution, and it'll happen.  But I'm gonna pay for it if I have to.  I'm not running for office for a job.  I'm not looking for a living.  That's taken care of.  And I'm doing it for another reason.  I wanted to remove some of the critic--why you wanna put your office down there?  They didn't like I told you because you could see through its, it's maybe a, a three story building to the extent of seeing through it in terms of the glass front.  You can see all of that going up the stairs.  So it's an excellent place for people to see you in there.  And when you see white, African Americans working in that time in Virginia, it wasn't supposed to happen.  And critics, particularly on the African American side, would say he's with them.  And so I don't care, I'll put an office down here.  And which I did, I didn't mind it at all.  It cost, but it wasn't exorbitant.
Story_ID: 578201
Speaker 1: You gotta understand that Bill Rawlings [William Vincent "Bill" Rawlings] is from (unclear) Southampton County [Virginia] which is where the slave revolt took place with Nat Turner [Nat Turner's Rebellion, 1831].  And you can imagine that that perhaps was one of the places in Virginia where racial feelings were still very high.  But a more decent guy you could never find.  And Rawlings was one of those persons that helped me to understand differences and why people arrived at differences.  But he also took the interest in helping me to understand the political process and who the players were and what took place.  I had never even been to see the legislature [Virginia General Assembly] in action, knew so little of it.  But he took time and I was just so pleased for that, saw that I got the good committee assignments, and encouraged me to give up a committee that I didn't wanna give up.  But I said okay.  He said, "I want you on this committee in place of that one," he said, "because that's privileges and elections, that's the committee that has to pass on anything relative to voting, anything relative to nominations and anything relative to confirming the people who're gonna be put--secretary on the cabinet," etc., etc.  And I trusted him.  And ultimately I did become chairman of the committee.  But in the process, he was always there to show me the--I, I sided with him on the fights that we would have in the senate between the varying cliches.  He was a moderate by any standard, but some Virginia standards they may even call him liberal.  Those terms mean so little to me because it depends on--in what degree and what entity you're describing.  So Bill was always there, even when I would call or if not, he would be there when I would request support, and I always supported him.  And I just can't tell you how important it was for me to have that.  He made certain that I was always included when important decisions were coming.  I was not a token representative to the point that he'd say well let's have our meeting, let's talk about what we need to talk about, and then let's tell Wilder what we've decided.  It wasn't like that.  We started at the beginning and we were a part of that process all the way through.  I ultimately became the chairman of the committee that assigned other senators to committees.  Which means you don't get much higher than that, in terms of you wanna be on the rules committee, you wanna be on the courts committee, you wanna be on finance committee.  I had a great deal to say about that.
Story_ID: 578202
Speaker 1: Now Governor Wilder, when you got elected, was there any like, oh my god, you know, or this is so different than what I thought it was going to be?
Speaker 2: From my vantage point?
Speaker 1: Right, from your vantage point.
Speaker 2: It was like I got a lot to learn about this process, and it's better to get down and stick to it.  And that's one of the things that it did, it made me spend more time doing that and it does affect the time you have available to bring in clients, to--for bolster your, your law practice.  But by the same token, I was--I had an advantage in that I didn't have to leave Richmond [Virginia] to go anyplace.  The legislature [Virginia General Assembly] was right here.  So I could forego some of the parties in the evening and just go into my law practice and didn't have to take pla--take part in all of the activities that, that the lobbyists will involve you with.  And on the other hand, though I really had an occasion to, to learn it.  The clerk was a good friend of mine and helped me tremendously.  The subsequent clerk, he was deputy clerk at the time.  And so we engaged in a, in a, what I call a revolt and turned out the old guard and put in a new group, and I was a part of the, of the new group that--and Bill Rawlings [William Vincent "Bill" Rawlings] was one of the protagonists, but more or less one of the leaders of that new grouping.
Speaker 1: Now also just so people understand the, the legislature met like how many days a year?
Speaker 2: At that time, they were meeting only once, they were meeting sixty days every other year.
Speaker 1: Every--so it was thir--I had read something like that thirty days a year.
Speaker 2: Well now then it changed with the 1972 constitutional revision to require the legislature to meet sixty days one year, thirty days the next year.  With the right to extend.  And now it's become almost sixty, sixty, I'm sorry.  It's almost become like ninety, sixty, and then they come back and forth and come back and forth.  It's been modernized to some degree, but it's, it's in my judgment, needs to be simplified more than it has been.  We streamlined it considerably, but it has to be streamlined more.  And that's like everything else, it just--you can't stay where you are, you gotta change and you gotta be certain that you be a part of that change.  And that's the other important thing.  That if you're not gonna be in that mix just being there is like Chance the gardener in the movie with Peter Sellers ['Being There'].  It doesn't happen like that.  You gotta be a participant.  That's one of the things that I wanna see more of in terms of the African American involvement in politics.  Not just to say that guess what?  I'm there.  So you're there.  What changes as a result of your being there?  Who is involved as a result of your being there?  And if you weren't there, would things be the same?  And I, and I think that the, the way that process changed once it started demanding more time, the thirty day session was supposed to be a corrective session with the budget.  But now it's changed to be just like the, the one you had before and it has to change.  It's too burdensome.  It's--they made it almost, almost a full time obligation.  But so much of it need never be done.  So if you determine what should be done, how much involvement should you be there to shape people's lives?  And this is what laws do, this is what regulatory bodies do.  If you look at the Code of Virginia, it used to be about like that (indicates width with hands).  Now it's books and books and books.  Why?  Because people change things and should they be changed or not?
Story_ID: 578203
Speaker 1: Now your legal background, I mean how many of the, of the people sitting with you were elected, I'm sorry, were lawyers?
Speaker 2: At that time, maybe over three fourths.  That's changed, now it's in reverse.  Some of my colleagues would say have too many lawyers in the body, remember what Shakespeare said.  Kill the lawyers first.  But he didn't mean it in that context.  But nevertheless, I was of the impression if you're gonna be in a lawmaking body, why shouldn't you be a lawyer?  And yet I, I believe that you need to mix--one of my good friends in the legislature was Dr. William P. Robinson, an educator from Norfolk State University [Norfolk, Virginia], Ph.D. in political science.  And he and I were just like that.  We were the only two African Americans for a while in the assembly [Virginia General Assembly].  He in the house, I in the senate.  And we were elected at the same time.  Our relationship was so close that he could say, "Well Doug and I feel this way about such and such a thing."  And I'd read about it in the paper and, "Hell, when did we discuss that?"  "Well we hadn't, I haven't had a chance to call you.  I'll go call you."  And I would do the same thing, "Well Dr. Robinson is upset about this thing too."  "Is he?"  "Yeah."  "Well call him."  He said, "What am I upset about?"  I say I, I meant to call you, but you were in class.  But we never, ever, not only publicly, nor even privately, disagreed because we're just in sync with so much.  We would discuss it and he, as I say he was a theoretician.  One of the few political scientists that I know that, that has been actively involved to the extent that he knows the realistic part from the theoretician, from the, from the theoretician's viewpoint.  And I'm not putting down political scientists at all.  But I'm saying it's, it's not theory, it's real.  And unless you're prepared to be in that real atmosphere, it's not gonna work.
Story_ID: 578204
Speaker 1: So were there two of you serving at the time?
Speaker 2: No, but see--at one--the first African American elected to the house was Dr. William Ferguson Reid.  And he was elected two years before I was.  And then he--I ran for the senate, he stayed in the house another two years, and then lost his election.  He had a tough district to run from because his district was Richmond [Virginia] and (unclear).  Then busing came about and he fell prey to the anti-busing movement.  A good man, very quality man.  Bill [Dr. William P. Robinson] on the other hand, was in Norfolk [Virginia], he and Bill were in the house together and I was in the senate by myself for a long time.  And then subsequently Barbara Scott came in and then I made some arrangements for Dr. Yvonne Miller to come in to take Peter Babalas' place by telling her, "Move in his district.  He and I are good friends and I think he's not gonna run again."  When I got to be governor [of Virginia], I was able to reshape it and draw enough seats for five members of the senate, which we have now.  And luckily that redistricting plan still stands.
Story_ID: 578205
Speaker 1: That was--because I read an interesting article about--that was analysis of blacks in the legislature [Virginia General Assembly] and how, you know at this--about this, around this time, there were, you know, the black caucuses were starting, but you didn't have enough numbers here to--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: Except they said, wait you would meet with two.
Speaker 2: Well yeah.  Well see and this is where, I'm glad you asked that question.  I helped start what was called the Democratic Black Caucus of Virginia.  That's not the legislative black caucus.  But because--and it started about the same time right after I was elected.  And it involved not just elected officials, to the contrary.  It involved NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] officials, community activists, educators, people from all over the state, and we were strong.  Trust me, we made differences here.  I recall back in '72 [1972] when there was a convention in Roanoke [Virginia].  I'd asked some friends of mine in Roanoke, I said we need a room to meet.  And they got the biggest room they could at the hotel.  I said my god, we're gonna be embarrassed because the media's gonna focus on how few people we have.  The meeting was set for five o'clock on a Friday afternoon.  You know how far it is to travel to Roanoke, in the mountains and five o'clock.  The room was packed.  It held five hundred people, you couldn't get in there that evening because of the interest and, and the numbers of people.  So then I was the chairman of that, helped with in that process by Dr. Calvin Miller from Virginia State University [Petersburg, Virginia], who's now in Jackson, Mississippi.  But between that process with Bill [Dr. William P. "Bill" Robinson] working with me with the establishment of the Democratic Black Caucus, we carried it over to the Black Caucus of Virginia with the three of us, Dr. Reid [Dr. William Ferguson Reid], and Robinson for a while, I mean Reid for a while, and myself.  But the, the, the thrust and the arm and the power was in the other larger group with more representative people, which has pretty much dissipated now.  Pretty much gone by the by, that you don't hear from it as much.  But you do have the [Virginia] Legislative Black Caucus with Democrats not in authority in the house, and not with the same degree of punch because as you pointed out, I was chairman of all kinds of committees and people had to, had to listen whether they liked it or not.  If you're in the political process, if you're in a position of authority, you, you can demand some respect.  But Bill and I, we used to joke that we would have a meeting in a phone booth and--but there again we, we were in sync.
Speaker 1: Which is, which is an important thing that didn't always happen.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  In sync, you could never divide us.  You could never show dissension.  But people regarded both of us as representatives of them in the whole state.  People thought we were their--I was from Richmond [Virginia], they--people in Norfolk [Virginia], there's our senator; Newport News [Virginia], Prince George [County, Virginia], wherever, this is our senator.  And I regarded it that way because they had no one else to speak for them.  I used to say Bill though, on so many occasions that whites were coming to see me, him.  Lobbyists were coming to see us.  Very few African Americans were coming because they hadn't been welcomed, they hadn't shown--they hadn't been shown the way, the, the opportunity to, to come.  And our responsibility was to, to do and move without waiting for them to say this is what we want because they'll let you know when you do something wrong.  And to the extent that we would do what many people agreed with, then that was all the license you needed, particularly if it was validated subsequently by, by the things that you were trying to do.
Story_ID: 578206
Speaker 1: You know what's interesting to me when you look at your legislative record, during that time the things--your legal background and your practice (unclear), have you know, I mean like penalties, you know reducing penalties for minor crimes.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Food stamp--I mean I'm not say--you know I'm not saying that you know--promoting-(unclear) discrimination in auto sales, juvenile offenders.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I mean it just looks like--it does look like the issues that you were meeting some, I'm not saying completely, and especially you know now that you're saying that the black community--'cause the black community is new to the process, so they don't know what to demand.  And so it--I just--it was sort of you know, you voted against capital punishment, though, for mass murderers.
Speaker 2: I voted against capital punishment for years because I cited statistics to show that prior to the Furman vs. Georgia [408 U.S. 238] case in 1972, which outlawed capital punishment in the country by the U.S. Supreme Court.  That in Virginia from 1901 until that time, all of the persons who had been put to death, only thirty-four whites had been put to death.  And every one of them had been convicted of first degree murder.  African Americans had been put to death for robbery, rape, attempted rape, burglary, assault.  The ages were as low as sixteen, fifteen.  And so there was no uniform application.  And so I said until such time as the law is across the board in terms of application, I can't support it.  And I always would issue the caveat this doesn't mean that we've addressed the moral compunctions as to whether I would support or could support a law relative to that.  Then there were about six categories that were spelled out that were approved by the court.  And I still said well I'll just wait and see.  And then when they threw in another one in terms of killing a police officer in the performance of his duty.  My thing was that at the time was that if it's gonna be applied across the board, then the people had the right--I put it this way.  People have a right in a society to punish the most heinous of crimes in a manner that's applicable to all.  Whether I support that or not is something different.  The difficulty came when I became lawyer, I mean became governor, was that if that's the law of the state, I have no problem with saying that this is what people have to do.  I can tell you today as you look at DNA, as you look at the mistakes of eyewitness testimony, it's gonna be very, very difficult to be absolutely certain to that the death penalty serves any purpose at all in terms of deterrence, whether it serves any purpose in terms of eliminating crime, or whether it's effective.  And when you consider that we are one of the last civilizations to continue to impose it, should there be a moratorium until such time as we really accurately assess what should and could be done.
Story_ID: 578207
Speaker 1: Well the other thing was, I'd like to talk about is Martin Luther King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] birthday because that was--that took some time, but you--
Speaker 2: Eight years.
Speaker 1: You beat Arizona.
Speaker 2: I beat Arizona and I beat the federal government.  And the interesting thing was that day was supposed to just be Martin Luther King's birthday, period.  We passed it once.  It was vetoed by the governor.  Passed it again, vetoed by another governor.  I passed to make it on July the--on January the first.  People say well--I said because you've been objecting to it being an expense that we shouldn't afford.  I was then trying to get the camel's head under the tent.  If I could get the moral commitment to observing the holiday, I was gonna move it to the fifteenth.  Well in Virginia we celebrate birthdays on Mondays, not the actual days, except Veterans Day.  We changed that, that one came down and raised the devil.  "You'd better make it November the 11th, other than that, we gone run all of you guys out of there."  So we, we changed that.  But that was another interesting thing on the Martin Luther King thing.  People said it would never happen in Virginia, you'll never pass it.  That's all I need to hear.  And it passed.  And the objections to it were amazing.  King was a Communist, he was a, he was a race baiter.  So all those same people would today say god, if we could have another, have another Martin Luther King, and that's life.  That's the history of people who are in the vanguard.  They always looked upon it in a different light afterwards.  Such--that's why you can't be concerned with how you're viewed at the time that things are being done.  And when we passed that King bill, I wasn't--I didn't--we didn't never try to pack the corridors with African Americans to see what we could do and how we can do it.  I was always appealing to the conscience, and always got the senate to pass it.  I don't care what form it was in.  Why?  Because I was there.  The senate always passed it and ultimately got the house to pass it.  Going back to the state song ['Carry Me Back to Old Virginny'] briefly.  That was repealed several years ago, as I wanted it to, without anything in substitute for it.  With an African American woman and a Republican man joining forces to say let's repeal it.  And so people have asked me, say well what do you think about it?  I say I think it should be done.  I think it should have been done and it's done.  So things happen with--whether you're there to see it or not doesn't matter.  If you do everything you can.  And that's why I, I, I can't brook intolerance, I mean I can't brook indifference, rather.  I can't brook people saying well what did, what, what can I do?  You can do nothing.  But somebody committed like you can do a lot.  And I can't--well it's not enough of a--not enough people in Virginia to elect you.  You know Virginia's one of the--it's the least popular state for African Americans in the South.  We've got 15 percent voting population in the South, maybe about a 20 percent population.  And you're not gone get elected.  Why not?  We have--so what does that have to do with my qualifications?  If you tell that to yourself, if you tell that to your kids, you'll never be anything other than that.  But then I started thinking.  Is aid you know this thing didn't just get into my head about who I was, that started when I was a kid.  I never thought I was anything other than as good as anyone else.  And if I present--if you see me and if we talk and if you leave thinking of me as African American, then I missed something, or I think rather you've missed it.  I can't change the way--I had no say so into what the color of my skin would be or what my race would be.  I had absolutely nothing to do with it.  I can have something to do with the type of person I am.  And if you prejudge me prior to that time, that's what's prejudice means, prejudge.  And we should never do that.
Story_ID: 578208
Speaker 1: Now, so let's move on to talk about your relationship with Robb, Charles [Spittal "Chuck"] Robb, because that had a lot to do with your eventual move into lieutenant governor.  It had--it was--it also--you've had a--you know you had an interesting relationship with Robb.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  I like the way you phrase that.  Robb and I came to know each other when he was running for lieutenant governor.  And he came to me and said, "If you're gonna run for lieutenant governor, I won't.  That's the respect I have for you."  I said, "Well, I'm not gonna run."  He said, "Well I am."  He ran and he was not accorded the endorsement of the African American leadership.  I said but you handled yourself so well in this process, you stayed here, you shook every hand in this group.  That's gonna stand you in good stead.  Peter Babalas, the senator for Norfolk [Virginia] and I then got together and told Robb how he could maximize that, and he did.  And ultimately got the Democratic nomination for lieutenant governor over [Richard] Major Reynolds [III], the brother of J. Sargeant Reynolds who had been lieutenant governor.  After that when Robb got to be governor, he and I forged a very close relationship, so much so that any nominations that I would make for his appointment for whatever, it, it was, it was no question about it.  The difficulty came, and there's a thing on the wall, there's a cartoon on the wall right behind me that when a delegate from Virginia Beach [Virginia] decided he was gonna run for the senate seat occupied by Harry Byrd, Jr. He said, "I want to run in the same mode of Senator Byrd and provide that same leader"--I said, "my god, what are you talking about?  Now do you know who, who Byrd is and what he's done?  We can't do that."  So I told Robb, I said this, I said we can't, we can't support this.  I said and what we am I talking about?  The Democratic Black Caucus, not the--and they were strong.  Robb knew we had turned that support for his, his opponent, [John] J. Marshall Coleman who had gotten the black support when he ran for attorney general, transferred that to Robb when Robb ran for governor.  And Robb said, "I thought you guys signed off on [Owen B.] Pickett."  No, we never signed off on him, we said there were certain things we had to talk about before we could, but that never came about.  I was then prevailed upon by a number of groups, not just African Americans, (unclear), educators, and education, "You gotta run."  "So if I run, it's the end of my career."  "Well we understand that, but somebody's gotta stop this guy."  So I said, "Robb, if Pickett runs, I run.  Pickett withdraws, I withdraw."  People thought I was holding the knife at Robb's throat and say you can't allow him to dictate to you--I said look, I'm not saying to you that you need to do anything.  If Pickett runs, I run.  It'll be the end of Pickett and it'll be the end of me.  I'll never be elected to anything else in life, but that's the price you have to pay.  I put myself in that position.  I'm saying I represent the people, the people are saying you gotta do it.  Well to make a long story short, Robb prevailed upon Pickett to drop out and Pickett dropped out.  Pickett dropped out, I dropped out.  Well the cartoon up here shows people coming to me and I'm sitting on a throne doing my nails and they're bending and bowing and scraping like they have to come to see this guy, who is this guy?  And they predicted again, that's the end of him.  Well shortly thereafter, I ran for lieutenant governor and I told Robb I'm gonna run for lieutenant governor.  I just don't want any hindrance.  Well his press secretary said, "My god, this is Virginia now."  And I said, "Hey Chuck, we can't have that."  "Well you know he, he wasn't speaking for me." I said, "He can't speak for anyone else.  No one knows him other than his relationship with you.  I don't necessarily mean he's gotta be out there to help me, but I don't want him talking to me like that or talking to the press like that."  So then I ran and the rest of that part is history, and I was elected.  And then there was subsequent developments relative to our relationship, which I'll say to you, and he would tell you the same thing, were misconstrued.  And the people around us caused most of the difficulty rather than Robb and myself.  We're friends, we exchange pleasantries today even, and it's a period in which if we both had to do it again, I think he would have handled it differently, I would have handled it differently.
Story_ID: 578209
Speaker 1: How is it structured here?  I mean, you know--
Speaker 2: It's a vacuous position.  You preside over the senate.  You vote in the case of a tie.  But you can make it something, and I used it to make myself the chairman of the Lieutenant Governor's National Task Force on Drugs.  You--I had enough clout in the senate to be able to get people to introduce legislation through which we established the background check for people who wanted to purchase guns at the motor vehicle, Department of Motor--Division of Motor of Vehicles [Virginia Department of Motor Vehicles].  And it's, it's a platform in terms of being able to really bring forth change, not necessarily so, but I had been in the senate for sixteen years, so with that I was able to do some things.  But in terms of the power of that position, it doesn't have any real power.  Other states have far more power in their offices of lieutenant governor than this one.
Story_ID: 578210
Speaker 1: Okay. So let me ask you though during those years that you were lieutenant governor, are there things that you--'cause you say it was--it's a position that you know, it's a, it's--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You can use it for a pulpit.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I did, I was able to get the weapons background check, which was very instrumental in making certain that people--nobody ever checked to see what your record was before you could go buy a firearm.  And as you know Virginia was one of the more proliferating, pro--
Speaker 1: Prolific.
Speaker 2: No, no, one of the more prolificating [sic, proliferating] states relative to the dispensation and the availability of handguns, they were there.  Still pretty bad.  But we limited it after I became governor.  At that time, you didn't even have to check to see if anyone was convicted of a crime or anything else.  And so as lieutenant governor, I was able to do that.  I was able to foster other types of legislation through members of the senate or house to accomplish some ends.  But it gives you a forum, and it gives you an opportunity for visibility.
Story_ID: 578211
Speaker 1: But what were you thinking you would do after that?  That's--
Speaker 2: Run for governor.
Speaker 1: Now honestly, was that in your mindset?  Was that in your career path or mindset?
Speaker 2: Originally it wasn't.
Speaker 1: No, okay.
Speaker 2: Originally it wasn't.
Speaker 1: When I say, but when you say originally, you mean originally when you decided to run for lieutenant governor, or originally--
Speaker 2: Even after I was elected.  I could have been lieutenant governor for life.  People say--but it wouldn't have been the extension of the aspirations to the point that it should have been because I had decided in 1982 at the time that I was telling you that it was either--I probab--I probably was not gonna win anything for the senate race.  But I decided I'd been there long enough in the senate.  I either should move up or out.  I didn't want a medal for being the, the only serving member of the senate with a medallion or a watch, gold watch that they give them.  And so if--I said I'm gone move up or out if I move into the position of lieutenant governor.  Wouldn't it be natural to assume that I should go to be governor?  And Paul Goldman, who was my campaign advisor in '85 [1985], he was talking to me and when he would talk, it was almost as if it was a conclusion.  He would say things like, "Well you know when the campaign starts."  I say, "What campaign?"  You know,  "For governor."  Why wouldn't it be?  And it doesn't take much encouragement, particularly in my case, it takes little to open the eyes for that opportunity to take place.  So I started thinking about it.  And then I--but the opportunity to serve as lieu--it gets back to the question of minorities.  In America you've always had to have what were called preliminary steps, entry levels.  And the entry levels for minorities can't be at the top before.  Idealistically, yes, realistically, no.  So for women, for Asians, for ethnic minorities, you've got to prove proficiency at other levels for people to see.  The thing--governor--if Wilder gets to be governor, will he be an African American governor, or will he be looking out for us, or will he be looking out for everybody?
Story_ID: 578212
Speaker 1: That's the thing.  So when I ran for lieutenant governor, I thought I'd been pretty well known.  I found out how little known I was across the state [Virginia].  Nobody knew me across the state.  That's why I chose to go to the southwestern part of the state where there are very, very few African Americans.  Down where Tennessee and Kentucky join, and work my way back up the state on through those rural areas, all through the counties, all through areas that no one goes.  Most people think Roanoke [Virginia] is the western part of the state; that's southwestern.  Roanoke is so midwestern that people in the southwest say you, you--Roanoke--that, that's--you gotta go another one hundred miles to get us, or more.  So when I went out there and decided--I stayed out there for sixty days.  And when I say I stayed on the tour for sixty days, taking off only on Sundays, respecting that day for not interfering with people.  Certain places I wouldn't campaign in.  I wouldn't campaign in restaurants, I wouldn't campaign in bars where liquor was being served.  Any number of things could happen in those things and people would say things that you wouldn't necessarily want to be involved with.  But I did a trail like thing by starting in one part of the state, staying out there sixty days straight and circling it to make certain that I would hit every independent city and county in the state, and we're a big city, big state, rather.  And I think it was something like three hundred or so independent cities and towns that you have to hit in Virginia.  And I was pretty much criticized in, in some African American quarters because they were saying I wasn't spending enough time in the African American communities because many of them had no idea what Virginia was themselves.  They'd never been to these places.  They wanted me to spend my time in Norfolk [Virginia], Newport News [Virginia], Richmond [Virginia].  I purposely fixed it so northern Virginia would be where I ended up, rather than where I started out.  And so by doing this and doing that, I would go places where very few African Americans lived, very few African Americans ever run for any office.  And I chose never to stay in hotels.  I would stay in the homes of the people either that I met or that I would call who had identified themselves or being there--staff people could stay.  I didn't carry a big staff, three people, [Paul] Goldman, my son or my nephew.  I never wanted a phalanx of people walking with me.  I didn't want a bunch of literature passed out.  I liked to have a grip card I call it, just one little thing I could put in my hand, in my back pocket that I could reach in my pocket and get it.  Shake your hand with one hand, and give you this with another, and look you in the eye, and then move on.  And have small fundraising gatherings, ten, fifteen, twenty dollars.  Well it got so people felt they were a part of it.  Media came from everywhere because they wanted to see the incident, where it occurred.  New York Times, Washington Post, all the television people were coming to see that--we ain't gone have that governor.  It never happened.  There was never an opportunity when anyone ever refused to shake my hand to say you're not welcome in here.  There were some who would say well we, you know, don't have people politicizing the, the area, and we understood that.  But that didn't mean me, it meant anybody.  Now once that happened, I had laid some ground roots, grassroots level support.  Not just in the white community.  I was doing things that [John Hansford] Chichester took for granted, my opponent for lieutenant governor's race.  Right after he won the nomination, he took off.  And I said I won't be a celluloid candidate.  I might not have enough money to go on television.  But I knew if I did what I was gonna do, I would have the money because I wasn't spending a lot of money.  I was raising--people would buy money for our gas.  I borrowed a station wagon.  They would feed me in the house.  They would feed us in the restaurants.  And they felt good that they were a part of it and that they were not taken for granted.  One guy said no, I never voted for an African American 'cause I never had a chance.  I never voted for one, no one's ever asked me.  Then when I did finally get to the African American communities, the press buildup was such that they were waiting, they couldn't wait for you to come and the churches were filled, banquet halls were filled.  Northern Virginia, by the time I got up to northern Virginia, boy it was just a matter of the election being held.  I'm going to an event tonight sponsored by Larry Salvatore who was saying at the time that all John Chichester had to do on election day was be alive to win the election because not in Virginia.  He says on so many occasions how much crow he's had to eat because of that.  I said look, you were espousing what would then be considered conventional wisdom.  But that--conventional wisdom is worth no more than the convention, than, than the convention that espouses it and consequently don't judge the people in Virginia.  We're not--this is what troubles me about the Democratic candidates who run for president.  I stood in Little Rock [Arkansas] with Hillary [Clinton] and, and [President] Bill [Clinton] was doing something else, Clinton.  And then the returns were coming on the thing and then he came in the room and said, "My god, look how close we are in Virginia."  I said, "You didn't even put a foot in Virginia to campaign hardly.  We told you that.  We told"--I think it was three points or four points.  He didn't campaign.  This place--I was elected here, man.  This place isn't this (unclear) to anybody's side that you would think it is.  Don't, don't, don't write the people off.  And I still say that.  Al Gore campaigned a little bit in northern Virginia.  Put his foot across the river of the Potomac [River] and then did a little bit.  But didn't come to the--and people resent that.  With the Electoral College being what it is, you're still gonna find more of that.  And I think people are turned off by politicians, those even engaged in public service, taking them for granted.  We don't need to talk with you, we'll talk to the people who deliver the vote.  You can't talk to anyone who's gonna deliver my vote without talking to me about it a little bit, let me know something.
Story_ID: 578213
Speaker 1: So you captured like, what was it 51.8 percent for lieutenant governor?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  That was--I count--I captured about 50, close to 54 percent.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry, 52, 52. 52--
Speaker 1: I have 51.8, but you're saying it was--
Speaker 2: It was, it was a little more. It was closer to 52 percent.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Closer to 52 percent.
Speaker 1: Which is a big--
Speaker 2: You wasn't even close.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It wasn't close.
Speaker 1: Right, which is a big deal.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Now when I ran for governor--
Speaker 1: That's a whole different story.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  One point less than one--one tenth of one percent is what I, what I won by.  And it would have been more had not some smear things took place in the end by saying that I was against the right to work law and I was gonna do this, that and the other.  But our polls always showed it would be what I won by.  It never had me up any more so than by one point.  Never.  So I knew it was going--but I tell you what.  I always thought I would win.  I never thought I'd lose, never.  The first news I got when I was running for lieutenant governor about the polls had me, had me twenty-seven points behind.  So press asked me what do you think about that?  I said I thought I'd be further behind than that.  What do you mean?  I said well I didn't think I'd be this close.  That close.  Do you know we said twenty-seven points behind?  I think John Chichester had something like fifty-four points down to me with twenty-seven points.  I said, well, I just started campaigning.  And that changed dramatically.
Story_ID: 578214
Speaker 1: Now with your run for governor, okay so you decide you want to run.  Now there's several things that, you know, happen.  You got an endorsement from, is it [Attorney General Gerald L.] Baliles?
Speaker 2: Baliles?
Speaker 1: Baliles.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Gerry Baliles.
Speaker 1: And then you sort of make up with [Charles Spittal "Chuck" Robb], sort of, okay.
Speaker 2: But the attorney general was running, Mary Sue Terry.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's right.
Speaker 2: And there were those who were Rob supporters who were likewise money raisers for the [Democratic] Party, publicly said we're support Ms. Terry.  And so she for a while, tried to garner the support in the constituent parts of the nominating process of the party.  I, I always felt that I would have that, and had worked to secure that.  And she subsequently dropped out.  Now strange thing about my race.  Don [Donald Sternoff] Beyer [Jr.] was running, no one ever heard of him.  He ran way ahead of me.  She came back on the ticket, she ran way ahead of me.  I was last on the ticket, even though I was top of the ticket.  And yet my bringing the votes from the--particularly from African American community, is what contributed to, to them being there.  And yet that's supposed to be the case in most instances, and it might very well be the case.  But I think the, the, the thing was I was supposed to bring down the ticket when I ran for lieutenant governor.  I was supposed to cause Democrats to lose the house and the senate.  It didn't happen when I was lieutenant governor, didn't happen when I was governor.  Democrats don't have the house and senate now, but it wasn't because of me.  I don't point it out for any other reason to say that African Americans shouldn't be apologetic for seeking office, running for office, particularly if their record speaks for itself.
Speaker 1: Well you know what is interesting.  I read an analysis, you know of different African American campaigns and they put yours as sort of a poster child in that you had worked, they said of people who have worked their way through the system.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And had developed a record.  That's the only--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That was the only way.  I mean that you were able to--
Speaker 2: And unfortunately, unfortunately, it's, it exacts an inordinate amount of involvement and work.  And a lot of people not interested in--well I shouldn't say they're not interested.  Might not understand that, that you just have to get heavily involved in recognizing what you gotta do.  Now if you can't pay that price, it's not gonna work for you.  It's not a matter of letting me have your campaign contribution list, or a matter of let me have the endorsement from this group, that group, the other group.  The candidate himself or herself has to be there.  And that's where it begins and that's where it ends.
Speaker 1: So [Paul] Goldman, he was with you during the lieutenant governor and governor?
Speaker 2: And governor, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so you had him and you had Joel Harris and--
Speaker 2: No I had Joel, no, no.  Joel Harris was not with me after the governor's race.
Speaker 1: No, not with, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, Joel Harris was working in my office as lieutenant governor and I decided prior to my running for governor that it might--it would be well if that changed.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was [J.T.] Shropshire, was he--
Speaker 2: Shropshire was the clerk of the senate.
Speaker 1: Senate, okay, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he and I were very--he passed this year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I went to his funeral earlier and he, he was a part of that cliche, that cliche that changed the thing in the senate.  Matter of fact, it made him the clerk.  Smart guy, young fella.  Now he's in his late fifties, massive stroke this year and passed.
Story_ID: 578215
Speaker 1: Now what were you--what would you consider the critical elements that came together?  You know, to allow you to run for governor.  There was a lot of attention focused on the campaign.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: A lot of pride from the black community.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well I was able to attract new funding sources and new financing and, and every, every candidate does that.  The spigots were not turned off, but they were not as, they were not opened as fully as possible in my case.  There were some people who had supported Democratic candidates all through the line until I came on.  So rather than complain about that, I opened up more spigots.  I raised more money than any Democrat had ever raised when I ran for lieutenant governor.  When people said I couldn't.
Speaker 1: How much did you--
Speaker 2: Six hundred thousand dollars or so, and that's (unclear).  I ran, raised more money than any candidate had ever raised who ever ran for governor.
Speaker 1: How much was that?
Speaker 2: About seven million.  And, but with new sources.  And that's the, the real lesson is don't worry about what somebody else did and got.  You open your new sources.  America is a very, very rich country.  Rich beyond compare.  There are people who want to give, want to help and want to participate that you nor I may never know about.  A number of African Americans who like are seating the wealthy.  Don't want the whole world to know that they are.  But they can write you a check and a big one if you need it.  There are those who can give you a continuous check.  The twenty-five checks that come from--sometimes the same people on a monthly, sometimes on a weekly basis.  I thought I saw this check before.  The one thing I did in both cases is I signed every check of disbursement.  You're not supposed to do that, you can't do that, you won't have the time.  I'll have the time to do it.  Because you can cut down on a lot of waste and a lot of--just things that you just couldn't begin to need.  And you can make certain that you're spending money in the proper areas.  I saved every dime I could when I was running for lieutenant governor to make certain I could afford television.  And Paul Goldman was smart enough to form the kinds of entity that would make the purchases.  He could go down and, and know when times to appear would be the best times to come on.  We even formed our own film crew.  We shot the one commercial that was selected as one of the best political of the time.  We shot it on the street.  There was a guy who watching us shoot down in Lunenburg County [Virginia] and this policeman was watching us.  "Is that Doug Wilder over there?"  They said yeah.  "I like him."  And he fitted the category perfectly.  Big, beefy redneck.  So Paul [Goldman] said, "Would you shoot a commercial for him?"  "Well if I wouldn't get in any trouble."  So contacted the town attorney, checked what violations were.  We shot that commercial on the spot, no rehearsal, no nothing, and it was perfect.  Why?  Because it was a metaphor.  This is this man saying this guy who should be soft on crime, this guy who should be liberal, is being supported by this policeman, as well as the Fraternal Order of Police.  Homerun.  But look at the money that was saved in the process.  Tremendous amount of money.  Shot on the spot, no preparation, no involvement with--well you gotta do this.  No makeup, no nothing.
Story_ID: 578216
Speaker 1: Did you enjoy the campaign for governor?
Speaker 2: I did.  Enjoyed the campaign for lieutenant governor first because I carried my son with me.  I hadn't known the people of Virginia like I thought.  And I wanted him to, to meet them and know them and see them.  And it gave me the opportunity to, to more fully recognize the, the almost artificial differences between people in terms of color.  Pe--I've had people that have pulled me on the side that you would swear that they had a (unclear).  Guy would say, "I wanna ask you something 'bout, 'bout this thing about abortion.  What you think about that thing?"  I say I'm in trouble now, see 'cause my view had been (unclear).  I said, "Well, you know I took the Jeffersonian view.  Government should have no right to interfere in the most personal of personal decisions and why shouldn't those things be left to the individual?"  Obviously saying choice, but saying it in a different way.  I said, "You know I, I, I just think that government shouldn't"--he said, "Ain't no man's decision no way, is it?  Man ain't got nothing to do with it."  I said, "You're right, absolutely right."  I didn't have to go any further.  But if you'd have seen this man.  First of all watching him, bib overalls on, tobacco stains and a crease in jowls and you would have sworn that he may have been somewhat differently.  And yet you can't judge people by the way they talk, by the way they dress, by the way they look in any capacity.  That's what that thing in lieutenant governor race did for me.  Did I enjoy running for governor?  Yeah, because it made me recognize that--and I thought I'd win, but here you are going to be having a victory for people.  People who never even gonna see you.  People who never thought they had a chance at being involved in anything.  I thought about I say the destroyed shrines to the souls of people everywhere of color because they could taste and share in the victory.  And on election day, I mean inaugural day, thirty thousand people standing out in the cold, it was brutally cold.  Standing out there, some crying, some just huddling to be warm.  But experiencing the victory because it was their victory.  And this is what I tried to proclaim.  So yeah you enjoy it, but it's, it's almost a vicarious thing to the extent that show what the possibilities can be of the human potential.  And we can never allow color to hold us back from that.  We can't allow color to be that which would say well you can't do this because you're African American.  That's what I think the, the victory meant to me and to them.
Story_ID: 578217
Speaker 1: Now can you, can you talk about how you felt that night, election night?
Speaker 2: Well this picture that I have here on my desk shows my kids and me looking at the returns. In the next room was Pamela Ermen [ph.], she was nervous.  She's--my god, this thing is too close.  I felt it was just a matter of time before I would go over to the hotel and say okay this thing is over.  And I felt relieved. Campaign is over.  There's nothing else we need to do but just, just wait.  And so when I went over, no network had called me and claimed that I had won.  So at a certain time I told Paul [Goldman], I said, "Well call over to the hotel and tell them that I'm coming on over there."  Said, "To do what?"  I said, "To proclaim victory."  So I get over there.  I said, "I am here to proclaim"--and before I could finish--hey, hey, hey.  Victory as the next governor of the Commonwealth of Virginia.  And it--to me then--but it still doesn't hit you.  That night it, it doesn't hit you.  It hits you maybe during the inaugural parts, particularly at the session itself when you, when you're being sworn in.  When you see that you're the 66th governor.  And you recognize that, that a lot of people had to be involved in that to take--see nobody ever does anything by themselves.  You just can't do it by yourself.  It's no anointment to it.  And one of the great disappointments I do have though, is that we've not had somebody else.  Will there be?  Yeah.  Will there be a president of the United States?  Yeah.  And, and should, should there--we shouldn't establish a prototype.  We shouldn't say well we need somebody like her or him or me.  You don't need anybody like anybody.  You need somebody like the person who's gonna get elected.  That person has to define themselves.  That person has to project themselves.  I would hope that it would have been sooner than it has been, but it'll come.
Story_ID: 578218
Speaker 1: Now when you got elected, how quickly did your--you have to move?  You know, because--
Speaker 2: I had hit the ground running, but I--
Speaker 1: Were you--but did your lieutenant governorship prepare you at all for the governorship, and it's something--
Speaker 2: Not that much.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: My being in the legislature [Virginia General Assembly] did a little.  But I was of the impression that we had more money than we had.  I was of the impression that we were not so much behind, and yet I found out that we were--the deficit ultimately rose to about $2.2 billion dollars.  And when I started telling members of the legislature that we had troubles, they thought I was not sincere.  They thought I was trying to strike a more conservative bit by saying--and so they started saying we gotta raise taxes.  Well I know who that usually hits most.  Who pays taxes as Leona Helmsley said.  Taxes are for the (unclear).  Said well now we gotta see first of all what--do you want me to raise these taxes for?  Where's it gonna be spent?  We gotta raise taxes.  Said no, not just so.  So I knew I had to establish the line.  So the first thing I did was to establish what is called the rainy day fund.  And I said before we do anything, I want two hundred million dollars put aside in a lockbox as they call it now, to be certain that we don't go through this again.  And did it happen?  Yeah.  Was it easy?  No.  My secretary of finance said, "Where you gonna get the money?"  I said, "That's the first two hundred million dollars we're gonna take."  And he said, "Well"--he came back, he said, "I got the budget director and he and others said we got twenty-five million dollars, that's never happened before.  You're gonna have a rainy day fund of twenty-five million."  I said, "That's not good enough.  Go back and come again."  He came back the next three or four days.  "Got some good news for you."  I say, "What's that?"  He said, "We have three times the amount we came in before. We have seventy-five million dollars governor.  I'm telling you that we are muscle now and bone.  We--there's no fat to cut."  I said, "It's amazing what you do and how well you do it.  You'd be surprised as to how much better you can do it, and you'll come back.  But next time don't come back until we have the two hundred million."  But by that time I got the chairman of the appropriations committee, and the chairman of the house, I mean the senate finance committee.  Say we got the message.  Can we do it our way?  The guy in the house says, I wanna do it my way.  The guy in the senate says, I wanna do it my way.  I said I don't care how you do it; do it.  And that's the problem.  I mean that's the process.  Give them a chance to have their leeway.  You give me two hundred million dollars savings like you wanna do it.  You give me two hundred million in savings like you wanna do it.  And then we'll meet in between.  And we did that.  And we never raised taxes in the general tax, a dime.  That's why we got all applauded such--that's why we got all the so-called accolades.  But that wasn't done by me alone.  It was done by a lot of people.  First of all having been convinced of the sincerity of what we were saying, and then recognizing that this is the way to go.  This is what people like to see.  This is what the taxpayers deserve for their tax dollars.
Story_ID: 578219
Speaker 1: Okay, so you developed a reputation as a fiscal conservative.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: With what you--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think that's a fair statement.  And it was derived primarily because of my record.  Not just as governor or lieutenant governor.  I think if you look at the history of African Americans in their own societal be--bearings, we've always been conservative in terms of what we spend and how we spend it.  Maybe of late some people think that we're in that area spending just all kinds of money in all kinds of ways.  And yet on the other hand, I think the reputation that I derived--people have asked me would you have liked to have been governor at a better time when you had more money to do more things?  I said yeah, to the extent that I could have done more things.  But to be tested, I don't--I couldn't pick a better time to have been governor faced with a $2.2 billion dollar deficit that I didn't throw up my hands and say I need help.  I don't need any help. We'll take care of it.  We're not gone raise taxes and we're gone do the job.  My thing was to be able to pass the state on to the next governor in far better shape than it was when I was governor.  And if you can do that without having to worry about blowing your own horn.  It'll get blown.  And people will say well, the guy wasn't that bad.  I have Republicans who walk up to me every day, I didn't vote for you, but I wished I had.  I've had any number of Republicans say I didn't vote for you, but I voted for a whole lot of Republicans that I wished I hadn't.  And I have people now who say well I understand.  If I had the votes of people who said they voted for me, if they'd counted, it wouldn't have been an election.  Which means you know people say all kinds of things.  "I voted for you."  "You did?"  You and I know what that means, and yet it's, it's almost a subliminal forgiveness.  It doesn't bother me at all.
Story_ID: 578220
Speaker 1: So now the--there were people that critiqued though your governorship.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Yes, sir. Yes, ma'am, rather.
Speaker 1: And they critiqued it because of--I mean the fact that you had to--I mean that was, that was not popular, the cutting.  And it also--
Speaker 2: But the cuts were not, not that (unclear).  And I had what I call the--
Speaker 1: Essential services.
Speaker 2: No, never eliminated nor curtailed essential services an iota, whether in social programs, whether in health programs, none at all.  Now there was some people that did not necessarily receive the kinds of stipends that they may have wanted, that had been expected from the spigot of the federal lar--I mean state largesse.  But now people see, as I said we created this rainy day fund which grew to be a billion dollars.  But for that fund, the present governor and his predecessor would have had far more difficult opportunities because the fund was to bail us out in indigent, emergency times.  I'm not being critical, but the fund has been availed of for budgetary things.  The fact that it was there and I could have started it, is sufficient for me to be pleased that it contributed to Virginia's continuing progress.
Story_ID: 578221
Speaker 1: And you also--there--I mean that's significant in and of itself since all the states are in like in horrible fiscal shape right now.  But you also continued your whole work with handguns, the purchase of handguns.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  We put in what was, what's in--well revolutionary for the South and even for some parts of the country, to limit the numbers of handguns that you could buy.  However, we can't stop there.  We've gotta continue to understand that we're not in a vigilante society.  We're not setting the proper examples for our youngsters when people can walk into businesses and establishments with concealed weapons and you could--you got your kids or your grandkids there.  Kids see them bulging out of their pockets.  The, the numbers of guns that are in the hands of people in the streets.  Where do you think they come from?  These are not hunters.  These are not people defending their homes.  And I think again we've got to take the commercial interest and compare it with the social interest.  And sometimes the two don't mix.
Story_ID: 578222
Speaker 1: And Governor Wilder, if you were to put your, you know your governorship in historical context, what would you say about it and its, you know, sort of significance?  I mean and, and that way--
Speaker 2: Well it shows you in my judgment, that the--we could do things because we had the support of a great number of people.  One, the--that we could pit a bond measure together and be one of the few states in the country that was able to do it at the time we did it.  That we were able to balance our budget without raising taxes.  That we were able to create opposite--opportunities for young people.  You're right, one gun a month, that would say to people hey, you can't just have a prolifi-proliferation [sic] of, a proliferation of handguns.  And you can't, you can't underestimate the importance of getting the better bang for your buck to the extent that you put it in the perspective as--in terms of minority.  Was it an aberration?  No.  Working through the system is one thing, but working through a system that many times opposes you, is a proper context because was I picked to be the governor?  No.  Was I selected by the [Democratic] Party to be the governor?  No.  I had people accuse me of using shop (unclear), and they're right.  You have to say hey, wait a minute, this includes me too.  That's why one of the things I would do when I first got involved in politics, when I first met with people like Bill [William Vincent "Bill"] Rawlings.  When I would see people on the floor of the senate talking, I would move up right to the group, having no idea what they were talking about.  And I would start nodding my head.  They would--turn around and say wanna-"Who asked him to come up here?"  They would think you did or he did or he did.  Then they would say we getting ready to--we gotta go take a break.  Say well we gotta meet again.  Why don't we get back on this five o'clock?  Yeah, fine good with me.  Where?  You push yourself in.  Nobody's going to invite you in.  Nobody's gone say hey, you should run for lieutenant governor or you should run for the state senate, or you should run for governor.  Doesn't work like that because if that's the case, then that means you are handpicked and that hand that picks you, that hand in many instances, wants to control you.
Story_ID: 578223
Speaker 1: I think the better perspective would be that it shows that you can be whatever you choose to be if you're prepared to work for it, prepared to pay the price for it.  And prepared to suffer what I call the slings and arrows, disappointment, and get back to that favorite saying again, not succumbing to flattery.  Because if you do, criticism will crush you.  I had more honors and more accolades than you can imagine.  And I don't mean to say to you that they're not important and they don't impress me.  But they don't change me at all.  It doesn't make me walk differently, doesn't make me talk differently, nor even make me feel any differently.  Because I've had enough criticism that would just ruin me.  People in my administration, "Have you read the paper today?"  I said, "No I haven't."  "Well let me"--I say, "You want, you can't wait to bring me some bad news?  Why don't you just keep it for another five, ten, fifteen minutes?"  And then I walk out and leave them.  I don't need to hear that mess.  What somebody wrote today.  Is it tomorrow or the next day, eventually I'll see it in the clips, and I'll give it the respect it deserves.  Many times it's nothing.  I'd run into reporters.  They would say to me things like, "Did you read what I had to say today?"  "No."  "What you think about what I had to say today?"  "I hadn't had a chance to think about it 'cause I hadn't read it."  "Well I want you to read it."  "Okay."  "And let me know what you think."  "I will do that."  They would call back and, "Well what'd you think?"  "I haven't had a chance to read it."  And many times that's true.  I'd read very little about what's written by me--about me.  Because it would have the tendency to, to shape you and to affect your actions.  And you can't allow yourself to live a life that's shaped by what you--perceptions are.  You gotta live the life that's shaped by what your real vision is and what your core beliefs are.  It took me a long time in life to determine what that personal credo of mine was.  You, you think you learn it, you think you know it.  When I was about forty or a little past, in that area when I really knew who I was.  It's one of the most important journeys you can ever take.  And I say to young people that's the journey that's more important than anything else.  What you are in terms of success is not as important as being successful in your own mind to the extent you know who you are.  That's the thing.  If you ever get there, most people never get there.  Most people never know who they are.  The journey to being governor helped me not only to discover who I was, but it helped identify roles that people could play in being who they are.
Story_ID: 578224
Speaker 1: After--'cause we talked about the fact that you know it's only two years, you know.  Any other place--
Speaker 2: Four years.
Speaker 1: Four years, I'm sorry, four years.
Speaker 2: One term, yeah, I didn't mean two years.
Speaker 1: One term.  So you, you served that period of time and you know you can't serve--right, you can't serve, you can't run again.
Speaker 2: No.  Constitution prohibits it.
Speaker 1: So what, so what were your thoughts at that point of what to do?  Or were you like most politicians not knowing where you wanted to--
Speaker 2: Well several things.  I, I almost became president of both alma maters.
Speaker 1: Right, Vir--
Speaker 2: Both.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Almost at Howard [University, Washington D.C.], almost at Virginia Union [University, Richmond, Virginia].
Speaker 1: I don't know this--I read the story about Virginia Union.  That was a--tell that story because--
Speaker 2: Well it--I came within three days of going up there, but I needed to--and it was pretty much understood that if I were gonna go up there, I had to, I had to be the person to determine who was gonna be there, what--and there was misperception in terms of what my role might be.  And I said well, wait a minute.  I was in Florida visiting with my daughter and I said I think I'm gonna call these people and say hey, you know, maybe it would be good to go another way.  And I met with the chairman of the board and he was a little, little bit surprised, but I--it was, it was best for me.  I, I didn't do that and then I went into things like being here at the university [Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia] and, and then I had started always looking at the establishment of a national slavery museum in Fredericksburg [Virginia] and was fortunate to get thirty-eight plus acres of land right on the Rappahannock River.  As you come down ninety-five [highway] if look over when you get to Fredericksburg to see the sign back from the highway with the Shawnees on it.  That's our land.  Pristine, never has ever been built on it.  So it's scheduled to build on that in latter part of this year, first part of next year.  Hopefully to be up and running well ahead of the 2007 quadricentennial of the nation, where the queen and others will be coming to Virginia.  And I found out how little people know about slavery, how little we as African Americans know about slavery.  And there are some of the people you mentioned earlier been working in that regard.  So it's enough on my plate to, to do and move down to the river down in Charles City [Virginia] and I like it down there.  I like living in the, in the rural aspects.  I have eagles flying, sitting in the trees and I say, "Wow, look here."
Story_ID: 578225
Speaker 1: And yet I had been critical again of the way the City of Richmond [Virginia] was running (laughter).  I laugh and you laugh too.  But it gets back to what happened before when you criticize if you're not prepared to jump in and do something, why criticize it?  So I thought that we should change it, and we did change it.  The way the mayor is selected.
Speaker 2: Can you explain that, though, for those who don't know?
Speaker 1: The mayor was selected by five members of the council.  And the mayor was a ceremonial position.  The mayor--we have a council manager form of government that's been in place since 1948.  I thought, and the people ultimately approved it, that it should be a strong mayor like you have in Chicago [Illinois], like you have in most major cities.  And most cities our size.  With that mayor serving for four years and running for another four years if that person chose to.  For two four year terms to change the course of the city to make opportunities better.  To stop some of the things from taking place, particularly in education and public safety.  And we did that.  It was opposed by the leadership.  The public voted for it in November.  Eighty percent of the people supported it.  Eighty percent of the people, in a referendum supported it with every leadership opposed to it.  Not surprised to me, because--not surprising to me because I've always felt that the people are ahead of leaders.  I still believe that.  And they, they might not articulate it, they feel it.  'Cause they're the ones who bear the brunt of the failures of government, leaders don't.  As we talked about the war [Korean War] earlier on.  Leaders are the ones who say do as I say, not as I do.  And people get sick of it.  So having said that, then I started spending some time trying to say well let's see if we can get--all right we've changed this thing now.  All right, it's time for reform and change to take place.  And I--the people weren't there that would be a part of that reform and change.  I saw some hands out there.  And as I described earlier, see this person might be a nice person or a good person, or is that hand gonna go away?  That they're not gonna be handled and determined as to who is gonna be doing what.  And it didn't.  And then there were so many people said okay, now you've brought this about.  There were those who criticized it in the first instance by saying well, this is gonna be a tool of the corporate leadership and the business community.  This is gonna be a dilution of African Americans' power and support since we've had it since 1977.  Well it won't be.  If it were, I would not be a part of it.  The justice department [U.S. Department of Justice] approved it and I testified before the justice department that, listen, if it was gonna be that, I couldn't be a part of it.
Story_ID: 578226
Speaker 1: And though--and then consequently we tried to again to say well what's gonna happen?  People were saying, you've gotta do it.  People say--and when I say they were saying it, truck drivers, people working in delivery, people who work on the streets, mail carriers, police, firemen, business groups.  All--every--you couldn't go anywhere.  You can't go to a restaurant, you couldn't go to a mall, you can't go to a Lowes or a Wal-Mart.  And so I said okay well I'll tell you what I'll do.  If I don't find what some would think would be a reformed candidate to change what's taking place, then I may consider it.  And then I decided to do it.  People said, "Well why'd you do it?"  I said, "For the same reason I got involved in the first instance."  I had a dream and went crazy.  But more importantly because I still want to be that bridge between young and old, black and white, rich and poor.  There are any numbers of things that might be good in Richmond [Virginia], and I wanna see them better.  Would it be a cast on?  Is it a step down?  No.  I don't think so at all.  I think it's a furtherance of public service.  And if it can culminate in moving the capital city further as a guide for those who would follow, it'll be better.  I'm the first Richmonder [ph.] to be elected lieutenant governor and governor.  And I think it says a lot when you consider that we restore a confidence in the capital city to make people respect it and want to come back and live and move in and not take their children and send them to private schools or to leave and flee the city.  And it might very well be symptomatic of what may take place in other parts of the country.
Story_ID: 578227
Speaker 1: So now there are people that even say that you--it looks like you're going Republican.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, on the other side.
Speaker 2: And yet they don't cite the instance.  The only instance they cite--not the only.  They cite the instance that I was asked to speak to a group in Reston [Virginia] by the speaker of the house.  And I was asked to come to give a report for a commission that I had chaired for Governor [Earl] Warner on excellence and efficiency in state government.  They wanted to--me to give them the recommendations that my commission made as well as what has been done and has not been done in terms of follow-through.  When I said to those people that they knew that I would be a candidate for mayor [of Richmond, Virginia], that if I were to be elected, I was coming to the legislature to ask for resources for the capital city because they were needed.  And the synergy between the city representatives and the state representatives has not been as good as it could have been.  I comment to that last part of the thing in terms of the independence associated with African Americans.  I shouldn't have that independence to go speak to a group of Republicans.  And yet the Democratic nominee for president, John Kerry, offered the vice presidency to John McCain, a Republican who has subsequently come out strongly supporting George Bush.  John, John Kerry has never been criticized for that.  Never been accused of going Republican.  But he has the latitude that would be denied me?  I say to those people who say what they've got to say, say what you gotta say.  Doesn't bother me one bit.
Story_ID: 578228
Speaker 1: Okay Governor Wilder, that points to another thing in that what would you say in terms of where you believe the growth is needed in the African American community from a political standpoint?
Speaker 2: With our young people, and it has to start at an earlier age than has been the case.  Many young professionals are locked out of the process because they have to fight too hard to get in.  There are those who might not want them in because they like the leadership positions in terms of gotta come through us.  That's always been the case.  That's not new.  And so I think the growth has to be that these people need to learn and I think we discussed it earlier.  Being involved in politics doesn't mean running for office, doesn't mean being elected.  Some of the most powerful positions in government and in politics are people who never run for office.  Condoleezza Rice has never run for an office, [HM] Colin Powell has never run for an office, Donald Rumsfeld has never run for an office.  But you couldn't say these people are not power--I don't believe Alan Greenspan's ever run for an office.  And so being involved in politics means being involved with what Lyndon [B.] Johnson would call the "out of the possible".  Being involved with making things happen.  How do you do that?  Carry some water.  By that I mean be a part of service, be a part of learning what the issues are, being a part of making a difference in terms of whether those issues are effectuated, promoting the kinds of interests you want for the people that you say you represent.  And then if you get there, leverage your influence to, to a point where if you're not there, it makes a difference to some people.  And if you are there, it makes a difference to some people.  Your just being there because of color makes no difference at all.  And that's the disappointment a lot of people have in the African American community.  That's why the votings--registrations are down.  That's why the voting participation is down.  They are saying what difference has it made to us?  What difference will you make to us?  Elect me.  Let's be a part of history.  Let me give you a classic example.  In the election in New York for [HM Herman] Carl McCall.  Comptroller, good man, run twice in New York.  Had to fight for the nomination for a man who'd never run for anything, whose claim was what?  That his dad [Herman McCall] had been governor.  Which is fine; I don't knock that.  But shouldn't the party hierarchy have said don't make this man expend all of his resources, his money, his energies proclaiming to be the nominee of the party when he's earned it.  And so by the time poor Carl had finished claiming the nomination, but he couldn't even get a chance to win it because Andrew Cuomo said I'm gonna drop out.  He dropped out at a time when Carl needed to win it to show he could win.  [William "Bill"] Clinton in campaigning for McCall--you remember what he said.  We need to make history and elect this man to be the governor of New York.  What does history have to do with taxes and transportation and education and health and opportunities for advancement?  I didn't run to make history.  I don't have that in my lexicon in terms of I'm the first African American this--doesn't have it.  The lesson could be that young African Americans have gotta be a part of the structure of government, gotta be a part of the structure of what's taking place, rather than to be considered an appendage.  Be a part of the body, rather than that which attach itself to the body at election time and then no more.
Speaker 1: Well that, that would be something since we've been always an appendage in many ways.
Speaker 2: That's why you said people criticize me because I've turned Republican because I dare speak to some Republicans?
Speaker 1: You're talking about mainstreaming.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yourself.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 578229
Speaker 1: What about--what is your definition of public servant?
Speaker 2: It's a, again a tautology.  It means serving the public, not yourself.  It means being a part of making a change that is not necessarily recognized.  Being a part of raising and contributing to the uplift of a, a group of people identified as, as the, as the public.  And what is the public?  It comes from the people.  We call ourselves here a commonwealth, no different between a state.  But the word's derived from common wheel, common good.  Public servant in my judgment is that which is good for the public to the extent you identify yourself to that which is good for the public by whose measure and by whose yardstick.
Story_ID: 578230
Speaker 1: Now do you have--when you look at the black community, what are your concerns?  What do you feel like may be the biggest issue facing?
Speaker 2: That's why I say we need an assessment of what we have not done in the last fifty years.  What's worked, what hasn't worked.  We know busing has not done what we thought it would do.  We have almost a re-segregated society in terms of our schools.  We need to be certain that if that wasn't good as Earl Warren said, if public education is that responsibility of government, then how does public education extend itself to take care of those who might not necessarily benefit from it to the extent that they could.  I, I'm hopeful that we are in a position to, to change some of that, to have a what I would call a unity, a variety and abundance.  That is that a number of people involved in several things.  There's a group for everything, and for what purpose?  Is it for the public purpose or for your group's purpose?  Why can't we all get in a room, say what's your agenda, your agenda, my agenda, narrow the agendas and see why we can't achieve some of them?  Why can't we as the richest nation in the world make the dents that we needed to have made in the problems that have been with us for as long as we've been here?  We've got all that we need to resolve them and solve them, and what stops us from doing it?
Story_ID: 578231
Speaker 1: And your legacy, sir.  What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: I don't know what it will be.  The only thing it could be interpreted is as that I did the best I could with what I had to work with.  To the extent that I didn't, it's my fault.  I never consider a legacy because I think it's too early to determine that.  There is so much yet to be done and I'm gone be a part of doing it.
Story_ID: 578232
Speaker 1: And your name, can you talk about the origin of your name?
Speaker 2: My mother [Beulah Olive Richards Wilder], Paul Laurence Dunbar and Frederick Douglass.  She had her reasons.  She was a great admirer of both of them and obviously I came to read Paul Laurence Dunbar early and was a great admirer of Frederick Douglass.  The thing that I was so impressed with--Dunbar with that he could write in such style, yet to be so educated that he could reduce it to the dialectical, the dialect.  And then that Douglass could educate himself, or become educated and show the value of education.  'Cause now here's a slave that is a leader, not of African Americans, but a leader period to the extent that his name still resonates with the leadership.  Means a great deal and to me in terms of what his contribution has been.  So it's a--and I think names sometimes inspire you and those two names have made me try to measure up to what those guys are.
Speaker 1: As if your mother had vision in many ways.
Speaker 2: I think she may have had a lot of it.  If I had listened to her, maybe I wouldn't have gotten into this trap of being in politics (laughter).
Speaker 1: Or we would not have had the benefit of a Governor Wilder.
Speaker 2: Or the, or the detriment (laughter).
