Story_ID: 15537
Speaker 1: My name is Charles Vert Willie.  It's W-I-L-L-I-E.  And I am a, the Charles William Elliott Professor of Education, emeritus, Harvard Graduate School of Education [Cambridge, Massachusetts].  And this is February 13th, the year 2001.
Speaker 2: And Vert is V-E-R-T?
Speaker 1: V-E-R-T.
Speaker 2: And what is your date of birth?
Speaker 1: October 8, 1927.
Speaker 2: Now, you know, I--Vert, where did that name come from?  Do you know its origin?
Speaker 1: I have no idea.  People want to know is there any French on the ancestry, and I don't know.  I had an uncle who was named Vert who lived in Fort Worth [Texas].  And I never met him until--well, I saw him when he died.  I went to his funeral with my father [Louis Willie].  But I don't, I don't know where that came from.
Story_ID: 15538
Speaker 1: I'd like to know what your favorite time of year is?
Speaker 2: My favorite time of year is, I think spring.  I like the flowers coming out.  I, I know I always take my camera out and take photographs of the trees as they're blooming, and it's getting warm.  And I just like spring.  It's just something new about it.
Speaker 1: Okay, favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color, I believe, is blue.  It's hard for me to say, but I think that would be my favorite color.
Speaker 1: A favorite food?
Speaker 2: When I was young, I thought everything ought to have rice connected with whatever other vegetable or meat there was.  And I still like rice.  I remember Louis Armstrong signed his autobiography, "Red Beans and Ricely Yours" (laughs).  I, I have--well, I used to like rice particularly, if it was with chili beans. That's showing my Texas heritage.
Speaker 1: That's nice.  No one has said rice to me before.  That's interesting.  And then your favorite vacation destination?  Do you have one?
Speaker 2: Don't have a favorite vacation destination.  I do like to go to the lakes.  I spent twenty-five years in upstate New York while I was affiliated with Syracuse University [Syracuse, New York].  And I grew fond of the lakes in the Adirondacks [Mountains] and those parts of New York state.  And since coming to Massachusetts, I've been more inclined to go up to the lakes in New Hampshire rather than to the Cape [Cod, Massachusetts] and the ocean.  So I would say that I probably prefer vacationing on those gentle, calm lakes that can become so cold until July (laughs).
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Favorite phrase?  I'm sure I do, but you almost would have to ask my wife what it is cause I probably say it in times of anxiety (laughs).
Story_ID: 15539
Speaker 1: I want to first ask about your father and what--Louis Willie, right?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Right, and what he was like as a, you know, about his side of the family, and, you know, what you know about that part of his family?
Speaker 2: Well, actually, my mother [Carrie Sykes Willie] and father [Louis J. Willie] together constituted a, an interesting heritage for us.  I usually tell people that I grew up in a working-class family and that is what a Pullman Porter's family would be, although, my family's unique.  My, both of my parents were born before the twentieth century.  My father had an eighth grade education.  He was born in DeBerry, Texas in Panola County.  And my mother was born in Horton, Louisiana.  And my father's father was born in slavery.  He was a slave.  I think my grandmother was an Indian, but I don't know what tribe.  But my mother's father [Enoch Sykes], as well as her mother [Henrietta Sykes], were born in slavery.  My grandfather, my maternal grandfather was a blacksmith.  And, of course, my paternal grandfather [Louis Willie] was a farmer.  My father grew up on the farm too in East Texas.  His mother was quite an interesting person.  They had, she had about six or seven children.  And she died when she was about forty.  I asked my father, I interviewed him when I became a professional sociologist.  I wanted to get information to pass along to my children.  And I interviewed him in the 1970s.  He, he grew to be eighty years old or eighty-five.  And my mother was ninety-nine when she died.  And I asked my father what was the cause of death of his mother.  And he said, just too many children.  She was worn out, too much work.  But his mother called him to her room just before she died.  He was not the oldest, but somehow she had a great deal of confidence in him.  And she asked my father if he would make sure that the daughter in the family--there was only girl among the siblings, if he would make sure that the daughter got a college education.  Why my grandmother was so fixated on that, I don't know.  But my father felt a strong obligation to fulfill her deathbed wish.  Eventually, he asked his father if he would give him permission to leave the farm and go to the city where he thought he might make enough money to send his youngest sister--and the sister was the youngest in the family, to send his youngest sister to college.  And his father gave him permission.  He left the farm in DeBerry, Texas and came to Fort Worth, Texas and first got a job in a packinghouse.  Later he saw an ad in the paper that the Pullman Company was hiring Pullman Porters.  And he went down to the District Office in Fort Worth.  And in those days, the superintendent of the Pullman district office lined up the blacks who applied to be porters and looked at them (laughs), and he said those whom I say sit down, I'll give you a chance.  And those whom I do not say anything, the interview is over.  My father was one who was asked to sit down.  And from that experience, he was hired and remained with the Pullman Company forty-two years.  And that gave him enough money to send his sister to college and also to get married.  He was a very good Pullman Porter.  He was a member of the Pullman Porters Benefit Association Board.  That was the insurance company, but he also was a member of the union that Mr. [A. Philip] Randolph organized.  And when, during the War [World War II] when there were more porters needed, he was pulled off the road and made a Pullman Porter instructor.  So he did a very good job in that respect.  And, of course, in those days, people who were Pullman Porters were very well respected in their communities.  So my father not only was interested in helping his youngest sister get a college education, which he did, and she became a teacher in the Dallas [Texas] Independent School District, but I think that his interest in helping his youngest sister go to college, and the promise he made to his mother, spilled over into his own family.  And all five of the siblings in my family have college degrees and most of them have graduate degrees.  And I think this was, the promise that he made his mother  regarding his sister, that spilled over into his own family.  But he also married a woman, my mother [Carrie Sykes Willie], who had a college degree.  And I think all of this adds up into this interesting mix.  Now, how my mother obtained her college degree was very interesting.  No one in her family had ever gone to college.  Her father could "figure" (laughs), but he couldn't read and write.  And he pursued the blacksmith trade after the Emancipation Proclamation [1863].  He helped a small college in Marshall [Texas]--the family moved from Horton, Louisiana and from Shreveport [Louisiana] to Marshall, Texas, and while pursuing the blacksmith business, he helped Wiley College [Marshall, Texas], a small black college in Marshall, erect a dormitory.  I remember the name.  It was called Coe Hall.  It was a three-story dormitory for the men students.  In those days, they didn't have steel beams, but the blacksmiths were employed to provide what they called anchor irons to help stabilize buildings.  My grandfather made the anchor irons for Coe Hall.  Wiley was unable to pay him all that they owed him.  And he figured that they still owed him money, although he couldn't read or write.  And so he made a deal Wiley that he would forgive them for what they owed him if they would establish a tuition account for his daughter, his youngest daughter, which was my mother, Carrie Sykes at that time.  That was her maiden name.  Wiley did.  At that time, Wiley had an academy too, a high school as well as a college.  She began in the academy, and stayed ten years and finished.
Story_ID: 15540
Speaker 1: Unfortunately, she [his mother, Carrie Sykes Willie] was unable to get a job as a public school teacher.  During the Depression in Dallas [Texas] and in other places throughout the United States, if the husband had a job, they wouldn't employ the wife.  So the only way my mother could get a job as a public school teacher was to go to the rural area surrounding Dallas.  She didn't think it made good sense to leave a husband and five children unsupervised in the city.  So she and my father [Louis J. Willie Sr.] made the deal together that she would be a stay-at-home mom--I never say she was unemployed because keeping five persons in clean clothes and feeding them and making sure that their health was cared for, and I think the fact that she did have a college education is one reason we survived as well as we did.  She found the free clinic.  She saved all of the money, and took us there even in taxis if we didn't have any other way of going.  And my father and mother were really a team.  He would come home, and, you know, an important part of the salary for a Pullman Porter was tips.  And he'd bring all of the tips that the patrons on his car gave him for being such a good porter.  I remember he would come home, and he would go in his pocket and pull out his tips and put them on the table.  And my mother would rake them off (laughs), and that was the end.  She was the bookkeeper for the family.  She was the, the strategic shopper, find the best deal in the market.  And she was looking for free health care.  She was looking for entertainment for us.  I remember when we used to go to the free shows and the public park.  This was before there was any voice connected with the films.  She taught our alphabet.  She really was a good scholar, see.  She could sing.  So here we had what I call a Head Start program, long before the federal government ever, ever thought of a Head Start program.  We had it at our home with our mother being the chief mentor in that family.  And she mentored not only her five children, but her husband.  My father really was the public presence of our family.  He was a member of the Steward Board in the Colored Methodist Episcopal Church, CME Church.  They changed the name to Christian Methodist Episcopal Church, but that was before the black revolution.  I think it probably would not have changed if the revolution had been going as it was during the '60s [1960s].  But at any rate, we were a member of the CME Church.  He was a member of the Steward Board.  He was a treasurer of it, which meant that he was entrusted with counting the money and putting it in the bank, and making sure it didn't disappear.  He also was very active with the insurance organization in the Pullman Porters Company.  And it made a wonderful public presentation.  He was so committed to education, he got to the teachers and the principals, he and my mother in all schools where we were.  We could bring home grades that might not be the top grades, but we dare not bring home a grade that had an F in conduct.  I lived in a folk community where between my father getting off the streetcar and walking home, he got all of the news of what the little Willie boys had been doing that was wrong.  There were four boys and one girl.  And in our family, the girl is the youngest too.  And we got into a fair amount of trouble, but my parents knew about it before we could ever come and confess.  All of that gave kind of a secure background, and my father and mother believed in owning our home.  They started out with a little four-room house that they owned in Dallas.  I, I never will forget that.  And even my aunt, the school teacher, came and lived with us one--at one time, and that meant one of those four rooms was the, dedicated to her.  It's a lot of commitment there, but a lot of hardship too living under those conditions.  But then he saved up his funds and on the front of the lot where that little four-room house was, he built a new house.  I remember see it being built.  This was back in 1936, and I was only about nine years old.  So this kind of thriftiness, this belief that you ought to invest in your children, and this belief that you ought to own some property that you can call your own, and this belief in education, was all a part of my family.  And I guess I introduced my mother in there with my father because I saw them as a very important team, a unique kind of team.  Pullman Porters were targets for single women and widows because they did have stable income and so on.  But my father [Louis Willie] brought all of his money home.  And his goal was to put all of us through college.  We could not think about getting married until we went to college.  I'm sure my parents did not know what sociology was or is--they do now.  But when I decided to be a sociologist, my parents didn't object.  All they wanted to know is, do they teach that in, in college?  (Laughs)  Whatever it was that I was doing was all right as long as I was going to school.
Story_ID: 15541
Speaker 1: When you interviewed your father [Louis J. Willie Sr.] about his father [Louis Willie] and growing up, and this goes back even to your, let me see, maybe your maternal grandparents [Enoch and Henrietta Sykes] who were also slaves, was there much that you learned about the slave experience or that people talked about during your interviews?
Speaker 2: No, neither my father nor my mother [Carrie Sykes Willie] knew much about the slavery experience of their parents.  I asked my mother about that, and I asked my father about it.  And neither one of them had any understanding.  Of course, my grandfather was a youngster, and probably a teenager during the period of emancipation, the period of the Emancipation Proclamation [1863].  That was one reason they did not know much about them, is that they were quite young during the age of slavery.  But there's another reason.  My mother was reluctant to let me interview her when I wanted to put on tape what their history had been.  And I could not understand it.  I talked my father into it, and I interviewed him separately and I--my mother was sitting in the kitchen while I was interviewing him.  And she overheard, and I think she wanted to set the record straight, so she eventually let me interview her.  But she didn't like for me to ask about things of the past.  Finally, one day she told me, "I don't want to tell you this because you're gonna write it down.  And then you'll publish it, and then people will start judging you by where you came from.  And I want people to judge you in, in terms of where you're going."  That was a very important moment for me, and I've made the black family one of my areas of study.  And I have two or three books in that area.  And one of the things I have found that, black families tend to be oriented towards the future rather than the past, which is to say, they tend to be oriented toward hope.  And they let the past take care of itself.  Now, of course, as we get a generation or two removed from that, we want to begin to understand that past.  But she didn't.  She didn't want to talk about it because she didn't want people to judge individuals in terms of what their circumstances were when they were growing up.  And I thought that was a very interesting idea.  So that's why I don't know anything about the slavery experience.  They never tried to learn much about it, and what little they may have known, they were reluctant to, to pass that along.  So I don't have any understanding at all about that.
Story_ID: 15542
Speaker 1: Now, how did they come to meet?  That's what I'm wondering.  You know, they--where did, when did they meet or how did they meet?  Do you know (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Well, that's a good Valentine's story, how they met.  My mother [Carrie Sykes Willie] and her parents [Enoch and Henrietta Sykes] and family moved to Marshall, Texas.  One reason they moved to Marshall, Texas is that they heard the schools were better there.  And they wanted a good school, certainly for the youngest child, but for the other children too since they were--had no idea that any would go beyond high school.  So they moved to Marshall, Texas because the schools were better.  And that was how they got to Marshall.  Now, my father [Louis J. Willie Sr.] who was born in DeBerry, Texas, used to go to Marshall from time to time.  Marshall was the biggest community where cotton and other kinds of things were sold when, after the harvest.  And so my father would go to Marshall from time to time.  He and my mother were attending a Sunday School conference at the CME [Colored Methodist Episcopal, now AME, African Methodist Episcopal] Church in Marshall.  And mother was the recorder.  She could always do good things like that.  She could write.  She could keep--she could figure.  She, she was a good, really a good scholar.  And my father, I forgot what role he was, but he was some officer.  And the recorder and he had to sit next to each other in that Sunday School conference.  And that's how they got to know each other.  Then, of course, my father went away to Fort Worth [Texas], and my mother eventually graduated from school.  And the year that she graduated, he came back and asked for her hand and told my grandfather that he was going to take care and keep her and she would never want for anything.  And my grandfather, my maternal grandfather said, "Now, don't abuse her.  If you two can't get along, bring her back."  My father said, "You'll never get her again," (laughs).  And so she packed up the year that she graduated from Wiley [College, Marshall, Texas] and moved to Fort Worth.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) That's a beautiful story.
Speaker 2: So they met in the church.  It's an interesting tradition because I met my wife [Mary Sue Willie] in a church choir.
Speaker 1: CME, how does it differ from AME [African Methodist Episcopal]?  Is there a big difference, do you know?
Speaker 2: No, they're similar, similar competing churches.  African Methodist Episcopal and the Colored Methodist Episcopal Church, they were similar.
Speaker 1: They both came out of Richard Allen [founder of AME churches]?
Speaker 2: That's right.  They came along at the same time too, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, tell me what it was like growing up in Dallas?  I mean how did your--you, it was Marshall [Texas], but how did they end up getting to Dallas [Texas]?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother [Carrie Sykes Willie] and father [Louis J. Willie Sr.], after they married, she moved on to Fort Worth, where he had a job with the Pullman Company.  And eventually, the Pullman Company transferred him to the Dallas district, but still in the Pullman Company.  So that's how they landed in Dallas, which I think must have been about 1921 or so.  They came to Dallas, and--no, it was a little later, maybe about 1925.  And they built this little house in Dallas and built a second house in Dallas.  And after we were just about ready to leave the nest, they built the third house in Dallas.  So Dallas became really the place from which they were operating.  They were--he was transferred there from the Fort Worth [Texas] district.
Story_ID: 15543
Speaker 1: But you are--you're the middle child, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, tell me what it was like growing up, you know, cause you had, mainly boys in the family, you know, with just one younger sister.  But can you tell me how it was growing up and, you know, just share any childhood memories that you have?
Speaker 2: Well, I often claim myself as being the middle child, the squeezed child.  That's why probably I'm always restless and trying to do things because you were never treated as the baby, and you were never treated as the oldest.  So you had to prove yourself and certainly having two brothers older than myself, it's five years between the oldest and myself.  So there's one [Joseph R. Willie] about two years older, and then one [Louis J. Willie Jr.] is, that's five years older.  That meant that I was almost too small to play with them, but I insisted on playing with them.  I never will forget one day that I sat down on first base so that they couldn't play ball unless they let me play.  They finally realized that the only way to get me off first base so that they could play, they would have to let me join one of the teams.  So they put me in the field (laughs).  Those were the ways that I was able to make my case known.  I remember when we got a bicycle one Christmas.  In those days, each child didn't get a bicycle.  There was a bicycle for the family.  And, of course, my two older brothers could ride, but I couldn't.  And they wouldn't teach me how.  I never will forget, one of my neighbors, next door, yelling at, to my two older brothers to teach me how to ride that bike (laughs).  And I got on, and I rode down--I almost ran into the street, until I wrecked it, so I, so the bike wouldn't go into the street because I didn't know how to put the brakes on.  So I had to do a lot of things for myself.  My, my wife [Mary Sue Willie] tells me that this story of being the middle child is not correct because my, the two younger children [Mary Gauthier and Alfred N. Willie] came along about, oh, five or six years after I'd been a baby for that long.  So she, she tells me that I really got all of the perks for being a baby, and just claimed that I was the middle child, the squeezed child.  Well, that may be 'cause I, I never felt put upon by anybody.  And I think our mother [Carrie Sykes Willie] was such a wise woman that we were lucky in terms of someone who understood children.  And also, we were lucky, even though financially, it was hard that she was there to give close supervision.  In effect, she was a stay-at-home mom.  She was there to give close supervision to us, not only in terms of just our behavior, but also in terms of our study habits, and helping us out along that way.  So we were all were pretty good students in school, growing straight out of her kind of experience.  They, together, enabled us to really take some risks.  My sister, the youngest child, is a retired music teacher in Syracuse [New York].  She plays both keyboard and was a voice major.  She sang with the Fisk Jubilee Singers [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee].  I never will forget in 1957 I was in Syracuse, and I picked up my 'Life' magazine, and there on the cover was a picture of the Fisk Jubilee Singers.  And there was my sister right up in front.  This was the Christmas magazine, and, of course, they featured them for that.  Nobody else in my family was musical.  My mother could sing, but she couldn't read music.  But I learned how to, to read music.  I played a trumpet in the band.  My brother [Joseph R. ], just older than myself, played the trumpet.  My brother younger than myself [Alfred N.] played the trumpet.  And my sister became a fine musician, and that was what she specialized in until her retirement.
Story_ID: 15544
Speaker 1: Can you also describe just family life growing up a little bit.  I mean you've described some of it, but, you know, was it heavily church oriented?  Was it, you know, was Dallas [Texas] more rural than it is now, or you know, neighborhood?  I'd just like to get a sense.
Speaker 2: Well, I grew up during the age of segregation.  I lived in a section of Dallas called Oak Cliff.  And that is in the western part of Dallas.  It was west of the Trinity River so we had to use the streetcar to get to downtown.  And that would have to cross the Trinity River.  It was an urban area and dense populations, but segregated neighborhoods, a city life.  It was city life.  It wasn't rural at all in that section, although I might add, some sections of Oak Cliff were rural, and that's one way that my family made it through the Depression.  And you have to chalk this up to the ingenuity of my parents.  With five children and only one breadwinner, my father [Louis J. Willie Sr.] decided that to feed us, he would keep some pigs and he would butcher them each year.  This was a skill that he, of course, came by from living in the rural areas of East Texas.  And we rented some land from a family near a creek and they didn't enforce the public health laws too severely in those days so each day, my brother and I had to go out, walk through the streets of Oak Cliff with two buckets of, of slop to take to the hogs.  It didn't endear us with the little girls that we were trying to impress.  But it did feed us.  It fed, it fed us very well.  We butchered two hogs every year for about six years.  That's how we got through the Depression.  Now, this is the ingenuity of my parents.  And so we never were hungry.  And that impressed me that they understood how to deal with things that way.  We also grew up in a neighborhood where it was clear that my father was interested in educating us, and the whole community began to respond to that.  It's a wonderful thing about black communities.  While they may be difficult, and they may be even dangerous on Friday or Saturday night at the nearest beer hall, once they decide there's one family that's trying to do something extraordinary, the whole community supports it.  I remember none of the boys who wanted to get into trouble ever invited me to go with them because I was one of the little Willie boys.  And they knew that you ain't supposed to recruit persons to go do naughty things from amongst those little Willie boys.  And as I said, my father would hear about all of the things that we did wrong before he got home, and we would pay for it.  I must admit, my parents believed in spanking.  I never considered that to be abuse or brutal cause they never did it to the extent of harming us.  It was simply their last resort method of saying, you don't do this.  And so we grew up believing strongly in their values, and those values, of course, were re-enforced by regular attendance at church.  When Sunday came, we were all in church.  And the Sunday school superintendent was always my friend.  I remember we had a Negro branch of the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association.]  This was not in the part of town I lived.  It was in North Dallas.  I lived in West Dallas.  But I wanted to have a membership so I could go over and learn how to swim.  I never fully learned how to swim cause it was too far from me, but I worked there during the, the time that I was in college, during the summers, at this branch.  That's why I almost went into social work.  But at any rate, the superintendent of my Sunday school, knew that I wanted a membership to the YMCA.  And so he arranged to take up a special collection (laughs) in church so that they--the church could purchase me a membership in the YMCA.  That was the kind of support that we had.  The teachers always thought that the little Willie boys were smart.  I must admit, my older brother was very smart.  I, I picked up all of his grades in school.  I wasn't as good a student as he was, but I didn't mind them thinking that I was smart.  So if they wanted to give me a higher grade, I, I took it.  That was--we were always oriented toward doing our lessons, and as I said, we had lots of help from our mother [Carrie Sykes Willie].  She was our Head Start program director.  My father, who would give speeches in church or when he went to Chicago [Illinois] to attend the Board of Directors for the Pullman Porters Benefit Insurance [sic, Association], he would give a speech which my mother wrote.  She was his speech writer.  And so this was the kind of unique background that the person who had the greatest amount of education, really was not the person out front in the community, but she was certainly the foundation for what was going in that family.  On the other hand, my father not only was the breadwinner, but he brought his money home.  They trusted each other.  As I said, she took all of the tips, and he never saw those again.  And then he and she both went through the sacrifice of making sure we all went to college.
Story_ID: 15545
Speaker 1: Now, with your father [Louis J. Willie Sr.], did you have--how long, as a Pullman Porter, how long would he be away from home?
Speaker 2: Oh, for long periods of time.  Sometimes--that's where my mother [Carrie Sykes Willie] was such a very important person.  He did have regular runs like from Dallas [Texas] to--at one time to Minnesota.  That's a long ways.  He did have other runs like from Dallas to Amarillo, Texas and back to Dallas or from Dallas to New Orleans [Louisiana] and back.  But certainly when the wartime, when the war [World War II] came around, he would go away and sometimes not get back for three weeks.  So that was a very difficult time with only one parent in the family.  But I think the railroad did something else for my father though.  Remember he had only an eighth grade education, but the railroad enabled him to really see and know things.  And, of course, he would pick up papers in different regions of the country.  And I think his work as Pullman Porter enabled him to be what I would call a cosmopolitan person.  And, of course, that rubbed off in the family too.  So there was nothing parochial about our family, even though we lived in what I would call a black ghetto and did not have access to the full range of opportunities in Dallas [Texas].  But the fact that my father was able to see a lot of what goes on in the world outside of that neighborhood where we lived, I think it was a very important factor in, in our lives and in our growth and in our ability to reach out to distant regions when we finished school and continued in graduate school.
Speaker 1: Now, did he ever tell you any stories about, you know, did he ever bring stories back from the road or do you think those were just shared between he and your mother?  Did he ever--
Speaker 2: No, he never did for a specific reason.  My older brother asked my father, after he had graduated from high school, would he intercede and see if he could get him a job with the Pullman Company.  And that was the worst thing my brother could ever ask my father to do.  He was, went into a rage.  "Nope, none of my youngsters are ever gonna work for the railroad."  He did not feel that this was a demeaning job.  But he did not feel it was the appropriate job that one should aspire for.  So he never really brought us stories from the railroad because he never wanted us to feel enamored by it.  That was deliberate.  So, and, of course, now, after that encounter with my older brother, none of the rest of us ever thought that we would go on the road.  He saw his work as a Pullman Porter as a means to an end.  And the end, of course, was to educate his family, and to maintain, you know, a strong home.
Story_ID: 15546
Speaker 1: Now, what was the young Chuck Willie like, you know, what were you like?  Were you quiet and shy or were you, you know, rambunctious or were you, you know, well behaved or were you at, you know, an introspective person?  What were you like?
Speaker 2: It was all of those.  I had a temper.  At times I could very angry with things, but on the other hand, I, I was a leader among most of the youngsters.  I was elected president of this, president of that.  I was president of my senior class in high school.  For my band, I was elected the major.  That was the highest office--I don't know how a major became the highest office in the band.  I was always called upon to participate in speaking contests.  And so I did have leadership characteristics, even when I was young.  But on the other hand, I--I felt left out of some things.  I always learned how to dance last.  Some young woman would take pity on me and teach me how.  And that when things always happen in life, someone takes pity on me and will teach me.  And I'm--I'm very teachable.  So that's why I said it was all of those.  On one hand, I was kind of an independent--I would not say I was a loner.  I was never, never, never a loner, but on the other hand, I did not do everything that all of the other children did because somehow I had other interests.  And I also, I--I did respect pretty strongly the, the code of our family, the values of the family.  And somehow I never wanted to violate those.  I was not a rambunctious youngster who, who really wanted to rebel against what was family.  I would slip and do things, but it wasn't outright rebellion because somehow I grew to respect what they were trying to do.  So I was called upon to lead, but that also was a liability because it took you out of circulation.  I remember I always played in the band.  And the band played at the football games and football games were a place you could kind of sneak out and really have dates.  I never had that privilege because I was playing in the band.  That was a responsibility that was impressed upon me early on, but I also saw the downside of that.  Even in college [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], I played in a little swing band that we had. That was lovely.  We played for the dances.  But that meant I couldn't be out there dancing with my favorite date.  I was up there playing.  This whole business of assuming responsibility and it keeping you out of the, some of the chance encounters that you might experience.  I experienced.  And I didn't know how to deal with it then.  I don't even know how to deal with it now.  I simply know that these are the kinds of things you have to recognize.  You can't do everything one way, and then at the same time, do some other things that you would like to do.  So I have been one who accepts the kind of compromises in one's life that come about because you have some aspirations that others don't have.  And you have to do what you need to do to, to get there.  So I wasn't rambunctious.  No, I was a kind of, I was kind of a nice kid to tell you the truth.  I, I didn't give anybody any real trouble.
Story_ID: 15547
Speaker 1: So your brothers, were they ones you admired and kept up with or was there any sibling rivalry or anything like that?
Speaker 2: It's very interesting.  There wasn't sibling rivalry.  I remember my brothers and myself, there was--we were the first three and then the last two were a brother [Alfred N. Willie] and a sister [Mary Gauthier], about five or six years afterwards.  But I remember my brother just older than I, who's Joseph [R. Willie], the dentist in Houston [Texas], when we wanted to get our school supplies and there wasn't that kind of money to go around.  I don't know.  Sometimes--although my parents wanted us to have them.  They may not have had the money.  We would try to talk our older brother into talking, talking to our mother [Carrie Sykes Willie] and father [Louis J. Willie Sr.] to get it.  He was smart, and, and, of course, he set the pace.  And we'd talk him into talking to them and getting our school supplies.  And, then, of course, they would get them.  And then we would be beneficiaries for it.  So there didn't seem to be sibling rivalry.  I remember my older brother [Louis J. Willie Jr.] was a great storyteller.  He made up stories.  We'd be sitting on the steps at night, in the evening at our home, and children from other families would be there.  And my brother would make up a story and tell it to us.  And we, we asked him to--we would ask him to tell little stories.  He had one story, it was called the, the name of it was 'Jim Bone and Sniff.'  And I don't know what that meant, but I know I liked to hear him tell about it.  So I don't really think there was sibling rivalry.  The only rivalry I remember is my brother who is just older than I, two years, he and I both drew a robin, bird, and the teacher put it up on the board.  And he claimed it was his robin, and I claimed it was mine.  But very much kind of good rivalry to see who, who drew, drew the best bird, bird.  But I don't ever remember sibling rivalry otherwise.  And it's hard to explain it because we did different things.  We weren't trying to do the same things.  And there's just enough age between us to, to separate us.  And the other part, which was the negative part, remember we came into age, as they would say and to our majority almost, even before that, made teenage, during the war [World War II].  And so my older brother had to leave in 1939 or '40 [1940] and go to the war.  And then my next brother left.  I turned, I turned eighteen just as the war was over, and I missed it.  But that also separated us.  But when they came back, we were all great friends.  We used to go out and party together and so on.  It's interesting--no, I don't think we've ever had--I think, sure, we've been rivals to see who can do more, what our parents wanted us to do, which I think was an interesting rivalry instead of who could rebel the most.  So I don't really--I didn't feel any sibling rivalry that way.  Yes, I think there's some competitiveness among us, but it's not the rivalry.
Story_ID: 15548
Speaker 1: Now, you went to [N.W.] Harllee Elementary School [Dallas, Texas]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So there were, so you didn't have a junior high school.  You went to the elementary up to what?  Eighth or ninth grade and then--
Speaker 2: Well, I went to elementary school up to seventh grade.  See, I graduated from high school when I was sixteen, but that doesn't mean that I was smart.  In Dallas, if the first grade was crowded and you knew your alphabets, then they would skip you to the second grade so that you could--there would be more room in the first grade.  That happened to me.  Then Dallas, in those days only had seven grades at the elementary level.  And then you went immediately into high school for four more years.  So I--by skipping one grade at the beginning of school and having only seven grades for elementary school, I graduated when I was sixteen.
Speaker 1: Now, were there any teachers that influenced you there or any subjects that were your favorite subjects?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, I had lots of mentors.  I've been fostered all my life.  In elementary school, there was a math teacher whose name was Ms. Ricks.  And I still remember her just because--I don't know what she taught me, but I think I learned a lot of math from Ms. Ricks.  There was a reading teacher, Jackie Farward, and she was also in charge of the library.  And I liked her a great deal.  And I had a history teacher named Mrs. Halbut.  This is very interesting.  I don't know how these names come--maybe because I liked these individuals so well.  And then we had a playground teacher.  He didn't do much in terms of teaching physical education.  And that was one of the liabilities I had.  I never was a great athlete, and in the black community, the people who get attention are athletes who are likely to be varsity.  And if you're not varsity, then there's not much teaching going on with reference to physical education.  Nevertheless, I liked my physical education teacher.  He used to, as a part-time job, he distributed the newspapers, like the 'Pittsburgh Courier' and then the local 'Dallas Express' and the 'Chicago Defender'.  And we were all newsboys.  So I got to know him that way too.  And he was one of my favorites.  I kept in contact with, even in adulthood.  Then he finally moved to Seattle [Washington].  I remember visiting him there.  I had a wonderful writing teacher.  And so I, I liked, I liked all of my teachers and had a wonderful music teacher named Ms--Ms. Dixon.  And I remember playing in the rhythm band.  And I played drum--drums in the Rhythm Band.  Those were interesting days.  And then after I got to high school, it was the same thing.  I, I like my trigonometry.  I liked my geometry.  I don't know really what it is they taught me today, but I am sure that they taught me a disciplined way of approaching problems and solving them.  I liked my, my history teacher, a man named J. W. Towns.  He, he would even send for me from the--to come in off the playground, during the play period if there was something he wanted to nominate me for.  And I had a wonderful, I had a wonderful English teacher.  And, and my band teacher, of course, was the reason I went to Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] because I, I wanted to Wiley [College, Marshall, Texas] where my older brother [Louis J. Willie Sr.] went and it's the school from which my mother [Carrie Sykes Willie] graduated.  And my next brother [Joseph R. Willie], just older than I enrolled in Wiley before the war [World War II] came along.  But Wiley sent one scholarship to Lincoln High School in Dallas--there were two black high schools, Booker T. Washington [High School] and Lincoln.  And they sent one scholarship to each of those schools for the ranking student in the class.  And while I was president of my senior class in high school, I was not the ranking student.  I wasn't a bad student in high school.  I, I was salutatorian, which meant I had the second highest rank.  But the student who had the highest rank, she took the scholarship and went to Wiley [College, Marshall, Texas].  And I had nothing.  And I did need a scholarship because remember there was five children in that family, and only one breadwinner.  So, well, my band teacher told me to look into Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia], and I did.  And Morehouse was a men's school, still is.  And Morehouse provided that--I wrote away for its catalog and read that Morehouse offered a scholarship to the ranking student in each graduating high school class.  And that's where I started doing deductive thinking.  I said, well, if the person with the highest rank was a woman, she couldn't have gone to Morehouse.  And if I have the second highest rank, then I must be the ranking student.  So I wrote away to Morehouse and asked for my scholarship, got it, went to Morehouse.  I didn't understand it that well.  I must have lost it after the first year cause my grades were not--I didn't keep my grades up that high.  But my parents never complained.  They always budgeted tuition, and tuition wasn't that high at that time.  And so anything to keep us in college was, was good with them.
Story_ID: 15549
Speaker 1: Now, your two older brothers, did they both go to Wiley [College, Marshall, Texas]?
Speaker 2: Yes, my oldest brother [Louis J. Willie Jr.] graduated from Wiley.  As a matter of fact, he never went to commencement.  They pulled--they invited his degree, and he had to go into the Armed Forces.  My next brother [Joseph R. Willie] had to--went to Wiley and then came back from the Armed Forces to continue and to complete his education there.  That was my brother, Joseph.  My older brother is named Louis.  And Joseph came back, and by that time, schools were beginning to erupt a little.  They had veterans and they had young people there.  And my brother was part of one of the first demonstrations at a college.  We think of the '60s [1960s] as the time when the happened, but that happened at Wiley College [Marshall, Texas] earlier.  My brother and his colleagues felt that some of the young professors were paying too much attention to some of the students, some of the women students.  And they thought that was inappropriate.  And they started a strike and a demonstration.  And I never will forget--now, this is where my family is very important.  Although my parents wanted, wanted all of us to finish college, they also believed in justice.  And when they found out why my brother and his friends were holding a demonstration at Wiley, they supported him.  And, of course, they put my brother out of school and even called up the Texas, the Sheriff's Department, at least the State High--State Police and told them to, don't let him back on campus.  And, of course, I was at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] at that time, and so I went to see my dean and, of course, it was a justice matter, as we portrayed it.  And dean said, "We'll be glad to have him at Morehouse."  And then my older brother had finally finished [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor Michigan], where he took an MBA.  That's when he came back from the armed forces, he had finished his bachelor's degree, and he needed some way to, to, to adjust and adapt back to civilian life because he was in the, there in the Battle of the Bulge [Belgium] and the really difficult times of World War II.  So his Spanish teacher told him there was a very good school in Michigan.  He didn't know anything about Michigan.  None of us had ever been out of the South other than going in the armed forces.  So he went to Michigan and got an MBA and came back and got a job teaching at Tennessee State, [formerly] Tennessee A&I [Agricultural and Industrial University, Nashville, Tennessee].  So my older brother decided he would go to Tennessee A&I, I mean my brother just older than I, Joseph, went there.  And, of course, my older brother could keep an eye on him (laughs) and keep him from getting thrown out of another school for starting a demonstration.  But I, I tell that story because it was very meaningful to me that even though our parents were fixated on getting us through school, they wanted us to get through school at the expense of, of justice.  And he was supported fully in that demonstration.  And that's been very helpful.  It, it's helped all of us continue to demonstrate all of our lives, if there was an injustice.
Story_ID: 15550
Speaker 1: Now, when you went to Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia], and when you were in the band, were you playing drums or were you playing trumpet?
Speaker 2: I played trumpet.
Speaker 1: Trumpet, but that's what I want--trumpet, but why was this trumpet thing going on in your family?  It seemed like everyone played the trumpet, right?
Speaker 2: Well, that's why I said I never think there was rivalry.  We were past--we passed down--now, my older brother [Louis J. Willie, Jr.] never learned how to read music.  See, but my brother just older than I [Joseph R. Willie], he played trumpet and then I played trumpet.  And then the brother just younger than me [Alfred N. Willie] played trumpet.  And my sister [Mary Gauthier] played piano and became really a fine musician.  That's the reason why I say there was not rivalry in the family.  Each one was kind of passing along something to the next one.  I don't know why we all picked up the trumpet, except I think we never really disdained what the other one was doing.  And that's always, was, was a very important part of the family kind arrangement that was maintained.
Story_ID: 15551
Speaker 1: Now, okay, so you go, you get accepted to Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia].  You go there.  What is that whole experience like?
Speaker 2: It's very new because I never had been outside of Texas, no one knew my family there.  In some respects, I think I was kind of pleased that I had been accepted by Morehouse because, as I mentioned to you earlier, I picked up the grades of my older brother.  I was one of those little Willie boys.  And I kind of wanted to know if I could do something on my own where no one ever knew me.  And so I was pleased to be at Morehouse.  Now, I was very young, sixteen.  They did bed checks on us at Morehouse.  My, one of my classmates, Martin Luther King, Jr., was only fifteen.  They encouraged him to come because the men had left to go to the Armed Forces, and this is when [Dr.] Benjamin [Elijah] Mays started an early admissions program before the Ford Foundation ever thought about a program like.  He recruited Martin Luther King, Jr. out of high school.  So they did bed checks on us because we were so young.  And, but it was a great experience because the President at that time was Benjamin Elijah Mays, one of the just wonderful educators in this nation.  I, I feel badly when I think that not enough people know about him.  Both a great educator, mathematics and english were his specialties as well as religion, but a great administrator and a great mentor.  He was my mentor.  And it's not easy to call your college president your mentor, but Benjamin Mays was my mentor.  And the kind of education that he provided at that time was so important to us, plus the fact that those were heady times to be in college because by 1946 when the war [World War II] was over, the veterans came back to claim their school, while we youngsters who were there keeping it going, thought it was our school.  And the rivalry between us was really something else, but it was a wonderful rivalry.  It again, was almost like the competitiveness in my own family, to--each one trying to see who can outdo the other, but it wasn't the kind of a rivalry where one was trying to hold the other down.  That's what I experienced at Morehouse.  It was a place that taught me how to think, how to debate, how to argue, how--to try to find justice and at the same time, it was a place where there was some great fellowship and I, I love the school because of that.  And I've always stayed in close contact with it.
Story_ID: 15552
Speaker 1: I was getting very practical and pragmatic learning [at Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], and learning how to lead boys, how to handle youngsters.  And I was still a youngster myself.  So I've been put in those kinds, I've been put in those kinds of situations.  I've had to show leadership despite the fact there wasn't much age difference between me and the people I was supposed to be leading.
Speaker 2: Now, would you go back and forth to Dallas [Texas] for breaks maybe once or twice a year or it was not that frequent?
Speaker 1: I, I went home for the Christmas break, and remember I could do this because my father [Louis J. Willie Sr.] was a railroad person [Pullman Porter] who therefore, could get a pass for me.  And then, of course, I went home at the end of each school year.  So I did get a chance to see my family mid-term.
Speaker 2: Now, the other question I have because Atlanta [Georgia] has Atlanta society, and they're--did you feel any, you know, they had the society part of the black community, and did you feel any of that tension at Morehouse?
Speaker 1: There wasn't tension in terms of social status and rank because remember, we were Morehouse men.  And whatever society there is in Atlanta, certainly embraced the educational institutions.  And the Morehouse men are supposed to be good catches if anybody wanted to catch us (laughs).  So from that point of view, we were recommended rather than felt isolated.
Speaker 2: Now, tell me, what is a Morehouse man?  I mean it's such a wonderful tradition there, but what would you describe as a Morehouse man, and what do you think makes that institution so important?
Speaker 1: Well, there was an independence that they taught us to savor.  And there was a strong dose of what I would call moral education, where justice was emphasized.  And I mean this in terms of not the community at large, but even on the community.  [Dr.] Benjamin [E.] Mays would not raise tuition without having an assembly to justify, and we would argue with him knowing fair--full well that he was gonna raise tuition.  But the fact that he thought enough of us to call an assembly, and that he thought enough of us to let us argue with him, that was a great teaching tool for us.  He lived in a time during segregation--this was in the 1940s, but really didn't believe in it.  And he used to tell us, made us feel badly about going to the movies where we had to go upstairs in what we called in those times, the Buzzard Roost, that blacks couldn't sit on the main floor in theaters.  And he, he used to rail against us doing that, although we would slip away and go to the movies anyway.  But the fact was he told us we should never voluntarily accept segregation.  There were many places you had to accept it because it was the law, but you shouldn't do it when it's voluntary.  His great feeling about justice, about fairness and his belief in education was--rubbed on all of us and that of our faculty.  Our faculty members were very interested.  We also had at Morehouse students on most of the college committees, long before the '60s [1960s]--in the '60s [1960s] students all over the country were demonstrating about having a representative maybe on the board of trustees.  And [Benjamin E.] Mays by--because he thought this was a learning experience, had students on these committees.  This was back in the '40s [1940s].  This was the kind of thing that Morehouse did for us that I think was very important.  And we had good teachers.  But they were mentors to us.  My sociology teacher, Walter Chivers, was my mentor too.  And I wasn't a great student in college.  I made decent grades, but as I mentioned to earlier, I got my first D on my record in, in college because I, I didn't realize I was supposed to learn French because my teacher was so beautiful.  But the point I'm making is these teachers really believed in us.  And they would recommend us for this, that and the other thing.  When I graduated from Morehouse, my mentor decided I ought to have a master's degree.  And he went to work to get--make sure I got a scholarship from Atlanta University [now Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], which was on an adjacent campus with ours.  Remember, again, there were five children in our family.  So, certainly, if my parents could get us through college, they couldn't pay graduate tuition and room and board and stuff like that.  But my mentor decided that I should get a master's degree and so he talked Dr. Mays into letting him have a teaching assistant and having teaching assistants at Morehouse was not the, the regular thing to do.  But Mays provided this teaching assistantship.  And I was a teaching assistant in the sociology department.  We never negotiated over salary.  My mentor found out what room and board was, the cost of that at Atlanta University.  That's what my salary (laughs).  I remember picking up a check from Morehouse and going over to the bursar of Atlanta University and signing it.  And that's the way I got my master's degree.  Then my mentor at Morehouse, Walter Chivers, my sociology teacher decided I should have a Ph.D.  I didn't decide.  He did.  He knew the chair of the Department of Sociology at Syracuse University [Syracuse, New York].  And he talked Dr. Mays out of enough money to bring this person to Morehouse to lecture.  I don't remember what the man lectured on to this day, but by the time he left, he had promised me a scholarship.  That's what my mentor thought would happen if he could get him there and show him his favorite student.  That's how I got to Syracuse.
Speaker 2: Now, were you his favorite student--did he see in you, because you were doing this practicum, a sincere interest in sort of social work and social issues?  And what were--and then I want to ask, what were the common prevailing beliefs, you know, coming out of an institution or (unclear), you know, like that?
Speaker 1: Well, I think it was not so much he saw in me a possibility of being a sociologist, but I think it was the leadership that I had shown on the campus.  I was president of the sophomore class, the junior class, the senior class.  That means I was a good politician.  And I was editor of the newspaper, the 'Maroon Tiger' and I sang in the Glee Club and a few times in the Morehouse Quartet.  And--which means that I had to stay for the commencement every year when everybody had left.  I was still there and even have the inspiration that would come from singing and hearing the great commencement speakers.  I heard that four years, rather one year when I graduated.  I think they saw the leadership that I was manifesting on campus.  And that led them to, to have a lot of faith in me.  One of the things I liked about Morehouse was they were not sure what grades you had.  They, to this day, I'm sure my mentors did not know my grade point average, which was not very high.  But I tell mine because Martin Luther King, Jr. had a grade point average that was lower than mine (laughs).  His was 2.5.  That's halfway between D and C.  And mine was 2.8.  But at that time, they could see something in us other than what the grade point average was.  And this is, of course, has helped me, even into adulthood and now when I begin to rail against standards that are keeping people out who have great potential, but don't meet certain kinds of standards.  Morehouse people saw that other stuff in us and knew that we had it, and as a result, they supported us.  And none of us ever had any problem in any school that we attended after we left Morehouse.
Story_ID: 15553
Speaker 1: Now, tell us about the [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] connection, and what you knew about him and your interaction with him during that time.  You were older--you were a year older than he was.
Speaker 2: Yes, and I was older, a year older.  But the other liability for Martin Luther King, Jr. at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] was that he lived at home.  We called that a city student.  So he didn't have a chance to get involved in the campus politics.  And the campus politics at Morehouse was pretty rough and tumble (laughs) to make it through to be--I never was elected president of the student body.  My political strengths were not that good.  But Martin Luther King, Jr. attended school, but stayed at home.  And therefore, we called him a city student.  And that was very important because we got to know him.  And, of course, the people who attended Morehouse and, but lived there, they often times invited the boys home to, to dinner.  As I said, the dining hall was closed on Sunday evening.  Those kinds of relationships helped.  But they also were a bridge between the campus and us for finding what churches we would like to go to.  And that was another way they were helpful.  And the fact that they lived at home and kept many of those relationships was a bridge for us to those relationships.  We--you were asking how did we fit in into the Atlanta [Georgia] situation.  I think in many respects, the individuals who lived there, but attended our schools were our bridges to, to that community.  Martin Luther King, Jr. was very young.  He was fifteen.  And this was the way Morehouse was able to stay open, having people who were before draft age.  On campus--he was a major, and so, he--his major in college was sociology.  He was not at all clear when he entered school that he wanted to go into the ministry.  It was not until his last year or his last two years that he finally decided that was, that was his calling.  So he majored in sociology.  He was a good student.  Dr. [Benjamin E.] Mays was a wonderful person who could pick your imagination and develop a thesis that you were gonna try to knock down.  And he would engage you in argument regarding that.  He liked to do that.  He was a debating--he, he was a debater at, at Bates College [Lewiston, Maine] where he finished his undergraduate work.  And he liked that.  And Martin Luther King, Jr. was one of the kinds of persons who after Dr. Mays spoke at the Tuesday morning chapel--we had chapel every day for about thirty minutes.  And Dr. Mays would speak at the Tuesday chapel.  That was the President's Day.  And then Martin Luther King, Jr. was among those who would follow him all the way back to his office arguing with him about some kind of matter.  So he was a good student, but not an excellent student.  And he loved to dance as well as anybody else.  And he wore what we called "Big Apple" hats.  These were hats that had wide brims and peg top pants.  These were pants that tapered down just to the shoe and, and fancy sport coats.  And he loved to dance as well as anybody else.  So there was not a somber kind of atmosphere surrounding him.  But, nevertheless, there was this real interest in being a good scholar and debating and stuff like that, which was very much similar to my own kind of experience.  And, fortunately, our teachers understood that.  They saw the potential.  Of course, this was before grade inflation so a gentleman's C was not very bad in those days.  And that's what, what we were, we were pulling down.
Story_ID: 15554
Speaker 1: Were there other well-known people who, you know, were your classmates [at Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Oh, sure.
Speaker 1: Can you give some names?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Robert E. Johnson, who was the Associate Publisher of 'Jet' magazine that was my classmate.  As a matter of fact, he came on to Syracuse [University, Syracuse, New York] to do his master's in journalism, and we were roommates there because I was studying for my Doctorate degree.  Oh, Bob Johnson and I were very close over the years.  I stay in contact with his widow now, Mimi, in Chicago [Illinois].  And Lerone Bennett was one year behind me.  He was on my staff when I was editor of the school paper.  And then he was editor, and then he was on Bob Johnson's staff, when Bob was editor of the 'Maroon Tiger', the student newspaper.  And when Bob Johnson went to work for the Atlanta, for the 'Atlanta [Daily] World', he brought Lerone Bennett in.  And then when Bob Johnson finally made it to Chicago [Illinois] with Johnson Publishing Company, he brought Lerone Bennett there.  That's the kind of relationship we'd have, you know, that was built up on campus.  And that's why many people have asked me, "Did you know Martin Luther King, Jr.?"  Yes.  It was the same kind of relationship.  We, we knew what each was trying to do and it was--what we were trying to do was in the image of [Morehouse College President] Benjamin [E.] Mays.  And just as I said in my family, there wasn't that rivalry.  There was not--oh, we liked to compete with each other, but there was a supportive kind of relationship among the Morehouse people that lasted through the years.  Every now and then, I might get written up into--in 'Jet', and I would tell people, that doesn't mean I'm the, I'm extraordinary or famous.  I just happen to know the, the Executive Publisher, the Associate Publisher of 'Jet'.
Story_ID: 15555
Speaker 1: Now, this is what--is it Chivers--what his name?
Speaker 2: Yes, [Walter] Chivers.
Speaker 1: Chivers.  He, he then decides you are gonna get your Ph.D.--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and he contacts Syracuse [University, Syracuse, New York].  He know someone there.
Speaker 2: And so what were your thoughts then at this point?  Were you excited about the opportunity to go, you know, because this is the first time North now.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: And it's a whole different thing.
Speaker 1: Well, you know, I think the security that I experienced--I, and my siblings experienced at home enabled us to risk insecurity.  That's a thesis that I've developed as a professional sociologist that I think is correct.  I often say that the securities that Martin Luther King, Jr. had in his home was why he was able to risk so much and even his life.  And many people who had not had that kind of security are not able to do that kind of risking.  So when I received the scholarship, sure it was a new and untried world for me.  And it was very cold in Syracuse [New York] (laughs).  Nevertheless, I didn't have a job.  And the only job available was a menial job.  I was recruited to be secretary of, of the black branch of the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] in Shreveport, Louisiana after I, as soon as I graduated from school.  And it was not the right thing for me to do.  So I--and I talked with my, my advisor, I mean my mentor.  And he said, no, you should get your masters degree.  And then, of course, the more education, you have a broader world open, was open to one.  And I understood that a doctorate degree might be good.  But I had no intention of getting a doctorate degree.  In those days, a lot of the teachers at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] had, you know, the bachelors from this school, a masters from another school and further study at New York University [New York, New York] at Columbia University [New York, New York].  I said, I'll go get some further study.  But by the time I got to Syracuse, I already had my masters degree, and I realized that you only needed ninety hours.  The masters degree was thirty hours.  I was young, and I took thirty hours when I was there.  And so I--after the first year, I was two-thirds of the way there.  I said, that makes--it doesn't make sense not to finish up.  The other thing happened though is my parents were behind me.  They didn't, they had two more youngsters to put through school.  But I asked my mother [Carrie Sykes Willie] and father [Louis J. Willie Sr.], I said, if I go broke, if things go bad for me at Syracuse, will you send me the money to come home (laughs).  They said, of course.  Well, okay, that's all I needed to take that risk.  I did.  And when I got there, again, things started breaking for me.  The chair of the [sociology] department decided that he was gonna be my buddy.  I don't know why he made that decision.  He was a new chair, and I'm not sure the rest of the faculty in sociology liked him.  The old chair who came to give the lecture had left by the time I got there.  I think they fired him.  And he wrote letters to all of the people who had been accepted and said, before you come to Syracuse, you really ought to look at two or three other schools.  Well, I decided I was broke.  I had no money.  I had no obligations.  I will--have a scholarship.  I'm going.  So I went to Syracuse.  And I liked it.  And the new chair--because the other faculty didn't like him--I don't know why they didn't, he decided that he would be my buddy (laughs).  He wanted somebody to be his friend (laughs).  He made opportunities for me.  One semester after I got Syracuse, I was teaching an un, an undergraduate course, as a teacher assistant.  I got there in September and by January I was teaching one course.  That was by 1950.  So I've been teaching for a whole half century.  And by 1952, I was full time on the faculty as an instructor, teaching four courses in Introductory Sociology.  So I didn't take my degree until '57 [1957], but I--cause I was really getting educated.  I had finished all of the coursework, but I knew I wasn't educated.  And it took me all that time.  And then I--somebody, my, my department chair interceded for me to get a fellowship to do some work with the New York State Mental Health Commission which had a research office in Syracuse.  And then, eventually the State University of New York [SUNY] Medical School [Syracuse, New York], the dean--I don't know how he got in touch with me, but he came over and asked me to be a part of a new arrangement in the medical school of teaching social science to M.D.s.  I, and I worked there for about five years, but always keeping my relationship with Syracuse.  And then I came back to Syracuse in 1960 full time.  And by 19, oh, '66 [1966], I had been asked to be chair of the department.  And then by 1971, '72 [1972], I was asked to be vice president.  So all of these things just kept happening.  I, I had mentors all along and which means that I was open to it, but I was also not afraid of the new and novel experience because I really had a secure grounding.
Story_ID: 15556
Speaker 1: This is 1957 when you got to Syracuse [University, Syracuse, New York].  And you have been in all-black environments.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And here you are in a white environment, and I assume your mentor there was white?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And, you know, for those of us who came out of the Civil Rights Movement, there's a perception and I particularly have a lot of interest in the pre-Civil Rights because, even in my telling of, you know, some of these interviews to people, they're sort of shocked and amazed too about the opportunities that people had that seemed almost unbelievable in many ways.  You know, he was, he mentored you in many ways, but was there ever a view that, okay, this is--you are a black person here, you know, and you can't really teach.  You can't be a teaching assistant to anyone else?  I mean even though you say he may have been ostracized or--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --the other people didn't like him?
Speaker 2: No, the problem that--the opportunity is that I was a graduate of Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia].  You see, I had great, great mentors at Morehouse and people who told me that, you know, other people may think that you are unworthy, but that's their problem (laughs).  The fact that Morehouse gave me that strong grounding in who I was and a strong grounding in learning, when I got to Syracuse, the fact that some people were not quite sure of me didn't bother me.  You're right.  On my folder, and I should not have looked at it, but since I was chair of the department, I couldn't help looking at my, my folder when I came in years and years earlier, there was a note written.  "He looks like a good student.  But we've already had one student from the school from which he came--they meant Atlanta University, who didn't do so well."  Now, that meant, in effect, I was on trial.  I didn't know that.  I didn't find that out until after I became chair of that same department.  But it was the strength that Morehouse gave us that we were somebody, that we had something to give to the world, that enabled us to go to foreign lands (laughs) and experience, you know, those kinds of questions about oneself and so on.  We also were so deeply grounded in the black community, there was not the situation of having an aversion to black situations.  So where I lived when I first got to Syracuse, in the Alpha Phi Alpha fraternity house, which had lots of undergraduates.  I don't know how in the world, but that diversity is another part of the beauty of the black community.  Here I was a graduate student.  There probably might have been another graduate student.  There was one fellow who was even working in an industry, and then all of these undergraduate students in this house, that we were able to rent from the university.  It kept us in the campus arrangement instead of isolated.  It gave us kind of a grounding in the black community, as it were, while we were in this kind of distant and foreign land.  But it was the security both of my family and then the Morehouse experience that enabled us to risk those kinds of things and keep moving.  So I started teaching.  As I said, I got there in 1949, the fall of '49 [1949] and by 1950 I was teaching.  By 1952, I was teaching full time, and then I finished my, my degree and went on faculty, started moving up the ladder ranks.  And I went in and out.  I knew how to do that kind of thing.  I think Morehouse taught me to.  When the [President John F.] Kennedy administration came, I went on leave from Syracuse to Washington [D.C.] to be Research Director of Washington Action for Youth, which was a project sponsored by the President's Committee on Juvenile Delinquency and Youth Crime.  And that made me more attractive to Syracuse.  I got back and the--and the fact I had been to Washington also made me attractive to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  And they invited me over in '66 [1966] to be a Visiting Lecturer in the Medical School.  And then that made me more attractive to Syracuse [University, Syracuse, New York].  I never--interesting, I was always loyal to each of my schools, to Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia].  My contributions are regular.  I pay Morehouse my contributions each month as if I was paying my gas bill.  And Syracuse was the same way.  So these loyalties to these situations that have been good to me have been very good to me in the end.  I never resigned from Syracuse.  I went over to the Medical School to do some work for five years, but still kept a part-time teaching at Syracuse.  I came to Washington.  But that was a two-year leave from Syracuse.  I went back.  I came to Harvard in '66 [1966], two-year leave.  Syracuse got afraid I wouldn't come back.  I had no intention of trying to stay at Harvard.  And that's when they invited me back to be chair.  All of these kinds of things were happening because in many respects I knew what I was doing.  I knew how to play the academic game simply because Morehouse taught us a lot about politics.  The fact that we had a very active student government--and we wouldn't let a teacher come in--my, the president couldn't come into Student Government's session unless he knocked on the door and we, we gave him permission to come.  We had a faculty advisor and that was the only person could come to our Student Government sessions.  That's the kind of teaching, you know, other than books that a school can give you.  And that gave, and they gave us that kind of grounding so that we could reach out and risk these unknown situations and still move through it.  So I stayed at Syracuse twenty-five years.  And then I've been at Harvard now twenty-five years, but you're right.  It was a strange and unsettling environment, but I never really had any trouble with it.
Story_ID: 15557
Speaker 1: The '60s [1960s] were not a benefit for anyone who had finally made it to the establishment because one could be a target.  But I, as a result of my background, Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and then my parents [Louis J. Willie Sr. and Carrie Sykes Willie], I knew that my job was to help make opportunities for the other people who were furious because the system wasn't treating them right.  And that's a tight rope to walk.  I never will forget that Syracuse University [Syracuse, New York] football coach fired eight of his black players.  And Syracuse has been known for having an outstanding football team and some outstanding persons such as Jimmy Brown and Ernie Davis and others.  Nevertheless, Syracuse University at that time and this is in the '60s [1960s] and early '70s [1970s], did not have one assistant football coach, although there were nine or ten coaches.  And none of those was black, although these black players had made Syracuse famous.  So the black football players petitioned the coaching staff, the athletic department to please put an assistant coach on, on the staff who was black.  They promised, but then they always came back and said, we couldn't find anybody.  So the black football players at Syracuse decided to, to boycott spring practice.  Now, football is a hard game to play and anyone who decides not to go through the rigors of spring practice, others don't feel too good about them.  The coach felt so badly about the boycott that he fired all eight black players.  I was chair of sociology at that time.  And I realized I had a responsibility.  First, I called together all of the black students, and I asked them what were their gripes.  And they told us.  I said, "Have you ever put that in writing? " They said no.  I said, well, "Nothing ever gets resolved in the United States unless there's a paper trail."  So I said, "I'll meet you down at the Black Center the next day, and I want you here, and I want you to dictate to me what your grievances are."  And they did.  And I wrote them down and, you know, helped write them up nicely.  Then I said, "Now, I want you to take these grievances, these are your grievances.  I don't want you to go to the athletic department.  I want you to go to the provost.  I said, this is a University problem.  This is not a, an athletic department problem.  And I want you to present these to him.  And not only do I want you to present your grievances, I want you to present a proposal for solution for this thing.  One is that you will accept the coaching authority in the future.  And I know you don't want to make an apology to the coach cause they were wrong, but they have a right to ask you will you accept coaching authority in the future."  Said, "I want you to say that.  I want you to also ask that the university start a research, a research program into racism, and the allegation of racism in the athletic department.  And then I want you to also request that you be reinstated on the team."  Now, my strategy was those boys were gonna so many foot--touchdowns that by the spring, everybody would be so happy, they'd forget about (laughs) the, the boycott.  Then I called up the provost who used to be chair of economics while I was chair of sociology.  He was then provost of the University.  I said, I, "I've talked with the black players.  They're gonna bring you a statement of their grievances.  And they're asking three things: to be reinstated, they're promising to abide by coaching authority in the future, and they want a study launched into the allegations of racism in the athletic department."  He took it and the bigwigs over in the administration went into consultation, and they decided to launch the study, but not to reinstate the boys.  I called.  I said, "That's unacceptable.  I said, and if those boys are not reinstated for bringing the bad news that you, that we've ran a racist coaching staff by not having any black, if they're not reinstated by tomorrow, I'm calling a news conference."  And then I wrote out what I was gonna say, and it was not analytical.  It was rhetorical (laughs).  And it said something like, when Syracuse decided to fire the eight black athletes who brought them the bad news that they ran a racist hiring practice in coaching, when they decided not to reinstate them, they decided to worship at the high alter of racism.  And it had that kind of lyric, lyricism to it.  Then, I sent a copy of it over to the provost.  I said, "I hope I never have to issue this, but I just wanted to let you know what's coming down the trap."  By the night--by midnight that night, they called me and said, "Tear up your news release.  We're reinstating the boys."  That, I knew that I would have shattered the relationship between myself and Syracuse had, if I had to issue that.  Nevertheless, I was a high-level authority in that university.  I was a department chair.  Somebody had to give some advice to those boys of how to deal with it, and I did.  That didn't hurt me.  Remember, I was I was in the--I was asked to be vice president after all of that.  So those times were difficult for people who were beginning to rise in the hierarchy.  But they were not difficult if you were not counting on that rise as being permanent or trying to protect it.  And I never needed to protect myself because first, Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] taught me how to study.  And I always did what I was supposed to do.  As you know, I have, now, more than twenty-five books and a hundred or so articles.  I never 'published or perished'.  I published because I wanted to keep being out there in the argument (laughs) dealing with it.  So because Morehouse taught me this business about justice too, when the '60s [1960s] came along, I was the person at the table.
Story_ID: 15558
Speaker 1: When I was vice president for student affairs [at Syracuse University, Syracuse, New York], I said, always round up some faculty and ask them to crawl through the window and just sit in there with the students.  They won't leave, but they won't wreck the building.  These were things that I learned and then, one time I negotiated as vice president, for a student to go on the board of trustees.  And I went back to tell the student, I think I won on that one.  When I got back to the students, they said we have voted that it is immoral to negotiate.  So we're not gonna talk to you or anybody else anymore.  Well, that left the stand-off, and so I then joined the administration saying, if you want to get an injunction to get them out of the building, go ahead and do it.  But you have to specific names on the injunction.  And I said now, I will not tell you the names of any people in that building that I talked with when I was in there negotiating.  I tell you what I would do.  I think they should leave the building since they're not gonna negotiate any more.  If you want to send a photographer up to the window, take a picture and then ask me to identify whose in there from that picture, I will. But I'm not gonna give you the name of anyone that I know is in there that I negotiated with earlier because if I do, and this happens again, I can't negotiate.  Well, they were furious with me.  But I knew that I was doing what was right so they left me alone.  And I don't know how they got the names, but I didn't have to put anybody's name down.  This was the kind of situation you're in.
Story_ID: 15559
Speaker 1: Even when I was vice president of student affairs [at Syracuse University, Syracuse, New York], the school was really run by a chancellor and four vice chancellors.  There's a vice chancellor of student programs.  They couldn't promote me to be vice chancellor of student programs.  They--I could still be vice president.  And when I saw who was being considered for the vice chancellorship, I recognized that individual did not have any more experience in student affairs than I had.  And I had already had the experience of being vice president while that individual had not even had that experience.  I told chancellor, "I'm not gonna tell you who to report, but if you report the wrong person, you'll have my resignation when you do."  And I did.  Now, I had a wonderful staff as vice president, and I told my staff, "I'm not gonna leave you high and dry simply because I've had a little disagreement with the central administration.  So I'm gonna resign immediately, but it'll be for next year.  But I've got to make it public."  Now, I told the chancellor that's what I was planning to do and unless he wanted the resignation now.  He said, no, "If you have to do it that way, it will be all right because by the time next year gets here, it won't be what you think it is."  In other words, it would--I would then know it wasn't discrimination.  Well, I did.  And I stayed on a year and news got out.  And that's when both Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and another school came after me and this had never happened before.  So I wasn't resigning because I was going elsewhere.  I had tenure at Syracuse.  I was going back to teach.  I went over to see the dean and told him I'm coming back.  And he said, well, we'd like to have you back, but you're doing a good job where you are.  I said, no, I'm coming back.  So I wanted news to get out that I was going back to teach.  So the '60s [1960s] and the early '70s [1970s] was a challenge to people who were climbing up the hierarchy, but it was a challenge as to whether they were going to hold fast to the concept of justice, which I always did.  In the end, it never hurt me.
Story_ID: 15560
Speaker 1: How was the experience when you came to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and I'm interested in that, but I'm also interested in the fact that that same year is when you--wait I'll get back to the Episcopalian, you participated as a lay preacher, you know --
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and supported the women becoming priests, and I think resigned as, you know, (unclear)
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: So, you know, I'm curious about sort of the--you're very activist at this point --
Speaker 2: That's right, and Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Syracuse [University, Syracuse, New York] both probably didn't like activists.  Incidentally, just for Syracuse's sake, I wish to say they have kissed and made up, and I have too.  Twenty years after leaving, I was invited back to receive an honorary degree.  I've received just about every honor that they have for alumni.  And someone asked me didn't I wish Syracuse would get over being--I don't know what word they used, so that they can give an honor to someone else?  I said, no (laughs).  I'm liking it.  So I've been very active back at Syracuse now.
Speaker 1: And your papers are there, your assistant said, are they going there, your papers?
Speaker 2: Well, part of them, but --
Speaker 1: Okay (unclear) --
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, no, no, all of my papers are there.  That's right.  But, but that's the beauty that comes out of these kinds of difficulty if they are done right and people know what's going on.  Now, you're right.  I've been an activist all, all of my life.  Well, I've tried to be a scholar, but I've been an activist scholar.  And when I came to Harvard in '66 [1966] to be a visiting lecturer in the medical school, Harvard didn't pay that much to people low down on the totem pole.  So I said, I, I think I'd like to moonlight.  And they says--my boss said, go ahead.  Everybody else does it.  So I wrote the Dean of the Episcopal Theological School [sic, Episcopal Divinity School, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  I was in the Episcopal Church then.  And, and incidentally, I got into the Episcopal church because after I finished my doctorate work, I really was tired of reading, and I wanted--and remember I was in the Glee Club at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia], and I wanted to sing.  And I went to this Episcopal church because that was the church nearest to Syracuse University campus that had a wonderful church choir, that was simply the best.  I went there--not there for theological reasons or anything else and, of course, stayed on.  But back to this activist life, I wrote to the Dean of the Episcopal Theological School, told him I was gonna be on leave and be in Cambridge for two years, and I'd love to teach there.  I never had any linkage to Episcopal, to theology school.  But he was about as bold as I was.  He looked at his catalog and found a course called "Church and Society".  And using the case method that we like so well at Harvard, you could teach, you know, Church and Society.  And I taught a great course called Church and Society, took my students to the movies.  And we'd come back home and analyze those.  And it was just an exciting thing.  I'd invite the retired bishops of the choir--choir directors and heads of the Vestry or Christian Education people and interview them.  So the students got a feeling of how people in the field were doing these things.  Well, for being on the--and then the school happened to have a house which I did not want to live in, but after I found out how high the rents were in Cambridge, I, I did.  And so people thought I was a minister.  And I was teaching at Harvard and, and moonlighting at the Episcopal Divinity School.
Story_ID: 15561
Speaker 1: When I went back to Syracuse [University, Syracuse, New York], the Episcopal Divinity School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] invited me to be on their board of trustees.  And then I was elected to the executive council of the Episcopal Church that carries out the resolutions of the general convention and between conventions.  The convention meets every--once every three years.  All of that started happening.  So I started moving up in the Episcopal Church.  The very first general convention that I ever attended as a delegate, I was elected Vice President of the House of Deputies.  Blacks had never had a high-level person and they said, we think you can get some white and black votes.  And I said, look, I told my wife I was gonna back home and not spend all this time in church business, but I know what you mean.  But if you get another candidate, you don't even have to tell me.  Just run that person.  But otherwise, I'll stand.  I won.  And I was re-elected again three years later at a Louisville [Kentucky] convention.  This was in Houston [Texas], then at the Louisville convention, I was.  And then the women decided they wanted to be priests.  And they turned to me and they turned to others, and I knew they were right because I realized we have an archaic way of voting in the Episcopal Church.  When they call by a vote orders, that is, clerical and lay people, there's only two votes.  And one for the lay and one for the clerical.  And if the delegates to the General Convention split, and there's an even number in each of these, then that split vote, which can be even for and against, is counted as against.  That meant that the majority of the people wanted women to be priests, but the archaic way of voting was what prevented it.  And it kept preventing it at each General Convention.  So they said, we're gonna seize the priesthood.  We have three bishops who are gonna lay hands on us.  They're retired so they can't lose their jobs, and we're going to have ordination in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  And there was a black parish there, a fellow named Washington who was the, the rector there.  It's a big old parish.  And, and then, they said, "We want you to participate in it."  And I said, well, "Why do you want to be priests?"  And they said, "It's not fair."  Well, that answer that simple is enough for me.  And I said, what do you want me to do?  They said, "We want you to preach."  I said, "I'm no preacher.  I'm a sociologist.  I acknowledge I was born in the South."  They said, "That's good enough," (laughs).  So I put on my academic robe.  I pulled up in the pulpit, and I preached that July 29 [1974], when those first eleven women broke centuries of tradition and seized the priesthood.  I was coming to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] that fall.  Fortunately, they had already signed--we had already signed the letters (laughs).  I think Harvard was a little worried about this activist that they were getting, but remember I was on justice business.  That benefited me instead of harming me.  To this day, about half of the people on this floor, in the School of Education faculty think I'm a minister.  And when I, and when I, back when I attended faculty meetings back in the days, if I decided I was going to object to something, nobody, nobody ever tried to put me in a box.  They would say, yeah, well, "Chuck really does that cause he's a minister" (laughs).  One time I talked with Cornel West about that.  I said, "Are you ordained?,"  he said, "no."  He said, "Are you ordained?  I said, "no."  I said, "But they think I am."  He said, "They think I am."  I said, "We get away with a lot of stuff because of that."  He said, "Yes, we do."  One of my students even came and asked me if I would perform at the marriage (laughs).  And I said, well, you won't be married if I perform.  The, that activist stuff that might have frightened Harvard, I had already signed on.  And what it did was freed me.  Nobody ever tried to pull me into a Harvard mold.  When you're on justice business, you don't have to worry.  My daughter [Sarah Willie] who's--she's got her doctorate now, and she's teaching down at Swarthmore [College, Swarthmore, Pennsylvania], has tenure there.  She was in a school before then where, it was almost like my brother [Joseph R. Willie].  Some of the faculty members were casting eyes at the students too much.  And the students decided to--no, the young faculty, she was a young faculty, to put in the faculty manual, you know, that romantic relationships are inappropriate.  And it was the old geezers who didn't want to put that in.  And she was calling me once where she said, you know, "I don't have tenure, and these guys are gonna have to vote on me."  I said, "Don't worry, Sarah, you're on justice business.  When you're on justice business, you don't have to worry about those kinds of things."  And, of course, nothing, it never harmed her, just as it never harmed me.
Story_ID: 15562
Speaker 1: I want to go to talk about your work here in the Boston [Massachusetts] desegregation case [1966-1975] cause that's been a big part and actually has continued, you know--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --to be a part of things.  And how did that come about?  That's once again, one more year after you get here.  I--and that was a, and Boston was a hotbed here.  So how did that come about?
Speaker 2: Well, if, from my stories that I have told you, it's clear that I never aspire for the next opportunity.  Somehow it comes because you're doing what you ought to be doing and you're on justice business.  When I got here, I had not been here--this is almost like Martin Luther King, Jr. becoming the leader in the Montgomery [Alabama] bus boycott [1956].  He was the youngest person there.  He hadn't developed any enemies, and so when they wanted someone to lead it, they asked him to do it.  I was just young on the ground here, on the playground here.  I didn't have any enemies.  And when they wanted someone to serve as a court appointed master, they had to have some diversity, I became the black candidate for it.  I didn't know the people, and they didn't know me.  And that's how it started.  But after going through that experience which was a very interesting experience in recognizing both all of our failings as well as the successes we had, I then was asked to be master or an expert witness or a consultant in several other desegregation programs.  And then I decided that being a scholar, that I want to do some research on this.  And I started doing research.  And so the research, and then the pragmatic experience and the research and the pragmatic experience just continued to blossom.  So I'm still there, and I'm right now consulting for the State Education Department in Florida, trying to promote a new form of desegregation that obliterates the whole neighborhood school concept and give a broader picture--
Speaker 1: And that's called controlled--
Speaker 2: Choice, controlled choice.
Speaker 1: So what is this controlled choice?
Speaker 2: Interesting technique.  I finally learned it by trial and error after being expert witness or master consultant in other plans.  I finally came to the conclusion that neighborhood schools had no connection with, with learning.  People go to the Boston Latin School [Boston, Massachusetts] which was the oldest high school, but it's not a neighborhood school.  People come to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and you almost fall off the banks of the United States.  It's not a neighborhood college, but people still come.  It became clear to me that the kind of opportunities that a school could provide was what was much more meaningful.  And it also was clear that not--that the neighborhoods are not equal in terms of socioeconomic status and in terms of the racial and ethnic concentrations.  So it was inappropriate and wrong from my perspective to require one to go to a school that one knows is not as good as another school, simply because it's one's neighborhood school.  My plan was to make it possible for everybody to go to every school in the community.  And if it was a large enough city, I'd just break the city down into large zones.  Boston has three zones with about twenty elementary schools in each zone.  And everyone of those schools is available to all of the people who live within that zone.  To be able to be fair, I created what I call "Racial Fairness Enrollment Guidelines."  And to not show partiality to any group, the enrollment preparedness guidelines were the same guidelines, were the same proportions as you would have if people were randomly assigned to schools.  Those are my Racial Fairness Guidelines.  Then you could sign up for a school.  You could rank order of your schools and you could get in as long as you're within the Racial Fairness Guidelines.  If more people in one racial group wants to go to a school--want to go to a school that exceeds their proportion, then you're assigned by lottery.  And that way, all students own all of the schools, the good as well as the bad.  And all students have access to all of the schools in terms of what they would have access to if they were randomly assigned.  And this means that the school system then doesn't assign anybody to a school.  But what it does is, it provides transportation and the school system then knows which schools to put its limited resources in and to have programs to upgrade them because it's the parents' choice.  The parents didn't choose it.  And even though they may be assigned to it, only the people assigned to them are in there because of their third or fourth choice, rather than their first or second choice.  This means these are the schools that you've got to work to help.  This makes education closer to the healthcare system than to educa--than to the economic system.  The healthcare system gets its reputation from helping people almost dead come back to life.  The educational system ought to be getting its reputation from pushing up the schools from the bottom each year, rather than looking at those at the top only.  So that's what controlled choice is about.
Story_ID: 15563
Speaker 1: You've spent really nearly twenty-five years in the whole area of desegregation, and what are your views about it?  Some people in the black community or--well, I'll talk about the black community, feel that it was a mistake, that, you know, if the same amount of energy had gone into the improving the schools, you know, the black schools, that we would be better off in many ways.  And I'm just wondering what your views are, you know, on that particular, you know, on desegregation, as someone whose been so actively involved over the years?
Speaker 2: Well, I have to start out with an answer to what I feel about desegregation by calling up on my knowledge as a sociologist.  All public actions are matters of power, and the people who have more power tend to place resources in institutions that will first serve their own kind.  So if whites dominate the school board and therefore have the capacity to allocate resources to educational institutions, those that serve whites will get more resources than those that do not.  And that has happened.  Because it is a power relationship then, I had to find a way of evening it.  And the way I, I evened it, we don't have to depend upon the School System allocating funds to a school that's predominantly white or less funds to a school that's predominantly black.  All the schools are available to all of the students.  So that's a fair way of dealing with it.  That's my answer to those who say we were better off before desegregation.  No, of course, I lived in an era of segregation, and I've had lots of experience of looking at desegregated situations.  And I can tell you, anyone who says that schools today are worse than they were, you know, a generation or two generations ago, doesn't tell the truth.  I liked my teachers, but those were limited schools that I attended, and I know it.  And my high school only taught Spanish.  And even that didn't have a good Spanish teacher.  I think he was undertaker, who was moonlighting in the schools.  And I never learned Spanish, which I feel badly about today.  My high school did not have any course in calculus.  And I liked math, but we didn't have that.  And my high school had none of the courses in the social sciences such as psychology and sociology.  The only social science they had, of course then, was in history.  My high school taught english literature.  We studied Beowulf and we studied [William] Shakespeare, but my high school didn't have anyone who was teaching black literature.  So I know that while I liked my teachers, and they were my mentors and supported me, I know objectively that schools then were not as good as schools are now.  And from that point of view, I understand people who say that because the, the trouble of trying to desegregate the schools fell totally upon blacks.  And yet, they were not given the benefits.  My own research tells me that more whites who were usually in the plaintiff case--in the defendant class, resisting desegregation have experienced desegregation more frequently than the blacks who were in the plaintiff class who won.  So what you really are hearing is a disappointment over all of the energy that was put into a process that was not resolved equitably and in a just way.  But I acknowledge it did not happen.  That's why I started developing a new program where you're guaranteed equitable access to all of the schools.  So if you wanted to hurt a school, you would have to hurt both blacks and whites.  Or if you wanted to help a school, you'd have to help both blacks and whites.  From that point of view, desegregation has been quite beneficial.
Story_ID: 15564
Speaker 1: I found, I've proven this from my own studies.  I have found out that poor blacks and poor whites, even though they may be poor, do not believe in the same things.  Poor whites have great belief in faith and the past.  They want their youngsters to do better, but they don't want them to forget their origins.  Poor blacks believe in the future.  They want their youngsters to be better, and they don't want them to remember the past.  Now, faith and hope both are necessary.  So you need the poor blacks and you need the poor whites.  I have found that poor whites know a great deal about contributive justice, the responsibility of the individuals to the group.  This is what [President John F.] Kennedy was saying in his inaugural address.  "And so my fellow Americans, ask not what, you know, America can do for you, but what you can do for America".  That's the wisdom of poor whites.  I have a case study where a youngster went to jail, professing to do a crime that he didn't because his brother, who committed the crime had just gotten married and had a little baby.  And he thought that was no place for a father to be.  Now, that's contributive justice, an individual trying to do something for his family group and making a real big sacrifice.  Poor blacks are the opposite.  The group will make a sacrifice to rescue one individual who's floundering, even if it pulls the rest out of the boat (laughs).  They'll throw out the life line.  Now, contributive and distributive justice are both important in social relations.  So you need to have both of these.  This is why I believe in diversity.  My diversity is not the beauty of the rainbow.  My diversity is that you need to have people who have developed different intelligences because of their life experiences.  And therefore, they are able to supplement those for the other people.  So when I talk about this, I don't talk about the advanced classes being great without having slow learners in them because I know that people in advanced classes need to learn the patience of dealing with slow learners because slow learners have something to teach the others.  So I'm a great believer in diversity.  My students always send me cards about Noah and his Ark.  I, I used to lecture about that all of the time.  Noah was really a new creation story.  The only people who populated things were the people on Noah's Ark.  But I also deal with Noah bringing big animals and little animals and bringing two of each.  I said, I don't know why.  And I'm not going to the barnyard to try to explain why.  But Noah, I think, understood that diversity is needed.  And that, and I take that image and move it on to all kinds of places.  So I believe in, I'm a great believer in diversity because I know no one has knowledge that's sufficient unto one's self and one needs to call upon others.
Story_ID: 15565
Speaker 1: Now, I wanted to ask you also about your book, 'A New Look at Black Families' because it's, it's in its fourth reprint.  Why did that book touch a chord and what was so important about it?
Speaker 2: Well, first I think it was the title, and I have to give my publisher credit for that.  That was a nice little title, 'A New Look at Black Families,' but I think the other reason was, I--I--I developed it using the case method.  I have cases of middle-class, working-class and poor black families, some single parents, some in multiple parents.  And from reading those case studies, you don't have to be given a lot of stereotypes in the families.  You can make out yourself what it is in each of these families and each class level.  I also had been very careful to--all of my studies, to  delineate--delineate the people I'm studying according to their economic resources.  See, one of the problems we've had in the past in comparative family studies, is we have studied blacks, for example, and they were predominantly working-class.  And then we studied whites, predominantly middle-class, and we didn't know whether the difference we were looking at was a difference in race and, and those experiences or was it a difference in social class.  I've always controlled for social class when I look at my ratio.  You--that's another thing I think that has made that very helpful.  And those kinds of things are not what's out there right now because a lot of discussion about race, they're stereotypes instead of knowing what difference class levels makes--and then remember, I even put out to, in my different class levels, depending on whether you were a white or black or any other kind of category or male or female, there are different ways that you look at life.  So I have found in terms of my own research that both race and social class are related to things like achievement and they are not duplicative variables.  They both have an independent effect, and they probably also have a joint effect.  And that's one of the things I've tried to maintain in my scholarship.  And that's why I think a book like that had some interests and some claim upon people's attention because it did take into consideration the class aspects and the racial aspects.  And it took into consideration the power aspects.  I've been--and I have another theory I haven't discussed much.  I call it the 'theory of complementarity'.  And it has been a central theme in just about all that's happened in my research.  How do different kinds of experience complement each other?  How do different racial groups complement each other?  How do different social class groups complement each other?  How do different college groups complement each other?  While I'm teaching at Harvard, I have had, I had--as soon as I got here in 1976, a conference on black colleges because I know that the black colleges know some things that Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] needs to know, just as Harvard knows some things that the black colleges need to know.  As a matter of fact, people are not aware of this, but schools like Harvard have done a better job of integrating students than private black colleges.  Private black colleges, the HBCUs, as they are called, Historically Black Colleges and Universities, they have done a better job in integrating faculties.  Faculties are usually one-fourth, one-third to one-half non-black.  So here are these schools that know how to integrate faculties.  They could teach schools like Harvard something about that.  Here are schools like Harvard that know how to integrate students, one-third people of color.  They could teach schools like the--some of the private black colleges how to do that.  That's what I mean by diversity.  My diversity doesn't--is not how, hierarchically drawn or driven so that you think what's at the top is better than what's at the bottom.  All of those entities are important in terms of the diversity that I talk which leads to my theory of complementarity.
Story_ID: 15566
Speaker 1: When you look back over your career, what are you most proud of?
Speaker 2: Well, I think I'm most proud of something that hasn't anything to do with careers, with the rearing of my children.  I think that we tried to keep them moving in an interesting way so that they can deal with opportunity as well as with failure.  And that's--and then after I leave my children, my, my students.  Oh, I love to see my students who are growing in grace, taking on new responsibility, but still operating on justice business.  And that's just, I think it's something I got out of my family and out of Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] that has stayed with me.  Finally, I--I like scholarship.  I don't think, I don't think I have to apologize for my scholarship.  And I--I always insisted that I know how to do qualitative research as well as quantitative research so that no one could say, well, that's all right, but have you looked at this?  I'm not that good in quantitative research.  I guess I'm not that good in qualitative research, but I do both.  I've always published.  I've written, not because I was trying to publish or perish, because Syracuse University [Syracuse, New York] awarded me tenure when I was an assistant professor, not because I was extraordinary.  I had always published from the very beginning, but because I asked for it.  When I came back from the [Harvard University] Medical School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] and I was an instructor there.  And, of course, I was a sociologist.  I didn't even have my doctorate degree when I first went to the medical school, but I finally got it by 1957, came back full time to Syracuse in 1960.  I said, "I want associate professorship."  I've been teaching eight years.  Remember, I started teaching in 1952 full time.  And I said, "I'm three years away from my doctorate degree."  I got that in 1957.  This is 1960.  Eight years of teaching, college-level, three years away from my doctorate degree I want associate professorship.  They said, well, "You don't jump a rank."  I said, "I'm an instructor because I'm at the medical School."  They don't like sociologists at the medical school.  And they said, "No, you don't jump a rank."  I said, "Okay, you guys, you're not gonna get in my way.  You're gonna bring me in, and I'll tell you what, I'll take the assistant professorship if you give it to me with tenure," audacious enough to ask for it, they went away and consult, consulted with each other for a month, and came back and awarded me assistant professorship with tenure.  Now, I didn't harm them because I never stopped writing and I went on to contribute to the university and liked it.  So I wasn't out looking for other places.  But I have learned that you have to be audacious.  And it has led me to another theme that you'll find in a lot of my writing, and that is learning from failures.  So if you are audacious enough, you, you don't fear failure, and, of course, I consider failure as the beginning of opportunity because then you know what your alternatives are and what the chances are.  And that lets you calculate better, which direction you're going to move in.  So I've always, that's also been a part of what I've done.  I give, I give others the benefit of the doubt.  I didn't say, oh, Syracuse, you're gonna be racist.  You're not going to give me tenure with assistant professorship.  I simply decided I would ask for it.  And when I did, it happened.
Story_ID: 15567
Speaker 1: Well, I think from my parents [Louis J. Willie Sr., Carrie Sykes Willie], their--what has rubbed off on me and my siblings, is the desire to invest in our children, like my parents didn't hold anything back.  Remember I lost my scholarship, (laughs) even the first year after I got to Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia].  But that never fazed my parents.  We believed in investing in our children.  When our 3 children finished college, none of them had loans.  We paid it because--and that came out of, that came out of what our parents did for us.  So that's been one of the important things I think that has driven us on.  And we knew the value of education because we knew we came out of a working-class family.  And we knew we were able to fend off a lot of problems because of our education.  So we instilled it in the youngsters.  I have, my brother in Houston [Texas] has, one of his children--well, one is a physician.  She's an anesthesiologist, another is a dentist, but then he got interested in law, and he's practicing dentistry and law at the same time.  I just think that whole idea of there's something out there to discover was important.  Now, I think we were fortunate with having a mother who had understanding about learning, who could help us.  That's why I said we had a, we had a Head Start program before anybody ever thought about Head Start.  But the investment of our parents in us, I think, has helped all of us to invest in our children and to stay with it.  And that's been one thing that I think has been, has been quite helpful.
Story_ID: 15568
Speaker 1: Now, as a sociologist, what are your concerns or if you could list your concerns for the black community, what would you say they are?
Speaker 2: Well, for the black community, I would like to see a strong dose of, of what we might call self esteem, that has served all of us well in years gone by, particularly, during the, the serious years of segregation.  I think that is still needed.  And I would like to see more of that.  Also, I would like for the black community to have a stronger understanding of what it contributes to others that's unique.  I think that's not out there.  There's always kind of a belief that if one is striving to do better, that one is trying to model oneself after others.  My position is that each group, based upon its existential history, has a great deal to contribute.  And what you do is you come to contribute.  That's--being at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], I came to Harvard to contribute an experience that is not here by most of my other faculty members.  Remember I told you when I was a youngster, we used to go slop the hogs because that's what got us through the Depression era.  Now, I think that's a unique perspective for a Harvard professor to have.  And I don't think I know of anybody else here who has slopped the hogs as a way of getting educated.  Therefore, I have something unique to give.  I'm not at Harvard, at Harvard's sufferance.  I'm here because I have something unique to give.  If I had anything I could do to help black people understand the uniqueness of their background, this is what I'd like to do.  And I have historical figures that help me in that respect.  Not only do I talk about Noah and, and diversity, I talk about Moses cause Moses and [Dr.] Martin Luther King, Jr.'s careers almost are in lock step.  Moses became a great liberation leader because Moses was socialized in Egyptian culture, adopted by Pharaoh's daughter as a child, lived in the palace.  And he also socialized in Jewish culture because his mother was his nursemaid, unbeknownst to Pharaoh's daughter.  So he was socialized in Jewish culture, socialized in Egyptian culture.  Because of that, he was a great liberation leader because he understood how to motivate both groups.  Martin Luther King, Jr. was the same way.  His father [Martin Luther King, Sr.] was the head minister of a 4,000 member, big black, Baptist church [Ebenezer Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia].  He had more security than if he was a Supreme Court Justice.  He never needed a scholarship to go to any school.  Nevertheless, he lost his life in a demonstration for people who collect garbage.  Here he was affluent and yet deeply involved with the poor.  He was what I call a marginal person, one who has a foot in multiple cultures and therefore, understands both of those and can help them begin to come together.  That's what I would like for black people to begin to recognize, that they're not crossing over and acting as if they was, what they are not.  They are bringing to the table, for negotiation, their unique experiences that others need.  And I think, unfortunately, many blacks don't understand how much others need what they have to give.  And that's, again, what I would like to fuse into the psyche of, of the young people coming.  And I do that.  Now, I do that both with blacks, but I do that also with whites.  None of my white students who come out as my proteges come out with any feeling of superiority.  We, we don't counsel that.  So the same kind of concept I'm dealing with, which I think is, again, the concept of justice, the concept of fairness, enables you to do your work, do it appropriately regardless of what ethnic group you come out of.  And that's what I had been working on, this whole business of justice, this whole business of fairness, this whole business of complementarity.  And that's been beautiful.  It's enabled me to be a scholar, but it also has helped me philosophically, ground myself and, and based upon all of this, I deal with this whole concept of being a person for others.  That's what--self preservation's not the first law of life.  In human society, it is being a person for others.  I try to teach my children that.  I try to teach my students that.  I talk about diversity.  Diversity and then I, I, I tell stories on myself in terms of my grade point average because it's--I want people to see that that's one of the historical backgrounds I have that enables me to make a contribution now, that I would not be able to make if I had not had that kind of start.  So that's what I would like to do.  And I, I hope I'm not just jumping around too much, but I, I think those are the things I'd like to do.  Note, I haven't tried to say I want to remake anybody.  What I want them to do is take what them to do is take whatever they are and understand it as authentic, and that--out of that authenticity, your contribution to the whole world cause the whole world is waiting for what you have, that it does not have.  And that's what I, that's what I try to do.
Story_ID: 15569
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: Well, I would like for my legacy to be that I was a person for others and that I was not afraid to both serve and sacrifice and suffer on behalf of others. That's, if that's part of my legacy, I think I, I'll be a happy person.
Story_ID: 15570
Speaker 1: All right.  This photograph of me teaching a class at Syracuse University [Syracuse, New York] was taken in 1952.  That was the first class that I taught as a full-time faculty member at Syracuse University.
Speaker 2: [Charles Willie with his students, Syracuse, New York, 1952.  From the collection of Charles Willie.]
Story_ID: 15571
Speaker 1: That's a photograph taken in 1983, and I was invited to come to Dallas [Texas] to celebrate Martin Luther King, Jr.'s birthday.  And I'm speaking there at a city-wide celebration.
Speaker 2: [Charles Willie, Dallas, Texas, 1983.  From the collection of Charles Willie.]
Story_ID: 15572
Speaker 1: That picture was taken in 1947 on the steps of the administration building at Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia].  And I, with my fellow fraternity brothers in Alpha Phi Alpha fraternity, am talking with Belford Lawson, an attorney from Washington [D.C.].  He was the national [Alpha Phi Alpha] president at that time.  I'm on the lower step with the piece of paper in my hand talking with Belford Lawson who had recently spoken at a, at a college forum for us.
Speaker 2: [Charles Willie (third from right) with Belford Lawson (center) and his Alpha Phi Alpha fraternity brothers, Atlanta, Georgia, 1947.  From the collection of Charles Willie.]
Story_ID: 15573
Speaker 1: That photograph was taken in 1961 at Syracuse University [Syracuse, New York] where Martin Luther King, Jr. came to address the banquet of the summer session.  And I was on the faculty at Syracuse at that time.  And this shows the old classmates reuniting after 1948, when they graduated from Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia] together.  And we'd been friends over the years and I took him back to the airport that next morning.  And it was a great, it was a really great session.
Speaker 2: [Charles Willie with Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., Syracuse, New York, 1961.  From the collection of Charles Willie.]
Story_ID: 15574
Speaker 1: That picture was taken around 1979 or 1980.  And it of Dr. Benjamin Elijah Mays, the Emeritus President of Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia] who came to Boston [Massachusetts] to receive an award that was given by the Northeastern Region of the Alumni Association.  The other person in that is Attorney Willie Davis who was President of the Northeastern Region of--Counsel of the Alumni Council.  And I am in the middle 'cause I was the escort for Dr. Mays when he came to Boston that year.
Speaker 2: [Charles Willie with Dr. Benjamin E. Mays (left) and Willie Davis (right), Boston, Massachusetts, ca. 1979.  From the collection of Charles Willie.]
Story_ID: 15575
Speaker 1: This photograph was taken in about 1969 or 1970 in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania at the headquarters of the Maurice Falk Medical Fund which sponsored a project, a book-writing project, called, 'Racism and Mental Health.' [sic, 'Mental Health, Racism, and Sexism'].  I was the Senior Editor of that and sitting next to me is Dr. Bernard Kramer who was a professor, at that time, at Tufts University [Medford, Massachusetts].  He was a co-editor as such--as well as Bertram Brown.  Dr. Brown was the Head of the National Institute of Mental Health and sitting next to Dr. Brown is Mr. Philip Hallen who was the president at that time of the Maurice Falk Medical Fund.  We were planning the book, 'Racism and Mental Health' [sic, 'Mental Health, Racism, and Sexism'], which stayed in print for twenty years.  It was published in 1972.
Speaker 2: [Charles Willie (center) with (from left) Bernard Kramer, Bertram Brown, and Philip Hallen, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, ca. 1969.  From the collection of Charles Willie.]
Story_ID: 15576
Speaker 1: That's a photograph that was taken, I believe in 1978 or 1979.  It was taken at the White House when we released the report about Mental Health that the President's [Jimmy Carter] Commission on Mental Health had developed.  Rosalynn Carter, the First Lady, was the honorary chair of that commission, and I served on that commission.  And when we released the report, we had a, a reception at the White House.  And that is myself and my wife, Mary Sue Willie who attended that reception.
Speaker 2: [Charles Willie with his wife, Mary Sue Willie and others, Washington, D.C., ca. 1978.  From the collection of Charles Willie.]
Story_ID: 15577
Speaker 1: This photograph was taken in about 1993.  And I am lecturing before one of my seminars.  I think that was the seminar on Community Power, Education and Decision Making, which is a seminar that tries to help our new educators learn how to deal with grassroots organizations as well as bureaucratic organizations.  This is a photograph taken in one of the seminar rooms at the Harvard Graduate School of Education [Cambridge, Massachusetts] in the Guttmann Library.
Speaker 2: [Charles Willie, Cambridge, Massachusetts, ca. 1993.  From the collection of Charles Willie.]
Story_ID: 15578
Speaker 1: This photograph was taken in Dallas, Texas, and it represent--it is of my mother and father, Louis James Willie [Sr.] and Carrie Sykes Willie.  They are celebrating their 100th--they are celebrating their fiftieth anniversary, and they are all dressed up and decked out to receive their guests.
Speaker 2: What year was this, sir?  I know it was their fiftieth year.
Speaker 1: I don't know if I put that--wrote that on the back.
Speaker 2: Go ahead, take it.
Speaker 1: 1971.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: [Charles Willie's mother, Carrie Sykes Willie, and father, Louis J. Willie Sr., Dallas, Texas, 1971.  From the collection of Charles Willie.]
Story_ID: 15579
Speaker 1: This is a photograph taken in 1956, one year before I received my Ph.D. degree at Syracuse University [Syracuse, New York].  And it is taken on the campus during the springtime.
Speaker 2: [Charles Willie, Syracuse, New York, 1956.  From the collection of Charles Willie.]
Story_ID: 15580
Speaker 1: This is a photograph taken in 1998 of Dr. Samuel DuBois Cook, former President of Dillard University in New Orleans, Louisiana and myself.  We were attending the commencement exercises of Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia] in 1998 as the fiftieth year graduation class.  We are celebrating our fiftieth anniversary of graduating from Morehouse in 1948.  It was a grand occasion, and the happiness on the picture shows the really colleague relationship that has existed among the members of the class of 1948 over the years.  We tend to call it one of Morehouse's greatest classes.  (laughter)
Speaker 2: [Charles Willie with Samuel DuBois Cook, Atlanta, Georgia, 1998.  From the collection of Charles Willie.]
Story_ID: 15581
Speaker 1: This photograph was taken June of 19--I'm sorry.  This photograph was taken June of the year 2000.  It is a photograph with Dr. Kenneth Shaw, the President and Chancellor of Syracuse University [Syracuse, New York] and it's on the occasion when I received the George Arents [Pioneer] Award, which is the highest award given to an alumnus of Syracuse University.  This award was given at the banquet in the [Manley] Field House at the university.
Speaker 2: [Charles Willie (center) with Syracuse University President Kenneth Shaw (right); Willie is receiving the George Arents Pioneer Award, New York, New York, June 2000. From the collection of Charles Willie].
Story_ID: 15582
Speaker 1: This is a photograph with Chancellor Kenneth Shaw and the grad--and the Dean of the Graduate School, Dr. [Howard C.] Johnson, and the Director of Public Relations, Dr. [Robert] Hill.  They are Administrators of Syracuse University and this picture was taken in 1992 when I was awarded an Honorary of Doctor of Humane Letters degree from Syracuse University.
Speaker 2: [Charles Willie with Kenneth Shaw, Howard C. Johnson, and Robert Hill, Syracuse, New York, 1992.  From the collection of Charles Willie.]
Story_ID: 15583
Speaker 1: This photograph was taken in 1992 at Syracuse University [Syracuse, New York] when I received an honorary doctorate degree.  My old friend, Robert Johnson, Associate Publisher of 'Jet' magazine, was my classmate at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia].  We graduated together in 1948, and when he came to Syracuse University to obtain a Master's degree in journalism, he and I were roommates there for two years.  He came from Chicago [Illinois] to Syracuse to, to be with me because he, of course, had a degree, a journalism degree from Syracuse.
Speaker 2: [Charles Willie with Robert Johnson and others, Syracuse, New York, 1992.  From the collection of Charles Willie.]
Story_ID: 15584
Speaker 1: From left to right, Martin Willie, my son, and Bob Johnson.  Bob Johnson's now deceased.  And then my daughter, Sarah Willie and myself, and then my son, James Willie, who also is a graduate of Syracuse [University, Syracuse, New York].  He has a master's of Public Administration degree from Syracuse, and then my wife, Mary Sue Willie, who also is a graduate of Syracuse.  She graduated from the music school there.
Speaker 2: Is that where you met?
Speaker 1: Well, we met, not at school, but down at the church choir.
Speaker 2: [Charles Willie with (from left) his son, Martin Willie, Robert Johnson, his daughter, Sarah Willie, his son, James Willie, and his wife, Mary Sue Willie, Syracuse, New York, 1992.  From the collection of Charles Willie.]
Story_ID: 15585
Speaker 1: That is a photograph of my paternal grandfather, Louis Willie, who was a farmer in DeBerry, Texas.  And he was born before slavery was over, but after slavery, he became a farmer all of his life until he died.
Speaker 2: [Charles Willie's grandfather, Louis Willie.  From the collection of Charles Willie.]
Story_ID: 15586
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of my maternal grandmother, Henrietta Sykes.  And she was born before slavery was over.  And after that, she married my maternal grandfather Enoch Sykes, and they lived in several places in Louisiana and eventually in Marshall, Texas.  She was a private household worker.  I think she was a cook.
Speaker 2: [Charles Willie's grandmother, Henrietta Sykes.  From the collection of Charles Willie.]
Story_ID: 15587
Speaker 1: That's Charles Vert Willie when he was six or seven years old in Dallas, Texas.  It was a picture taken outside in the yard of my neighbors who lived next door where there were several children with whom we were playmates.
Speaker 2: [Charles Willie, Dallas, Texas, ca. 1933.  From the collection of Charles Willie.]
Story_ID: 15588
Speaker 1: This is a photograph taken in the 1960s [1960s], could be as late as 1970 at the School of Public Health at Columbia University [New York, New York].  And my career early on involved Medical Sociology or the Sociology of Public Health, and I lectured at Columbia University once a year for about five or six years.
Speaker 2: [Charles Willie, New York, New York, ca. 1960s.  From the collection of Charles Willie.]
Story_ID: 15589
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of the Morehouse College Marching Band [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia].  In those days, we had capes as our uniform and I am playing trumpet.  I am immediately behind the second tuba, playing the trumpet.  And this, of course, was photographed during the 1944, '45 [1945] season.
Speaker 2: [Charles Willie (third from right, on trumpet) with the Morehouse College Marching Band, Atlanta, Georgia, ca. 1944.  From the collection of Charles Willie.]
Story_ID: 15590
Speaker 1: This photograph was taken in the late 1960s [1960s].  It is a photograph at Pathfinder Lodge, which is a camp maintained by the Baptist church in upstate New York near Cooperstown.  And my wife, Mary Sue and I, are there with our three small children.  From left to right, Martin and James and Sarah.  And then the young woman with us is named Barbara Sealy.  She's from England, and she was a nanny for our children.  We met her when I was invited to Coventry, England to attend a conference on People in Cities.  And she came back with us for a year.
Speaker 2: [Charles Willie with (from left) his wife, Mary Sue Willie, his sons, Martin Willie and James Willie, Barbara Sealy, and his daughter, Sarah Willie, Cooperstown, New York, ca. 1960s.  From the collection of James Willie.]
Story_ID: 15591
Speaker 1: This is a photograph when I was six or seven years old in Dallas, Texas, taken in the yard of our next-door neighbor, who had a wonderful peach tree.  There I am, about the fifth person from left to right, with my head cocked to the side.  And the rest of the children are my next-door neighbors, although my brother is up in the peach tree.  It was a caper that we youngsters engaged in, in those days.
Speaker 2: [Charles Willie (front, second from right) with his neighbors, Dallas, Texas, ca. 1933.  From the collection of Charles Willie.]
Story_ID: 15592
Speaker 1: This photograph was taken in the hallway of the Longfellow Building, which is the administration building for the Harvard [University] Graduate School of Education [Cambridge, Massachusetts].  It was taken on the occasion of my retirement party in 1999.  And I'm being greeted by Cornel West, who was one of the speakers on the panel that day that was discussing my career, trying to put it in perspective.  Cornel and I have been friends ever since I came to Harvard.  He was just graduating as an undergraduate, and when I came in 1974, and he made his way to my office so that we could have a conversation.  Cornel always wanted to know who was on town--who was in town, and what they were talking about.  And we have been close over the years.
Speaker 2: [Charles Willie with Cornel West, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1999.  From the collection of Charles Willie.]
Story_ID: 15593
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of my family of which I am quite proud, our three children and my wife.  From left to right, James Willie, who is an administrator in one of the clusters of the Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] Public School System, and Sarah Susanna Willie, who is a faculty member of Swarthmore College in [Swarthmore] Pennsylvania.  She is a sociologist.  And Martin Charles Willie, he is in construction administration, working with an architect firm in Boston [Massachusetts].  And incidentally, he recently supervised twelve of the buildings in Disney downtown for the new Disney[land] in California.  And then my wife [Mary Sue Willie] who is a musician.  She is an organist and choir director and myself.
Speaker 2: [Charles Willie with his family.  From the collection of Charles Willie.]
Story_ID: 15594
Speaker 1: This is a photograph that was taken in about 1997 for a new occasion that we have established at the Harvard [University] Graduate School of Education [Cambridge, Massachusetts].  During commencement season, we also have a robing ceremony where all of the doctorial degree graduates get their robes and hoods put on them, even before they receive their diplomas.  And we tell all about their thesis and the hardships they had in writing those and the good findings that they had, and I'm there as a sponsor of one of the students who is going to receive a doctorial degree to read a citation pertaining to it.
Speaker 2: [Charles Willie and colleagues, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1997.  From the collection of Charles Willie.]
Story_ID: 15595
Speaker 1: A photograph that was taken during my early years at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  I came in 1974, and I think this was taken around 1976.
Speaker 2: [Charles Willie, Cambridge, Massachusetts, ca. 1976.  From the collection of Charles Willie.]
Story_ID: 15596
Speaker 1: This photograph was taken in about 1987.  It was a [Ernest] Bachrach photograph, which my wife gave me as a present to celebrate my sixtieth birthday.
Speaker 2: [Charles Willie, ca. 1987.  From the collection of Charles Willie.]
Story_ID: 15597
Speaker 1: This photograph was taken in about 1970.  It's a photograph of Benjamin Elijah Mays, who was my mentor as well as president of Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia].  He retired from Morehouse in 1967 and while chair of the department of sociology at Syracuse University [Syracuse, New York], I invited him to come and give a lecture.  He stayed overnight with us, and he is shown with the second generation of the Willie family.  It's James Willie, Martin Willie and Sarah Willie, who are hovering around him as he sits in a chair in our home which the children have all called the, the Bishop's Chair because, because of its long back.
Speaker 2: [Benjamin Elijah Mays with Charles Willie's children, James Willie, Martin Willie, and Sarah Willie, Syracuse, New York, ca. 1970.  From the collection of Charles Willie.]
Story_ID: 15598
Speaker 1: This photograph was taken in 1995.  And it is on the deck of our home in Concord, Massachusetts, where we have lived for the past twenty-five years.  And I am performing my culinary skills as the cook-out chef.  Our yard backs up to a wooded area, and those are the lovely trees in the, in the reservation area on Concord [Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: [Charles Willie, Concord, Massachusetts, 1995.  From the collection of Charles Willie.]
Story_ID: 15599
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of Dr. William Mangin on the occasion of his retirement as Professor of Anthropology at Syracuse University [Syracuse, New York].  Dr. Mangin and I came to Syracuse as teachers about the same time back in the mid-1950s, and he's probably one of my oldest friends at Syracuse.  And we have been very close over the years.
Speaker 2: [Charles Willie with William Mangin.  From the collection of Charles Willie.]
Story_ID: 15600
Speaker 1: This is a photograph that was taken in 1992.  I'm conversing with Dr. Melvin [A.] Eggers, the Emeritus President and Chancellor of Syracuse University and Dr. John Palmer, Dean of the Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs at Syracuse University.  I was breaking ground with Dr. Eggers for a new Maxwell School Building that would be named in honor of Dr. Eggers.  This was the commencement ceremony, 1992.
Speaker 2: [Charles Willie with Melvin Edgars and John Palmer, Syracuse, New York, 1992.  From the collection of Charles Willie.]
Story_ID: 15601
Speaker 1: Well, it is said that all work and no play makes Jack a dull boy.  In this instance, [Charles] Chuck [Willie] is trying to liven up his life by having a vacation on Newfound Lake in New Hampshire.  This picture was taken in 1967, and it is a lake we have summered at several times.  I like the lakes rather than the ocean as the place to stick my toe into the water.  And I'm shown here trying to row the boat ashore.
Speaker 2: [Charles Willie, Newfound Lake, New Hampshire, 1967.  From the collection of Charles Willie.]
Story_ID: 15602
Speaker 1: This is a photograph taken at the MIT, Massachusetts Institute of Technology [Cambridge, Massachusetts].  It is with me and Dr. Frederick Humphries, who is president of Florida A&M [Agricultural and Mechanical] University [Tallahassee, Florida].  He is a chemist by training and was a lecturer at a conference at MIT.  And we were discussing his lecture and I'm surrounded by two other administrators at MIT.
Speaker 2: [Charles Willie with Frederick Humphries and others, Boston, Massachusetts. From the collection of Charles Willie.]
