Story_ID: 15069
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm the videographer--I mean, interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns; observing is Peggy of your office, and Julieanna Richardson of The HistoryMakers.  Could you state your name--
Speaker 2: (Unclear)
Speaker 1: Could you state your name for us, and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yes, I am Wilma J. Webb.  W-I-L-M-A, middle initial--J., the actual name is Jean--J-E-A-N, Webb W-E-B-B.
Speaker 1: And, what's your date of birth?
Speaker 2: May the 17th, 1943.
Speaker 1: And, you were born here in Denver?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was born and raised here in Denver.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, where are we at the present?
Speaker 2: We are here in Denver, Colorado, in the Mayor's Office.
Speaker 1: And what's today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Today is June the 20th, 2002.
Speaker 1: That's right.  And, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am full-time First Lady of the City and County of Denver.  I have held three positions at one time during this reign as this city's First Lady.  I'm formerly a member of the Colorado General Assembly; I served in the House for thirteen years, and I am also formerly a Presidential Appointee.  I was the Secretary's Representative for the United States of--for the United States Department of Labor, from 1997 to 2000, to 2000.
Story_ID: 15070
Speaker 1: What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: I really like to eat well.  And it's really difficult to answer that question.  I probably like steak; I like Mexican food; I like Chinese food; I like vegetables.  So, I really like well-rounded, well-prepared food.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: A favorite color.  I never have defined myself that way, I tell you what I wear a lot of--because I, I think it does a lot that perhaps other colors cannot do, as often, all of the time--and, that is, I wear a lot of black.  I think black's beautiful.  I think all colors are beautiful, but I wear black for several reasons, and so, I like black.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: A favorite vacation destination.  I've traveled throughout the world, and the question favorite always sort of--takes me, because I don't really look at things as being favorite.  I look at things as being--you like this place or that place because.  And there are a lot of places that I like, because.  A lot of places in the United States that I like: I like Washington, D.C., I like it because there's a lot of history there; I like it because the terrain is pretty, I think the hills and the brooks and streams are pretty.  I also like Italy: I like Florence, I like the art that is there; I like Rome.  I like Africa:  I liked Cape Town [South Africa] particularly; I've never seen a place as what I saw, in terms of Sun City, in South Africa.  I'd never seen anything like that before.  And, I didn't stay long enough to say, "Yes I like" or "I don't," but it was certainly, one of the most wonderful places in the world.  I like Hong Kong; I like several places, and so, I like different places, because they all offer something very different.  I like Paris [France].
Speaker 1: Okay, do you--you're not going to like this question, I guess, but--do you have a favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I do have a favorite time of the year.  I like the springtime.  I like the springtime because it's so very fresh; and I like the blooming of--of flowers and the grass turning green, and the birds coming out; and I like people starting to come back outdoors.  And that's not to say that I don't like summer, and autumn, and winter--because I do.  But I do particularly like spring.
Speaker 1: Is, is there a special saying or phrase that you have?
Speaker 2: Oh probably, I probably have several.  (laughter) I don't think I'm the type of person who has just a, a one this, or a one that.  I probably have several.  I always ask God to guide my steps and to lead me; and wherever he leads me, I try to go that way.  I also say, the only statement better than "just do it" is "we just did it".
Story_ID: 15071
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your early life, and we can start by talking about your mother.  Okay, can you state her name, and spell it for us, and then tell her--tell us something about her.
Speaker 2: Yes.  My mother's full name is Faye Elizabeth Wyatt Gerdine.  My mother was born in Fort Worth, Texas, in 1918.  She was raised in a small town, outside of Fort Worth, McGregor, Texas.  And she also lived, a part of her younger years, in Houston [Texas]--sometimes.  And she went to school at Mary Holmes Junior College, in West Point, Mississippi.  She also spent some time, with an aunt, in Ada, Oklahoma.  I, I adore my mother.  She's very vibrant; she's very religious; she's very dedicated, to her children.  My mother was an only child, and so, she always wanted to have a large family.  I'm one of seven children; I'm the second born, of seven.  And, my mother always wanted many children because she was an only child.
Speaker 1: So when did she--did she tell a story to you, about how she came to Denver [Colorado], or--?
Speaker 2: Yes, actually, the first person to come to Denver, out of my immediate family, was my grandmother--her mother, Lou Anna Keys.  And, she actually came to Colorado Springs [Colorado], which is a--a city south of Denver.  And, she came during a time when the railroad was being developed.  My mother was in college, in Mississippi, and my grandmother came from Texas to Denver.  She came for two reasons: one was--she had an older brother, my uncle, who had already come here, and then, as families did, at that time, one-by-one or a few at a time, would come to a better place to live.  And so, my grandmother came here, from Colorado Springs, actually from Texas.  And then, my mother, after going to school, you always come back to where your parents are--my mother then, came here to Denver, where her mother was.  And the railroad had a lot to do with my grandmother first coming here.  And then, my mother came back home from school, to be with her mother.
Speaker 1: Now, where did she go to school?
Speaker 2: She went to Mary Holmes Junior College, in West Point, Mississippi.  And she actually studied teaching, elementary education, and that is also, where she met my father.  My father, Frank Wendell Gerdine, was born in West Point, Mississippi, and he went to Rusk College [Rusk, Texas].  And, actually, he was doing his teaching there, at Mary Holmes, and--it's a coincidence that, the year that my mother went to Mary Holmes, it had previously been an all-girls college, and my grandmother thought she was sending my mother to an all-girls college, and it changed into a coed school.  And so, they had a host committee there from Rusk--and I suppose, from Mary Holmes, as well--to meet all of the new students, who were getting off of the train.  And that's where my dad and my mother met.  And she went to school there for two years, and Daddy went four.  And then when they came to Denver, of course, at the time that they were going out into their careers, there was still the stigma of a lot of discrimination.  And so, their educations were not accepted for the professions for which they were trained.  And so, my father went to work for the United States Postal Services, and he stayed there, and retired, and shortly thereafter, he died.  My mother went and took training, to be a nurse aide and a practical nurse, and so, she was a part of the openings of brand new hospitals, here in Denver, Colorado. She was one of the first, to come on the staff at Rose Medical Center [Denver, Colorado], and then, at that time--whenever women would have babies, they would have to quit their jobs; they could not go on maternity leave, or whatever.  And so then, another new hospital opened, which was the Veteran's Hospital [U.S. Veterans Medical Center, Denver, Colorado]; my mother went to work there, and then she had a couple of more babies, and then, eventually, my mother stayed twenty-seven, thirty years--I don't remember exactly--at Presbyterian Hospital [Presbyterian St. Lukes Medical Center, Denver, Colorado]; where she retired.  And so, that's pretty much the story of Mother and Daddy.  My mother is still living; she's eighty-three.  And she's still very active, she lives in her own home, and she drives her own car; she's very active in the church.  She's the type of person who doesn't miss a Sunday, unless she's sick.  And, she participates in a few civic organizations, like--the Delta Mothers, she likes doing that; and she's very, very active for her age.
Story_ID: 15072
Speaker 1: Reflect on some of the sights, and sounds, and smells of growing up in Denver [Colorado]?  And tell us about the neighborhood you lived in.
Speaker 2: I--I really value and treasure of my childhood, and the neighborhood that I grew up in.  it was a very loving neighborhood, it was a very closely-knit neighborhood, and it was a neighborhood where everybody cared about everybody.  It was primarily an African American community, but it really wasn't strictly an African American community.  We had a diverse--a diversity of African Americans, of white people, of Hispanics, of older people, a few Asian people.  So our community was really quite diverse.  I went to Whittier Elementary School [Denver, Colorado], and I went there from kindergarten through the sixth grade, and I was there when the first person in Denver was made a principal of a school, period. That was Mrs. Jesse Maxwell, and Mrs. Maxwell had me as a student all through elementary school, she was a music teacher.  And so, we had to go to music class--it was, it was required--and, when I was in the sixth grade, she became the principal of the school, and she was the very first African American, here in Denver, to become a principal.  I was always an excellent student.  I was a straight-A student.  We had people who cared about us, who cared about our education.  Although, we didn't know until years later that, the educational system that we went through was one where, we were not afforded the same things as other parts of the city.  We lived under a defacto segregation system, and so, for the most part, the materials that we received, the assignment of teachers was not one where there was a great mix of new teachers, and teachers who were experienced.  A lot of new teachers would always be placed within the African American community.  But we didn't know it, because they all cared about us.  Although we weren't getting the same materials, nor the same fairness--in terms of the school system.  I went also to Cole Junior High School [Denver, Colorado], that was what it was called at that time.  Now of course, they're called middle schools.  I was placed in an accelerated class, and it was an experiment, at that time.  And, actually what happened was that all of the students that were feed-in schools from elementary school to middle school, that were the top grade receivers, were placed in this accelerated class; and we were, we were given extremely difficult and advanced work, and I think I learned more in middle school, than I learned anywhere.  I had one teacher that was particularly outstanding.  She was an English teacher, and she was very, very dedicated, and very, very commanding--that you excel in her class.  And actually, every night I'd sit at home and do homework, until one, two a.m. in the morning, and still go to school.  Some of the parents began to complain about the amount of homework that this one particular teacher was giving; but I thank that teacher to this day, that she taught so well, and that she demanded so much of us.  I was always involved in, like student council, and I was president of my class, vice president, and all of those kinds of things.  Really just had wonderful learning experience, because I liked school, I really did like school.  High school--I went to Manual High School [Denver, Colorado], which was, the most integrated school in Denver.  Some of the neighborhoods, that were next to the Manual High School neighborhood, had a few African American students--like East High School [Denver, Colorado] only had, at the most, six to twelve African American students, out of a school population of about, ah maybe I would say, probably eight or nine hundred students.  So Manual was the most diverse school, within Denver, at that time.  And then also, we had more school spirit than any other school.  We just had a supportive community.  We enjoyed each other.  We were--we weren't best in everything that we did, but still, we didn't realize that, what we were receiving was not what could have been possible.  As an example: we had three foreign languages that were being taught at Manual High School, they were French, and Spanish, and Latin.  While at other high schools, in Denver, at that time, there were five foreign languages being taught.  At the time, electric typewriters were the state-of-the-art, we were still learning, typing on manual typewriters.  But still, whatever we learned, we learned it well, and we had such wonderful school spirit, that we had a great--a great school.
Story_ID: 15073
Speaker 1: Why do you think the school spirit was so, so high, you know?  And, and--
Speaker 2: I, I think it was because of the community [Five Points, Denver, Colorado] being so close-knit.  I think it was because the teachers did care.  I think students enjoyed each other.  And we really didn't have, some of what had passed in the last--I would say--twenty years, or so; we had a very, very low crime rate.  We didn't have a high crime rate.  Most of the time, if something would happen, in the community, it would mostly be some type of an emotional kind of incident, say for instance: a man and a woman may have a disagreement with each other; but we did not have that.  We had a family-oriented community; we had a community that was very, very connected spiritually, to the church.  I mean, the African American church.  We also had, we had to, to play together--if you will.  As an example: on my block, everybody knew each other; everybody did, it wasn't like you--even if you didn't visit, you knew who lived in which house; you knew them by name; you knew whose grass, whose to step on and where to step, or where not to.  But we would have to play together.  We would do things, like, there was a vacant lot that was really a lot that was a field; we would take, and make bases to play softball.  And all of the neighborhood kids would just know that that's where you play softball.  Or we would take the back of a garage door, and play dodgeball.  And, we would climb trees; in one yard, there was an apple tree, cherry tree, lilacs in the back yards.  People cared about their homes, and I remember the year that--I'm really dating myself, but I do remember the year that we first got television, in Denver.  It was oh; I think, maybe 1952-53, something like that.  And only one person, on the block, had a TV; and you would have to put the antenna on the outside of the home, they didn't have the type that had rabbit ears at that time.  But, but everybody would go over to that person's house, to watch TV, and then just go home.  And--
Speaker 1: They were welcome.
Speaker 2: And they were welcomed to come in, and we had that kind of a community.  It-it was, it was just really, very loving, and that's the kind of community that I grew up in.
Speaker 1: Do, do you think it's--people were so close because there was such a small number of black people here in Denver?  Do you think that played a role in the closeness of the community?
Speaker 2: I, I think we were primarily all in one community, one geographic area--the Five Points community.  And there was a time when black people couldn't purchase homes beyond what we knew to be Ray Street.  And that it was called Ray Street; and then, it was York Street; and then moving further eastward, it was Colorado Boulevard; and then from Colorado Boulevard, it was then out to the airport.  And there was a lot of redlining that went on within, within Denver.  And eventually, those kinds of things went away with legislation.  I can remember--I can't remember, but I was told--that there was legislation carried that opened up fair-housing here in Denver.  I think it was Representative Ike Moore, who was an attorney, but he also served in the Colorado House of Representatives; and also State Senator, at the time, George Brown--both of them carried the fair housing laws, which, which removed all of those redlining barriers.  And then black people started moving out.  I think our community was really close, because we did live together.  You would have everyone from the custodians to the doctors, and to the ministers, and to the teachers, and to the nurse, and the nurses--everybody lived in the same community.  And so, we had a very strong community, and everyone, I think, was very close to the church.
Story_ID: 15074
Speaker 1: Were the political issues that faced Five Points [Denver, Colorado], discussed in your household?
Speaker 2: Growing up, or do you mean after I became an adult?
Speaker 1: Growing up, did you--what was happening here?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My parents both came from the South, my mother [Faye Gerdine] from Texas, and my dad [Frank Gerdine] from Mississippi.  And so, leaving a system where the segregation was so obvious and so apparent, and coming to Denver, was really a better place to live for them.  But, there were times when segregation was an issue, even here, in Denver--such as going to the show, the theater.  There was a time where you'd have to go up in the attic, so to speak, to be able to go to the show.  There were times when you would not be served at the counter at Woolworth's. There were times when, I remember very distinctly, because some schools were considered, "That's the Negro schools."  I remember my mother wanted us to go to a better school, so she thought. because that was what people would say, that this isn't a good school, but really, it was a good school--looking back at it, but people would say that.  She wanted us to go to another elementary school.  And so, she gave another address, because the schools were, in fact, segregated by address.  And so, we went to that school for three days, and then they found out what our address was, and they sent us back to Whittier Elementary School [Denver, Colorado].  But, yes, it was discussed, there was always the talk of because of, as they called it prejudice, and because of segregation, they believed so strongly, in education.  And talked about how important it was to get an education, an education will, will, will take you out of, out of this situation, where it's always: you can't go here; or you can't go there.  Because they felt, my parents and the community, for the most part, really did believe very strongly in education.  And yes, the discussions came up all of the time, but they were more like incident, kinds of discussions.  Like when something would happen, they would talk about it.  They didn't really talk a lot about the institution of discrimination, as much as they talked about different things that would happen.
Story_ID: 15075
Speaker 1: What kind of a little girl were you? And what were you amused by, and what concerned you?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was the oldest girl, in our family. And so, I was the big sister, and so, I always had to take care of the rest of my sisters and brothers.  I had one brother that was older than I, but, at that time, boys got to do things and girls didn't get to do certain things; but the girl had, like a lot of the responsibilities around the house.  And so, I was the oldest girl, in the house, and I, I kind of had to take care of my sisters and brothers, while Mother [Faye Gerdine] and Daddy [Frank Gerdine] were at work.  And then when they came home--which we would always be looking up at the bus stop, to see when they would--we could actually see them getting off of the bus, coming home, to work.  And one was at one time, and one was at another, and, and, and between the time from school to the time they got home, it was my job to, to watch everybody.  And, I took piano lessons, I started taking piano when I was six years old, and I really was very good at playing the piano.  As a matter of fact, when Mrs. Coretta Scott King came to Denver--I was twelve or thirteen years old when she first came, and I was actually the one playing the organ for our Women's Day services that were held at New Hope Baptist Church [Denver, Colorado].  And it was her first time speaking in a public environment.  And so, we always sort of kid each other about that, when we see each other now.  Because I was playing the organ, in the church, with the adult choir, with everyone, and she was the guest speaker for the morning services, the afternoon, and the evening.  And of course, she came in the day before, and there were a lot of--at that time--teas and social events of that the women of the church participated in, because, on that particular day, was the day that women really took over, and managed the church in every regard--was on Women's Day.  And so, I played the piano when I was a little girl.  I was also popular, I got along with, pretty much, everybody.  All of the other kids in the neighborhood, and we'd have a lot of fun playing.  And I used to go to the library a lot.  We used to get little, oh, I guess it was, stars on a card, for every book that you would read, you would get a star for the book that you would read.  And then at that time, too, because all of the schools didn't have libraries, the bookmobile would come around, and so you could go into one of the trucks, and read the books.
Story_ID: 15076
Speaker 1: As the oldest and in a, you know, it's a fairly large family, did--how'd you feel about having a lot of responsibilities, for your brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: I, I enjoyed them.  I thought that, I thought sometimes that I had to be grown sooner than I would have had to be.  But, according to my mother [Faye Gerdine], I was always that way (laughs), so I, I, I enjoyed my sisters and my brothers and my family and we did a lot together.  I remember when I was nine years old, my grandmother passed, and, and that hurt a lot.  I was nine years old, and she was always with us, and she was the strength, and when she passed away, it, it hurt for a long time.
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: Her name was Lou Anna Keys.
Speaker 1: Can you spell it for us?
Speaker 2: L-O-U, first name--Anna, A-N-N-A; last name--Keys--K-E-Y-S.
Speaker 1: Is this your mother's--?
Speaker 2: This is my mother's mother.  Yes, yes and I re--I remember I was nine, and, oh it was just very hurtful to me, because I was very close to her.
Story_ID: 15077
Speaker 1: With our family, we, we, we had things that we were expected to do.  Like, one was going to church.  We were in the church, not just on Sundays, but we were in the church for Red Circle, Missionary Society; we were in church for the Junior Choir Rehearsal; we were in church for different celebrations, for practice; we were in church plays; we went to church camps.  I remember when the minister that came that actually took the place of the minister who baptized me, but he went to California, I was baptized when I was six.  But the minister that came who took his place, he did some things that were very unique and very community-oriented.  Like, we went up to the mountains, and people were baptized in the creek, which was different for here because usually you're baptized in a pool inside of the church.  And we did some things, like, whatever job you had, there was one day a year that everybody was working for the church on that day, and you would take a different job, where you were using your hands.  And I remember, the minister--even though he was a minister, and he was educated, and had degrees, and whatever--he went and he worked in a service station; so that everybody would be using their hands, to, to contribute.  And so, so we did things like that, and so, our family was just always a part of all of that.  So I, I didn't think any different than this was what we do as a family, and so, I enjoyed our family.
Speaker 2: Okay.  What was the name of--?
Speaker 1: Am I, am I okay?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that, that looks great.
Speaker 1: Okay, oh okay, all right.  The name of my church?  My church was New Hope Baptist Church [Denver, Colorado].  And actually, there's a great history behind New Hope Baptist Church.  The first New Hope that I knew of--and I understand there was even one before that--was what was turned into Granberry Mortuary, which today is Pipkin Hill Mortuary.  But New Hope Baptist Church was there, in this small church, on 25th and Ogden Street.  That New Hope Church purchased a bigger, more beautiful church, on 23rd and Ogden Street.  I remember I was about maybe four or five years old, and we marched from one church to the other, to the new church.  And I was actually baptized at the new church, which was on the corner of 23rd and Ogden, and then I remember years after that, the mortgage was burned, and there was big celebration for the burning of the mortgage.  And so, that was the church that I grew up in.  My present church, because I went to the church where my husband is, is Zion Baptist Church, which is actually, the mother church of Denver, or of the Rocky Mountains--there's always been a debate as to who is the mother church.  Because I think, Shorter AME Methodist Church [sic, Shorter Community African Methodist Episcopal Church, Denver, Colorado] and Zion Baptist Church [Denver, Colorado] actually organized in Denver, like maybe a week or two difference, one from the other--so they both claim to be the mother churches.  But actually, I belong to Zion Baptist Church now, which is the church that my husband's grandmother, and my mother [Faye Gerdine] and dad [Frank Gerdine] eventually became members of, and I belong to, and all of our children were baptized at Zion Baptist Church.
Speaker 2: Now did you have a lot of responsibilities in the church?  Did they, did--?
Speaker 1: Oh yes, oh yes.  I was in the church, and, and the church was a great part of my life, but it wasn't all of my life.  In the church, I was the pianist for the Sunday school; I played for the Missionary Choir.  I was the president of the Youth Department; I was always in essay contests, which I won several times.  I was in many plays in the church.  I was in almost every organization that the church had; we were a part of it.  And my dad was the superintendent of the Sunday school.  My mother sang in the choir, and she was also a Sunday school teacher, and eventually she became a deaconess, and also very much a part of the Missionary Society, and also, what she calls, or what is called now, the Praise Team.  So we were just a real part of the church.
Story_ID: 15078
Speaker 1: You said earlier that a lot of people liked you, and could, could--did, did they tell you why they like you, what qualities they really liked about you.
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: What do you think they were?
Speaker 2: I never thought of it.  I-I guess just because we got along pretty good.  I-I was fun, actually, I think. (laughs)  We, we just, we just enjoyed each other; we went over to each other's houses; we did homework together.  Some of what was enjoyable to us was like riding our bikes.  And sometimes we would ride together, around the block, and the biggest problem was--if somebody had a garden hose, watering their grass, they would be angry because the bicycle rode over the, over the, the hose.  And, we just had, we just had a good community [Five Points, Denver, Colorado], and I think everybody had a common bond of working; we were a working community; everybody worked hard.  And then everybody enjoyed everybody.  You could hear happiness in our communities.  Such as: a lot of people used to sit out on their porches, just sit and talk, for hours; while we played in our front yards; we played jump-rope, a lot, going through schools--we would call it; or red hot peppers; we used to even play a game like, walking down the sidewalk, to avoid stepping on the cracks.  While we were out playing, parents would come out and sit on the porch, and, and there would always be company, always people stopping by and visiting.  And we would also visit neighbors, "Let's go over so-and-so's house," or "Let's go up on their porch," or "Where is so-and-so?"--at nighttime, you could hear parents calling their children,"It's time to come in," they would call you by name.  And you, you could, you could hear this, you could hear children jumping rope, and singing the chants that go with them.  We would play hide-and-seek, and, and just all kinds of, of games that we would do to enjoy each other, and parents were like that.  Sometimes people would bring you something to eat, that they were cooking, that they had a specialty in, they would bring over to your house.  Some people grew gardens, and, and people would boast that, "Oh my collard greens are really great this year!" or "My mustard greens."  And people would go over to each other's gardens and get food, or like someone would have a specialty, like--I remember probably now, I don't know if I would like it, but I remember--everybody used to talk about my grandmother's [Lou Anna Keys] mayonnaise cake.  She would make this cake, and, and she would use mayonnaise in it, and it, it looked like devil's food, but it was called mayonnaise cake, and people would ask her, "Lou will you fix me a mayonnaise cake?"  And people would do things for each other, like that.  They would just, you know, bake somebody something, or cook somebody something, or take somebody something.  And it was, it was just what people did.  And so, that--I don't, I don't know why they liked me--other than, we just enjoyed each other.
Speaker 1: You mention the stories told on porches at night.  Can you remember any specific stories, or talk about the kinds of stories that were told?
Speaker 2: Oh.  Whenever somebody would go on a trip, they would say, "Well, I went home last week," or "--last month." And then they would talk about what relatives were still there, or who they saw, "Well I saw Cousin Brother"--we actually had a relative named Cousin Brother.  Or, something about things that we didn't do here, as an example: in Texas, as I remember, people used to have to take the mud off of their shoes, because it was so muddy there.  And so they would have knives on the porch, where you take the, the mud off of your shoes before coming in the house.  Or they would talk about their trip on the way over, on the train, and how beautiful the train was.  Or they would talk about who was a good doctor, and where you could get a good doctor.  Or, or they would talk about Five Points, they would talk about who was playing there, or who was at the Rossonian [Building, Denver, Colorado].  Or even to just go down on the Points, people used to just go down on the Points, and just sit, and watch people, just as a pastime.
Speaker 1: Now what is the Points?  Can you explain what the Points is?
Speaker 2: Five Points is--it's a place, in the African American community, in Denver, where business was located, it was thriving.  It's actually, the coming together of five different streets, in a star.  It's 26th Avenue [sic, 26th Street], it's Welton Street, it's 26th Street, and then it's the other end of Welton, and I believe, it's Glenarm [Place] or Tremont [sic, the intersection Webb refers to is the intersection of 26th Street, 27th Street, Welton Street, and Washington Street]; but they all come together, each, with a corner--and so, it's called Five Points.  But within the Five Points block, between, oh I would say 24th & Welton down to about 29th or 30th & Welton, there were all kinds of black businesses that were there; and it was thriving.  That's where everybody would go for entertainment; would go for renting of property, or buying of property; would go to the beauty shop, to the barber shop; for good food, soul food, Chinese food, fried chicken; would go to the theater.  The Roxy Theater [Denver, Colorado] was the only--well there were two movie towns, within the African American community, when I was growing up--one was the Roxy Theater, and the other one was the Grand Theater [Denver, Colorado].  And the Grand Theater was torn down, oh, several years ago.  But also the Phyllis Wheatley YWCA [Young Womens Christian Association, Denver, Colorado] was, was there.  And it was a place where young African American women could go to stay, if they didn't have a place to stay, who were experiencing the first years of their career.  And then they could find a place after they actually located to Denver.  There were a lot of girls clubs that were there, that taught manners that taught you how to embroider or how to knit, there were dances that were held there for teenagers.  I remember once, they had like a, what they called a door party, and you would pay, like, a nickel for every door that was part of the house or the building, so it would cost something like, twenty-five, thirty-five cents--to get in, or something like that.  Also, the [Benevolent and Protective Order of the] Elks [of the USA] were located on the Points, and it was just a central place, where, where people would come.  It was the place to be, and the place to see, and, and the place where big-name stars would, would, would appear.  Like at the Casino [Theater, Denver, Colorado], or at the Rossonian, you would have people like Cab Calloway, like, oh, Fats Domino, or like, all of the big-name stars would play the Rossonian or the Casino in Denver.
Speaker 1: Now, can you spell the Rossonian for us?
Speaker 2: R-O-S-S-O-N-N-I-A-N [sic], Rossonian.
Speaker 1: Okay, and did, did you attend any shows at the Rossonian?
Speaker 2: Well, no.  My parents wouldn't let us, and I wasn't old enough when it was really the place to go and be; but I would, I would hear stories about the Rossonian.  It also, I think, over the years, has been con--been converted from one use to another.  As an example, I think, on the first floor there used to be the place where all of the entertainers performed.  But then on the second floor, at one time, it was a hotel, and another time, it was where the Denver Housing Authority had their offices.  And now, I think it's being--it has been renovated to be a, a art gallery, as well as a coffee shop, and then, city offices are on--are planned, or are on the second floor of the Rossonian.  But it is a historic, a designated place of, of, of great people being able to stay there, and being able to play there, when they couldn't in other hotels, and in other places, other than coming through the back door.
Story_ID: 15079
Speaker 1: You seem to be proud of being a part of [the Five Points community, Denver, Colorado]--,
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  Oh, yes!  When I was elected to office, one of my campaign offices was right--well actually, two different campaigns, I had my campaign offices right there in Five Points.  And people could come in and share their, their problems with me, and, and if there were government solutions, I would enact on them, and if they needed other kinds of services, I would tell them where they could go, and, and it was right there in Five Points.  A lot of the larger campaigns were centralized, at my state representative campaign office there like we, we centralized the district for the governor's race, and for the congressional race, and for the State Senate Race--all of those came right through my campaign office there.  So I'm very much a product of, of the Five Points Community, the Five Points Neighborhood.  I went to the Phyllis Wheatley YWCA [Young Womens Christian Association, Denver, Colorado].  I went to the library, which eventually became Equity Savings and Loan, which was a savings and loan company for people, KDKL radio [Denver, Colorado] was there, I did interviews there, on several different occasions.  I used to rent, before I bought a home, from Public Realty, which was there at Five Points, and, I used to belong to a drill team, when I was young, and we used to practice our drills there.  And actually, over the years, I've been able to, along with my husband [Wellington Webb], along with other elected officials, to bring others into Five Points, to share, in a greater way, the neighborhood, and how wonderful it is.  As an example: we had the Colorado Symphony Orchestra [Denver, Colorado] to perform a concert, right there in Five Points, the Colorado Symphony Orchestra.  And, I narrated a part of that symphony, with the 'Lincoln Portrait', which is a symphony written for President Abraham Lincoln.  We've had Juneteenth celebrations there, for which I've been a part of the the Juneteenth celebration ever since it was put into place here, in Denver, Colorado.  We also had a major, well the Shriners' Convention was held here, and Five Points was a great part of that.  And so, so, it's a part of the African American experience here in Denver.
Story_ID: 15080
Speaker 1: You went to high school at--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Manual High School [Denver, Colorado].
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And were you, were you pretty popular, at Manual High School?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, I was.  I was the sophomore class president; and the junior vice president of my class there--of our class, I guess I should say.  We, we had, at the time of graduation, we had begun with, I think, something like 555 members of the sophomore class.  By the time that we had graduated though, the drop-out rate is really high, within the minority community, I think, our graduating number was, something like, 256--or something like that.  And, so I was quite popular in school.  We had a wonderful high school, except for the fact that learning, as I got older, of what we were not afforded, in terms of--our education, itself; we were not as aware as people who were older than we were, at that time, that the schools were, in fact, segregated--in a de facto manner.  But the experience that we had, while we were there, was one of, of love, and one of caring.  It's sort of a mix, because, on the one hand, you're not getting what is possible, and you're paying taxes like, like everyone else, who's paying taxes--your folks working, or whatever, and then you're still not getting an equal education.  And only until I had my own children, did I realize how entrenched the, the desegregation [sic, segregation] was, in Denver.  And I became a member of a young parents organization, and this was because my own children were going through the educational process, and this was the time right after Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was assassinated, and all of the papers and the documents that, that showed the segregation of the Denver Public Schools, was housed in the basement of, of a, of a school, and, and one of the black teachers, he's deceased now, but, he brought forth all of that information that, that had been secretly filed in one of the schools.  And, in 1968, a woman by the name of, Mrs. Rachel Noel, Dr. Rachel Noel, she ran for the school board, and I remember, she came to our church.  And she spoke, and she told us why she wanted to be on the school board, to bring about equal education, and so, then, she did get elected, and it was a city-wide election, it was very, very difficult to get her elected, because, no one had been elected state-wide for the school board.  And she was the first African American to do that.  We started, as young parents, going to the school board Meetings, and then I ended up being, sort of, like a spokesperson for that young parents group, and I never had an intention or a thought, ever, that I would be elected to office myself.
Speaker 2: Now, when you were in high school,
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: When you were on the verge of graduation,
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: What did--what were your aspirations at that time?  What did you think you'd go on to do?
Speaker 1: I, I wanted to be a writer, I wanted to be an author; or, I wanted to be a teacher.  And then, later years, I wanted to be a publisher, I wanted to publish my own writings, and books, and whatever.  I never did do any of that.
Story_ID: 15081
Speaker 1: In high school, or, well, immediately after high school, you were married, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was married.
Speaker 1: So that--
Speaker 2: Yes, so that--
Speaker 1: Did that change your idea of what--?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, it changed my priorities.  My priorities were my children, and, and making a living.  Those were my priorities, at that time.  I went to college at a later time in my life; I didn't go to college right out of high school.  I went to the University of Colorado at Denver, but my priorities changed.  To make a living, and then, also, to make sure that my children received a better education than I did, and I think, to some extent and some degree, that was my motivation for political involvement.  And also, for running for office at a later time in my life.  Actually, it was the [Dr. Rachel] Noel Resolution that I first became active in politics.  I also was active in supporting a young man who was running for office, and he was not successful, and it, it was actually the first political campaign that I had ever been involved in, and he ran for State Representative, but he lost.  But actually, I think, during the period of time, when my children were in elementary school, and then also, right after Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was assassinated, and then I just started reading so much.  I read so much about, about reality, which was sort of like, always there, but, but sort of like, something that you lived with everyday, but you really  just didn't involve yourself as much as, as perhaps, living here in the North, we didn't as much, although we did have circumstances here that were with us every day.
Story_ID: 15082
Speaker 1: Did meeting the--Mrs. [Coretta Scott] King, like early on, make you feel closer to Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.]'s ideas?  Do you think?
Speaker 2: What, what actually made me closer to Dr. King's ideals were, maybe two or three different things: one was, I remember, it was 1962 and I had just had my second child--my daughter--and, I remember, people were going to Washington, D.C.--to the great March on Washington [1963], and, the buses came by our church and people were loading up on buses, here in Denver [Colorado], to go to Washington, D.C.  And, that was sort of like, a first memory, about what was really happening.  Dr. King came to Denver, also, oh, three, maybe four times, that I remember; he came to our church, once again, to New Hope Baptist Church [Denver, Colorado], he came for our men's day, I don't remember if he came twice, or if I'm remembering his being here and being in other places, because, we were so involved with the church.  But he came and he spoke, at our men's day services, at New Hope and he was--just, remarkable.  I remember that, because, I used to take all of the men, and put them in the center part of the church, and on that day, the men took over, and the women would be sort of like, you sit in the back or to the side, or in the overflow room.  I remember that, and then, I remember the National Baptist Convention was here, in Denver, in 1956; he was here, again, and we used to have, what we called, courtesy homes and courtesy cars, and people would stay in each other's homes, because they couldn't stay in hotels, or there weren't enough hotel rooms, or whatever it was.  But, he was here, and, of course, my mother [Faye Gerdine] and dad [Frank Gerdine] went to every National Baptist Convention that there was, because they did this every year, they would go to the National Baptist Convention, and I would always go to the youth day.  And so, Dr. King was here, then. And he was here for another church, for the Mount View Presbyterian Church [Loveland, Colorado], I believe it is and then also, he spoke at Denver University [sic, University of Denver, Denver, Colorado].  Mrs. King came twice, but more to that, she came on different occasions to speak.
Story_ID: 15083
Speaker 1: Now we were discussing your political awakening.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: 1968 was, was critical--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You know, the assassination of Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.]--
Speaker 2: The assassination of Dr. King--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) You've talked about the March on Washington [1963], and--
Speaker 2: --and, and then, and then also, my experience working in a large corporation [Mobil Oil Coporation, now ExxonMobil Corporation].  President [Lyndon B.] Johnson had his Plan For Progress, which was in place, which I didn't know that that was what and why I was hired, but I was hired at a large corporation, and I would say, of a office, maybe, of about 150.  There were four African Americans, who were hired there.  And, this large corporation would, just, all of the time, go through reorganizations, and what have you.  And so, through a series of promotions, I was promoted, but I was--actually started lower than my qualifications--at the time, I knew shorthand well, at one time in my life, I could type 130 words a minute, easily, easily--and, so, what happened though, over a period of years, I was much more qualified, much more experienced, much more capable, and then I was really training other women that were coming in--less skilled, less able, and whatever--and they were being promoted over me, and making more money than I, even to start.
Speaker 1: So these are white women.
Speaker 2: These are, these are white women, that, that I was training, and so, that was really an awakening, because I always had, sort of like this, faith that the next person would be a better person, and they would see my contribution, and whatever.  Then, one day, it just struck me that this was a policy of this corporation.  And so, I had gone out, and I had sought--this was after a number of years, I stayed there at that corporation for fifteen years--and, I went out, and had four or five, six different offers.  And went in to give my two-week notice--that was like, on a Friday.  By Monday, by Monday--I don't know if they thought I was going to sue, for discrimination, or, or what--by Monday, I had a significant increase in pay, as well as a triple-promotion, all of those things.  And so that was an awareness that there was--in fact, very, very real discrimination; even though it wasn't somebody calling you a dirty name, to your face, you were still being, not treated fairly, in the workplace.  And so, that, as well as what was going on with Dr. King, and then also, what happened to Malcolm X.  So I was reading a lot, really getting a greater reality of life, as it really did happen, rather than, just sort of, being secluded in my own world of survival.  And then, really, becoming active, and wanting to do something to make things better, for the next generation--things better for life, the way that it was, and the awareness that--I just wasn't going to sit back, and let discrimination continue to happen, without doing something about it.
Speaker 1: So you were keenly aware of the difference, in how you get recognition, at home, and in your community--
Speaker 2: Oh yes, yes.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) The difference between that and--
Speaker 2: Oh yes, it was--there, there, they were, they were two different worlds, of existence--of living within your community, where, where you could be who you are and be regarded who you are.  As compared to being in a corporate sector, where you're, in many instances, excelling and doing better than many employees--and most, to say it in a modest way--you're better, you were better, at least I was at that time.  And then being looked over, or being ignored, or being underpaid, or being not promoted, all of those kinds of things, in the corporate world.  And, I do think that I made a great difference, in the corporate world.  Because, I think that, that the limited view that many people, who are isolated into their own existence, and don't have an opportunity, or an experience to work with people that are different from themselves; then they get this negative viewpoint, of how, how someone of a different race is, other than themselves.  And so, I think that it made a difference, the, the, the few--four of us, who were there, in terms of, the people who really lived in a homogenous world and existence.  But the discrimination did happen, and so, then that's when I started fighting along with the [Dr. Rachel] Noel Resolution, which she actually put the resolution into place, right after the assassination of Dr. King, and she did it in the spirit, of Dr. King, to desegregate the Denver [Colorado] Public Schools.  And, so that was really my first political involvement, where the awareness of, of, of racial discrimination; the awareness of, of, of, of how the institutions have, in fact, discriminated, and a lot of times you'd be asked, well, questions like--oh about, the police, have--what do you think about police harassment, or harassment?  And, from an individual standpoint, you may not have experienced it; but from a standpoint of, of looking at the statistical data; and, and unemployment; and what happens to one person, who does the same type of crime as another, then you do have what is harassment.  And so, looking at things, in a, in a broader perspective, and in a, in a more realistic manner, as to why, this whole group of people is on this economic scale, and this other group is on this scale, and this group continues to be, even though, they are, are as capable, or educated, or getting educations--or whatever--and, and still these, these better places in life were not happening, for people who were as, as competent, or as capable as others.  And that's not to say that, we, we as a people, African Americans, didn't have our element of, of, of negativity, because we did.  But not to the degree, and not to the proportions that we were all suffering from, because of race.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did you, as you became aware, did you have to change your persona, to start like--fight, I mean into a fighting gear, or, or were you--do you con-consider yourself some-some-someone to whom combativeness is natural?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I think, because of the training that I had in my home, and I think, because of, of, of my belief, my religious fundamentals that I was always taught to stand up for what is right, and what is just.  I just didn't really know all of what was right and just.  And so, I already had that foundation, and that, and that, that, that something within, to allow me to stand my ground, when I really knew that I was right.  And, and so, I think, that, that ability to have perseverance and determination, and to make a difference, was there, it was just, it was just, I would say, utilized in, in a more realistic way.
Story_ID: 15084
Speaker 1: Tell us about Dr. [Rachel] Noel, too.
Speaker 2: Dr. Noel.  Rachel Noel, is whom we regard, in Denver [Colorado], as probably, the Godmother of the African American Community.  She ran for the Denver Public School Board [1965], and she ran successfully.  She broke a, a--new ground, which had not--no one had ever served, who was African American, on the school board in Denver.  And, she actually was able to put forth the desegregation bill of the Denver Public Schools, which is, in essence, meant getting busing into place; and, because of her efforts, busing did take place, in Denver, and it, it did make a difference in the school system, in terms of fairness.  When the busing first started, students were bused out, to--black students were bused out, to white schools; and then, eventually, as it got more into place, it wasn't fair that just the black students got bused out, and white students could stay in their neighborhoods, but then, the, the cross-busing started, back and forth.  As a consequence, there was a lot of migration of white people, out of the city of Denver to the suburbs, the suburbs just grew, and grew, and grew, and grew.  And it was because of busing in Denver, and a lot of the white families moved to the suburbs.  And sometimes Mrs. Noel and her son Buddy, who's an attorney, in more recent times, sort of joked, they said they did more for the real estate industry (laughs) than anybody else.  Because, what happened was, was that white families moved to areas where they could be out of the, the desegregated schools.  And then, consequently, because of the fair-housing, and then, then, then, eventually, laws also changed while I was in the legislature, which allowed people to go to school--to public schools, anywhere that they choose to, now.  And that was not the case, before.  But, even if you live in, in Denver, if you want to go to school in, in Parker, Colorado; or if you want to go to school in Littleton [Colorado]; or, or Englewood [Colorado]--and vice versa; wherever there are openings, you can go to school there, now.  And so, the schools, even, across the county lines, and the city lines now, are becoming, a little bit more diversified, but still, they're predominately, one race or another.  But there was so much white flight out of Denver that it really did take away the school population.  When I went into the legislature, which was in 1980, the school population had, had dropped in Denver from a school population of about ninety thousand students, down to about sixty; and even lower than sixty, in some instances.  And so, yes, Rachel Noel, she was very courageous, and she eventually ran for the State Board of Education, and once again, she broke ground there, as well.  And she was on--she was a regent at the Colorado, at Colorado University [Boulder, Colorado].  And, she's still very well regarded, and very, very respected, not only here, in Denver, but nationally, as well.  She's a very fine and gentile woman, who's highly regarded.
Speaker 1: Did you get a chance to work directly with her, or, or, or--?
Speaker 2: I--I was a young parent when she first introduced the busing in Denver, and we knew each other, yes, and she knew that we were organizing young parents to come to the, to the school board meetings, and later on, it's interesting, because I was on as a member of the Colorado House of Representatives.  I was the first African American woman to serve on the Joint Budget Committee, which is the highest committee, in the state of Colorado, in the legislature.  And, on several occasions, the issue of transportation would come up.  And there would be those who were opposed to--not the great big definition of transportation, because it's transportation for various reasons, but, opposed to--the busing.  And so they would cut the money, for the school buses, and for, for the operation of them, and I would be in a, in a battle to, to save the efforts of busing at the legislature, because the dollars were being cut, were being eliminated.  And some people didn't really know what was going on.  Because for a while, people thought that the buses were just in, in disrepair, and that there was a lot of incompetence, and this-and-that, but that wasn't the problem.  The problem was that the dollars were being taken away.  So Rachel and I worked together in that regard.  In more recent times, there is a chair that's been established in the name of Rachel Noel, at Metropolitan State College [of Denver, Denver, Colorado].  And I've worked year, after year, after year with her and her family introducing guest lecturers here to--for people to be able to know national speakers who've come in, in the name of Rachel Noel.
Story_ID: 15085
Speaker 1: You got involved in the Committee for Greater Opportunity, I think it was?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: In those days.  What you did then, and re-repercussions down the line--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: A (unclear) struggle--
Speaker 2: Oh very much so, very much so.
Speaker 1: But I wanted to, take you back to that same period of time--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --when you, you were an activist--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --for--with other parents--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and the Committee for Greater Opportunity.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) On Greater Opportunity, COGO, as we called it, yes.
Speaker 1: And, and, and, and you become re-acquainted with an old classmate, Wellington Webb, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So can you tell us about that?
Speaker 2: Oh gosh,  Wellington Webb.  I knew Wellington, and he knew me, he knew, he knew of me, I knew of him.  It's sort of, like knowing somebody, in school, but you really, you really just know who they are, but you really haven't had any interaction with them, or whatever.  And, Wellington was married, once before; and I was married once before; and we were both divorced.  And we both were activists, and we would see each other, at different meetings, and, and, actually, as meetings go, and how you sort of like, chat with each other, and just, sort of, leave.  And, so, one day, he called me, and he said, "Well I'm downtown, would you like to have lunch with me?"  And so, we went to lunch, and that's where we just, sort of, found that we both had a lot in common with each other.  We were both trying to make a difference; we both had children; and actually, we started seeing each other.  And we saw each other for two years, before we married.  And so, that's how we actually, got together.
Speaker 1: Okay, now this is in 1969.  Right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We actually got married in 1971.
Story_ID: 15086
Speaker 1: In 1970--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: By 1970, you're, you were elected a Democratic Committeeperson--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --that was 1970.  Can, can, can you tell us about your, your early days with the Democratic Party?
Speaker 2: Oh.  Well--,
Speaker 1: This is ground level stuff.
Speaker 2: Yes, very much so.  Right after Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was assassinated, there was a shopping center, here in Denver, that was very, very much, a very thriving shopping center, it was the Holly Shopping Center.  And, there were a lot of young people, who really were moved to wanting to, to, to riot, and so, I went up to the Holly Shopping Center, and there were some other people that were there: a man by the name of Mr. John Bates was there, he was over the Park Hill Civic Association [Denver, Colorado].  And so, we, along with, a lot of--maybe about, twenty other people, neighborhood people, property owners, everyone was in that community.  We stayed in that parking lot, pretty much, all night long, and we were able to persuade some people, who would rather riot that that wasn't the way to go.  And so, actually, it was sort of the first night that I had ever heard Malcolm X.  Somebody had a portable record player, and they were playing recordings of Malcolm X, and, and he was just saying things that really made a lot of sense; and here we were, also, trying to make sure that calm was, was kept.  And so, then I was a part of the Park Hill Civic Association, which was a community-neighborhood organization.  And then, later on, Wellington [Webb] and I were going with each other.  And, and then he was participating in--oh my gosh, it was, I wish I could think of the name of it, but it was--an organization, where neighborhood residents--the Neighborhood Resident Participation Program--could participate in the decisions about their own communities.  It was a new federal program, and so, he was participating in that, and I was participating in the Civic Association, and all of those kinds of things.  So we were both doing those things.  And then, there was an election going on, I think I kind of mentioned, I got involved in an election, I think it was 1968, but the gentleman lost.  Then I started going to the caucuses, and so, I went to my first caucus, I think, maybe, in 1968, '69, and, at that time, they were very strict about having to be inside by seven o'clock, the caucus would start, and if you came one minute after seven, you couldn't come in; and these kinds of things.  So, I attended my first caucus meeting, and then, the committeeman there, he asked me if I would put out all of these pamphlets, and whatever.  So I took them, and that was my first experience, as a committee--well going to a committee meeting.  And then, eventually, I was asked to be a committeewoman and I really didn't think too much about it, but then, eventually, after going to some of the meetings, I decided I would be a committeewoman, because this would help to get people elected that you believed in.  And so, that was my first experience, I became a committeewoman.  And then, after being a committeewoman, and calling elected people, who were members of the Democratic Party, to get out and vote, and whatever, then I became a captain.  And then aft--well, co-captain, first, because I really didn't want all of the responsibility of captain.  And then, eventually, I did become a captain.  And then, I ran for State Party Secretary, which was actually the editor of the Colorado Democratic newspaper.  And so, I served as the elected State Party Secretary, I think it was for four years, and it was two terms, I think it was four years.  And then, that was actually, the beginning of my formal political involvement.  Up to that time, I had been involved, but not in a formal way, until I became a committeewoman.
Speaker 1: Let's now--it's pretty--you're, you're rising pretty fast--?
Speaker 2: (chuckle) Yes, I--
Speaker 1: For a short period of time.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Story_ID: 15087
Speaker 1: It seems to me, when, when you look at all this, I don't know, did--do you see yourself as a person who can get things done?  I mean, in--when a, when you hear stories, stories of church, and school, and do you see yourself as a person who can get things done with other people?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, I, I think I have the ability to get things done.  I also think I have influence.  I think, more than anything, people have to trust and believe in you, in order to follow you.  And, I believe that people have trusted and entrusted me with their lives, and I've, I've never forgotten where I've come from, and I've never made promises that I didn't keep, and I, or that I didn't attempt to try to make something happen.  And, I think, when people, when you give your word to someone you keep it, and I've always kept my word, when I've given my word to people, and I think that they, they trusted me, and I think that that is key to a lot of things, is whether or not you're trustworthy and if people trust in you.
Story_ID: 15088
Speaker 1: Can you tell us about the Jane Jefferson Democratic Club?
Speaker 2: Oh, the Jane Jefferson Democratic Club.  That is an organization within the [Colorado] State Democratic Party, and it's primarily, a women's organization that was named for Jane Jefferson--who was the wife of Thomas Jefferson; and they are a support organization.  I first became involved with them, sort of, as one of the first activities that I really got involved, in politics.  And they, they are really supporters of people who run for office.  And they invite various people, who are running for office, in to speak.  They keep the issues before the party; they also raise money for the parties.  And, it was sort of actually like, a women's organization that was mostly older women that belonged to it--I was a young woman, who belonged to it.  And they, they liked; they liked me being a member.
Speaker 1: Were there very many Black women members of the Jane Jefferson Club?
Speaker 2: No, not very many.  Actually, the way that I became a member was, Wellington's grandmother, Mrs. Helen M. Gamble.  She was a Jane Jefferson, and she took me with her.  She, she had been involved in Chicago [Illinois] politics, long before coming to Denver [Colorado], and they didn't call them committee-people, but she was a committeewoman in Chicago for fifty, sixty years, so her political involvement really ran long and deep, as a supportive type of person.  So she was the one who actually took me to the Jane Jefferson Club of women, and I joined.
Speaker 1: Now this was--she's someone that really knew what she was doing, in terms of politics--Chicago?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Oh very much so, because, as you know, Mayor [Richard J.] Daley, and, and Chicago there was always, quote 'The Machine', and everything was run through whom you supported for politics, so yes, she was very much--because she had received all of her experience in Chicago, before coming to Denver.
Story_ID: 15089
Speaker 1: Mayor Webb, Wellington Webb, served before, you know, this term--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --he served as State Rep for--.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, he was elected in 1972 to the Colorado House of Representatives.  He served for three terms.  And then he went to serve for President Jimmy Carter, as Head of [U.S. Department of] Health and Human Services, at that time it was, [U.S. Department of] Health Education and Welfare; and so, then, of course, President Carter did not win re-election in 1980, and then Wellington went to work for Governor Richard Lamb, heading up the Colorado Department of Regulatory Agencies.
Speaker 1: Now, you're involved in these campaigns, as well as these activities on some level--?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, oh, I've always been involved, always.
Speaker 1: And--but you, but you didn't, you didn't pass the, the seat because, the State Rep seat--?
Speaker 2: No.  The Representative who succeeded him was an attorney, by the name of King M. Trimble.  And, King served in the Legislature in the House for, maybe, close to two years.  And then there was a vacancy in Denver City Council.  And so, then, King left the House Seat, and then became the Councilman.  And then, I ran for the House seat.
Story_ID: 15090
Speaker 1: Now we're talking about 1980 and your run for the Colorado legislature [Colorado House of Representatives].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And, the position was vacated by King Tr-Trimble--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --who was a fair-fairly well-respected lawyer--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  King Trimble is an attorney, or was an attorney, until his death, which was, oh, three or four years ago, I'm not sure exactly.  But, King ran for the [Colorado] House of Representatives, and he was also a part of young activists, who really wanted to, to make a difference, and to do some positive things, and to serve; and, and he did.  Then our senior person--senior being, in terms of, involvement with elected politics--Elvin Caldwell; he and George Brown, probably served, at that time, more years than anyone else.  Elvin was going to step down, from being [Denver City] Councilman, which he did do that.  And, it's interesting because people wanted me to run for the Council Seat, because King Trimble was already in the House.  But then, King decided he wanted the Council Seat, and there was also a rumor that was probably a true rumor, at the time, that Councilman Elvin Caldwell was going to step down in the middle of his term, so that the Mayor, which could at the time, appoint the replacement.  So, this little young woman, by the name of Wilma Webb, had a meeting with Councilman Elvin Caldwell, along with Wellington Webb, and we talked about that, and said that that wouldn't be fair to the residents, not to be able to elect their own Councilperson, even if there was a vacancy.  And so, Elvin, being the politician and the statesman that he was, and is, carried a change to the Charter, which Wilma Webb suggested.  And that was, to change the Charter to say that if there were a vacancy in a Council race, that there would be a special election, which did happen.  And so, there was another gentleman, by the name of, Hiawatha Davis, he's deceased also, he and King Trimble opposed each other for the Council seat; and King Trimble won; Wilma Webb, then, fulfilled the vacancy that was at the [Colorado] House of Representatives, made by King Trimble.  And so, I served seven months in 1980, as an appointed vacancy Representative; and then, I ran in November, and I won, and I served thirteen years, I served six, six and a half terms, in the Colorado House.
Story_ID: 15091
Speaker 1: What were the, some of the highlights of your, your te-term in the [Colorado] House [of Representatives]?  I know of one, was your appointment to the Joint Budget Committee.  I know that's one, one for you but I don't, I don't know what you want to t-talk about first.  Oh, I'm sorry; can you spell Trimble for us, King Trimble's name?
Speaker 2: Yes, the first name King--K-I-N-G, middle initial--M., last name Trimble--T-R-I-M-B-L-E.  I, I went into the [Colorado] House of Representatives believing that I could make a difference, and not just wanting to be someone just there, or someone who, at the time, people said, "Well she's only there just because she's the wife of--," which was not true.  And so I went in, wanting to do something for my district, for the people that had elected me, and for people who didn't have very much representation--out of a membership of sixty-five members to the House, and thirty-five members to the [Colorado] Senate, only two members were of African American decent in the House.  So that left sixty-three others.  And in the Senate, there was only one African American Senator out of thirty-five--and so I wanted to do something, I wanted to make a difference.  I just didn't want to sit there.  I was an African American woman, who was a Democrat; so I was a minority of a minority of a minority.  And so, everyone told me, when I went in: "Don't expect to get anything done"; "You can't get anything done"; "You don't have a majority"; "You're also black, you're also a woman, so just don't get dismayed if you don't get anything done."  And that was not my nature, not to get anything done, or to just sit there and, and, and, and think and, and operate in, in a, in a way accepting of not getting anything done.  It was not easy.  It was difficult.  But, from the time that I went in, I carried strong legislation that would make a difference.
Story_ID: 15092
Speaker 1: The one bill that most people know me for, is, that I was the member, the legislator, who carried the legislation for Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] to have a holiday, in the state of Colorado.  It took me four different times, four different years; from the beginning of 1981 up until the time that it was adopted on April the 4th, 1984.
Speaker 2: Now, that wasn't a popular--?
Speaker 1: No, no, no, it was not popular at all.  It was a fight.  It was a fight, it was a, a task that people believed was impossible.  I was also, sort of, doubted by African American people, as to why was I spending so much time on, on this bill--it's nothing but a holiday, and you ought to be working on housing, or you ought to be working on education--which I was doing all of--all along.  I carried bills for full-day kindergarten, when no one else did; I was the first one to do it.  I was able to pass legislation to get subpoena power for the Colorado Civil Rights Division.  I carried legislation when apartheid was very much a part of South Africa, to disinvest retirement funds, which equaled, at that time, some seven billion dollars  in the state of Colorado.  I also carried legislation for people who were serving as election judges, to be paid a more equitable amount of money.  I worked for the poor, on the Joint Budget Committee, for Social Services.  I carried legislation for the elderly, to be able to receive care at home, rather than being placed in nursing homes.  I carried legislation for the business community, to make sure that people who had their money in banks, if the banks were to, to become disvalued, that they would have insurance, mandatory, to cover whatever money people would have in banks.  And so, I carried some forty-four different pieces of legislation, while I was serving as a minority of a minority of a minority.  And, of that amount, I got, I think, it was, thirteen different bills adopted that were of significant impact to the state of Colorado.
Story_ID: 15093
Speaker 1: The Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr. Holiday] legislation was probably what I will be remembered for, because it was, it was a battle, it was.
Speaker 2: How did you--how'd you win that battle?
Speaker 1: Well, first of all, believing in it, and, and believing in the great American that Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. was; and secondly, from persevering, and not giving up, and it got more difficult as the years went on, but I broke down the opposition, which was, it's an amazing story in itself.  Each year was different, in the way that I carried it.  Each year, there were stories to tell about what happened.  It's such a story that sometimes you say which part should you tell.
Speaker 2: Tell the good part.
Speaker 1: Oh the good part. Okay, I suppose the, the good part, the, the, the first, the g-all of it was the good part, because people came down, and, and, and supported it.  As an example, the first--just this one story, which is a brief story--but the first time that I carried it, it was to be heard like at about 1:30 [p.m.] in the afternoon , when the Legislature [Colorado General Assembly] were to go back in session, and the committees were to be meeting.  And I was spending my noon hour getting all of my thoughts, and all of my preparation and how I would present the bill, of what I would say, all of my strategy together.  And I was in my office, and I heard these voices, and I said, "What is that?"  But it was a group, about three hundred people, coming down to the Legislature, to say we wanted a holiday for Martin Luther King.  And it was a coincidence, because they didn't know that the bill was being heard.  And then, there I was, sitting there--getting ready to go into battle, for which I knew it was going to be a hard battle.  And so, they came into the building, and really, they were, they were really in a very excited state.  And so, I was asked, by the security in the state capital, "Come and talk with them?"  Because they were trying once again to, to, to, to keep people under control; and so, I went down, and then, I asked them to come into the committee hearing where the bill was being considered.  There were so many people that they wouldn't fit.  They wouldn't fit in the committee hearing room.  And so, then they moved it to the old [Colorado] Supreme Court chambers, where the bill could be heard.  And so, people were testifying in favor of Dr. King having this holiday.  And so, there was no opposition, at all, no opposition to Dr. King having that holiday--the first time.  Well, the Chairman of the Committee wouldn't take the vote, he postponed the hearing, thinking that he would do it, at a much more quiet time, when no one was around, and he could kill it.  Well, he had to postpone it to a--a day certain, which was like two weeks further up, and the second week, the same number of people came down.  We had to have the hearing, once again, in the old Supreme Court chambers, and so the vote was taken, and there was no opposition--no opposition!  Yet, it failed; it failed on a six to four vote, out of the committee.  So that was the first time, and I can tell stories of the second and third and fourth, but I guess, the time that I felt, I felt the best, but then, but then I was disappointed again, was the third time.  Each time, I grew, in terms of myself, and how I can make this happen.  The first time that it was carried, we only had African Americans as the chief sponsors, and we had minorities and we had Democrats, then I crossed the aisle, and I had Democrats and Republicans on the bill.  And the third year, I was able to get the Majority Leader's name--who was in the Majority, he was the Majority Leader--to be a chief sponsor on the bill; he put his name on it.  And, that year, I was able to get the bill, not only, out of the Committee, but I got it out of the [Colorado] House [of Representatives], and over to the [Colorado] Senate.  Well, it died in the Senate, but that was the first time that I was ever able to get it out of the House.  The next year, the opposition, which was strong opposition, and I'm just giving you, really, a very brief synopsis of everything that went on there.  Yes.
Speaker 2: --the [Ku Klux] Klan was involved--
Speaker 1: The Klan was involved; many member in the, in the House were supportive, they changed their votes; there was heavy lobbying going on; and I failed to tell you, but in the third year, was the year that I had Dr. King himself, to be a witness in the Committee.  I got his speech on 'America Is Essentially A Dream', and I played that speech for the Committee members.  This is the speech where he talks about America, not the 'I Have A Dream' speech, not the more familiar ones, but the one about America.  And, that third year was the year, because of his testimony, I believe, and what he said, which most of those people had never heard him with this speech.  The bill came out of the Committee, and went out of the House, that year.  But the fourth year was interesting, because the opposition, including the Speaker of the House, who had opposed it all of the years that I'd carried it, realized that it was going to pass.  Because I had the votes, I had, I, I personally lobbied every member of the Legislature, including the House, and including the Senate.  I lobbied them myself, personally.  But something very interesting happened, and that is, that before the bill went out of the House of Representatives, they made it a bill for people to hate.  They tried to make it a bill for people to hate: they eliminated the day off for Election Day, and cut it down to people being able to only get two hours off on Election Day.  They eliminated Colorado Day, and some other things; but they made it something that nobody would want, because they attached it on to the King Holiday Bill.  They also put this horrific, the worst amendment that they could have put on, which would have caused a new civil war in the state of Colorado.  They put this amendment on, to say, if Martin Luther King was so great, then let's not exercise our responsibility, as Members of the House of Representatives, or as Members of the Senate--let's send it out to the public, and let the public vote on it.  And they knew that if it were defeated in the public, and with Colorado only being 4 percent African American, and also, with such a horrific battle it would have been, with all sorts of, of negative forces being out, that more than likely, it would have failed in the public arena, on purpose.  Well, I had to make a decision myself, as to whether or not to kill the bill myself, in other words, advocate--let's, let's not let this bill pass; or whether or not to take the chance that I could get the amendment off in the Senate.  So, I went up on the final reading, as it comes out of the House, and I urged that the body support it, even though I knew it was in horrible shape.  It went over to the Senate, I went over, and I talked, and I lobbied, and I presented the bill myself in Committee; I did everything that I could do to get that off, and the amendment came off in the Senate.  I got it off in the Senate!  Then, as the process works itself, when it has to go back to the original House, it came back to the House, but, for the first time in the history of Colorado, the Speaker put the House in recess--gave us the day off, which was on a Friday.  During that whole weekend, there was such heavy lobbying going on, to get those who were supporting the bill to vote no on it, to vote no, to kill it, to kill the bill.  And so, I did my homework and my research over that weekend too, because I knew it was going to come up on Monday.  And I, I analyzed every possible thing that I could do, to make this bill pass.  And so I spoke with one member, who had been a member of the House for thirty years, and he, he counseled me on the different moves that I could do, and whatever could happen.  And so, when the time came, which was that Monday morning, one of the people, who was the opposition, came over to me.  And that I knew it was going to happen, and said, he was, he was the Assistant Majority Leader.  Because the person who I told you was the Majority Leader--who'd put their name on the bill, in the third year--they threatened to take away his leadership, if he put his name on that bill again.  He cried to me, when I went to him to ask him would he put his name on the bill, and I said, "It's all right, you don't have to."  He told me what they had threatened to do to him.  And so, the Assistant Majority Leader was the one who had been assigned to take up this opposition at the microphone.  And so, when he came to me, and said, "I'm going to move, make a motion, that your bill be sent to a Conference Committee."  And by Conference Committee, the Speaker, who was opposed to the bill would have had the opportunity to appoint the people who would serve on it.  And he would have loaded that Committee with people that were the opposition, and then, if you can't resolve your differences, then it automatically dies.  And so, then, when he did that, I knew what I had to do.  So, the person who is the main sponsor of a bill had the responsibility to call for the motion on what they want to happen.  And so, I went to the microphone, and I moved every opposition position that there could have been.  As long as I was there at the microphone, I could do that; and, each of them had to be voted upon until you got to the main motion.  And I recommended how to vote on each one of those motions that I was making, which seemed to be, at the time, like, why would she do that, when that's really not in support of the bill?  But I got the votes that I wanted on each one for the people who had the strength, and the courage to keep their word, and to follow through, because I knew, I had the votes.  And then the final two recommendations were, one, that we adhere to the Senate version, which was without that terrible amendment.  And that we re-adopt the bill as the Senate amended it; and that was to put it, in the form that it should be.  And to adopt the holiday, and then it was, it was like the vote was cast upon the voting lights that are on the wall in the House, and it passed.  It passed overwhelmingly.  And you could've heard a pin drop, you could have heard pin drop.  And then, the media was running up to me, wanting to talk about what had just happened, because, I didn't really, really appreciate the depth of the King Holiday.  I was just doing something that I thought was right, and that was for a great American; but I didn't realize the impact that King made, and what it meant, in terms of, this holiday.  And so, then I was asked to leave the chambers--even though I was a member--while the press talked to me.  And, so then, the next year, I paid very dearly for it, because as a member of the Joint Budget Committee--that's one of the highest, if not the highest committee in the Legislature.  Although my Democratic colleagues appointed me, and elected me, the Speaker refused to re-appoint me to the JBC.  So I had to go to court, to be able to be seated in the position for which I was already appointed and elected to be a member of.
Speaker 2: So this is 1984, an, an exciting year, wasn't it?
Speaker 1: In 1984, '85 [1985], and until '86 [1986], when it was first celebrated.  1985 was the year that he refused to put me back on the JBC.
Speaker 2: So the, the lawsuit was successful.  Did it--?
Speaker 1: Oh yes, I won.  I, I--well I shouldn't say, I won, we won.  But, I didn't know what was going to happen with that either, because, well it, well I just didn't know what the judge would do.
Story_ID: 15094
Speaker 1: Is there any thing else, that you would consider a highlight at the legislature, your, your legislative career?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I, I'm very proud of my record in the Legislature [Colorado House of Representatives], as well as, a lot of firsts that I was able to achieve in my life, and I'll tell you those.  But I was very proud of the fact that I carried two pieces of legislation, in addition to the [Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] Holiday, that I thought were very important.  One was, the disinvestment, because of the apartheid in South Africa, I carried that for four years.  And when Nelson Mandela was released from prison, I had a bill that I was ready to, to have put into the process.  I had already had it drafted up and everything--I was doing this in spite of, because, he had already been in prison, what the twenty-six years, and then it was the twenty-seventh that he was out--but I had done this for four years.  And so, word was, all over the media, that Nelson Mandela was going to be released, and so I was wondering whether or not I should file this bill, or not.  And so, I was in the halls, and it about, around noontime, and we got the word that Nelson Mandela had, in fact, been released from prison.  And, once again, it was another bill that people were saying, "Why are you carrying this?  South Africa is so far away, it has nothing to do with, with the impact of, of what is going on here."  And, I felt so good that I had tried to make a difference in South Africa.  And Nelson Mandela was released, and all of those years, and all of the people who, who carried legislation, or who demonstrated in protest of apartheid, and all of that, I felt very good about that.  And then, the other bill that I really felt good about--and it passed, after carrying it three years--was the Anti-Drug Abuse Bill.  And that was, that people, who have substance abuse problems, could get treatment on demand for, for drug abuse.  And, at the time, it did not have the understanding that people have of drug abuse now.  It was, sort of like, well you just need to throw people in jail and throw the key away.  And I, I kept trying to say that it was an illness, that it was a disease, and that people needed to be able to receive help for it.  And finally, on the third time, it passed, and it allowed for drug treatment programs, here in the state of Colorado; we already had alcohol-abuse treatment programs, but we did not have drug-abuse treatment programs.  And I was able to do that, and I felt very good about that legislation.
Speaker 1: So, so prior to that time, prior to this legislation--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --people just had the choice of either being addicted or being arrested, I guess--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you would say.
Speaker 2: Yes, and there were, there were no treatment programs available for, for, for drugs other than alcohol.  And so, that's the law now.  And so, then that, that made people, who were addicted, and the health department, and, and all of the different programs, be able to use federal funds for drug abuse, whereas, before, it was for alcohol.
Story_ID: 15095
Speaker 1: After thirteen years, I think, six terms, thirteen years--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --sponsoring forty-four or more bills--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you decided not to run again.  Can you tell us what happened?
Speaker 2: Well, in 1991, a man that I love very dearly [Wellington Webb] was elected mayor [of Denver, Colorado], and, so we had two elected officials in one home, one household, at the same time.  And so, I had to decide whether or not I was going to run for the same office again, or run for something different, or go into something different, or be a full-time First Lady, because I was getting the demands of, of both being a First Lady and also of being an elected official.  And so I decided to become a full-time First Lady, and I did that for four years--a full-time, all the time, all of my energies, everything, was given to the city as First Lady, of Denver.  It was the first time we ever had an active First Lady, in the city's history, I'm actually the first active First Lady this city has ever had.  And then, I decided that I wanted to serve, in an appointed capacity, for President Bill Clinton, and then I sought the position as the Regional Secretary's Representative for the United States Department of Labor, under Alexis Herman.  And, once again, I became the first woman to ever hold this position.  The first African American woman, and people saying that, she's probably not going to get appointed.  And then people saying, because my husband was a mayor, why should I have such a position.  I--it's just always, sort of like, discrimination based upon marriage, which was not fair to, to my life and fair to my background and experience and then fair to my desires.  And so, I was appointed, and I served there until the Clinton Administration, left with President Clinton.  And so, that was, that was a wonderful experience as well.
Story_ID: 15096
Speaker 1: I wanted to continue with your term as First Lady [of Denver, Colorado, wife of Mayor Wellington Webb]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you just told us about your, your stint as Secretary's Rep[resentative] for the [U.S.] Department of Labor--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --of Region 8--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --under Alexis Herman--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and--but let, let's talk more about your, your stint as First Lady, which has been ongoing--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --throughout all of these appointments, and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and activities.  So, what, what has that been like?
Speaker 2: Being the First Lady of Denver, I think, has presented a lot of firsts for a lot of people, because, I don't believe that there's ever been an active First Lady of the city of Denver, before.  And so, I came to the position of First Lady with a lot of experience and background myself, and so, many of the requirements and many of the expectations, and many of the requests, came because of who I was before coming in to being the First Lady of Denver.  It's really been a very rewarding and fulfilling experience, I think it's been good for all women, I think it's been good for African American women, and I think it has also been in the way of pioneering, and going into something that is new for everybody.  There have been some really wonderful, wonderful experiences that I would probably not have had, had it not been that I'm in this position.  There've been some really wonderful things, I believe, that have happened because I've been here, and I've been glad to be a part.  Some of the experiences that I've had, that otherwise I would not have had include meeting wonderful people throughout the world--the First Ladies from eight different countries, during the Summit of the Eight [1997 G8 Summit].  I was really honored and privileged to be able to host them here, and to talk with them, and to get to know them, and to represent our city, and to represent women, and to represent African American women--which I thought was a highlight.  Having a chance to, to be a part of World Youth Day, where the Pope [John Paul II] came to Denver, was another highlight.  Representing the city in different countries, throughout the world, including: England, France and Paris, South Africa, in Mexico, in Israel--just so many different countries.  Germany, having a chance to represent this city, there, was quite, just a wonderful experience, because it really allowed for others to get to know us better.  And for, for me to get to know the countries better, to, to see for myself what I had read in books.  Or to, to really have a chance to talk with people about concerns in the world.  Or things that they have seen, or had seen happen, in the United States--if they wanted to ask me more about.  So that was, in itself, just, just, a priceless experience.  And then also, being able to do some things that, I think, have improved our, our lives here.  And, and to make some strides toward helping people, everywhere.  I've been an active advocate, and, and patron and supporter of the arts, and what the arts can do for people, and for society, and for all of us.
Story_ID: 15097
Speaker 1: I've always believed that the arts can provoke positive messages that make us better people, better humans, that unify us, that allow us to share with one another what, maybe, we would otherwise, not be able to share.  And, to have appreciation of all kinds of people, and enjoyment, as well as, education.  And so, we've been able to improve the presence of art, within our city, and in the lives of people, and have been able to appreciate all kinds of art.
Speaker 2: Now, I've read that Denver [Colorado] has aspirations of being the Athens [Greece] of the West--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --and--but, but there are, there's another issue here, and it's--that goes beyond, I guess, aspirations of being the epitome of European art.  You, you have here in Denver, you have a large Hispanic population--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --a, a culturally focused black population--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: -- with great artists, and dancers, like Cleo Parker Robinson, and other people--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --and then you have, you have a Native American population, too--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --that, that's expressing from.  How do--did you have a, a mission, I guess, in the arts, to get other people involved?  How did you deal with that?
Speaker 1: When, when the Mayor, when Mayor [Wellington] Webb [husband], became mayor of Denver, in 1991, art was very much on his mind.  And he created and made it a part of his administration, the Mayor's Office of Art, Culture, and Film, before, there was just, a mayor's ruling to include art.  But he made it a part of the law, an ordinance, which really made it a part of our city's organization, city structure.  And so, the Mayor's Office of Art, Culture, and Film was created, along with a commission that consisted of citizens, and we took what was a percent-designation for art to be included in new capital construction buildings, to also reach out into the community for art to be a part of our fabric.  As an example, including the [Colorado] Symphony Orchestra [Denver, Colorado], not only in the traditional performances that they have been a part of, but also within all communities, and making some of the performances free and open to the public, which had never been done, done before.  Also, in the awarding of commissions to evaluate the commissions as they happen, and as they occur, to make sure that all people have opportunity for being a part of receiving commissions a part of having visual art and performing art in their lives, and, and being awarded some of that participation.  And so, we were able to, along with, with my participation--I, at one point in time, was the Chairperson for the Mayor's Commission on Art, Culture, and Film--we did a master plan for the city's art collection.  And we also put into place a process, to ensure that all people were included in the city's art program--and that meant people of diversity; people from Denver; as well as, internationally known artists; as well as, nationally known.  And so, we really did make a program that is working, and we've been able to, not only have European art, but also, to have art, which represents all people, and also, the visual, as well as the performing media of art.  I also founded a private organization that has direct correlation into the city, and that is the Denver Art, Culture, and Film Foundation, which allows for private funds to be collected for the purpose of art for the city of Denver.  And so, with both of those arms, working together, we have seen some successes, and they have indeed worked.
Story_ID: 15098
Speaker 1: How have you been able to be a, a mother?  You know, for four children, I guess, and, and, and also have, you know, such a busy, you know, public career?
Speaker 2: Well, I think all of my children would say that I'm a good mother.  I think that I'm a good mother.  I think my husband [Denver, Colorado Mayor Wellington Webb] believes I'm a good mother, and I believe I'm a good mother.  I have been able to, because I know, and they know too, that politics, that serving in the public affects more than just themselves, and they've been around it, pretty much, all of their lives.  I didn't run for public office until our youngest was eighteen years old [1980] and they were all off, either going their own ways, or in college.  And, all of this time, though, I think, my husband and I were able to work together, and to balance out--the time and the needs of our children, and our family.  And, often times, sometimes, the needs have been greater than the public demands.  And often times, we've both been tired or weary, but we thought that there was a calling that was bigger than just our own personal concerns.  And so, we've been able to, to do it, because we believe in it.
Story_ID: 15099
Speaker 1: I would just like for people to remember me as a person, who really did, really work, and try to make a difference.  And that they will really know "me."  And, so often, sometimes you don't really get to, to express who you really are.  Even though you're receiving, to some degree, public attention.  But I really want them to know that I really wanted to make a difference, in a good and positive way--so I hope that that's my legacy, and that people will remember, that she did try to make a difference.  I think that's important, I also think it's important that, that young people, and people in the future, keep progressing, and, and keep building, and keep, keep making good things happen--I think that's very, very important.
Story_ID: 15100
Speaker 1: Your mother's [Faye Gerdine] still alive, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, my mother is still alive.
Speaker 1: Did your father [Frank Gerdine] get a chance to see you be involved in public life, and--?
Speaker 2: I went to the Legislature [Colorado House of Representatives], in 1980, my dad died in 1986.  He was sick in January of 1986, the year that we first celebrated the Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] Holiday--he never thought he would ever witness that, but he was here until July of that year.  And so, he was able to see that, and he was able to see me serving in elected office, which I had never set out to do that; and so, that was a real highlight for, for him to see that.  And so, I was glad that he had a chance to, to see the Martin Luther King Holiday actually become a real holiday.  And so, yes he was, he was able to, to share some of my being elected.  I have some photos with him, and he was very, very proud, and just very glad.
Story_ID: 15101
Speaker 1: You said at one time, I think, you said, "I cannot separate myself from being Black, a Black person, and being a woman."  And, and you said that, "I'm the entirety of it all, and facing the inequities of both."
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --is that, is that how you feel?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, I, I think that there are prejudices against women that all women face, and have to, have to live with every day, and deal with.  I think, it has improved, but I think that it's still real.  I think that African American women, and, and probably all women of color, face even more, more, more burdens that are unique to their race, or their color.  And I've called it either racist discrimination, or feminine discrimination, and when you put the two of them together, you, you have a, a double whammy.  Because you're dealing with unfairness, because, not only, because you are a woman, but because, you are an African American woman.  And, and you're being treated even more differently than being a woman.  I think that also, sometimes you get mistreated for being a woman, on some issues that are beyond the race, because they're perpetrated throughout everybody, because you're a woman.  And so, you do get a double jeopardy, in terms of being an African American woman, but you, you have to recognize them, and some of the things that, that are different, in terms of, different treatment.  As an example, being the First Lady of one of the country's largest cities in the United States [Denver, Colorado], I've seen where some first ladies--particularly, more wives or first ladies of governors, and of the President of the United States, more so than mayors' wives, or first ladies of Mayors, in cities.  But some of the activities that you participate in, the press doesn't come out and cover them.  Or when they do, they don't mention your name; or they don't give you the title of Mrs., or they don't refer to you as a First Lady.  They want you to be less, in some regard, like, not to, to denounce, or to, to lessen, in any way, the, the institution of being a wife, because that's a great calling--to be a wife.  That's, that's, that's a very, very, very devout, and very--one of the most important callings in the world, is to be a wife, or to be a husband, or a parent.  In some ways though, because, to be a first lady means that you are representing, and that you are also providing, in yourself, a role model for all women.  And for all girls that some people just don't want you to be that.  They don't want you, as an African American, to hold that kind of position.  Where you are really trying to, to present to all women the best values in life, they would rather someone else have that position.  And so, that's just one example that, that, that I know, and I'm living and experiencing, but I believe, which I've always believed, that goodness will always prevail, even--no matter what.  You'll always be all right, as long as you try to be right.  So, so yes, there, there is, there is a, there is a double standard, a different standard, a double jeopardy, in terms of, being a woman of color.
Story_ID: 15102
Speaker 1: You yourself, are not--from what I've read--are not the most comfortable public person.  Though, I mean, you, you certainly can handle yourself, but, there's a perception that you're, you're shy, on some level.  But, I'll tell you, since we've been here in Denver, every--many households and places where we go, we've seen a photo of you and Mayor [Wellington] Webb [husband]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and people, in the Black community, put it up on a wall, you know--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and they also call you all, "Mr. and Mrs. Mayor"--
Speaker 2: (Laughs)
Speaker 1: --to--so, how do you feel about that?
Speaker 2: As I perceived myself, I don't believe that I'm shy, I believe that I'm more necessary; I speak when it's necessary.  I do what is necessary to give my best, and to be supportive to the city, to be supportive to the Mayor, my husband, to be supportive to my children--to, to be necessary--and that doesn't always mean that you have to be out front.  And if that implies shyness, then I think some people are mistaken.  Because strength doesn't always have to be vocal, or in front.  And, I'm in front when I need to be, and I'm on the side when I need to be, and I'm behind when I need to be.  But I, I wouldn't characterize myself as being shy, at the same time, I wouldn't characterize myself as being need--needing undue attention, I, I, I don't really have to have that.  I do believe in fairness; I do believe that where you should be, you should be given the respect for where you are, and, a lot of times, that doesn't happen, but I think, how you handle it is very important, as well.
Story_ID: 15103
Speaker 1: What are your hopes and aspirations for the black community?  I mean, not just in Denver [Colorado], but--maybe specifically here, but in, in general.
Speaker 2: I hope that we can achieve all of what we can achieve, as human beings.  I think, Tavis Smiley once documented what needs to happen, within the black community, in America--which was, sort of like, a self-evaluation of ourselves, and, and our weaknesses, and what we could work on.  But I want for the African American community, I guess, is what I want for everybody; and that is, I want us to be economically stable, and not just stable, but, successful, and, and quote: "Live the dream, live the American Dream, as well".  I want to see us be healthy; I think that sometimes the African American community doesn't receive the health care, that, that, that is available; I think that our mortality rate is high for some places, where it should not be high.  I want to see us all higher, in terms of--of quality of life, of education, of, of housing.  I want to see us be able to, to, to live in harmony, as individuals, as couples, as families, as neighborhoods, as cities.  I'd like to see the strife and the stress, that we may experience from time-to-time, in our life, eliminated.  And, I would like to see a world where, even though we've eliminated discriminatory laws that, within the hearts of people, that there, there is no more hatred, or bigotry, or, or silent dislike, or, or not liking, or not loving people--based upon some bigoted reason.  I would like to see all of that come about, where, where we're just, all great human beings.  I think, I think we will achieve that someday, and I think we'll just keep working at it.
Story_ID: 15104
Speaker 1: Is there any, is there anything that we haven't asked, that you would like to express?
Speaker 2: Sometimes, in, in my life, in many instances, I haven't had the resources that could be available, in a position like First Lady.  Or where I wish that I had been able to, to add all of the icings on the cake, like, saying "thank you" to people, maybe they may have invited you somewhere, or sent you an award, or, or expressed their support to you--and I haven't been able to say "thank you" to everybody.  And I would really like people to know that I really do appreciate what they've allowed me, and, and have enabled me to do, in my lifetime.  So I just want to say, "thank you."
Story_ID: 15105
Speaker 1: A photo taken during a groundbreaking ceremony; it shows a new park that's to be dedicated--Centennial Park [Denver, Colorado]--that Mrs. [Wilma] Webb wanted to have developed in the sense of it being a formal garden.  Shown in the photo are Mayor Webb--Mayor Wellington Webb, of Denver; Brensley Burbridge, who is with the Denver Botanic Gardens--B-R-E-N-S-L-E-Y, B-U-R-B-R-I-D-G-E; and Mrs. Wilma Webb, First Lady of Denver.
Speaker 2: [Wilma Webb (right) and Mayor Wellington Webb (left) with Brensley Burbridge of the Denver Botanic Gardens at the groundbreaking of Denver, Colorado's Centennial Park, not dated, from the collection of Wilma Webb]
Story_ID: 15106
Speaker 1: This is the actual groundbreaking ceremony for Centennial Park [Denver, Colorado], to be dedicated early Spring of 2003.
Speaker 2: When did this take place?
Speaker 1: Oh gosh, this is a test (laughs).
Speaker 2: Yes, if you don't remember, that--
Speaker 1: The first of 2002, around January, February, 2002.
Speaker 2: Okay, where?
Speaker 1: In Denver, Colorado.
Speaker 2: [Groundbreaking for Denver, Colorado's Centennial Park, 2002. From the collection of Wilma Webb]
Story_ID: 15107
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of Wellington E. Webb, who was sworn in as Auditor of the City and County of Denver; along with his family, his wife, at the time, was [Colorado] State Representative, Wilma Webb; and our family is shown with us.  This was in 1987, in Denver, Colorado.
Speaker 2: [Wellington Webb, with family members, sworn in as auditor of Denver, Denver, Colorado, 1987. From the collection of Wilma Webb]
Story_ID: 15108
Speaker 1: Wilma J. Webb, and Wellington E. Webb, along with the parents of Wilma J. Webb.  Wilma was State Representative, at that time, and Wellington was an Appointee of Governor Dick Lamm; he was the Executive Director for the Colorado Department of Regulatory Agencies.  Wilma's parents are: Mr. Frank--F-R-A-N-K, W., Gerdine--G-E-R-D-I-N-E; and Mrs. Faye--F-A-Y-E, middle initial E., Gerdine--G-E-R-D-I-N-E.  This was taken in Denver, Colorado.
Speaker 2: [Wellington Webb (right) with Wilma Webb (second from right) and her parents, Frank (left) and Faye (second from left) Gerdine, Denver, Colorado, early 1980s. From the collection of Wilma Webb]
Story_ID: 15109
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of Mayor Wellington E. Webb; First Lady, Wilma J. Webb; Mr. Harry Belafonte, and his wife, Julie [Belafonte]--taken in Denver, Colorado.  I don't know when, maybe about, oh, probably 1999.
Speaker 2: Do you remember the occasion?
Speaker 1: Why was Harry Belafonte here?  I for--he was making an appearance, Harry Belafonte, when he was here.  Why was he here?
Speaker 2: He was--it was for an award.
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) That's--
Speaker 2: Through the Art, Culture, and Film, I remember it was when John (unclear).
Speaker 1: Well, he had been awarded, by the National Conference of--the U.S. Conference of Mayors--
Speaker 2: Right. (unclear)
Speaker 1: Right, right, right, so, so he, he came in as, as a courtesy visit, I believe, and he was presented. [Note: Belafonte also spoke at a conference in Denver that year.]
Speaker 2: [From left to right: Harry Belafonte, Julie Belafonte, Wilma Webb and Denver Mayor Wellington Webb; ca. 1999. From the collection of Wilma Webb]
Story_ID: 15110
Speaker 1: This is a photograph taken at the White House with Mayor Wellington E. Webb, First Lady of Denver [Colorado], Mrs. Wilma J. Webb, and President William Jefferson ['Bill'] Clinton, during the holiday season of 19--, oh, I believe it was 1999 [sic 1998].
Speaker 2: [Wellington Web (left), President William 'Bill' Clinton (center) and Wilma Webb (right) at the White House, Washington, D.C., 1998. From the collection of Wilma Webb]
Story_ID: 15111
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of Mayor Wellington E. Webb--Denver [Colorado]--and First Lady, Wilma J. Webb, at a dedication of the renaming of a building, of a city building, for the name of Minoru Yasui, who was an Asian American; and also the dedication of a, a piece of art, a sculpture for Minoru Yasui.
Speaker 2: [Wellington Webb (left) and Wilma Webb (right) at the renaming of a building, Denver Colorado, not dated, from the collection of Wilma Webb]
Story_ID: 15112
Speaker 1: This is a photograph taken of Hillary Rodham Clinton and Wilma J. Webb, during a visit, when Hillary came to Denver, on her several visits, speaking here.  I believe this was 1997 [sic 1995].
Speaker 2: [Hillary Rodham Clinton (left) and Wilma Webb (right), Denver, Colorado, 1995. From the collection of Wilma Webb]
Story_ID: 15113
Speaker 1: This is the unveiling of the Minoru Yasui Bust, which was dedicated during the same day that the building was named for Minoru Yasui.  It's, it's in conjunction with the promotion of the arts in Denver, which the First Lady [Wilma Webb] has had a major role in.
Speaker 2: [Mayor Wellington Webb (left) and First Lady Wilma Webb (right) unveil a bust dedicated to community leader Minoru Yasui, Denver, Colorado, ca. 1996. From the collection of Wilma Webb]
Story_ID: 15114
Speaker 1: This is [Colorado] State Representative Wilma J. Webb in the Colorado House of Representatives Chamber; this is, this is she seated at her desk, and this photo was taken in 1988, during her service there.
Speaker 2: [Wilma Webb in the chamers of the Colorado House of Representatives, Denver, Colorado, 1998. From the collection of Wilma Webb]
Story_ID: 15115
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of three mayors, and the current First Lady of Denver, it's: Mayor Quigg Newton, to the left; First Lady, Wilma J. Webb; Mayor Wellington E. Webb; and, former Mayor Federico Pea.  This was during a dedication of the Hall of Mayors, for which was inspired and created by Mrs. Webb.
Speaker 2: [Wilma J. Web with three Denver, Colorado mayors at a dedication event. From left to right: Quigg Newton, Wilma Webb, Wellington Webb and Federico Pena. From the collection of Wilma Webb]
Story_ID: 15116
Speaker 1: We talked a lot in the interview about community.  This is a picture of Wilma J. Webb, when she was, I think, twelve years old, with a lot of the children in the community, in the neighborhood, and this was taken for an essay contest, of finalists, who were in the essay contest, here in Denver, Colorado.
Speaker 2: Got a year?  Sorry, I know--I keep pestering you.
Speaker 1: Probably 1955.
Speaker 2: [Wilma Webb (second row, third from left) with other essay contest finalists, Denver, Colorado, ca. 1955. From the collection of Wilma Webb]
Story_ID: 15117
Speaker 1: These are three First Ladies of Denver [Colorado]. On the left is the wife of former Mayor Quigg Newton; in the center is the wife of Mayor Wellington Webb, Wilma J. Webb; and, to the right is the wife of Federico Pea, Ellen Hart Pea.  And this was taken during a dedication of the Hall of Mayors.
Speaker 2: [Wilma Webb with two Denver, Colorado First Ladies at a dedication event, Denver, Colorado, not dated, from the collection of Wilma Webb]
Story_ID: 15118
Speaker 1: This is a photo of Wilma J. Webb, with Mrs. Minoru Yasui--Y-A-S-U-I, during the dedication of a city building in honor of her husband [Minoro Yasui] who is deceased; and also, dedicating the bust in his name.
Speaker 2: [Wilma Webb (left) with Mrs. Minoru Yasui (right) during dedication ceremonies, Denver, Colorado, not dated, from the collection of Wilma Webb]
Story_ID: 15119
Speaker 1: Hammer time.  This is First Lady, Wilma J. Webb, with entertainer/artist, MC Hammer, taking--Mrs. Webb was taking a lot of young people--trying to encourage them to be all that they can be--to the concert, featuring MC Hammer, and also, presenting him with an Appreciation Award.  This was in 1992--
Speaker 2: [Wilma Webb (center) presents MC Hammer (right) with an appreciation award, Denver, Colorado, 1992. From the collection of Wilma Webb]
Story_ID: 15120
Speaker 1: The Urban League Director's name?
Speaker 2: Hugh Price.
Speaker 1: Yes, Hugh Price.  This is Hugh Price, National Director of the Urban League [sic, president of the National Urban League], and Wilma J. Webb.  Hugh was here as the guest speaker; and also, he was also at the African/African American Fifth Annual Conference, in Ghana, Africa [in 1999], where he was a guest speaker there; and he and Mrs. Webb have worked together on a number of issues.
Speaker 2: [Wilma Webb (left) with Hugh Price (right), President of the National Urban League, not dated, from the collection of Wilma Webb]
Story_ID: 15121
Speaker 1: This is Inauguration Day for Mayor, Mayor Wellington--
Speaker 2: Could you straighten that out?
Speaker 1: --for Mayor Wellington E. Webb, July of 1991, in the Mayor's office, it was the first time that he sat is the Mayor's chair.
Speaker 2: [Mayor Wellington Webb (seated) with wife, Wilma Webb (standing), in the Denver, Colorado mayor's office; Mr. Webb was just starting his first mayoral term, July, 1991 From the collection of Wilma Webb]
Story_ID: 15122
Speaker 1: This Mayor Wellington E. Webb and Mrs. Wilma J. Webb, at the third inauguration celebration for Mayor Webb, featuring the Commodores.  And the Mayor is presenting them with a proclamation from the mayor of Denver [Colorado]; and these are the Commodores with Mayor and Mrs. Webb.
Speaker 2: [Mayor Wellington Webb (center) and Wilma Webb (second from left) with the Commodores at an inaugural celebration, Denver, Colorado, July 1999. From the collection of Wellington Webb]
Story_ID: 15123
Speaker 1: This photo is a photograph taken in Ghana, in Accra--A-C-C-R-A, Ghana, with all of the first ladies of different countries in the continent of Africa.  The hostess was the First Lady of Ghana, Mrs. Nana, oh gosh, what was Nana's last name?  It's the First Lady of Ghana.
Speaker 2: You know what year it was?
Speaker 1: 19-, I think--
Speaker 2: '99? [1999]
Speaker 1: Is that Rawlings?
Speaker 2: --yes, Rawlings, that was her name, Nana Rawlings, she had about four or five names, "Nahna--da--da-da-da-da-da Rawlings" [sic, Nana Konadu Agyeman Rawlings]
Speaker 1: R-O-W-L-I-N-G-S?
Speaker 2: R-A-W--
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) That's what I meant, R-A-W.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: You need to point out which one is--
Speaker 2: She is the lady to the left of Wilma J. Webb, she has on the long, striped outfit, with horizontal stripes on it, with the hat to match, and a blue jacket; Mrs. Webb is in a light yellow outfit.
Speaker 1: [Wilma Webb (fifth from left) with the first ladies of African nations, including First Lady Nana Konadu Agyeman Rawlings of Ghana (fourth from left), Accra, Ghana, 1999. From the collection of Wilma Webb]
Story_ID: 15124
Speaker 1: This is First Lady of Denver [Colorado], Wilma J. Webb, and First Lady of the country of Ghana, in Africa, Nana [Konadu Agyeman] Rawlings--R-A-W-L-I-N-S [sic, R-A-W-L-I-N-G-S].  She was here in Denver, and we were hosting her.
Speaker 2: [Wilma Webb (left) with First Lady Nana Konadu Agyeman-Rawlings (right) of Ghana, Denver, Colorado, not dated, from the collection of Wilma Webb]
Story_ID: 15125
Speaker 1: This photograph was taken in 1998, it is the United States Department--the Secretary of the United States Department of Labor--Alexis M. Herman, and the Secretary's Representative for Region 8--Wilma J. Webb, who was also the First Lady of Denver.  This photo was taken in Denver, during a visit of Secretary Herman to this area, where she was keynote speaker and the guest of this region.
Speaker 2: [Wilma Webb (left) with Alexis Herman (right), U.S. Secretary of Labor, Denver, Colorado, 1998. From the collection of Wilma Webb]
Story_ID: 15126
Speaker 1: This is First Lady, Wilma J. Webb, and Nick LeMasters [general manager of the Cherry Creek Shopping Center, Denver, Colorado], during a celebration of art, featuring Jacqueline Kennedy, at the Cherry Creek Shopping Center, where there was an art display of the Jacqueline Kennedy [Onassis] years.  This was in 1996, I believe.
Speaker 2: [Wilma Webb (left) with Nick LeMasters (right) at an exhibition opening, Denver, Colorado, ca, 1996. From the collection of Wilma Webb]
Story_ID: 15127
Speaker 1: This is Hillary Rodham Clinton, and Wilma J. Webb, during the first, during the election campaign of President William Jefferson ['Bill'] Clinton, before he was elected to the Presidency; this was on their campaign trail, the night before he was elected President of the United States of America, they were here.
Speaker 2: [Wilma Webb (right) with Hillary Rodham Clinton (left) on Bill Clinton's presidential campaign trail, Denver, Colorado, 1992. From the collection of Wilma Webb]
Story_ID: 15128
Speaker 1: This is Wilma J. Webb, First Lady of Denver [Colorado], and this is Vice President Al Gore, during one of his visits to Denver.  I believe the year was, 1999.
Speaker 2: [Wilma Webb (left) with Vice President Al Gore (right), Denver, Colorado, 1999. From the collection of Wilma Webb]
Story_ID: 15129
Speaker 1: This is Wilma J. Webb, First Lady of Denver [Colorado], during a visit of Hillary Rodham Clinton to the 'Women are Serious' event, as--featuring Hillary Clinton as the Guest Speaker, and Wilma J. Webb was introducing her.
Speaker 2: [Wilma Webb introduces Hillary Rodham Clinton at an event, not dated, from the collection of Wilma Webb]
Story_ID: 15130
Speaker 1: This is a tour with Wilma J. Webb, looking at different art throughout the country, and looking at gardens; this is in Rhode Island.
Speaker 2: Date?  If you can recall.
Speaker 1: 1992.
Speaker 2: [Wilma Webb takes an art tour across the U.S., Rhode Island, 1992. From the collection of Wilma Webb]
Story_ID: 15131
Speaker 1: This is [Colorado] State Representative, Wilma J. Webb, and Wellington E. Webb, Executive Director of the Colorado Department of Regulatory Agencies; it was during the reelection campaign for Wilma J. Webb, State Representative, in Denver, Colorado, in 19-, I would say 198-, '85, 1985.
Speaker 2: [Photo - Wellington Webb (right) and Wilma Webb (left) at her re-election campaign for state representative, Denver, Colorado, 1985]
Story_ID: 15132
Speaker 1: This is First Lady, Wilma J. Webb, and a member of the Commodores, during the Inauguration Ball, the tennis, the Tennis Shoe Inauguration Ball, of Mayor Wellington E. Webb; everyone wore tennis shoes to the ball.
Speaker 2: Can you hold it there for a minute.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, go ahead, next.
Speaker 1: Okay.  He was actually singing to me (laughs).
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It was 'Three Times A Lady,' yes.
Speaker 2: [Wilma Webb (left) with a member of the Commodores (right) at Mayor Wellington Webb's inaugural ball, Denver, Colorado, July 1999. From the collection of Wilma Webb]
Story_ID: 15133
Speaker 1: This is First Lady Wilma J. Webb, who, at the same time, was the Secretary's Representative for the United States Department of Labor; presenting Oleta Crain--O-L-E-T-A, Crain--C-R-A-I-N, who had given fifty-two years to federal service, including her tenure as Head of the Women's Bureau for Region 8, and also, as a retired member of the United States Armed Services.  This was in 1998.
Speaker 2: [Wilma Webb (left) presents an award to Oleta Crain (right), a veteran public servant, Denver, Colorado, 1998. From the collection of Wilma Webb]
Story_ID: 15134
Speaker 1: This was First Lady Wilma J. Webb, in the capacity of the Secretary's Representative for the United States Department of Labor, hosting the visit of Secretary [of Labor] Alexis Herman, in Denver, in 1999.  She was introducing Secretary Herman.
Speaker 2: [Wilma Webb introduces the U.S. Secretary of Labor, Alexis Herman, Denver, Colorado, 1999. From the collection of Wilma Webb].
Story_ID: 15135
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of Mayor Wellington E. Webb, First Lady Wilma J. Webb, and the Mayor of Belfast [Jim Rodgers] in [Northern] Ireland, during a city visit promoting tourism, and business with the City and County of Denver.  Both--this top photo was taken in Belfast, as well as, the photo to the bottom, which also includes members of the Mayor's Office of Economic Development, and also, members of Denver City Council, in Belfast, Ireland.
Speaker 2: [Wilma Webb (sixth from right) and her husband, Denver Mayor Wellington Webb (fifth from right) visit Belfast Mayor Jim Rodgers (fourth form right) and other city officials, Belfast, Northern Ireland, ca. 2001].
Story_ID: 15136
Speaker 1: This is photograph was taken in [Northern] Ireland, during an economic visit to promote tourism and business in the country of Ireland; with the Mayor there in Belfast [Jim Rodgers], as well as, members of Denver [Colorado] City Council, the Mayor's Office of Economic Development, and various dignitaries, at a reception that, that was held for the Denver delegation.  There is also the U.S. Ambassador to Ireland [sic, U.S. Ambassador to the United Kingdom, William S. Farish III, not pictured], who is, is featured as well.
Speaker 2: [Wilma Webb (fourth from right), Wellington Webb (center), and Denver City Council members with officials from Belfast, including Mayor Jim Rodgers (fourth from left), Belfast, Northern Ireland, ca. 2001].
Story_ID: 15137
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of Mrs. Coretta Scott King, widow of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., and State Representative Wilma J. Webb, at the Colorado House of Representatives, in 1985.  During her visit, we created the commission to establish the Inaugural Holiday of Dr. King, which had been adopted.  And was to be--in 1984, and was to be celebrated in 1986.  She's there hoping to address the Colorado House of Representatives, and was denied the opportunity to speak before the House; so we were both there, in the Chambers, there; I was a member at that time.
Speaker 2: [Wilma Webb (left) with Coretta Scott King, during the struggle to recognize the Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Holiday in Colorado, Denver, Colorado, 1985. From the collection of Wilma Webb].
Story_ID: 15138
Speaker 1: This photograph is of Mrs. Coretta Scott King, widow of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., on the right; with Executive Director of the Colorado Department of Regulatory Agencies [later Mayor of Denver], Wellington E. Webb; and, State Representative Wilma J. Webb.  During a visit of Mrs. King to Colorado to inaugurate the Commission to plan the first celebration for Dr. King's Birthday, to be held in 1986.  This photograph was taken in 1985.
Speaker 2: [Wilma Webb (left), and Wellington Webb (center) with Coretta Scott King (right), during her visit to promote the Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Holiday, Denver, Colorado, 1985. From the collection of Wilma Webb].
Story_ID: 15139
Speaker 1: [Colorado] State Representative Wilma J. Webb, middle; along with Mr. Wellington E. Webb,  Executive Director of the Colorado Department of Regulatory Agencies; and Dave Brubeck, musician.  This was at the first celebration for Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., in 1986, where Dave Brubeck had written a special concerto piece for Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.  And he performed it here, in Denver, along with a one hundred-voice mass choir, and a diverse group of, of concertgoers were there for this occasion.  This was in January of 1986.
Speaker 2: [Newspaper clipping from 1986 with photo of Colorado State Representative Wilma Webb (center) and her husband Wellington Webb (left) with pianist Dave Brubeck (right), at the first celebration of the Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Holiday; Wilma Webb had been the principal proponent in the state legislature for a holiday honoring Dr. King;  Brubeck had composed a concerto for Dr. King, which he and a choir performed at this event in Denver, Colorado, 1986. From the collection of Wilma Webb].
Story_ID: 15140
Speaker 1: This was January 1986, at the African American West Museum [sic, Black American West Museum and Heritage Center, Denver, Colorado]--where a reception was held to celebrate the first, the first holiday officially celebrated for Dr. Martin Luther King, in 1986--where many of the pieces that represented Martin Luther King, and his visits to Denver, were being featured.  This was at the African American West Museum.
Speaker 2: [Wilma Webb speaks at the Black American West Museum and Heritage Center, celebrating the Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Holiday, Denver, Colorado, 1986. From the collection of Wilma Webb].
Story_ID: 15141
Speaker 1: This photograph was taken July the 1st, 1991, at the swearing In ceremony for Mayor Wellington E. Webb.  In the photograph are Mayor Wellington E. Webb, on the right; First Lady of Denver, his wife, Wilma J. Webb; and the Judge administering the oath of office, in Denver, Colorado.
Speaker 2: [Wilma Webb (center) witnesses husband, Wellington Webb (right), being sworn in as mayor of Denver, Colorado, July 1, 1991. From the collection of Wilma Webb]
Story_ID: 15142
Speaker 1: This is photograph of President William Jefferson ['Bill'] Clinton, Mayor Wellington E. Webb, Denver [Colorado], and First Lady Wilma J. Webb--also the Chairperson of the Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Colorado Holiday Commission--during the 1994 celebration of Dr. King's Birthday.  There were over forty thousand people at Civic Center [Denver, Colorado], in attendance, at this march and celebration that President Clinton flew in for.  Mrs. Webb is presenting him with a birthday cake, in honor of Dr. King.
Speaker 2: [President Bill Clinton (left) and Denver, Colorado mayor Wellington Webb (center) watch Wilma Webb (right) make an address at a Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. celebration, Denver, Colorado, 1994. From the collection of Wilma Webb].
