Story_ID: 168950
Speaker 1: --I'm the interviewer, and Matthew Hickey is the videographer, and Cynthia Moreland, M-O-R-E-L-A-N-D is observer.  And I'd like to have you start out by stating your name and spelling it for us.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And your date of birth.
Speaker 2: My name is Kenneth Robert Walker, K-E-N-N-E-T-H, Robert, R-O-B-E-R-T, Walker, W-A-L-K-E-R.  My date of birth is December 19, 1930.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And can we have-
Speaker 2: (Brief interruption)
Speaker 1: Can I have your--today's date and our location?
Speaker 2: August 13, 2003.  Location is Oak Bluffs, Massachusetts.
Speaker 1: And your profession?
Speaker 2: A professor.
Story_ID: 168951
Speaker 1: Okay.  I ask five questions of everyone.  They're little People magazine-ish, so just bear with me.  I'd like to, and short answers, I'd like--
Speaker 2: (Brief interruption)
Speaker 1: Okay.  I'd like you, you know, they're short answers.  I'd like to know what your favorite food is.
Speaker 2: Meatloaf.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation?
Speaker 2: Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: Purple.
Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying.  Do you have one?
Speaker 2: Jeepers, girl.
Speaker 1: Cheapest girl?
Speaker 2: Jeepers--
Speaker 1: Oh, Jeepers, girl.
Speaker 2: G-E, yeah, Jeepers, girl (simultaneous). Okay.
Story_ID: 168952
Speaker 1: I'd like to start out by asking you about your mother.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: If you could give her name and what you know about her background and her, you know, growing up?
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.  My mother, her name was Lillian Mae Frye [ph.], and then, of course, it became Lillian Mae Walker.  She was born in Louisa County, Virginia.  Year, I don't remember.  Unfortunately, she passed away when I was six years of age, but I was the oldest, and so I, I have a fleeting memory of her.  She, for the most part, at that time, was a housewife.  My father [Frank Walker] worked two jobs and that's about all that I can really remember about her.
Speaker 1: Did you have much contact with her side of the family?
Speaker 2: All through the years, we had one of her sisters, one of her sisters and one of her brothers lived with us for a while.  They--when they apparently came up here from Virginia, they moved into a rural area of Rhode Island, Charleston, Rhode Island, as a matter of fact.  And they then came up into the city, so to speak, and so, an uncle and an aunt both lived with us for a short time until they got off on their feet.  But the other members of the family, all the siblings until--I think there's one, one left yet, one brother left.  But through the years, we obviously knew each other being in Rhode Island, Rhode Island, being small.  And they lived in Providence.  We lived in East Providence so, yes, I, I, you know, knew them well.
Speaker 1: Do you know how your parents met?
Speaker 2: It's, it seems to me my father [Frank Walker] met--my, my mother was working as a waitress at the Providence Art Club, and he met her some way.  She, she was living in the country as I had mentioned.  And that's from my--what I can remember, that's how they met.
Story_ID: 168953
Speaker 1: And tell me about your father [Frank Walker], his name, and, you know, and his background and growing up.
Speaker 2: My father was born in Providence [Rhode Island].  He was the oldest of four children.  He, he worked as a porter for the Providence Journal which is a newspaper.  He worked as a porter.  And then he bought a men's rubbish removal business--not only bought the business, but also bought the man's house.  And so, that's where we grew up in, in this house.  So he had both this--he worked, as I said, as a porter which was doing janitorial work for the newspaper building.  And also, he had this rubbish removal business which, which after a while, became very--I, I would say at that time, very lucrative.  And I have very fond memories of that because my brothers, two brothers [Ronald and Leonard Walker] and myself, had to work on one of those two trucks all summer, vacation periods from school.  World War II [WWII], help was hard to find, so we had to go to work to a telephone building, taking out the, the rubbish before we went to school.  And that made us want, want to take part in athletics after school so we didn't have to go to work.  However, often, we'd get home from, whether it be football practice or basketball practice, and he'd come in and say, well, I have another job that, you know, I need you guys to do.  So, and that was him and he, although he just, as I remember, I think he just graduated from grade school.  He was a very interesting person, a very, very interesting, very personable, very personable.
Story_ID: 168954
Speaker 1: How--can you tell about how your father's [Frank Walker] family or your grandfather--how far are your roots in, in Providence [Rhode Island]?
Speaker 2: My father's, on my father's side--gosh, it goes back, I don't know how far.  I mean, when I say, how far back, he was, I believe my father was born about 1916, so he was born in Providence.  My grandfather, grandfather [Frank] Walker was born in Providence.  So that goes back--it, it's got to go back to, I dare say, probably after the Civil War on, on my father's side.  On my, on the maternal side, my grandfather was born in Virginia, and I mentioned the--his children were all born in, in, Virginia as far as I know.
Speaker 1: Do you know on your father's side the history of how your family came, you know, how they came to actually come to Providence, or where they originally were from?
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, I don't, I, I don't.  I know that my grandmother, my maternal grand-, my, my paternal grandmother, she was one of seven sisters.  And they were, they were raised in Washington, D.C. and then came to Providence--all seven of them, back--well, back, I dare s--well, back before I was born.  And, well, it had to be, because my father was born in Providence.  And, and, obviously, my grandmother was, was there at that time, so that goes back, again, to the 19-, into early 1900s.  Unfortunately, unfortunately, my step-mother [Emma Walker] gave me two copies, a copy of two wills, from my paternal great-grandfather, paternal great-grandfather, paternal great-great-grandfather.  And it was too bad that my father wasn't living because he could have explained some of these things to us.  Very interesting, I, I wanted to photocopy them and give them to other members of the family.  One came out clear because it was written with black or blue ink.  The other one was written with white ink (laughter), white ink, and therefore, it didn't come out on the photo-, you know, copying came just plain blank, blank sheet of paper.  So that, as I said, my, my maternal, my maternal [sic, paternal] grandmother, I know that she came to Rhode Island, along with her other six sisters from Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: Now, can you give your siblings a name and where you fit in the birth order?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I am the oldest, I am the oldest.  There were, there are four boys and one girl.  Three, the, the three boys, three oldest boys, including myself [Ronald, Leonard and Kenneth Walker], are the product of my mother [Lillian Mae Walker] and father [Frank Walker].  The two youngest siblings, Frank and Arlene, are products of my father and my stepmother [Emma Walker] because as I said, my, my grandmother, my mother died when I was about six years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 168955
Speaker 1: What is your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: My earliest memory would be--I can remember, I guess I was, I was about four years of age.  We were living in a two-family home in East Providence [Rhode Island]--seeing the trolley cars go up and down the street, seeing the bread man deliver the bread across the street to a market that wasn't open.  It had a box out there where they kept things.  That, and, of course, some of the people that lived in the area at that time--I can remember, you know, I remember that very vividly.
Speaker 1: Those were your neighbors?
Speaker 2: They're neighbors, yes, uh-hum.
Speaker 1: Do you remember their names?
Speaker 2: There was one family by the name, the one family I remember so well--the, the last name was Bano, B-A-N-O.  They were Portuguese and they lived around the corner from us.  And my father [Frank Walker] and mother [Lillian Frye Walker] bought a home, as I had mentioned, bought a home from the man that he sold the business, that, that sold him the business.  And so, we moved, still in East Providence, and maybe two miles away, and did not see any of those Bano boys.  There were three brothers--from the time I was, let's say, five years of age until I started junior high school.  And one junior high school and lo and behold, there they were, so that's the one family that I remember.
Story_ID: 168956
Speaker 1: You know, while you were talking about, you know, the--being able to see the bread being delivered across the street and everything, I would like you to, you know, take yourself back to your early years in that neighborhood, and, and talk about what other sights, smells, and sounds remind you of growing up.
Speaker 2: Well, I'm just thinking.  It, of course, other than what I've just mentioned, I can't really remember.  Actually, I had mentioned the trolley cars, the, the traffic, the cobblestones of the streets, cobblestones.  I remember people getting married but it seems so distant to me.  I mean, here I was, five, six, five years old, four years old, and grown-ups dressing to go out.  My father [Frank Walker] was very active in the, in the Masons [Prince Hall Freemasons] and seeing him dress up and wearing a black suit or blue suit, white shirt, bow tie, going through all those rituals, having a ring, a Masonic ring ,and such things as that.  But the neighborhood itself, we, we lived in an, we lived in a neighborhood where there weren't many people of color, and still is not.  I mean that neighborhood has changed, the neighborhood has changed.  It was a very heavy Portuguese neighborhood, white Portuguese from the Azores.  And it still is pretty much that way today, all these years later, because they've had recent immigration, heavy immigration coming into that area.
Story_ID: 168957
Speaker 1: So was it primarily the, the east Portuguese and, and some black, or was it other ethnic groups mixed in?
Speaker 2: Well, in, in that immediate neighborhood, there were all Portuguese for the most part.  And, of course, my world did not go much further that could, than the street, you know, one block up, one block down.  So for the most part, it was Portuguese.
Speaker 1: And what street was that?
Speaker 2: Warren Avenue in East Providence [Rhode Island].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And that's what I, you know, earlier, there was a difference, the East par-, so was your family from East Providence, or were they from Providence [Rhode Island]?
Speaker 2: They were from Providence.
Speaker 1: Okay.  When did East, is East Providence a newer development or did it always, always exist?  Is it--
Speaker 2: Well, historically, historically, you probably heard of Roger Williams.  Roger Williams, supposedly, he, he discovered Providence, Rhode Island because at that--all of that area was on one side, what they call the Seekonk River, was Massachusetts.  And Roger Williams, being a minister, a Baptist minister, who is, who founded what is today the oldest Baptist church in America, First Baptist Church in Providence, where Brown University [Providence, Rhode Island], for example, have, they have their convocation for commencement.  That was, that part, as I said, belonged to--that was Massachusetts territory.  And Roger Williams had a relationship with the Indians [Native American], with the Narragansetts, I guess.  And so, East Providence became a separate entity from Providence, the border being the Seekonk River.  And, and so, East Providence is a small--it started out as a town, but it is now a, you know, a city, city of about sixty thousand people.  So there is that distinction between Providence and East Providence.
Speaker 1: And growing up, were there many Cape Verdeans around you, or was it mainly just the east port-, you know, the--
Speaker 2: No, no, many, many Cape Verdeans, you know, they, they maintain that there are more Cape Verdeans living in America than there are living in the Cape [Cape Verde], in the Cape Rhode Islands.  There are six or eight islands, but East Providence, for example, had a large Cape--well, I say, large, where were large Portuguese, Cape Verdean population.  Pawtucket [Rhode Island], Pawtucket, Lincoln [Rhode Island], East Providence, and, of course, then going into Massachusetts, Taunton, going down the Cape, you know, what the, New Bedford [Massachusetts], New Bedford, very, very heavy, very heavy Cape Verdean presence, very, very heavy.
Story_ID: 168958
Speaker 1: Now, you don't have any memory of any smells that remind you of your childhood?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Sounds?
Speaker 2: No, not even sounds.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Just, as I said the, you know, cars going up and down the street, but no, no, real sounds other than that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you give me just some, you know, stories or memories you had of your family life and things that happened, you know, in the early years?
Speaker 2: Well, I've, I've told many people what I'm about to say.  Working on that rubbish removal truck seven days a week--rain, snow, cold, the barrels of rubbish or the barrel bashes had to be moved.  And there was only one that it, they were going to be re-, be moved, you know.  You had to pick them up, put them on the truck, take them to a dump, such things as that.  And in the summer time going into people's yards to get the grass that was in barrels and, of course, when you talk about smell--rot, rotting grass smells.  And doing things like, you know, Saturday afternoons, you see people were through.  They don't work Saturday afternoon.  Well, here, we had, we had a route we had to finish.  And I said at that time, now I'm getting into my teenage years, I--this is not what I want to do the rest of my life.  And so that in--so that motivated me to, obviously, want to get an education.  And I was, I've always wanted to teach, so I want to teach, and that's what I want to do.  And my, and my brothers followed, pretty much follows the same, you know, the same path.  We worked, even when I started teaching, on Saturdays or holidays, I, I would help my father [Frank Walker] 'cause he had a couple of men.  But I did it, not only because he needed the help, but also that extra money was very handy, you know, coming into the household when I first got married because teaching did not pay the most money.  Well, so you, you really needed a second job, so I did that.  I, I did that on vacation periods and at Christmas time, things such as that.  But that was the motivating thing, that working on that truck in all kinds of weather.
Story_ID: 168959
Speaker 1: Were you aware of your, you know, since you lived in an integrated community, were you aware of yourself at that point it was Negro?  Were you aware of yourself as that, and was that sort of, was there any discussion about that in the family?
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh, yeah, we knew we were, we knew we were colored.
Speaker 1: Color, color.
Speaker 2: We knew we were colored.  And it, it never, I don't think it ever bothered us because we knew we were.  But on the other hand, we knew that if we--when I say, we, I'm really talking about my, my, my brothers [Ronald and Leonard Walker] and myself, we knew that in order to get away from that truck, we were going to have to do some of the--well, we wanted to do some of the things that we saw other people doing, you know, white people, for example--in, in my case, teaching.
Speaker 1: So was it, was that what--so that's what I'm saying, how aware were you of the larger community growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, in East Providence [Rhode Island], it, it turned out because of my father [Frank Walker], we were well known.  And, of course, once we got into high school--we, we all were athletes, and so people knew who we were, which I imagined, we, we, we did stand out somewhat because of who we were of color.  And that carried, you know, that carried on.  I mean, it's carried with me.  I still live in East Providence other than here, so that still carries on.  People that I've known for years and years and years, they're there.  And every now and then when someone dies that I knew, I mean I haven't had any close contact with them for a few years, but knowing them back then well, I'll attend the wake.  And, of course, it, it brings out a great deal of nostalgia because there were people, and we start talking about the old days and where so and so is, and what has happened to so and so.  So, in that respect, you know, we knew who we were.  We didn't look at it as, as in any, in any type of negative tone, but we knew what we had to do if we were going to, as I keep saying, get away from that early beginning of working.
Story_ID: 168960
Speaker 1: So if I understand you right, your father [Frank Walker] is sort of the head of the household.  He sets the tone.  The business is the sole support and every--all the boys have to work in the--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum, uh-hum, right.
Speaker 1: --you know, the business.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What, with elementary school, where did you go?
Speaker 2: I went to Bliss Elementary School [East Providence, Rhode Island] which was, you might say, the neighborhood school.  And, you know, they had like a district.  If you lived in a certain area, that's the school you went to.  So, obviously, that school was integrated--not, not a great many kids of color, but it was integrated.  It, it was the only, it was the only school, obviously, all white teachers, white janitor.  So that was my elementary school.  My--
Speaker 1: Was there a teacher there that influenced you at all?
Speaker 2: Not, no, no, not, not in the elementary school.
Story_ID: 168961
Speaker 1: Well, what were you like as a young person?  Were you, you know, were you, you know, a typical boy, sort of, you know, busy and active, or were you well mannered?  Were you rambunctious?  Were--I mean, I'm just--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  Well, we, we, being well-mannered went without saying.  They had me, you had no choice on that--had to be well-mannered.  Little me, I like to talk, so, you know (laughter), talk, you know, talk about anything to the point of where relatives would say--I'd start to explain something.  Yeah, we, we know, we know, so they, you know, shut me up.  Now, shutting me off had made a mark on me.  It made a mark on me to the sense that to this day when a young person is talking to me, or talking in a group, and I'm part of that group, I want that youngster to talk and talk.  And people say, well, why are you so--you're such an advocate, but whatever the kid is saying, because when I was that age, adults shut me off, or tried to shut me off.  They weren't always successful but they did.  I was a Boy Scout, wanted to be a Boy Scout, became a Boy Scout.  And in becoming a Boy Scout, I liked to get to go to summer camp, which I did, until I was about sixteen, you know, and then, then stopped.  So, but that's, you know, in my early years, I, I remember things like that so well.
Speaker 1: Did you become an Eagle Scout at all?
Speaker 2: No, no, the most I became was a Life Scout.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And was that, was that, probably the Scouts, was that the most significant part sort of besides sports?
Speaker 2: At that time, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: I would, I would say, yeah.  It was something to look forward to every week, go to a meeting every Monday night.  We met right through the summer and, of course, then we would go to camp.  We--there had two types of camps.  One camp was a real residential type, you know, seven days a week.  And then, individual troops would go to a camp site in, in Massachusetts where it was a real camping experience.  You had to bring your own food, you know, you had the cooking gear and such things as that, whereas this Camp Yawgoog [Rockville, Rhode Island] was a residential camp.  You just, you just brought your clothing, and, you know, whatever else and, of course, you ate your three meals in a, in a dining hall, a mess hall, or whatever they called it, slept in tents or floor boards, you know, not on the ground, but floor boards, bunks.  That, yeah, that back during those--and, and that was up until the time I was about sixteen.
Speaker 1: Now, did you, when did you start getting involved in sports?  Was that something from, you know, you would play and, and what sports were they?
Speaker 2: Well, I started playing basketball in junior high school and, as well as football.  I started playing football and playing a little baseball, but I had never, I never really got that part, and ran track.  I say ran track--I high jumped.  And then, of course, in high school, it was more concentrated, football and basketball.
Speaker 1: Now, where did you go to junior high?
Speaker 2: It was Central Junior High School, again, in East Providence, went there for three years.  And, as I said, participated in sports and, and not, there weren't any clubs as I remember.  And from there, I went to East Providence Senior High School [later East Providence High School, East Providence, Rhode Island].
Story_ID: 168962
Speaker 1: The interesting thing about Central Junior High School [East Providence, Rhode Island], I, you know, started there in the seventh grade, twelve years of age-- never thought I'd be talking about the future, never gave any thought to the future at that school.  But after--I, I did my student, and to jump forward, I did my student teaching at Central Junior High School.  I wanted to go back there to see teachers that I had had as a student.  I did my student teaching there.  And the principal, who had been the principal when I was there as a student--the last day I was there, I went in to thank him for allowing me to do my student teaching.  And I was sitting there in front of him and he's sitting behind the desk.  And he, he looked at me, and he asked me if, if I, if I would like to come back there to teach.  I said, "Oh, absolutely."  So, I went back to that same junior high school that I went to.  I went back there as a social studies teacher.  I left that school--I graduated from the ninth grade in 1946.  And in 1957, I went back to that school as a social studies teacher, and stayed there until 1970 when I left to go to college.  But I came in as a classroom teacher of social studies and, and left there as the assistant principal.  Is that significant?  It's significant in the sense that I was the second person of color to be hired--what, what, I'm sorry, I mean, the third person of color to be hired in the system, the first to be hired on the secondary level as a, not only as a male, but also as a black.  And so, that was a, you know, I, and, and then I have youngsters who I taught, youngsters who I had to discipline, and now, you know, 19-, I mentioned I started in '57 [1957].  I left in 1970, so there's a period of unrest.  And the, the black is beautiful and, and some of the young people did not appreciate some of the discipline that I had to dole out, especially some of the black kids they thought, he, he's supposed to be different.
Story_ID: 168963
Speaker 1: I want to go back to you in junior high school [Central Junior High School, East Providence, Rhode Island].
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: And, you know, you're coming of age at that point.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: And, you know, I'm just wondering, you know, what, you start really playing more--there's, you know, sports, and you've said--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: So was your, so was your first love basketball at that point?
Speaker 2: First love was basketball.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: And were, you were playing--there was a team actually in the--
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, we played in the league.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And what position did you play?
Speaker 2: I was a forward 'cause I was tall and, and--well, in junior high, I, I'm trying to think now.  In junior high, I, I guess I might say I was, I was next to the tallest on the, on the team.  Yeah, I was, and skinny.  But, yeah, we was a league and we played and it was, you know, I, I mean, gee, not, not making a team, I mean, I never had that problem, you know.  I always made the team and there were some guys that never had that opportunity.
Speaker 1: So, who, do you remember who your coach was at the time?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, my junior high coach was man by the name of Frank Saraceno who was still living.  He's still living.  An interesting thing about him is I had him for science--more interesting when the principal and the assistant principal, who had been in that building for twenty-five years, they came the year that I, the year that I entered that junior high school, the principal and assistant principal were appointed to those positions.  Twenty-five years later in 19-, in 1957, twenty-five years later, I want to be sure of the dates.  I'm saying, '57 [1957], yeah, twenty-five--well, anyway, they both retired at the same time.  This man, who had been my basketball coach who--my science teacher, he became the principal.  I became the assistant principal.  Teachers that I had were still there.  I became the assistant principal.  They were still teaching.  It, it's just, just how, you know, the luck of the draw.  It's just how things were.  But as I tell, you know, try to tell young people now, you know, you don't know what's around the corner, so you got to be prepared, you know, you've got to be prepared.  And I, and I, and I state what I've just said to you.
Speaker 1: What did you learn from him--sort of about, you know, you know, about like the sports, and I mean, it's for the (unclear).  What did you learn?
Speaker 2: Dedication, discipline, but be-, behind all that, the, the, the academics, you know, the studying, the studying, and the studying because that's what I felt.  That's, was the only way that, the only way things were going to get better for you.  Now, how did that happen?  My, my father [Frank Walker] who, as I mentioned, just had a, really a grammar school education.  He used to buy--it was a local newspaper, a black newspaper, The Providence Chronicle, get that every--it came out once a week.  He'd get that, get the Baltimore Afro-American, the Pittsburgh Courier, and the Chicago Defender.  Now, reading, especially the Baltimore Afro-American newspaper, black teachers, black teachers because that's what I, you know, I really focused on it.  So that gave me a different slant on how life was somewhere else.  So, that was and, again, that's sort of a motivating force for me.
Story_ID: 168964
Speaker 1: Now, what, what made you decide--I mean, was there any--did, did you have exposure to any black teachers in your--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: So you, this was something you, but what made you focus on teaching?  Why did you know that instinctively, I mean, or--
Speaker 2: I think because I, I, because I liked to talk and liked to show people things.  That really, it made me, gee, just, and I loved history.  I loved reading and to be able to talk with people about that, about what I had read.  And, of course, if they had read it, then we had this dialogue, so that really was my, that's really how I really got started.  I really wanted to go into teaching.
Speaker 1: So, what, what types of things did you like, you know, periods of history that, that you liked, or do you remember things that caught your attention?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I liked European history, I liked, I liked European history.  I loved, I loved American history.  The Coloni-, well, the whole--all of American history, the Colonial age going up into the settle-, you know, the settlement of the westward movement.  Obviously, the Civil War, and then, I, I didn't think too much about the, the years of the depression, but then, World War II, and being able to reach out to that.  Why?  Because I could read it, not only in the newspaper, but also listen to, listen to people, veterans, you know, and (unclear), 'cause this is--at that point, it was just before television.  So, it was radio, newsreels, you know, and the movies, and such things as that.
Speaker 1: Now, did your father [Frank Walker], was it assumed that he wanted you to--was he saying that he wanted you guys to go into the rubbish business?  Did he ever say that, or it was just the rubbish was an ends to a mean?
Speaker 2: Yeah, ends to a mean.  No, he never, he, he never said, never said that.  The, the, the thing that I--now, now I was, now I'm out of--I mean, I'm now, I'm a professional, I'm a teacher.  And I said to him, I, I said, "Dad, you know, you, you need to think about dumpsters," which--something new and the trucks that would compact the material.  I said, you know, "You need to get one of those trucks.  You wouldn't have to make as many trips to the dump," and such things as that.  But he was, you know, old school.  And he just looked at me and said, "Yeah you, you college guys all have these new ideas."  So, you know, I never got any further than that.  But he never, he was very proud of the fact that his oldest son went to college.  His brother, my, my uncle, was the same, you know, very proud of the fact that his nephew was going to college.  And, of course, along came my, my sibling.  He didn't go.  He went into business, but then the third son and the fourth son all, you know, all went to college.  But he never, he never emphasized that, that business aspect.
Story_ID: 168965
Speaker 1: So, during your, your teenage years, so who was else was influencing you?  That's what I'm trying to sort of figure out what influenced you as a--
Speaker 2: Uh--
Speaker 1: --besides, you know, reading the papers and, you know, seeing that there were-(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Now, okay, you're talking now, what--going into high school [East Providence Senior High School, later East Providence High School, East Providence, Rhode Island]?
Speaker 1: I'm talking high, yeah, going into high school right.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  We went to a Baptist church in Providence [Rhode Island], a black Baptist Church.  The minister there, and perhaps you've heard, heard his name, [Reverend Dr.] Samuel [D.] Proctor.  He was doing graduate work at Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts].  He was also the minister of our church [Pond Street Baptist Church, Providence, Rhode Island].  And he had a great deal of--he had that influence on people.  And he kept, "What are you going to do?"  And now, I'm going into my senior-"What are you going to do?"  So I said, "Well, you know, I'm going to do something."  Hey, what?  I, I'm going to something.  And he had me meet him in his house, and we had a long talk about the future--whatcha going to do?  Although my, my vita doesn't, doesn't show it, I went to Virginia Union University [Richmond, Virginia] for two and a half years because of him.  He, he took me down there.  He left Providence [Rhode Island] and became a member of the faculty at Virginia Union [University, Richmond, Virginia] and took me with him.  He said, "You're, you're going South," so I did.  So he had that type of influence on me in high school.  Other people--
Speaker 1: Did he ever say what he saw in you or did--or how did he message to you?  That's what I--
Speaker 2: It wasn't, it was only after he had written his book, the last book ["The Certain Sounds of the Trumpet: Crafting a Sermon of Authority"?], and he mentioned in the book that when he was in Providence, he saw any number of young people who were not looking to the future.  And because of that, he felt, he felt a commitment of getting these young people to, to get out of that--I hate to say a stagnant mode--but to get out of that do nothing attitude, and do something with their lives.  And I never gave that too much thought, you know, in that, in that respect, but that was his, that's what he always felt was his, his mission.  So he, obviously, he had a great deal of influence on, on me, as well as so many other people.  There were men--I worked, I worked as porter when I was in college and when I, during the summer, coming back from Virginia Union.  And it was a man, I, I think of him every now--an older gentleman, a man by the name of Thomas Dix [ph.].  He was just a nice man.  He was, he was very calm.  And they always talk, you know, about saving your money, you know, I mean, for school, and things like--he was just a nice person.  And the man, obviously was much older than I, but he, he, he had a little influence on me, as well as a friend of my father's [Frank Walker], the man who went to work who, who, who worked with my, worked in my father's job when my father went on his little honeymoon.  He, he became the night foreman and he was a very interesting person to speak with.  You know, some walked, and you've--at least I found that young people can talk to that other person much easier than they can talk to their parents.  And, and I, of course, I was with him five--actually, I was working five or six nights a week, but I was with him, so (laughter) we talked.  I mean, I was doing my job, but you know, we would talk, but he was a very close friend of my father's also.
Speaker 1: So, in high school, you are, you come across a Reverend [Dr. Samuel D.] Proctor, right?
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Story_ID: 168966
Speaker 1: And you're playing sports.  Are you still playing, are you still playing forward on the--and what was the team?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, high school [East Providence Senior High School, later East Providence High School, East Providence, Rhode Island].
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: Yeah, high school basketball.  I was an end in, end in football, and a, a forward in basketball.
Speaker 1: And is that what took up, besides just working, that's what took up a lot, part of your time.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Are you thinking that you want to--at that point, that's--is there any hope--not for professional sports, it's not like you can that, right?  Was there any thought in--no?
Speaker 2: No, no, no thought of that considered.
Speaker 1: 'Cause it's not even possible?
Speaker 2: Not, no, no, not--I mean, the NBA [National Basketball Association] was a--what was it--out there somewhere.  But there, you know, and there were no role models really for, for black youth 'cause it was still lily white for the most part.  No, but never gave, never gave that a thought.
Speaker 1: But on your team, was your team a winning team in high school or not?
Speaker 2: We did, yeah, in my senior year, we did well, yeah.
Speaker 1: What, what does that mean?
Speaker 2: We, we, we won more than we lost.
Speaker 1: (Laughter), okay, okay.  You don't know what I mean--like division championship?
Speaker 2: No, no--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).  Okay, okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: --we didn't win, no, we didn't win any division champ.  Because the format was much different then.  There weren't as many schools at--but, no, we never, we never won any division championships or anything.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 168967
Speaker 1: You know, I want to get a sense, too, of, you know, I'm just--I think I have a sense but, you know, East Providence [Rhode Island] right then is, is, is primarily a working class community.  Am I wrong or right or I mean, I'm just--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, working class, yes, uh-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And there, and it's mainly a white community--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --that you, so okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So but there were enough blacks to have--'cause I've-[Reverend Dr.] Samuel [D.] Proctor.  I wonder if we interviewed--but anyway, there, there are enough blacks to have a Baptist church.
Speaker 2: Well, that's in, that was in Providence [Rhode Island].
Speaker 1: It's in Providence.
Speaker 2: In Providence, yes, oh, in Providence, yes, and not East Providence.  But people came from--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --different parts of the--the metropolitan Providence area to go there.
Story_ID: 168968
Speaker 1: And [Reverend Dr.] Samuel [D.] Proctor, was he--can you describe him as a, as an individual, you know or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was, first and foremost, he was an outstanding preacher.  You probably know he was, what, he was, he was judged to be one of the ten, one of the ten best black preachers in America.  He was affable.  He was very easy to speak with.  He always carried a message, always had a story to relate to whatever the situation was, whatever the incident was.  And as I best remember him--never, never wanted you to admit defeat or failure, wanted you to constantly strive, constantly strive, constantly strive.  That's what I best remember about him.  I remember I was up at Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts] working on my doctorates and, well, I was commuting back and forth 'cause I was still holding down a full time job.  And in one class, this one particular year was just around the time of [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.]'s birthday.  This student, a graduate student, said, you know, "There's a, there's a speaker coming next week to the chapel, Marsh Chapel, and I understand that he's a tremendous speaker."  I say, "Oh, really?"  And so, she pulled out this flyer and, of course, it was Sam Proctor.  At that time, he was in Rutgers [University, New Brunswick, New Jersey], he was at Rutgers, sitting in the Martin Luther King chair.  So I looked at it, and it turned out to be the day that I was going to be in Boston [Massachusetts] anyway.  So I left early in the morning, got up there, sat through his, his speech, and people were standing in line to shake his hand.  And so, I hadn't seen him in maybe three years, so I, I'm standing there.  And I said, "Reverend [Samuel D.] Proctor"--he looked, he says, "Kenny boy, what are you doing here?"  So I said, "Well, you know, I'm up here working on my doctorates."  "Are you really?"  And they were--the, the host, whoever the host committee, they were taking him to lunch somewhere on the campus.  So he said, "How long are you going to be here?"  I said, "Well, I got to stay all day.  I've got my class at 4:30."  He said, "Well, come with me."  So he said, "This is one of my boys."  So I had lunch with him, and just to listen to these folks talking about him, and here I am sitting, you know, sitting at the table.  And, and when I did get my degree, and some friends decided to give me a recognition dinner. And they asked me--now, by this time, I say, he's, he's not only at Rutgers, but he's also at Abyssinian Baptist Church [New York, New York].  He had, he had, he succeeded Adam Clayton Powell.  And so, they asked me, the committee, the chairman asked me who, said, "Who, who would you like to be a guest speaker?"  So I said, "Bob, you know who I like to be the guest speaker."  He said, "Well, tell me."  I said, "Well, I really don't want to tell you because the man is busy.  I mean, and I understand his fee is steep."  He said, "Tell me, who do you want?"  So, I, I let loose with a few choice words.  I said, "You know, who," and he said, "Tell me," so I said, "Reverend Proctor."  He said, "He's coming."  I said, "The money?"  He said, "It's costing us a round trip air ticket to Newark Airport."  And so, he came.  He came and spoke and had people well after that--white people who were there who said, "That, that man, I mean, never heard anybody that speak like him."  I said, "Well, that's, that's Sam Proctor."
Story_ID: 168969
Speaker 1: So, now let me ask you this.  With Virginia Union [University, Richmond, Virginia], how did that come about and was that the place you went right after, you know, high school [East Providence Senior High School, later East Providence High School, East Providence, Rhode Island]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And, and why, and why, okay, what happened there?  That's what I'm wondering.  You spent two and a half years--
Speaker 2: Two and a half years.  I went there because [Reverend Dr. Samuel D.] Proctor took me and--
Speaker 1: And when you say, took you, physically took you?
Speaker 2: Physically took me (laughter), physically.  He, he, he, he had me write a--he actually wrote out a letter.  He said, "Now, these, these are the things that you've got to write and ask about," which I did.  Application, an application came.  I filled out the application, sent it back, I got accepted.  I called and he said, but he knew all that anyway, so he took me down there with him.  And I played basketball, first year.  I had to work, worked in the dining, dining room.  Second year, and then I, you know, so I was finishing my second year.  The Korean War had just started.  And I thought, even though I had a little scholarship, it wasn't anywhere near enough to pay for, obviously, the education.  But being the oldest of five children, I, I thought, I said, you know, this, the next two years, it's going to be a struggle.  So I, I'm going to allow myself to be drafted, which I did.  It, there was a deferment you could buy.  I, so I, I was drafted.  In fact, I have saved my money and such things as that which I did.  And when I gradu-, when I got out of the service two years later, I mean, my goal, I was going to go back to [Virginia] Union [University, Richmond, Virginia] and finish up and such things as that.  Well, that summer, I met my wife.  I mean, I knew her, but I mean it was just a casual hello, goodbye type of thing.  But we, we started going--I came out of the service, and maybe a month or so later, I mean, we started going to movies and, you know, such things as that.  But I went back to Union that September.  And at that time, if you were going with a person or a young lady for six months, I mean, you gotta get, you're supposed to be getting serious.  I mean, it's--so people getting engaged all around me, and here I am in college in Virginia and she's here.  She, and wants to know, what, what, what are his intentions and, you know.  So we talked about it that Christmas and decided I'd come back to Rhode Island to finish college which I did--came back and finished at Providence College [Providence, Rhode Island].  But that, that Virginia Union, that Virginia Union experience was just--it was something I, I, I have with me today.  Why?  I came out of a white environment and went into a black environment, black professors, black college president, black lawyers.  There were some lawyers, black lawyers in Rhode Island, but, you know, two or three black lawyers, black principals.  The whole, you know, it went from one ex-, I mean, it went from one extreme to the other.  And I, I really thrived then, I just, I just thrived then.  The culture was sort of (unclear).  Everything was so different, and I wouldn't trade that for anything.  I just, you know, and I go back every year.  I go, I go back South every year on my way to Florida to, to attend a basketball tournament in Raleigh [North Carolina].  I always stop off in Richmond [Virginia] and look over at Union.  It's larger now, more modern, but I do that because it's--it was just a feeling, you know, just a feeling I have.
Speaker 1: Well, let me, let me just ask two quick questions about that.  Was Virginia Union--who was the president at the time that you attended the Union, do you remember?
Speaker 2: The president was John Ellison.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what was its--who went to Virginia Union back in those days?  I mean, what--
Speaker 2: You mean, students?
Speaker 1: Yeah, students.
Speaker 2: Most of the students were from the Virginia area, but there were students there from New York or Chicago [Illinois], but most of the, most of the students were from the, the greater Richmond area.
Speaker 1: Now, were you going there to be a teacher, to study to be a teacher?
Speaker 2: To be, yeah, yes, uh-hum.
Speaker 1: But it also, didn't it train also religious leaders as to--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, does it have--
Speaker 2: There's, they have a seminary.
Speaker 1: Seminary, that's what I thought.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they have a seminary.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they have a seminary.  It's a liberal arts school but also a seminary, the Virginia Union Seminary.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Story_ID: 168970
Speaker 1: So you came, so, you, you end up getting married, right?
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: And then you come--wait, where did you serve also?  That's the other--
Speaker 2: In Korea.
Speaker 1: In Korea?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where were you stationed, were you stationed at?
Speaker 2: I, I went to Japan and I went to Japan.  I went, I went overseas as a heavy, heavy instrument--infantry man.  They pulled me out of that, what they call a pipeline, they pulled me out of that, as they did so many other men, and sent us to a specialist school.  I became a signal corpsman, a pole lineman, climbing poles, and then went to Korea as a signalman, and then came back out of that.  And that's when I went back to [Virginia] Union [University, Richmond, Virginia] for that one semester before coming back North to, to finish up at Providence College [Providence, Rhode Island].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And then, so Providence, so you're newly married, you just have how, how much to finish up at Providence College (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well, when you transfer schools, you lose credit.  I had gone to Union for two and half years.  Union is a Baptist institution.  Providence College is a Dominican institution, a Catholic institution.  And so, they whacked me good.  I lost, on paper, I lost a year and a half by transferring because there were some courses that just would not fit.  So I spent three years at, at Providence.  So with the two and a half years I spent at Union and the three years, it took me five and a half years to get my undergraduate degree because of the loss of credits.
Story_ID: 168971
Speaker 1: And so, after you got your degree [from Providence College, Providence, Rhode Island], that's when you went back to your junior high school [Central Junior High School, East Providence, Rhode Island].  Is that where--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I went, I went back to that junior high school--
Speaker 1: High school--
Speaker 2: --as, as a teacher.
Speaker 1: That's when, this is 1957?
Speaker 2: Uh-hum, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And has the makeup of the school changed at all, you know, the racial makeup, or is it pretty much the same and--
Speaker 2: Oh, no, it's changed.  It's, there's a new building now.  They have a new building but that, no, the makeup has changed.  East Providence [Rhode Island] has a heavy influx of, of, Portuguese people.  And so, that has, that has magnified--heavy, heavy, heavy influx of Portuguese that came over for a better way of life from the Azoreland, not, not from the mainland, but from the islands.  And then you have a, a number of, of Hispanic youngsters.  But the black population has increased proportionately, not, not as great as in a place like Providence [Rhode Island], but it has increased.  So, it's a more diverse group now.  And, of course, the faculty, the staff is diverse now, I mean, it's diverse.  It's, it's not like it was when I was there as a student or when I went back there as a teacher or as an administrator.
Story_ID: 168972
Speaker 1: So you really sort of existed--I mean in terms of the African American experience, sort of more with the level playing field.  You sort of have felt that, you know, you, you, in many ways, right?  You didn't have, you didn't, you have and up to this point, had any neg-, negative experiences, racial experiences?
Speaker 2: Well, if, if they were there, I, I, you know, if they, I didn't see them.  But in retrospect, when you look back, there were some, but I never gave too much, you know.  For example, I remember in a history class and, as I told you, I loved history.  We were having an exam.  I, I'm, I'm enjoying it.  And a woman in front of me, a student in front of me, turned around and asked me an answer to one of the questions.  She said, "What do you have for that?" And I said, "What, what did you say?"  "What do you have for that?  What, what do you have?"  The teacher, Miss McElroy [ph.], she, she looked up and she saw us.  So, she said, "Kenneth, stop talking about the test."  I was innocent, but she zeroed in on me, not, not the person that had asked me the question.  But, but I think, you know, that was something similar to that.  But, I, I, to say that I had a, I, no, I can't really say I had a negative, I can't really say I had a negative feedback, but I think it's this.  I think it was that type of setting still that propelled me to do as well, if not better, than all my, my counterparts.
Story_ID: 435059
Speaker 1: Okay.  So I want to take you back to, you know, your early teaching days.  And I would like to know--so you're back in your school [Central Junior High School, East Providence, Rhode Island].  You, this has been your lifelong ambition to teach.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum, uh-hum.
Speaker 1: So, are the things that you're learning about teaching--I mean, your, you know, first of all, you're working with people who are actually teaching you.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: But, you know, as a young teacher, you know, are you learning how to discipline the kids, you know, what, I mean, are you idealistic as a teacher?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I'm just trying to figure out--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, when--because I got married before I finished college, at my wife's [Gail B. Walker] insistence, I mean, she wasn't pregnant, she just wanted to, you know, I mean, get married, (unclear) either official, cut the bait, so I got married.  And that did away with any thought of continuing to play basketball in college.  So I got a job.  I got a job in a settlement house in Providence [Rhode Island] that had as their clients, public housing students.  The two years that I spent working in this settlement house, as the boys worker, coaching the basketball team, supervising just general activity.  Those two years working there with the director of the programs, I said, it really served as a backdrop for me to continue on because I, I got to meet people, different people.  I mean, different people--well, single household, I mean single parent household, such things as that.  So when I started teaching, I had that somewhat as a backdrop, a background of, of realizing that, yeah, there's thirty kids, but they're thirty different stories.  Some of them are good, some of them aren't so good.  So, what I'm saying is taking each individual as you saw them and that helped me, helped me to discipline and helped me with instruction because, you know, the thirty kids were supposed to be a homogenous group.  Perhaps, perhaps all of them weren't on the same page and I had to work with them.  And that made me a better teacher.  And if we fast forward a little bit, I tell people to, today, and I, if I'm speaking somewhere, those youngsters that I had in that school--not when I was, not so much when I was administrative assistant principal, when I was in the classroom, those youngsters promoted me to the point of other people noticing me.  Those youngsters--not, and why, they obviously went home and told their, their parents about Mr. Walker.  And I had, I was in the guidance department.  I was teaching, but I also had part-time guidance counseling.  And there was a young lady, a white young lady who, good student, good student, and I asked her what course, what course of study she was going to take the next year.  And she said, "Well, I'm going to take a business course."  And I said, "The business?"  "Yeah, I'm going to take a business course.  That's what my mother and father, they want me to take a business course."  I said, "Well, you know, I think you ought to take a college course.  You, you can take your typing or--  Well--"  I, I said, "Well, I, I'm going to have your mother come in."  So that particular day, the first period, I had a first period unassigned.  I'm going to talk to this mother.  And I saw this woman in a car, and she was talking to a teacher at the far end of the corridor.  And she started walking down, and I thought perhaps, I though perhaps that she was the parent.  So she, she walked right down.  She looked at me.  And I said, "May I help you?" And she looked and "No," she says, "no, I, I'm all right, I'm all set."  So, okay, so she walked down into the corridor, and I went back into my classroom.  No one was in there at the time.  And she walked back up, walked by.  So, I said, Gee, she's not here.  So I went up to the office and I told the secretary, I was going down to the teachers' room.  I was going to smoke my pipe and have a cup of coffee.  So I got downstairs, poured the cup of coffee, had just lit the pipe, and over the PA system, "Mr. Walker, will you report to the office?"  So I put the pipe down, the coffee, I go up to the office, and who's sitting there in the office, but this woman that I had seen, you know, fifteen minutes before.  I said, "Yes, Mrs. (unclear)," whatever you told me.  She says, "Well, Mrs. so and so is here to see you."  I looked at this woman, and I said, you, I said, "I asked you, I asked you, could I help you, and you said no."  You--so I--well, she looked at me, and I could tell she was a little embarrassed but I got around it.  We talked, we talked about her daughter.  And I said, "You know, tells me something about your family."  "Oh, what's that, what's that?"  I said, "Your daughter, whatever her name was, which I've forgotten, she talked about Mr. Walker, but she never spoke about what Mr. Walker looked like."  "Oh, that's true, that's true."  So I, I let her off the hook then and which was good because it and I, and I think that happened a great many times with, with kids.  They never really, they never told their parents who I was other than the fact that I was a teacher.  On the other hand, the, the few kids of color, many of them knew me so they knew who I was, so that wasn't, that wasn't a question.
Story_ID: 435060
Speaker 1: Now, let me ask you, why did you go back to get your master's?
Speaker 2: The only way you could receive--well, you receive that there was a difference at that time of $100 a year in salary if you had the master's.  Secondly, in order to get ahead in the school system, you had to have a master's degree.  Those were the two reasons.  One, because there's $100 more a year and, secondly, if you wanted to be considered for a promotion, you had to have the master's degree.
Speaker 1: And so you went to--you decided to go, were you working at the same time that you went back to--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum, yes, yes, both--
Speaker 1: Okay, to Rhode Island College [Providence, Rhode Island]?
Speaker 2: Rhode Island College, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And was that a one-year program?
Speaker 2: Well, it, it would be, it would be a solid year if, in fact, you weren't, you know, if you weren't teaching.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But most of the courses were offered in late afternoon or early evening.  So it took me, it took me three years because I was taking two courses a semester, plus, plus I had what they call a summer residency requirement--
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: --which you had to take.  You took two courses during the summer.
Story_ID: 435061
Speaker 1: You were at East Providence [Rhode Island] schools though through 1970.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: And you have become the assistant principal.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: So that's actually in the time that you got your master's, too, during that time.
Speaker 2: Yes, uh-hum, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you were saying that, you know, that the community had, you know, it was the '60's [1960s] that where you viewed as old school by some of the kids and--
Speaker 2: Yes, oh, yes, oh, yes, 'cause I didn't have a fro.  I had like long sideburns but I didn't have a fro.  And I, you know, fine, I wasn't interested in all this rah-rah.  You know, you're here for an education and this is what I think you, you, you need to get.  And so, you know, some of the kids, they really didn't like that.  And I, I don't know if I had mentioned earlier but since that time, I've had the, the, the parents now, themselves, you know, didn't appreciate some of what you made us do back then, but I understand now.  Let me buy you a drink and that type of thing.
Speaker 1: So what was your, what was your philosophy on education--
Speaker 2: Uh--
Speaker 1: --and, and how to, you know, deal with kids?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Everyone can learn, everyone can learn.  Some learn quick-, some learn quicker than others, but everyone can learn.  Everyone, every student, the men, every student has to have respect.  You have to respect that student because in the long run--you just don't know.  You don't know how that may come back to haunt you later if you don't give that person respect.  So treating everyone, you know, on a level playing field, with, with, with respect.  That, that was my basic philosophy.
Speaker 1: Now, then that's what I'm wondering.  So how, how did you go--and you were mainly still teaching social sciences, studies, I--
Speaker 2: Social, social studies, well, social studies and English.  I ended up teaching both English and social studies.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, tell me, how did things--did you notice--I want to ask one question though, did you notice during that time period that people start getting less--what about their use of the English language?  Were there, was there any, you--
Speaker 2: No, the English language was still pretty up through--well, it was starting to change, you know.  We're getting into some of the, the slang, the, the "ghetto-ease" as I called it.  Yeah, that started in the late '60s [1960s], yeah, the, the--I call it the "ghetto-ease".  They're various expressions of--I, I think of, like a hog.  You came to a hog, who was a Cadillac, why--'cause it took so much gasoline.  But then, again, you're talking with some people, hog meant a motorcycle, so it, it depend, depended on your, your audience, you see.  But, yeah, the, the words, the terminology were, yeah, were starting to change.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Story_ID: 435062
Speaker 1: Now, you, how did you come to teach at Rhode Island College [Providence, Rhode Island]?  That's where you went, but then in 1970, you--
Speaker 2: Right--
Speaker 1: And what was Rhode Island, can you describe what kind of college it was and what it's--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Rhode Island College, at one time, was Rhode Island.  It was known as Rhode Island College of Education, teacher training, teacher training.  And they changed, they went, they became a liberal arts school.  You might say at one time, there were--most of the folks in Rhode Island that were teachers graduated from Rhode Island College.  So that's really, it was a teacher ed school.  As I said, Rhode Island College of Education became, it became Rhode Island College because they were getting away from being strictly a teacher training institution.  I had the opportunity to work in a federal, federally-sponsored program called Project Upward Bound [sic. Upward Bound Project] in 1966.  A friend of mine, who I refereed with, who was a high school principal, called me one day.  He said, "Ken, what are you going to do this summer?"  I said, "I'm going to work in the mill."  He said, "Well, his program," and we talked about it.  And so, I started teaching in this program.  Why, I wasn't teaching, I was like a quasi-administrator.  And so, I did that.  Well, when I became assistant principal, I was still working during the summer there.  And one of the department chairs at Rhode Island College, who came out to observe student teachers in our building, I, I got to meet him, and know him pretty well.  And he saw me one day.  It was, you know, in the summer time and he said, "How you doing?"  I said "Fine."  He said, "Are you happy?"  I said, "Listen, all the kids are in class, no problems, of course, I'm happy."  I said, "And the best part of it is we got another three weeks, and then I'm going to the Vineyard."  This is back, 19-, 1970.  He said, "Oh, really."  He, he said, "How would you like to come here?"  I said, "To do what?"  He said, "To, well, to teach," you know.  I said, "Aww, naw, you people don't make any money."  Well, the end result was without going through all of the ins and outs, I began teaching in 1970 there, where, where I stayed for twenty-three years--
Speaker 1: Can, you des--(simultaneous)
Story_ID: 435063
Speaker 1: --Twenty-three years--
Speaker 2: Can you describe the Upward Bound Program--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --you know, for people who don't understand Upward Bound--
Speaker 1: The Upward Bound Program--
Speaker 2: --and even, do you know anything about its origins?
Speaker 1: Yeah, the Upward Bound Program was started, per, obviously, through the Office of Education.  It's, it's the tail--I dare say it was the tail end of the Great Society, the New Frontier with President [John F.] Kennedy and President [Lyndon B.] Johnson.  It was for the educationally and economically disadvantaged youngster who showed promise of being identified by teachers, social workers, detached workers, these detached workers who worked the streets to be sure that the kids weren't getting into trouble.  That, that's, that was the background of the program.  So during the summer, they would have academics, showing them, you know, the importance of education, such things.  They had a small stipend at that time, like $6 a week.  We took them on many trips, so they could broaden their, their cultural aspects of life.  And as the program became more and more progressive and more intensified as it is now, they track these kids all for twelve months.  In other words, they get, they get identified, maybe in their sophomore year.  And, and, of course, they're going to meet the guidelines, Federal guidelines.  And they're tracked for the entire time they go to, they go to the campus for the, for the summer, six weeks or whatever.  And upon graduating from high school, obviously, they've got all of these various colleges after them.  So, but Rhode Island College [Providence, Rhode Island] is one of the first institutions in the country since the 19-, 1966, I believe, but that's the general background.
Speaker 2: Was the program effective, Upward Bound?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, it is.  It's, it still is effective, yeah, 'cause it's given kids an opportunity, number one, to be on a college campus which, which they never would have had.  It's given their parents an opportunity to see what can happen, so yeah, it's been very effective.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 435064
Speaker 1: And let me, let me ask you--I'm going to sort of change a little bit here.  When did you start refereeing?
Speaker 2: Nineteen, well informally, informally, like 19-, 1958, '59 [1959], informally.  Then, then, that I got really involved in it, and I took the various tests needed to become, you know, a certified referee.
Speaker 1: Can you talk about that process?  I don't think people know a lot about referees and how their--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, you start out doing, doing junior high games and CYO games, Catholic Youth Organization, and church games and such things as that.  And, and some people like it, some people don't.  And if you like it, you, you're able to take all the criticism and all the other stuff.  And then you, you apply to a local board and you go through a series of tests, written tests, as well as a floor exam where individuals watch you refereeing a floor.  So you become, you, you become certified or licensed in that respect.  And then, depending on how you feel about doing that, you, you know, you, you strive to do college games.  And it's like all over again, you know, people are watching you.  So it's somewhat--if, regardless of how good you might be, it's still a luck of the draw if you get that lucky break.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what, what makes a good referee?
Speaker 2: To stay, to stay out of the limelight.
Speaker 1: What does that mean?  I mean, within the course of the game?
Speaker 2: Yeah, not be seen.  The game is going on and, and calls are being made.  Obviously, people agreeing with most of the calls, but you're, you're there, you know, you're there, and you're not there.  You're like the invisible man.  And you hope that nothing goes wrong in terms of fights or whatever in the game and no controversies.  And before you know it, the game's over.
Speaker 1: And do most referees, are they ones who've played the sport before or as, was it helpful that you have played basketball?
Speaker 2: Well, it's, it depends on the individual.  It can be helpful.  It can be a disadvantage.  Why could it, why is it helpful?  Because you understand the game, but it could be a disadvantage because you think you know so much about the game and, and, and the rules are such that you never gave rules a great deal of thought.  So things are done so well--you try to say, well, I use my common sense.  That common sense could be wrong because that's not the correct rule.  I'm not talking about on a, on a written exam.
Speaker 1: Now, how many rules does, does a referee have to learn and are they standard?  I mean, is it standard for every type--
Speaker 2: Well, it's supposed to be standard all over the world, but I've--not, I'm sorry, all over the United States because Europe has a different--their rules are different than the United States.  But there are so many rules.  I mean, we can go on and on and on.  It's like a buy, you have a book like a Bible--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --that covers everything.
Speaker 1: And, and when did you--when you got it started with refereeing, how many referees were there--black, black?
Speaker 2: In Rhode Island, none.
Speaker 1: How about in other parts of the country?
Speaker 2: In New England, in New England, I bet the entire New England region, it probably were fifteen or twenty.  College officiating, I was the first in New England.  And then a fellow from Connecticut came after me, which meant I did many games where I was the only person of color.  That was back in the '70's [1970s].  That has all changed now, obviously.  You pick up, you what, pick up, you turn on the television of the game, you'll see--there was a time when I knew most of the officials but that, those days are gone.
Speaker 1: And how does, how did it work, you know, is it something you did, you did it in season?
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: Right, and you worked your, you know, you were still teaching.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you were, you had to basically travel, too.
Speaker 2: Travel, uh-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, was there any involvement during, sort of practice season, no?  I mean, do you--I'm just wondering how you, how do you train as a referee?  Maybe this is a--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, well, you have two ways.  First, you have the physical, you had, you had the PT [physical training], shall we say, where you get in shape--running, jogging, running backwards, all those things.  Then you work scrimmages--see, schools before they actually start their season, they, they have scrimmages with other schools, in high school at least, and even in college to a degree.  So you work those scrimmages, you know, game, you know, game situations.  That's, you know, that's, that's how you, you know, that's how you get in shape.
Story_ID: 435065
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you talk about--I mean, 'cause I don't, not many people know about this area.  I mean, as a career or how people get chosen or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  Well, it's, it's luck of the draw.  You have to be very, you know, it, you, you're lucky.  I was lucky--first of all, by being in education, I had time to go.  When I went to the college, I, I--
Speaker 1: You mean Division school?
Speaker 2: Please?
Speaker 1: Oh, you mean, when you went to, to, Providence [College, Providence, Rhode Island], which--
Speaker 2: No, when I, when I was teaching, when I was teaching at the college [Rhode Island College, Providence, Rhode Island] and I was refereeing, many people can't, during the week, they, they put a 100-mile limitation on their travel because you have to be in, you have to be in the places an hour and a half before the game.  So, with me, the way I could arrange my schedule, it was never a problem, even if there were times when I would tell the class, look, we are not going to meet next week because I'm going to be such and such place.  So, so for me, it was, it was ideal.  And, as I said, I was very fortunate.  And just, well, you see a lot of the country, you, you know, talking about coaches.  There are many fine coaches, some that you just don't want to be around, they're nasty, excuse me, just like fans.  At some places you go, you would go, fans, fans were great.  Other places you'd go, oh, my God, what do we got here?  Going North, going up to Maine and Vermont, even New Hampshire, in the early days, they never saw anyone of color so it was kind of different.  "Where are you from?"  "I'm from Rhode Island."  "What do you do?"  "I'm a, a college referee."  "You are?"  "What do you teach there?"  Things like that.  So it was, it was broadening their outlook on, on people, I, I always thought.
Speaker 1: So how, how many referees are there in, in the col-, you know, in the col-, I mean, college referees are there in the country?
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, I don't know what the number would be.  I know that men doing high school basketball and such things, and this would include some college men.  There are fifteen thousand, fifteen thousand that are members of what they call the International Association of Approved Basketball Officials.
Story_ID: 435066
Speaker 1: And, and tell us some stories.  You know, I had asked you earlier about just some stories from your, you know, from your time as a referee?
Speaker 2: I think of--well, I, I remember once I teched, I called a technical foul on this young man.
Speaker 1: What game is this, do you remember?
Speaker 2: No, no, I don't remember the game.  But a coach, you know, I teched him.  And the coach said, "Well, what, what happened?"  So I said, "Well, I happen to know, coach, that my mother and father were married for at least a couple of years before I was born.  And, and he called me something that--related to me being born out of wedlock."  Well, the coach laughed.  He thought, you know, he thought that was funny.  He, "Wow, that's pretty good, Ken."  I can think of being at Dartmouth College in Hanover, New Hampshire and it, the game was almost over and I, I guess, I guess Dartmouth had called a time out.  We're ready to play and the team that calls a time out, when they're ready to play, you, you begin playing.  You don't wait.  And the other team has to be ready to play, too.  Well, the other coach and I, I don't know, I may be illusioned.  So, I say, "Okay, men, let's go, we'll ready to go."  So he said to me, this other coach said, "Yeah, Walker, we know, you got to get back to punch a clock in the morning."  I said, "What did you say?"  Officially, you're not supposed to talk to coaches, see.  I, I was, I'm always guilty of that.  I mean, I could be indicted on that every day.  So, "What did you say?"  He said, "Aw," said, "yeah, you got to get, get back, got to punch a clock in the morning."  "Well," I said, "let me tell you something.  I got more degrees behind my name than the president of your institution, so don't give me this business about, I got to punch a clock.  As a matter of fact, I think I'll stay over and do some skiing," which wasn't really true.  So the next time I saw him, he, he, he said, you know, he said, "Gee, you know, we had those words."  He said, "I, I wasn't really, you know, I just had something to say."  I said, "Well, I work too long and hard for what I have for, for you to make, and you, you probably did think that I was a blue collar worker."  I said, not to (unclear) being a blue collar worker, but I'm not a blue collar worker.  He said, "Yeah, and I heard that, yeah, yeah, you, you're a doctor, right?  I, yeah, yeah, you're right."  So, and so that, I mean, I think of those two stories.  I think of, of going somewhere.  And I, I had been chairman of the Rhode Island Parole Board for a number of years.  And someone had seen me, had seen at least an article or something I had done--he said, "Gee, you, you, you, you, you lead a different type of life.  I guess, see, calling a ball game is easy, huh?  I mean, when you're making decisions on people."  I said, "Yeah, it's," I said, "but it all affects people one way or the other, whether it's there or there."  So, yeah, but it is different, so, you know, you, so and it, and as I said, there are some coaches that are just good people and there are some others that, that--
Speaker 1: Who--(simultaneous)
Story_ID: 435067
Speaker 1: --Who were some of your favorite coaches?  And what was your--who--you were in what--were you in division, you were--
Speaker 2: I did all three, Division I, II, and III of, of college, and, of course, high school.
Speaker 1: Is that usual that you would do all three different--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: So you travelled, you travelled all over?
Speaker 2: Travelled all over the East [Coast]; went north as far as Maine; went south as far as South Carolina; went west as far as Indiana, Bloomington, Indiana; and, and then I went to Angola, Africa with the--that's the fur-, obviously, that's the furthest I ever went, but everything in between.
Speaker 1: And who were some of the schools in Division I, II, and III and that?
Speaker 2: What--
Speaker 1: The Division I are the--
Speaker 2: Villanova [Villanova University, Villanova, Pennsylvania], Division I, Villanova; Penn State [Pennsylvania State University, State College, Pennsylvania]; University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]; Rutgers [Rutgers University, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey]; St. John's [St. John's University, New York, New York]; Fordham [Fordham University, New York, New York]; Manhattan [Manhattan College, New York, New York]; University of Connecticut [Storrs, Connecticut]; University of Rhode Island [Kingston, Rhode Island]; Brown [Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island]; Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey]; Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut]; Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York]; Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], all those schools.  I, I worked, worked, worked all those schools at one time or another.
Speaker 1: And who has been your favorite coach in sort of college sports?
Speaker 2: My most favorite coach, Division I, would be Chuck Daly who went on to coach the Detroit Pistons [Auburn Hills, Michigan].  He was at the University of Pennsylvania.  A coach by the name of Jack Kraft who was at Villanova, then came to Rhode Island [University, Kingston, Rhode Island].  A fellow by the name of Tom Commody [ph.] who coached at the University of Rhode Island.  His name slips my mind--Jim Calhoun, who's now at the University of Connecticut.  I had him when he was at Northeastern [University, Boston, Massachusetts] for a number of years.  A fellow by the name of Frank Sullivan, who is Division II coach at Bentley College [sic, Bentley University, Waltham, Massachusetts], who now is at Harvard.  So, Bob Brannum who's a former Celtic, Boston Celtic [Boston, Massachusetts] player who, who coached at Brandeis University [Waltham, Massachusetts].  So I guess if I sat here long enough, I could think of some others.
Story_ID: 168982
Speaker 1: I think about, you know, some of the things that I've, I've been lucky, I've been very fortunate.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I, I've been, I've been, I'm very fortunate.  I--
Speaker 2: So once you get into the--the fifteen thousand, that seems like a lot of, I guess, a lot of people, but that's--
Speaker 1: Although that, that group--
Speaker 2: --but that's, that's really all part-time, right?  No one is--is, is anyone--do--
Speaker 1: There are college officials now doing it full time--
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: --during the season.  Now, some of them have jobs.  They're salesman.  They have different jobs.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: But some other, I know of men who have taken leave of absence for a year or two.
Speaker 2: Well, and, and, done--
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause the money is so great.  You've got people making--you got, you--guys making $75,000 a year 'cause it's, it's all taxable now, you know, you can't--wherever you go at whatever conference, number one, after your signature is your social security number and--
Speaker 2: But before it wasn't?
Speaker 1: Oh, no, they pay you cash--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --or, or they wouldn't send you the WD [Wage Division] form.
Speaker 2: (Laughter), so that's all (laughter).
Speaker 1: I would, I would say (unclear)--I, I was audited twice.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And, and my wife [Gail B. Smith], my wife didn't know, she didn't know.  And one time, we're coming back from vacation down here years ago.  And, and, Labor Day, 'cause I was still, I was teaching.  And it was this big manila envelope--I looked, Internal Revenue [Service].  They had it down.  I mean it was everything--if you wish to contest it, do it, do (unclear).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) so (laughter).
Speaker 1: I showed it to my wife.
Speaker 2: You can't do any (unclear) (laughter).
Speaker 1: They had it, it was there.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: 'Cause she, she looked at it.  She said, that, that was the first one.  And she said, "Well, well," she said, "You, you made it, so I mean you, you gotta, you're going to have to pay it."  She, she handed it back to me.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: And, and the last one was just, just before I was going to retire from (unclear)--I had, I mean, heck with it--I worry about--well, I always filed, I mean, I always filed for most of it.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: But I showed it to her.  She said, "Are you telling me that--" and she's good with figures--"are you telling me that you made that, that, percentage-wise, you made this much more over what we declared?"  "Yeah," I said, "I guess--."  She says, "Well, you're go have to pay it since you got it."  And she, she handed the thing back to me.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: All right.  I paid it, this--what are you going to do?
Speaker 2: So, so, from now on, right, on the street.
Speaker 1: So, now, but now, see, you can't do that.
Speaker 2: You can't do--
Speaker 1: But, but, you, you see, you can deduct, deduct your uniform.
Story_ID: 168983
Speaker 1: Can you tell me, is there a history of the referee?  Did the games always have referees from the very beginning always?
Speaker 2: Uh-hum, yeah.  Some weren't so fair, but I, you, they, first, there would be people connected right with that institution who would do it,  And then, of course, to become more non-partisan, they reached out, and that's how officiating started.  There's a lot of money there and it--we've tried to get young men in Rhode Island, young blacks in Rhode Island interested in officiating.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We've tried.  But I, I told them, you know, "It's tough."  You, and you got to have a family.  You got to have--if you, you know, you got, your family's got to understand that, that comes first.  That, that comes first, that comes, that comes first.  Now, if, if you're not married to a woman, and there are some men--women involved now, so I say, "If you're not, if you're not married to a woman, or you're not married to a man, or you're not going with a man, or going with a woman who understands all this, then you're going to hurt yourself 'cause you, you got to have that thought on your mind.  You, you want to go out to dinner, or you got a game.  Well, you got to go to the game."  It, it does a job on your home life.
Speaker 1: So, why are there not more former players finding careers as referees?  It would seem that--'cause a lot of them just end up falling off on the, you know, not doing anything.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, it's, it, it, it can be discouraging, you know.  It's so, it's a different life, it's a different world.  You, you--it's different.  You can't, you can't socialize.  You--well, it cuts into your life.  I mean, I didn't realize Valentine's Day was so important till I stopped officiating back in 1990.  I, I mean, people go out, pe-, people go out Valentine's Day.  They go out.  I mean, forget the candy, forget the (unclear).  They go out.  They take their wives out.  They--it's, it's a what, other than what, Mother's Day, New Year's Eve, it's like the third biggest day in the, in the history.  Another (unclear)--well, I was working, never gave it a thought.  But, so I said, you got to have that person--a person's got to understand.  You've got to have an understanding person because you are on the move.  I mean, you, you don't see your children.  So what is happening?  In my case, personally, I, I tried to make it up with my grandchildren, and they're able to do things with me that their, that their mother, their mothers or their father were not able to do because--hey, I was a disciplinarian when I was home.  And they, they, for a while, they didn't understand why he could change though.
Speaker 1: So, how many, how many nights were you away?  What is this--
Speaker 2: You could be--maybe twice a year, I worked seven nights, seven, seven nights, maybe five nights, and two afternoons.  Maybe I worked the Saturday afternoon and Sunday afternoon.  So, you got the college schedule, and then if you--see, at the time, col-, high schools are playing Tuesdays and Fridays.  So, let's assume, you had a college game on a Monday.  You may have had a high school game on a Tuesday, or maybe you had a college game.  So you worked maybe, you worked a high school game on a Wednesday; a college game on a Thursday; a high school, a college game, that's Friday; Saturday, college game; and maybe that Sunday afternoon, you did a college game somewhere.  But that didn't--I mean, seven days, that didn't--I, I think in the course of a year, in three or four years, that only happened to me a couple of times.  We usually work about four, five nights a week.
Speaker 1: And when you say that there, it's a lonely, or you--it's not, you can't really socialize.  What is, what are the, you mean, in terms of ethics or what, I'm not--
Speaker 2: Yeah, with your, with, you go into a, you, you get, you've got to be to the place an hour and a half before.  They don't want you socialize with anybody.  You're there to do a job.  You, you, you're in the locker room or whatever.  That, that's starting out.  As you get older, you get to be a veteran.  You know, you get a little more leeway.  Talk to a coach, answer a question.  However, if one coach wants to talk to you, you're supposed to bring the other coach, so that the other coach won't think that the first coach is getting an edge on him.  Don't discuss the game at all.  Reporters, you don't discuss the game with the reporters.  You shower, you do whatever you got to do.  If you're travelling together, you get in the car and you talk about the game.  Maybe you'll stop and get something to eat.  If you're a long distance, like if--I've come from, I've driven to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and come back the same day.  So you're anxious to get back because maybe you got something to do the next day that's important, you know.  In school, you know, not necessary so much classroom, but something important, a meeting or whatever, or a funeral, or a wake or whatever.  So you're leading that normal life, but then you got this extracurricular thing which is a good way to keep your weight down.
Story_ID: 168984
Speaker 1: So you, what, what did you like about it [refereeing]?
Speaker 2: Starting, I liked the excitement, going different places, making money.  And then as you get older, it's what, if, if you asked me, well, okay, that's all well and good.  Why'd you stop?  I stopped because the excitement of getting in a vehicle, or getting on a plane and going somewhere to work was still there, but the weather, you have to be there.  The game is being played.  You have to be there.  You can't say, well, I couldn't make it because if you're flying, you take an earlier flight.  If you're driving, you leave earlier.  And you're, and you're considered a single contractor, so they're not interested in excuses.  So, the weather played a, you know, played a major role.  I, I never, I never looked at the weather forecast in the summertime or fall.  But from December to March, what's it going to be like, what's it going to be like, because of, you know, especially in New England.
Speaker 1: Do you--is one game that you officiate, is there one game that stands out in your mind?  Or any talent that you were, you know, you know, basketball talent that you--
Speaker 2: Well, oh, yeah, I saw players that--
Speaker 1: Or any of your favorite players?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I always say a person that I really enjoyed so much because he was such a gentleman--a young man that played for Holy Cross College [sic. College of the Holy Cross, Worcester, Massachusetts] a fel-, a young man by the name of Ronnie [Ron] Perry, oh, just a fine, fine young man.  I, I, I'd put him at the top of the list in terms of class, you know, just a fine, fine person.  And then there were other players that I, I never, I never officiated their college games.  I'm thinking of two in particular that went to Providence College [Providence, Rhode Island], Marvin Barnes, who fell off, was into the NBA [National Basketball Association], but fell off, got involved with drugs or whatever.  And, and another young man by the name of Ernie DiGregorio who was, who was outstanding.  They, they're local.  There are, there are some others, but well, a young man that this year will be coaching the Washington Wizards [Washington, D.C.].  He played for Rutgers [University, New Brunswick, New Jersey].  He was a smooth ball player, Eddie Jordan, and he coached, was assistant coach with the Lakers [Los Angeles, California], assistant coach, I think up in Portland with the Trail Blazers [Portland, Oregon].  But now, he's--this coming year, he is coaching the Washington Wizards.
Story_ID: 168985
Speaker 1: Now, I want to take a little turn.  I'll come back to basketball a little later and to teaching, but I want to go to you as head of the [Rhode Island] State Parole Board--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --and how that even happened, you know, to come about because that seems an unlikely--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --it doesn't fit any place.
Speaker 2: At Rhode Island College [Providence, Rhode Island], they had a program called New Options (cannot be verified) or something.  College--
Speaker 1: This is, this is what year?
Speaker 2: '78 [1978], '77 [1977], '78 [1978].  I had a call one day from a woman who ran this program, Project Option, I think it was.  It was a program whereby the college people, college professors were going into the prison to teach courses, psychology, sociology, history, English.  She asked me if I would be willing to teach an intro psych course.  And I said, "At the prison?"  She--"yes."  I said, "This is for college credit?"  She said, "For college credit."  "For Rhode Island college credit?"  She--"yes."  I said "Psych department is not going to let me go in and teach."  She said, "Well, you have a master's in counseling."  I said, "Yeah, but, you know, people, they protect their turf and all."  She said, "Will you do it?"  I said, "Yeah, good luck," and I laughed.  I said "yeah."  She said, "I'll get back to you."  She called me back in about four days.  She said, "You'll all set.  You're going to teach this course."  So I started teaching this course, intro--just psych 101.  Then during the fall--that was during the, it was spring.  During the summer, I taught a course in, in what they call a drug unit, people that had been incarcerated because of drugs and sociology.  It--enjoyable.  I did that--I started out in '78 [1978], so I did that '78 [1978], '79 [1979].  In the fall of '79 [1979], November, so I get a call from a woman who works for the [Rhode Island] Department of Corrections.  And she said, "Ken, John Moran (ph.), who's the Director of Corrections and my boss, he'd like to talk to you about going on the [Rhode Island State] Parole Board."  I said (laughter), "I--come on, I'm not interested."  "Oh, well, he wants to talk to you."  Now I had been approached by a previous governor, but I was working on my doctorates.  And I, I said no, no, I'm not interested.  But, well, 'cause when you're working on your doctorates, you gotta be focused.  So, anyway, I--she says, "well, talk to him," so I spoke to him.  This is in--now we're getting into the first of December of, of '70 [1970], '78 [1978] and--'79 [1979], I'm sorry.  And in talking--well, I mean, he says, "Well, who, a person is leaving, a person who is on the board is leaving, moving out of state, a government job moving out of state.  And he was the one black member on the board."  So he said, "Ken, very honestly we, we've got have, you know, we got to replace him with another black.  And it's got to be someone that is well-known."  And I, I said, "Yeah, yeah, John."  And he said, "So I'd like you to serve."  I said, "Well," so I started asking him questions.  He didn't have the answers.  He said, "I'll get back to you," which he did.  He said, well, (unclear).  I said, "I don't know, John, I don't know."  So, he said, "Well, the governor is going to call you."  So I mentioned it to my wife [Gail B. Smith].  She said, "What are you going to tell him?"  I said, "Don't worry, I'm not going to, I am not going to do it."  Well, the governor called me.  And he said, "Ken, if you just do me this favor, you know, just one year--that's all that's left on this person's appointment.  And after the year, you can walk away from it."  I said, "Okay."  It's 1979, so the appointment was 1980, finishing out a term.  From January of '80 [1980] to January of '81 [1981], I'll be all through.  Well, January of '81 [1981], the governor reappointed me.  Without even asking me, he reappointed me.  And, but then I asked the question to John Moran, I said, you know, "He identified me."  He said, "Well, you know, the inmates--they say, hey, the guy, he's straight.  He tells it like it is, you know, he, he has real hog bones and they, they respected you."  He said, "Well, if that's the case if he is, ideal for the position."  So that was 1980.  And I'm, I'm now on my fifth governor.  I've been on the board for twenty-three years.
Speaker 1: So you're--(simultaneous)
Story_ID: 168986
Speaker 1: Can you talk about the [Rhode Island State Parole] Board, how, what size it is, how many prisons are within the penal system there, you know--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum, yeah.  We have--when I, when I got on the board, there were five members.  There are now seven.
Speaker 1: Appointed, all appointed by the--
Speaker 2: All, all appointed by the governor.  When we were all part-time, I was reappointed by the governor--three-year terms overlapping.  I was chairman for eight years and--
Speaker 1: The years between what and what?
Speaker 2: 198-, 1985 to 1993.  At that time, part-time, part-time--
Speaker 1: That's thirteen years though.
Speaker 2: No, 1980--
Speaker 1: '85 [1985], I'm sorry, '85 [1985].
Speaker 2: --19-, yeah, 1985 to '93 [1993].
Speaker 1: --to '9-, uh-hum, that's right, okay, that's eight years, right.
Speaker 2: The, the board elected its own chairperson.  In 1985, the chairperson was not reappointed by the governor.  So, the person who had served longer than I at the time, he called me one night and he said, "Elliott [ph.] has not been reappointed.  Someone else has been reappointed in his place.  I polled the other board members.  We want to elect you to president, uh, chairman," so that's how I became chairman.  In 1993, we had lobbied the legislature to make the chairmanship full time because the responsibilities were getting greater.  And it passed, and I was, it was supposed to be my job, but we couldn't get together on the money.  So I stayed on the board as a, as a part-time member, which I still am.  I'm the vice-chair now, but, you know, just as a, just as a part-time member.  So there's seven members.  And the, the makeup of the board is there must be someone from the law profession, a member of the Rhode Island Bar Association.  It must be someone with a psychiatric background, a psychiatrist, someone with a social work background, someone with law enforcement background, and then members at large.  So I was considered a member at large.  In the state of Rhode Island, we have, we have a high security unit, a maximum security unit, a med-, two medium security units, a minimum, a minimum security unit, where these are the young men that you see working out on the roads.  And then, you have people who are on home confinement who have been put on home confinement by the courts.  And they are, they're on the street, but they're, they're confined.  It's just so much they can do.  So that's, that's the makeup of the penal system in, in Rhode Island.
Story_ID: 168987
Speaker 1: So what are the racial makeups of the inmates?
Speaker 2: The racial makeup is--there are about 20, 20 percent of the--we're a small state [Rhode Island].  We got about 3,500 people locked up.  About 20 percent would be people of color.  And if you see them all out in the yard, they say, say, wow, look at them, but they only still make up about 20 percent.
Speaker 1: What--why, why is that the case, the--when you see it visually, it seems more?
Speaker 2: No, because it--they're, they're together, you know.  They're just for whatever reason, they just stand out, you know.
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.  What is the average cost right now to keep someone, you know, to keep them incarcerated?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  The, the last figure I had was about $42,000 a year.  Obviously, the higher the, the higher the security unit, the higher the costs because high security--they only have one hundred cells there.  But with that one hundred cells, you've got some of the most dangerous with--some, some of the most dangerous people in the state.  So, there's more personnel there.  On the other hand, down in minimum, we have men going and working out on the road, the, the supervision is not as great there as it is, you know, on the higher level.
Speaker 1: And so, Rhode Island, in terms of when you look at this sort of a national system, I know you're a smaller state, does that mean that, you know, where do you fit on, you know, in terms of either progressiveness or, you know, or per capita expenditure or--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum, yeah, well, per capita is pretty high.  They spend, spend a great, large sum of money.  At one time, we were considered one of the three most conservative states, from the parole board situation.  We were ranked with Utah, and some other state.  I don't know, U-, but Utah was one.  I forget what the third state was.  But we're small, you know, we're small in numbers.  We, we don't, I mean, we--California, Los Angeles County has like ten thousand people on parole.  And they've done away with parole, but they had ten thousand.  We have about five hundred.
Story_ID: 168988
Speaker 1: Let me, with the DNA, with that whole advent of DNA, have you found that there have been, you know, that has sort of affected release, like in--
Speaker 2: Oh, sure, oh, sure, oh, sure, sure.
Speaker 1: And who are the people that are coming before--are there quite a few, you know, minorities that are being released, you know, based on DNA?
Speaker 2: Well, no, not a great many being released on that.  You'd, when you say DNA, what--
Speaker 1: DNA, I'm talking about, you know, where people have been wrongly accused?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, we don't have that.  We don't--in Rhode Island, it's not that large a number.  But, you, you raised another, you raised a point that the, the drugs, you know that there's a difference between a person having cocaine in powder form and having crack cocaine.  And so, there are individuals who are being locked up now, and have been locked up, who are caught with a little bit of crack cocaine, as opposed to someone with marijuana or cocaine in the, the powdery form.  And legislation, legislation, United States legislation has called for stricter sentences.  Well, most of these individuals overall, 99 percentage-wise, well, percentage-wise, are, are people of color.  They cannot afford attorneys, a good attorney.  So they, you know, they, they're found guilty and they serve their time, whereas someone of color, I mean, someone that, that's not a color that has a little thing going for them, it seems to be able to escape the--it's, it's treated as an illness.  The governor of Florida had a, has a daughter that's--she's in, she's in treatment, she's in treatment.  Someone without those means is in jail, is in--one's in the hospital, the other one is in a jail, you know, so and you see that in my years.  I, I see it all the time.
Speaker 1: So, let me ask you, are you--have--do you ever ponder the situation about how many incarcerated, how much it's costing, and whether the system could be changed?
Speaker 2: Well, I have never given the thought, I've never really given a great deal of thought to costs.  What I, I've always looked at, I've tried, I've tried to look at the individual.  What can be done with this individual to give that person another shot?  Now, and I, I don't care what the crime is--look at that individual.  I mean, is there something that can be done to, to help this person when they get out?  Sometimes you come up with what you think is a solution.  Sometimes you can't think of what, you know, a solution.  Sometimes you come up with the solution and you find out that you were wrong.  I--you were wrong, you were wrong.  The person, the person may have meant what he or she said at the time, but they're just--those, those vices out there in the street were just too heavy for them.  And some of them last a while, I, I had a sister, a sister.  A man called me last week when I was home--matter, matter of fact, my daughter took the message.  This man had a twenty year sentence.  He served, he served close to thirteen years.  He's been out for about, he's been out almost seven years.  He was picked up a couple of weeks ago buying, and I (unclear) come back.  I, I, you know, and she was calling.  She said, you know, "He, he slipped."  And I said, "Well, I, I did everything I could to help to get him out last--seven years ago."  I said, I, I said, "Well, he's going to have to be seen, you know, if I'm sitting there that day.  I'm not going to make a special trip out there to see, sit on that board, but if I'm there that day, then we'll listen to what he has to say."  He had some problems, he'd lost a son or such things as that, but everybody has a story.
Speaker 1: So, so--
Story_ID: 168989
Speaker 1: Do you believe that, you know, people like [HM] Angela Davis have been railing, though, you know, for--I would say last maybe ten, fifteen [years]--maybe, well, even since the time that she was incarcerated--
Speaker 2: When she was, yeah, uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --about the, the Prison Industrial Complex.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: I mean she has written extensively about it.  And, and I wonder, you know, there are people that believe that, that's basically, though, you say the numbers are small, but, you know, African Americans, that's the new sort of system to incarcerate--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum, uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --and sort of make money off of us, you know, in an incarcerated form that, you know, it's a new form of enslavement.  And, you know, and especially when you have such differences--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --you know, you have the country club prisons--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --you know, that people, you know, if you, you know, on Wall Street and embezzle, you know, are your--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: --you know, highly elected official (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Or Darryl Strawberry.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Few, few and far between.  Yeah, I, I think that she--see, there's no doubt in my mind that much of what she has proposed and spoken about is so true, it's so true.  If we could fast forward to the, to the present, 2003, you know that, that the, the church, the church is, in many states, are getting involved now with, with prison ministries because if someone doesn't take a stand, this help, the individual gets out, goes back to the same neighborhood, and gets caught up in the same web that they were in--that got them into prison in the first place.  So, this, this business of what, pre-release, of attempting to help the individual prepare for that eventual transition back into the community because if someone's been locked up for ten, ten years, fifteen years, things have changed, you know.  And I mean, there, I've seen men, they don't know what it is to, to ride on a freeway.  I think of one young man who was out on a furlough, he got scared.  He was in a supermarket and in a supermarket, you know, those ladies go up one aisle and down the other.  They got their routine.  I mean, they're regular customers.  He was going against the grain, and he didn't want to get into any trouble.  He said, they were running me over in those, those carts.  He scared, he was scared to death.  Why?  Because he, he had gotten out, work release or furlough, and he hadn't seen any, you know, things like that.  So, and it's, you know, that's--it's big business, it's big, it's big business.  I remember a Christian brother years ago who was very active and with juveniles.  He, he used to give a talk and he'd start to talk, by talking about what would happen if--think about it--if law enforcement--
Story_ID: 168990
Speaker 1: --I'm just, you know.
Speaker 2: No you're right, you're right.  See, you know--
Speaker 1: And then, who's making--someone's making a ton of money.
Speaker 2: Oh, sure, the opportunists.
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: I, I wish I, I wish I--I'd like to have the plastic bag and the styrofoam cups, the styrofoam cup--
Speaker 1: Concess-, the, the, the contract.
Speaker 2: --and the, the paper towels.
Speaker 1: See, someone even told--
Speaker 2: Just, just give me those.
Speaker 1: CYNTHIA MORELAND:  Uh-hum--
Speaker 2: I'd be--
Speaker 1: CYNTHIA MORELAND:  --or just one of them.
Speaker 2: I'd--no, no, I want to be pick, I want to be like everybody else.
Speaker 1: CYNTHIA MORELAND:  You want the (unclear).
Speaker 2: I want, I want, I want, I want them all.
Speaker 1: So who's getting those contract?  You're the parole--who, who makes those decisions?
Speaker 2: State purchasing.
Speaker 1: It is so wrong.
Speaker 2: You got to be on the list.
Speaker 1: I mean, it's--
Speaker 2: See, that's where the, that's where the--
Speaker 1: Are there black people that are on the--are, are on the--(unclear)--I bet there are very few black people that are--get contracts like that on (unclear).
Speaker 2: Well, in Rhode Island, but there are some, you know, in other states.
Speaker 1: But not that many, I don't think.
Speaker 2: I--
Speaker 1: CYNTHIA MORELAND:  In building prisons, it's a huge business.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  And there are, there are blacks who are in key roles in some of those private, the private--
Speaker 2: Oh, this is so sad.
Speaker 1: --the privatization.
Speaker 2: I see what she means.  It's just I never talked about this.  I mean, the whole thing is depressing.
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: Forty-two thousand a year, you said?
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: Forty, and how many, how many, how many prisoners?
Speaker 1: Rhode Island, 35-, 3,500, and we're small.
Speaker 2: CYNTHIA MORELAND:  And that's very small.
Speaker 1: Small.
Speaker 2: So less small, but think about it.
Speaker 1: CYNTHIA MORELAND:  Now, where does that price fall in, in terms of (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Isn't that amazing?  It's ridiculous.
Speaker 1: CYNTHIA MORELAND:  Security.
Speaker 2: And then people are in for ten years?
Speaker 1: CYNTHIA MORELAND:  Is that the average prisoner?
Speaker 2: Minimum--that's the average, yeah, the average.  Minimum would be down, probably minimum would probably be down around--
Speaker 1: Twenty?
Speaker 2: --twenty and high security would be, because of the numbers--
Speaker 1: And high security would be more than that?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, because you've got more personnel watching fewer people.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: See, the unions call for X number of, they call for X number of personnel to be in a facility.  In other words, you got to have, let's say, you got to have a captain.  You got to have a lieutenant.  You got to have this, you got to have that.
Story_ID: 168991
Speaker 1: The daughter that you met, she--we have, we, we have a, a complete security system.  Well, we've got one here, and we have one in Rhode Island, complete system.  She was fearful that someone would kidnap her because of what I was doing.  I was blessed.  I never had, you know, I had one threat.  But, so when we would go out, her mother--every light, when we would come, every light in the house was on.  The stoop light, the, the garage lights, the driveway lights--I mean, it's to--it'd be cheaper for us to take her with us.  But she was scared to death.
Story_ID: 168992
Speaker 1: There are in the other states, there are communities that welcome correctional facilities because it's, it's bringing income into the area, you know, remote, some remote areas.  But it has given people an opportunity to, to work.  And, and the most, probably one of the most interesting experiences, talking about prisons, Attica in New York.  I think [former] Governor [Nelson] Rockefeller was governor at the time.  Now, Attica is a rural agricultural area in New York, somewhere in upstate New York.  And many of the inmates were from New York City [New York], people of color, among others.  And they, according to all reports, it's the most, it's one of the most terrifying, historical hostage-taking experiences in the, in the history of the United States.  People are killed, like the correctional people, the guards and all.  They, their culture was so different than the culture of those men that they were watching.  They came from the city.  They, that's the city, urban, compared to the agricultural part.  And I, I mean--and from that, I, I guess it's that way in many other areas, but now we get into another part of this whole scenario.  The individuals that are coming into this country, some legal, some illegal, who have been here for a while, still don't--never took out citizenship papers--get into a problem.  Well, now they're being deported.  And, obviously, many of them, and many of them have been here many years, many years--never, never wanted to become a citizen.  But they're going to do it, they're going--if they get out, they're going to do it next month.  They, think that's going to help them get out.  So it's, it's an ever changing, ever changing scene.
Story_ID: 168993
Speaker 1: Do you find that the--are criminals becoming more hardened criminals or is--I mean in your--you said twenty-eight years.
Speaker 2: Twenty-three [years].
Speaker 1: Twenty-three.  What have been the, I mean, do you see any trends besides drugs, drugs?
Speaker 2: No, drugs, well, no, drugs and alcohol are 90 percent of the problem, although if you read police reports and, and you don't see that.  You don't see that because if a person, a shop-, it's a simple thing, shoplifting.  A person shoplifts--why, why, what do they shoplift?  They may shoplift baby food.  Why?  Because people always need baby food and, and they get that money, or they exchange it for drugs.  That's an illness, but they're sent to prison.  As I said earlier, one person is sent to a rehab center.  Another person go to jail.  Another area, prostitution--well, why is that person doing that?   It, perhaps because they've been hooked on drugs by the pimp or some friend and that's all they know.  So, I mean that's increasing.  Young people, young, you know, young people, young women, it's increasing.  And I, I, I look at that as an illness.  I don't look at that as, you know, it's, it's, well, it's a crime, according to the books, but I look at it as a term of illness.  So, but it's easier just to warehouse a person in an attempt to put him in treatment somewhere because that's taking money.  And it's not the popular thing to do in, in most cases.  It's more popular to lock them up and throw the key away.  Or if you--well, what's the expression--if you commit the crime, you do the crime--if you commit the time, you do the time, you know, that, that, that type of situation.  And, finally, I think the judicial system, you have people sitting on the bench who have no, have not had any real exposure to other cultures.  And is that important?  Well, I think it is important because you have somewhat an idea of what this person has gone through to, to get before you--you being the judge, which some people, you know.  I mean, we have the expression, the hanging judge, in some cases, outlandish sentencing.  And I'm not talking necessarily about a person who's committed a heinous crime.  I'm talking, when you review the entire history of the person, the person that is sentenced to this long sentence to this long term.  Never had a chance in life, could be twenty-two, twenty-three years of age what you seeing, never really had a shot in life--deserted, foster home, neglected, molested as a child, you know, all of these.  And there are some people like that--never had a chance, never, never had a chance in life.  And now, that's one side.  And then, then, maybe a critic comes back and says, yeah, what about, what about the sister or brother who, who came up in the same environment, but turned out to be wonderful.  Well, that's the individual person, that's, that's, that's the individual mind.
Story_ID: 168994
Speaker 1: So does Rhode Island have a country club prison itself?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, we ain't, we ain't, (laughter), no, they don't have any country club.  It's a--
Speaker 1: But you have a federal prison
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Then you don't?
Speaker 2: No, no, there is a federal detention center in Central Falls [Rhode Island], which is, which is privatized.  But, no, we do have a, we do not have a, we do not have a federal, we don't have a federal penitentiary as such.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, matter of fact, in all of New England, in all of New England, there is only, at this present time, there is only one federal--would, we call it, you could call it a penitentiary or whatever for only a center, only one detention center or whatever, only one in Massachusetts, only one.  The others are--there's, and there the people are, there's one as I said.  It's an Air Mass [Massachusetts Air National Guard], Fort Devens [Ayer/Shirley, Massachusetts], old military reservation.  The people there usually have some medical problem.  There's only one federal prison in New England and that's Danbury [Federal Correctional Institution, Danbury, Danbury, Connecticut].  That's all and it's just for, that's just for women now.  It used to be for men and women.  So if you commit a crime, a federal crime, and you're sent out of state, you're going to be, if you're sent somewhere, you're going to be sent out of New England.
Story_ID: 168995
Speaker 1: And if you had a chance to change the penal system, what would you change about it?
Speaker 2: That's a very difficult question to answer because things are so ingrained.  Me, with my educational background, more education, more education based on the needs of the inmates.  In other words, not fit, not fit the inmate into an existing program, but fit the existing program into the needs of the, of the inmate, which is difficult to do, very difficult.  Why?  Well, that's, that's one thing and difficult.  The other part of it would be more of a pre-release support system.  Another part would be halfway back.  We've heard of halfway homes, halfway out houses, I'd have a halfway back.  Okay, a person starts to slip--don't bring them back.  Just bring them back into the halfway back house, so that they look, this what you're doing.  If you continue this, you're going all the way.  That, things like that.  However, I, I realize it all costs money.  And I, you know, a lot of people don't share my, they don't share my, my concern, my interest in it because I, I think, as we've been talking for the last few hours, I think of, you know, something could have gone a little different in my life.  And I could be where those folks are that we're talking about now.  I, I mean it's--at my age, I, I, and I say this.  I talk, I say this to my wife [Gail B. Smith] and to my brother and other people, you know, we're on a tight rope.  We, we, we're all on a tight rope and we survived.  We were on a tight rope and we survived.  I mean, it would have been so easy to fall off, so it, it, you take a deep breath.  And I pray a little bit more and I go to church because it, it's such a thin line.  Well, it's a thin line and, and, yet, I think individuals, you know, they look, they look at, they don't look at the whole picture.  They don't look at the whole pie.  They look at just a little cut.  They look at, they look at someone like myself, look at Ken Walker.  Ken Walker, he got a house in Martha's Vineyard, you know, well, his children, they're all educated.  Well, well, it's a thin line, and things just broke right for, for me, you know, they broke right.  Some other person, same background, but something went wrong, you know.  And just so, it's, but it's, but it's, I think back, wow, what if, what if, and fortunately, things, you know, (unclear).  I mean, into the point of, of someone wanting to interview me about my past, you know, which is not over yet, by the way, so, still got time.
Story_ID: 168996
Speaker 1: So, sir, let me, you know, 'cause you started out, you know, and I, and I was going to ask you about that thin line--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --you know, between the thin line that, you know, we walk in life.  And, you know, and your comments about it could have gone, you know, either way.  You chose education but it still could have, you could have been at the wrong place at the wrong time.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum, uh-hum.
Speaker 1: And when you look at the, you know, African American community and you know, where we are to date--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --what are your, you know, hopes and/or concerns?
Speaker 2: My concerns with the young people would be that they--it's, and I don't know what the answer is, but I would hope that they could look back on what has transpired over the last fifty years--what, what has happened, how they got to the point that they are now.  That's, that's one.  Now, in saying that, someone asked the question, gee, why aren't more black young people going into education and into teaching?  Well, the opportunities that they have today are much broader than when you had to go into teaching, social work, the post office, or being a minister.  That's changed.  Is this to say there's something wrong with those professions?  No.  But they're, they're, there, there, there are MBAs now and well, whatever, lawyer, whatever we want, whatever the area, but and they look at this as being a more luc-, in my opinion, is they look at it as being more lucrative.  There's more--I don't think there's any more security, but it, it's, it's lucrative.  There's more material gains to be made than going into the areas such, such as education which I did.  I've even thought about that.  I said, gee, if the opportunities were present in the '50's [1950s] as they are now, would you have gone into education?  I don't know.  I don't know.  But I've had opportunities, obviously, when I was younger, to leave education, or I had opportunities to go into, to, to leave the area, education, and I, I opted to stay.  Why?  Maybe I was a little apprehensive about what was out there, but I, I like being on familiar, on familiar ground, which had, which was, and is, has remained very fertile for me, you know, as, as an individual.
Speaker 1: So, your hopes, though, what about the hopes for, for the black community?
Speaker 2: Well, I think we've got to, I think nationwide, nationwide, I think we have got to be careful that priorities that, that have been directed towards us over the last, again, the last 20, 30 years, that those priorities are not lost on us and, and given to someone else, given to new arrivals, so to speak.  And I'm afraid if we're not careful with the leadership and all this, this is a type of thing.  We, we considered to be the, you know, considered to be the largest minority.  And, of course, that's questionable now because you've got the other groups coming in.  But those, the progress that we've made, I, I think we have to be very careful that we don't lose that.  And that's by having somewhat of a united effort, which is, is difficult because everyone has their own agenda.
Story_ID: 168997
Speaker 1: Now, what do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: I would like, I, I would like individuals to think that I was, I was, I was respectful to others, that I gave individuals an opportunity to see me as a mentor, whether it be in education or officiating or any, anything that I, that I did.  I'd like them to think that, well, he, he did things to somewhat open the door for, for us.  And if that takes place, then I think I would be, I'd be, I'd, I'd be well satisfied.
Speaker 1: One last question, though, your legacy within East Providence [Rhode Island]?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I'm in the East Providence Senior High School [East Providence, Rhode Island] Hall of Fame.  Obviously, I'm, I'm well, still well known in the city.  Something that's going to take place, I hope next year--a young lady that I had in school, she, hopefully, she's going to be, hopefully, next year, she's going to be selected to go into the East Providence High School Hall of Fame.  She'll be--I think she'll be the third woman of color, and I'm sponsoring her, which means I have to convince the body, that this woman deserves--and, and, I think she's going to make it.  She's not making it because of what, she's going to make it because she deserves it.  She's, she's the affirmative action officer for the City of East Providence.  A wonderful young lady, she, she sponsors or coordinates the [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] Black History Month.  She has all of these various momentos from all over the country, de-, depicting black culture, Aunt Jemima, Cream of Wheat, Underground Railroad, Bo Janus, all these things.  I mean, some of them when you look at them, you know, obviously, they're negative, but nonetheless, they're out there.  So I hope, I mean, if, if she survives the cut next year, and then I, I would think I, I think I would be, say, well, I guess, I've arrived in that respective scene--a child that I knew as a twelve-year-old, who now is a woman with her own family.  She, she's, she's made the circle, and I, I had a small part of it.  And if I wasn't in the position I was in, I would not have been able to, to do that, hopefully, successfully.  But on the other hand, I'm not through with, I'm not through with the grandchildren, you know.
Speaker 1: So, one last, just one last, what do you want to do?  You said you weren't finished yet?
Speaker 2: Right.  Well, when I say I'm not finished, I'm, I'm--it's a personal thing with--
Speaker 1: Stories, I thought.
Speaker 2: My, right, with my, my grandchildren.  I mean, my, my children, they, they chose their lives and, fortunately, you know, they are doing all right in terms of (laughter), law abiding.  But now, there are six grandchildren, and I, I would like to see them--well, one--I'd like to see them listen to their grandfather in some areas a little more than what their parents did to their father.  And you saw one example today with, with the three-year-old.  So I, and, and I say that, but then again, I think as long as I breathe, I don't think I'll ever be finished because I, there's always something there, something there.  Something comes up, something, whatever it happens to be.  And as long as there's someone who's willing to listen or ask for advice, then, I guess, you know, I'll always give it.  Some, they may not like it, but nevertheless, I'll give it because they asked for it.
