Story_ID: 307832
Speaker 1: My name is Loretta Henry and I'm conducting the interview, and this is Scott Stearns.  He's going to be doing our videography.  Could you please tell us your full name, first, middle and last and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Okay, my entire name--
Speaker 1: Your entire name.
Speaker 2: --is Olly Woodrow Wilson, Jr. [HistoryMaker Olly Wilson].  Now, I never use that nickname and the only reason I told you is 'cause you asked me explicitly so I had to.  I'm a Jr. and as was often with African American families, frequently people were named after people who were relatively famous.  So my father [Olly Wilson, Sr.] was named after Woodrow Wilson [President Thomas Woodrow Wilson], to my chagrin, and, and so I was given that same moniker.  So Woodrow, Olly is O-L-L-Y, Woodrow is W-O-O-D-R-O-W, and Wilson, of course, is W-I-L-S-O-N and I am a Jr.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Also, it's interesting that the, on my birth certificate, it doesn't say Woodrow and so I said, "That's interesting."  It says Woodward, W-O-O-D-W-A-R-D and I thought, oh, that's interesting.  So, I, I was tempted, I like Woodward rather than Woodrow, especially for all the obvious reasons and I would have changed it, and I was going to do it, except I, my father's was Woodrow and I wanted to honor him so he lived with that for seventy-seven years so I figured I could live with it too so that's, that's the name.
Speaker 1: Oh, it's a great story.  Could you tell us your date of birth and where you were born?
Speaker 2: My birth--date of birth was September the 7th, 1937.  I was born in St. Louis, Missouri and I don't exactly know the hospital but I was born in St. Louis, Missouri on September the 7th, 1937.
Speaker 1: Okay, and today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is October the 15th, 2005 [sic. October 14, 2005].
Speaker 1: Okay, and the location of this interview?  The address.
Speaker 2: This is 500 Alameda, Berkeley, California.
Speaker 1: Okay, fine.  Your occupation.
Speaker 2: I'm a retired professor and a still active composer.
Speaker 1: Okay, very good.
Speaker 2: I'm, I retired from Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] in 2002 but as a creative artist you keep doing that and so I'm still working on music and fortunate to be in a profession that never ends as long as you have the will and the, and the ability to do it so that's why I'm still working and so I guess I never retired from that, but officially I'm retired from the university.
Story_ID: 307833
Speaker 1: We're going to do five very simple kind of warm-up questions, kind of People magazine questions so just short answers is fine (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure. Sure. Sure.
Speaker 1: Your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food, gee, that's a tough one for me.  I like so much food.  It's, it's hard for me to indicate any one food.  I love fruits, I love, I love chicken that's fixed, and my mother [Alma Peoples Wilson] used to make great fried, southern fried chicken and that, that's good but there's so many other foods.  You know, I really like good food.  I'm sort of a gourmet person.  We spend a lot of our time going to restaurants and so forth, the whole range of foods and then I cook outside too, on the deck, you know, and smoked this and smoked that so, that was great.
Speaker 1: Oh my, good for you.  Your favorite time of year.
Speaker 2: Again that's difficult.  I guess it depends on my mood.  Sometimes, it's the autumn and especially in California because now we have the Indian summers, the so-called Indian summer which is warm in October and it's pleasant, it's beautiful and so forth, most of the time, but as a kid I remember really enjoying the spring in St. Louis [Missouri] because, you know, trees were coming back and, and it would be, there would be light spring showers and very pleasant and so forth, so spring was that.  So, and then I'm also a football fan and the fall is interesting but in the spring there's always a sense of renewal and I enjoy that as well.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you.  Your favorite color.
Speaker 2: Again, that's a tough one.  Probably, if you ask my wife [Elouise Wilson], she would probably say black because I wear, you know, I like black pants and black jackets and so forth but, you know, I like many colors, blue, different shades of blue, yellow, you know, a wide range of colors, red, you know, primary colors, but also subtle colors.  It's, you know, it's hard for me to have a, one specific color.
Speaker 1: Okay, good, thank you.  I know you've traveled a lot.  Your favorite vacation destination.  If you had to be one place.
Speaker 2: My favorite vaca--that's again another tough one.  I have enjoyed living in places in Italy.  I mean, in Bellagio [Italy], I really enjoy Bellagio.  I've been to the Bellagio, the Rockefeller center [Rockefeller Foundation Bellagio Center] in Bellagio.  It's a very beautiful place and it's very, very nice.  I love Carmel [California].  I really love, we go to the Carmel Monterey Jazz Festival often and so every year, as a matter of fact, and that's, I like that.  We visited Hawaii.  I found that interesting but I wouldn't say it was my favorite place.  I mean it's just a beautiful place to relax and it's, it's, I guess all of those places would be interesting places.
Speaker 1: Very nice choices.  Do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Perhaps, hard again to pinpoint any one but one of them is, is, this too shall pass.  That old business about perseverance and facing what seems like overwhelming odds and then overcoming those and then saying, ah-ha, you know, you made it through, you know, and so often I remember that.  When there are difficulties I have to face, I always remember, this too shall pass.
Story_ID: 307834
Speaker 1: --Now we're going to talk a little bit about your family background.  Could you please tell me about your mother?  What was her name, where was she born, could you spell her name for us, please?
Speaker 2: Sure, my mother's name was Alma Grace Peoples, that was her maiden name and Alma Grace Peoples Wilson, you know, is her married name.  Alma, A-L-M-A, Grace, G-R-A-C-E, Peoples, P-E-O-P-L-E-S, and then Wilson, of course.  Actually, she had about five names.  I mean it was Alma Grace Beulah, something, something, something.  There were named after her aunts and so forth.  I can't even remember them all now but, and I didn't discover that until we were adults and so we were, and we were talking to her and she said, well your name, said, "Well somebody referred to you as another name."  She said, "Oh yeah, I had five names" and so she told us all five names and they sort of went in one ear and came out the other but it was, I was impressed that she had five names and apparently she was named after all of her sisters, all of her mother's [Nancy Laremore] sisters.  She was born in Arkansas and in Forrest City, Arkansas.  I believe she was born in Forrest City, Arkansas.  I know she spent her childhood there and I think that's where she was born and she was born, she never told us her birth date.  She was of the generation that said a woman's right is to maintain her, her age in confidence and so we would speculate it, about it, and we estimated that when she died she was about eighty-four.  So we think she was born around 1911.  And so--
Speaker 1: And she died--
Speaker 2: And she died in 19--1994.  So 1994, so that was the year that, that she actually died.
Story_ID: 307835
Speaker 1: Do you know anything about her [Wilson's mother, Alma Peoples Wilson] background?  Her growing up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she grew up in, in Forrest City, Arkansas.  She was the eleventh of a large number of children.  She grew up on a farm.  Her father [Robert Peoples], her father died when she was a young teenager and her mother [Nancy Laremore] remarried to a person who also had a farm across the street, you know, and they put their farms together to a man named Laremore [Prince Laremore] but I think, but she was, you know, the children all retained the name Peoples, which was the name of her father.  And she grew up in a farm community but was, the custom in that time for many people was interesting in that most of the women, most of the females in the families were strongly encouraged to go to college.  I guess the males too but the females and the males and most of them went to a college, it was both a college and an advanced high school in those days.  This was around, you know, 1920s or middle '20s [1920s] and that kind of period and she moved to Little Rock [Arkansas] and she went to Philander Smith College in Little Rock, in that area, and I subsequently discovered that most of her sisters and brothers went to Philander Smith College.
Speaker 1: This was a black school [HBCU]?
Speaker 2: This was a black school.  It was traditional black school.  As a matter of fact, it still exists and so forth.  As a matter of fact, we had a family reunion in Little Rock and, about ten, fifteen years ago, and we went to that school and I was amazed to find that all, almost all of my mother's sisters and brothers had gone to that school.  Now they all didn't graduate but they all went there, at least at a point, and so, that sort of become kind of a family school, at least when I discovered it, that so many had gone there.
Story_ID: 307836
Speaker 1: So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Did she [Wilson's mother, Alma Peoples Wilson] graduate?
Speaker 1: No she didn't.  She went there [Philander Smith College, Little Rock, Arkansas], she went for a year, maybe a year and a half and then she met my father [Olly Wilson, Sr.] who was also going to school and they got married and moved away, you know.  In those days, I guess, being astute and married, just didn't go, didn't work very well, especially from limited means, but her family had a large farm and they all worked on the farm that was a typical kind of farm.  They actually owned the farm but, but it was hard work, you know, and so you had, everybody pitched in and did a lot of things and that whole people, that whole idea was for people to go away, go to school and, and to develop enough education so that they could come back often to jobs like teaching and also helping, you know, with the farm and so forth.  So that's the kind of thing that, thing that she was preparing for.
Speaker 2: Did she work outside of the home?
Speaker 1: At that point, you mean later on?
Speaker 2: Later on.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, later on.  After she and my father got married, they moved to St. Louis [Missouri].  I actually moved to a small town outside of St. Louis called Kinloch [Missouri], which was a predominantly black town.  As a matter of fact, I think it was founded as a black town, one of those, one of those towns in several places that were, that was always traditionally an African American town.  And so they lived there and they moved there because my, my father's sister was living there and so we moved then, moved in with her and then they began to work and then after a while they were able to save enough money and then they moved into St. Louis.  Kinloch was a, on the suburbs of St. Louis and this was moving into St. Louis.  So that's, that's what they did.  She worked, well, when we were growing up, I mean, I was the, I was the next to the last of, of five kids and when I was very young, I don't think she worked but I do remember her working when I was about eight, nine and from that time on to, on through high school [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri], and she worked primarily as, as she was a seamstress sometimes for people.  She also worked in, in cleaning and ironing for people, for wealthy people, and that kind of thing.  So that was one of the options of employment in St. Louis at the time and that's what she did.
Story_ID: 307837
Speaker 1: Did she [Wilson's mother, Alma Peoples Wilson] ever tell you any stories about her growing up, her childhood?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah--
Speaker 1: Could you tell us, share one with us (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) a lot of stories.  Well, one of the things that she, she told us about, she apparently was very successful in school, in high school and so forth and she talked about being valedictorian of her class and she remembered her speech.  I can't remember part of it but it was a very high-blown linguist, speech, you know, in the terms of the kind of language they used and so forth.  It was very, very impressive, you know, it wasn't your typical prosaic kind of language.  It was a very elevated kind of language, which probably was standard of that day and she talked about that.  She talked about her friends, some of her girlfriends and most of the people that she knew were relatives and close friends that she grew up with and so forth and she had a large family, our beloved siblings, you know.  She had, there were, I, it's eleven or it might be nine.  I might be getting that confused but any rate, you know, there was, there was a lot of interaction between her and her siblings and stories about what happened in the family.
Story_ID: 307838
Speaker 1: Your father, what was his name?  Could you spell it for us, and where was he born, where he grew up (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, name was Olly, O-L-L-Y, Woodrow Wilson, Sr., and he became Sr. after I was born and he was born also in Arkansas.  He was born in a city, a small town, probably unincorporated area called Turner, Arkansas, which is not far away from Marvell, Arkansas and he also lived on a farm.  His family had a farm.  They owned the farm and it was a, and they, they worked the farm and so forth.  The major means of support was through farm, through farming.  He was the last of, again, a large family.  I think, I think in his family, there may have been eleven and something, but he was the very last and the only surviving male, the only male that survived to adulthood so that he had a lot of sisters and he had had brothers but none of them really survived.  I think there were a couple who lived until they were, most of them were in the primary ages, eight to ten, and then there was one who I think lived to about fifteen or sixteen but the others died from some disease or something and so, and so he was the only surviving one.  His mother died shortly after he was born so he, and his father married shortly after that.  And so he was raised primarily by his stepmother who had the name, who we always refer to, and I guess everybody else referred to, this adorable term, Mama Honey.  So H-O-N-E-Y, Mama Honey, you know, and she said, oh how great Mama Honey was and she was the person who raised him and the person who he related to as a mother.  His mother, his, his biological mother was named Katherine [ph.] and I don't even know what her maiden name was but Katherine and, she married his father and so, and so, and probably the reason I don't know her maiden name because she died so early and so forth but Mama Honey, and that's the name I knew her by, all the time.  I actually had the opportunity to meet her.
Story_ID: 307839
Speaker 1: When I was about eight years old, my father [Olly Wilson, Sr.] wanted to go home, you know, go down south, go home, we were living in St. Louis [Missouri], and he wanted to go home and see his mother, see his stepmother.  And so he took me and my sister [Marian Wilson], who was immediately older than me, and the two of us went down to Turner, Arkansas.  It was an interesting trip because we, we caught a train to Memphis [Tennessee] and then, or was it Little Rock [Arkansas], it may have been Little Rock, and then we had to get a bus to go from the part of departure or, of getting off the train and then going to Turner and that meant we had to wait at a little local store.  Well it's an interesting thing because this was in the middle of the South, I mean, this is eight years old, it was about 1940-something, early '40s [1940s], and we stopped in this little store and we had to sit there and wait.  Well, this was a, you know, the, the proprietor's store was a white man and this little kid kept saying, he looked at us and said, "That nigger stole my nickel," you know, "That nigger stole our nickel" and I, you know, I'm eight years old and I'm saying, what, "That nigger stole the nick"--and I was, what is this kid saying and my father was saying, just, you know, "Just, just don't say anything, just--" so, and then the owner of the store, he was a little embarrassed by this so he kept saying, "You mean the Navy stoled your nickel."  He said, "No, that nigger stole my nickel" he kept, he kept saying, so that got my attention, you know, and I realized I was definitely in the Deep South where people didn't mince words and so forth and other things and this was a, this was about the time, it may have been a few years earlier than the Emmett Till, you know, murder, and so, you know, people were very much conscious of that, going to the South, crossing the Mason Dixon Line.  You're putting, you're in jeopardy and he told us now, be careful, you know, you stay with me and, and this kind of--we were little kids, we weren't going to do anything else but it was different.  We had to wait in this place for the bus and it was a public Greyhound bus, a local bus thing.  We got that and then we had to go to another place and then the inside (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Did you have to sit in the back of the bus?
Speaker 1: You know, I don't remember that.  It may not have been any other people on the bus but I, I don't remember the back of the bus and I don't remember much about that experience of riding the bus.  On the trains, I do remember that when we left St. Louis, I think the, the trains were integrated but by the time we got further down, then they either got all the white people off and put them on another car and we stayed in our same car.  I know that happened back, in the '60s [1960s] when I went South for my first job and that was when, you know, right before, well this was public accommodations in 1964.  This is 1960 and this was, of course, in the beginning of the civil rights struggle and the Freedom Rides and all of that and so that became, it was really a difficult, it was really an important decision we made to go to the South to teach and so forth.  So, it was--but getting, getting back to this experience (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It just seemed, there's that, not--
Speaker 1: --this was earlier and I was eight or something and, but I do remember that story and I do remember finally getting to the house and it was a big, big house and it had, and I also remember that it had a number of beautiful fruit trees there, pear trees and apple trees and every, just an abundance, and the house had been an older house and part of it had been shut off, you know, and then the other part was a wooden house, you know, which was, which was probably, probably been there for years and, and since she was living there by herself, she didn't need all the--she had closed that off and she was living in the other section and it was, it was an interesting place and I was really delighted with all those, all that fruit and so forth, but I also was kind of shocked with the outhouse 'cause there was an outhouse there.  I was going, oh my gosh, you know.  So this is, this is the, and (unclear) George in the house and sort of a real sense of the old country and so forth but it was also charming, just the food was very good.  It was very pleasant and so forth, and it had a lot of space and, and that kind of thing but she was just there by herself at that point because all the other children had moved away and my father, being the last one, you know, had long since moved away, too.
Story_ID: 307840
Speaker 1: By the way, I mentioned when you were talking about, when we were talking about my father [Olly Wilson, Sr.] and my mother [Alma Peoples Wilson], my father had gone to Arkansas Baptist College in Little Rock [Arkansas] and that's where he met my mother, you know, at least he met my mother, actually on a streetcar in Little Rock and they met each other.  It turned out that he had known her older--one of her older sisters and so forth and so they sort of met each other but they actually had a chance meeting on a streetcar and so forth, so that was, and so he was, that was, he had finished about two years, too, and that, you know, then that romance started, they got married and that was the end of, you know.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 307841
Speaker 1: Did he [Wilson's father, Olly Wilson, Sr.] ever tell you any of his stories of growing up when he was a child?
Speaker 2: Yes, he talked about, there were certain kinds of things, some of them were apocryphal stories that many, which I can't remember, but I do remember he talked about his background, you know, and he talked about the fact that he said his mother was, his biological mother [Katherine Wilson (ph.)] was, was partially Cherokee Indian [Native American], you know.  Now, you know, as we know, in the African American community, you talk to anybody, in fact, there's somebody has somebody who has, has, claims to have, some American or Native American blood or American Indian blood, or some of it.  In this particular case, he, he said that one of the characteristics that he, he noted from his mother, that she had long, coal black hair and he had long hair.  His hair was, you know, of course like most peoples, was black, but it was, it was a little bit different in terms of its constitution and, for example, my hair and he, and it was, and he always wore it long.  You know, he always wore his hair long most of his life.  And so, you know, that seems to leave some credence to it plus also historically they were in Arkansas, in that area.  There were a lot of, a lot of interactions between blacks and Indians, you know, especially in the 19th century and, and even in that area, you know, 'cause people moved over, you know, the, the Indians who were forced to leave and go to Oklahoma, all of that, and some of those people came from some other tribes, or the groups, that were ethnic groups, that were in Arkansas and some of them even came as far as you know, from Florida and so forth, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, right.
Story_ID: 307842
Speaker 1: What was his [Wilson's father, Olly Wilson, Sr.] occupation?
Speaker 2: He was, for most of his life, well he started out, after he left college [Arkansas Baptist College, Little Rock, Arkansas] and they got married, he started out trying to sell insurance.  So he was selling insurance 'cause he had two years of college education, and he always was a very articulate and well-spoken, well-spoken kind of individual and also a very sharp dresser and so forth.  He always made a good impression.  And, but his work, when he started, came to St. Louis [Missouri], he was selling insurance and I think he probably dabbled in real estate and so forth, neither which made much money at that time.  So, he began to work for wealthy white folks and he began to be, he began to become a butler, you know, 'cause he was a butler because he could, you know, he was, he looked the part, you know, and it happened that he works on people who were very wealthy.  So that, that, in those years, I mean, late '30s [1930s], early '40s [1940s], if you worked for somebody who was very wealthy, you were paid, you got a steady pay, you, you were paid and it wasn't as life-threatening a kind of work as existed in the factory of those days, prior to the unionization, you know.  I mean, blacks and factories did the hardest work, hardest, most difficult, most dangerous jobs and so forth.  And he was a person who was always interested in the arts.  He was a singer.  He was an amateur singer.  I mean part of this was one of the kinds of things he did when he was in college and so forth because every traditional black school [HBCU] had probably a, Fisk Jubilee Singers had a group of singers and it, one of its functions was to go and raise money for the institution and all those institutions were very struggling, you know, and they had to, they needed to raise as much money as they could.  So he had that experience and he wanted to, and of course he had a beautiful voice and he wanted, you know, he wanted to do that.  So he studied music and at least for a couple of years.  Now I don't know how much he formally focused.  I don't know if music was his major in school.  He probably, like most people of his generation, probably was in education in some form but he loved to sing and he was, and he performed with groups like that and then when he came to St. Louis, he continued to form, perform, groups like that so all of my life I knew of him as a person who sang.  As I often say, and we're getting ahead of the story a little bit, but as I often say, he had the biggest and the best voice in the First Baptist Church choir in St. Louis, Missouri and he was really a person who was, who was, had a certain amount of charisma too, as a result of that.  I mean, he sang and, you know, he got a lot of, a lot of praise for that and he was very good at doing it and, and also Sundays were special days because he comes to church and he's all dressed up and he's a person of, of accomplishment it seems, seems like that and because he was well-spoken and, and reasonably intelligent, you know, it was, people assumed that his profession was something that was a fully professional as opposed to being a butler, you know.  And so for although it really didn't make that much difference because most people were butlers or something like that in that case, except for a few doctors and lawyers at the time. But we'll talk about the church a little bit later.
Story_ID: 307843
Speaker 1: That's another important goal (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, okay. Your grandparents on your mother's [Alma Peoples Wilson] side.  What can you tell us about them?
Speaker 1: My grandparents, you know, we--I can't tell you too much.  I know who they were.
Speaker 2: Okay, their names were?
Speaker 1: And, his name was Robert Peoples and her name was, I'm forgetting it right now, we'll come to in a minute right now, but, I don't remember what her maiden name was but it will probably come.  We have a family history, we're a big family unit, I'll be able to get that.  They were farmers in Arkansas and according to the legend, or according to family folklore, he and some of his brothers had originally been in, they thought, in Mississippi somewhere but there were a large number of people, Peoples, who lived in, in Arkansas at the time.  He had several brothers who lived there.  And then on my mother's mother side, let's see what do I know about her, no, I guess it's more about my mother's father's side 'cause he was a Peoples and the family unit is Peoples-Ellis.  The reason why it's called Peoples-Ellis is there were, in this small town, this is Forrest City [Arkansas], there were three People, two Peoples brothers who married two Ellis sisters and one Ellis brother who married one, one Peoples sister.  So, I mean, it was, one of those kind of cross-fertilization things, and so they, they knew it and so half of the family thinks of themselves as People, half of them thinks of themselves as Ellis and, yeah, so that's part of that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, we're going to take a little break here.
Story_ID: 307844
Speaker 1: You just told us about your mother's [Alma Peoples Wilson] parents' side.  Could you tell us about your father's [Olly Wilson, Sr.] parents?
Speaker 2: Parents, okay.  I know less about my father's parents.  As you know, you saw my mother, go back to my mother's grandfather and since some people are actually trying to reach back and go back in the middle of the 19th century, so I tried to do that.  On my father's side, as I said, because his mother [Katherine Wilson (ph.)] died when he was young, I don't know much about her family at all.  His father, according to legend, his father's, and his father and one of his brothers left Holly Springs, Mississippi and, and came to, came to Arkansas to work, you know, try to start a farm and so forth.  There are some legends and some of the legends are that, and this goes back to slavery time because his father must have been born about 1860s, or something, or a little, maybe, it was certainly probably during slavery time because he had, he had a long list of sisters and brothers and he was the last one and he was born in 1905.  So, it probably was at least twenty, thirty years, you know, so it could have gone back to as early as eighteen, eighteen, or maybe his father started having kids when he, in, in 1870 or something which meant that he probably was born at least 1850 which meant slave time.  But one of the stories that, that, one of the legends people talk about, was about how they lived.  They were working on some plantation in Mississippi and that the owner of the plantation was very cruel and hard and so forth and at one point he attempted to try to make one of the brothers eat a dead dog that, he had done something that angered the slave owner or the overseer, whoever it was, and he was going to make a, make an example of him and so he told him he had to eat that dead dog, had to eat part of a dead dog that was there and they, and according to the legend, he jumped up, the guy jumped at the men and attacked the, the owner or whoever it was, the owner or the straw boss and killed him, and, but he had to run, you know.  Of course he had to run and so he disappeared and so they never heard from him again but they knew he had, he had gone.  Now, how much truth there is in that story but it's been recalled over and over again and so it has been as often before his, you sometimes get ornamented a little bit, just a little bit more, more enticing, more dramatic but that story consistently occurs.  And then, and that was given as an example to say that, because my father's father was only first generation in Arkansas, that it's hard to trace anything back.  I've gone on Ancestry.com and a few places trying to find some information about them.  I can find examples of my father and I can find, but I can't find anything of my father's father and, you know, on any papers and so forth that we, any, any of the, any of the documents, so forth, you know.  You need to look hard and check out some others so which and so forth but I've tried to do that.  One of my ideas was to try to do that and have it all done by one of the next family reunions.  That was a year or so ago and I still haven't been able to do it so--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 307845
Speaker 1: Now we're going to talk a little bit about you.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: What was your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: My very earliest remember--memory is, again, another tragic story and the earliest memory, I must have been, when we think back about it, I must have been about three years old and it was a funeral of my sister, of a sister I have, there are about five of us originally, the second one of which, whose name was Jean, Alma Jean [Jean Wilson], I guess she was called, no I don't think it was Alma, just called, just called Jean.  She died at age six or so and she had, I think, it either was, I'm not sure what the disease was.  I used to think it was infantile paralysis but, or polio as it was called in the day, but I subsequently checked with my sister and she said, no, it wasn't that, it was something else, but at any rate, she had a childhood disease which killed her and apparently she had, she had had problems earlier because she had been hit by a car.  She was just crossing the street and she'd been hit by a car and this exacerbated her condition and so forth, but she died, but I remembered that as a defining moment because I remember being very angry and I was very angry because my sister was dead, but I hardly knew my sister.  I was only three years old and I sort of had an image of that and I remember she had long braids and I remember the family, before they buried her, they cut off her braids and they put the braids in a box and I guess her further belongs and I used to, I thought that was so fascinating and I said, well the braids, this is my dead sister's braids and I remember it.  So I remember her more from the, the symbol of those braids but also the, the fact that it was a very traumatic experience, the funeral, because at a funeral, this is the first experience I experienced.  Everybody, the experience, everybody was crying--
Speaker 1: Of course.
Speaker 2: --and my mother [Alma Peoples Wilson] and father [Olly Wilson, Sr.] were crying and my sisters and brothers and everybody that I saw around me and I didn't quite understand it and I said well, if you're unhappy, why aren't you mad, you know.  So I was just kind of mad and they were saying things like, God, you know, God took her, you know, things like that to a little kid that meant, well, God's mean.  Why did God take my sister?  She didn't do anything.  So I was sort of mad at God and the whole scene and not understanding.  I remember that and I know, and that becomes, as I said, a defining moments for me as being, as being an early memory.  I remember that.  I also remember things about, I think I remember, things about the smell of a milk bottle, you know, sort of sweet stuff in it, you know, a bottle.  I think, and I don't know if that's something I recreated somewhere but I do remember this business about, about my sister dying and calculating about the difference between her age and my age.  I couldn't have been any more than three at that time.
Story_ID: 307846
Speaker 1: Talking about your sisters, could you tell us the names of your sisters, in their birth order?
Speaker 2: In the birth order, okay.  The oldest sister was Gloria Ernice Wilson [ph.], okay.  She was the oldest.  She was five years older than me.  The one that just died was named, was named Jean [Jean Wilson] and she was, she must have been three years older than me.  The one who was immediately closest to me was a year and a half older than me and her name was Marian Geraldine [Marian Wilson] and she was, she's a year and a half older than me, than me and then I had a younger sister who was four years older than me, four years younger than I was.  So we had, so I was the only male of, of siblings of five, you know.
Speaker 1: Were you spoiled?
Speaker 2: And, no, I wasn't.  I, you know, I thought, and it depends on who you talk to.  I mean, if you talk with my sister they'll say, yeah, well he, he was the only male so he got to do this and I don't remember it that way.  What I remember about was that had I been the oldest child, or the youngest child, I think I would have certainly gotten preferential treatment.  I mean, as the youngest child, the baby boy, you know, fine, you get, you get that treatment or the oldest child, you know, you're expected to do this, you know, you get, you're the first, everybody treats you royally.  Well being in the middle, and being the only boy was a problem because on one hand, my father [Olly Wilson, Sr.], who was a very patriarchal kind of person, this is it, men do this, women do this.  You do the man's work around the house when I'm not here, you cut the grass, you mow the lawn, you shovel the snow, you, yeah, you do the outside work.  You have to do that, you know, that's what men are supposed to do.  So I got that from him but I'm number four and, and well, actually number three because one sister died so young, in the pecking order, and so, and so it becomes, the sisters are saying, and the sister five years older than you are, who was like surrogate mother in certain respects when you're very young, and they're saying, no, no, no, you have to do stuff too.  You have to learn how to wash dishes.  We have to wash, you have to wash dishes.  You have to, you have to help clean the, clean the stuff off the table.  You have to do stuff in the house too.  You don't only do stuff outside, you have to do stuff, so I had to deal with that, and they were bigger than me and they were setting the tone and so, and so my mother [Alma Peoples Wilson] then sort of let them have some sway so I--the compromise is this, I had to help with the dishes 'cause washing and drying the dishes, I had to take a turn at washing, drying, taking the dishes off the table.  We had a dining room and we have to take them from the dining room to the kitchen and then we had to wash and then we had to dry them.  I had to do that kind of stuff.  I had to do all the outside stuff which they didn't do, however, however, and I can, you know, as they got older, when I was very young, I couldn't do it.  I mean, I couldn't mow the lawn and something, but I, as I got older, I just assumed that my father would come home, did you do this, did you do that, so, those were my responsibilities.  However, my mother did not make me, I never learned how to cook, you know, the girls had to cook.  I didn't have to wash the clothes and the girls had to wash the clothes so there were certain things.  I had to help around the house, clean up the rooms, sweep and dust and that kind of stuff but I didn't have to do everything they had to do.  So from their perspective, I was getting off.  From my perspective, I had to do some of that and some of the stuff outside that they didn't have to do.  So, it was an interesting kind of dynamic.  I think, because I had so many sisters, I think it served me in good stead because I learned something about female psychology, you know, and, and can learn to judge different moods and attitudes and things, so it was good.  It served me well in my life, you know, around, dealing with, with females, you know.  So it was, so I don't complain about that at all but they say I was spoiled.  They say I was, my fath- my mother's favorite and I don't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You don't--
Speaker 2: --I don't see that.
Story_ID: 307847
Speaker 1: Can you describe the street you lived on, your community?
Speaker 2: Okay, we lived in several different houses when I, from my early, my earliest house was in, was at 42--well, I don't know.  There it is again, you know, the earliest one I remember was 4204, I remember that address, Evans [Avenue], which was in the center of town, you know.  St. Louis [Missouri], the predominant, which was a segregated city.  I mean, the housing segregation, certainly they existed there.  So it was a predominantly black neighborhood but it was a decent neighborhood and close to the central, to the central civic things that were around in the black neighborhoods in St. Louis.  St. Louis at the time had the major hospital, the major teaching hospital in, in the Midwest, Homer G. Phillips Hospital [St. Louis, Missouri] which, and if you talk to any black physician who is over sixty and now, they would certainly know of Homer Phillips because many people went to school there.  You know, that's where they did their specialties and so forth.  So, so you have that.  So, and as a result of this, there were, there were a couple of senior, not senior citizen homes, there was what was being referred to as an old folks home which was run there and there was an orphans home which was run there and it was built on a complex where on one corner there was the, this big, you know, you know, high-rise hospital which was, which was totally black, you know, and then on, then in the middle of the, middle of the community, this was over in an area called The Ville [St. Louis, Missouri], and the village was called The Ville, you know, it became the slang name for it.  In the middle of that there was a public, there was a park, you know, a sports field, you know, where there was a football and a baseball and, and that.  On one side was Sumner High School [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri], where I went to high school which was one of the first black high schools built west of the Mississippi, you know, and it was really, you know, it had a long and glorious history and so forth and that, in that tradition.  On the other end of it, there was Stowe Teachers College [Harris-Stowe State University, St. Louis, Missouri], which was the premier, which was then the teachers college, the premier teachers college for black folks in those days there and then on the other side of the corner, there was, there were grade schools.  So there was this big sort of public complex which was kept very well.  I mean, I thought every place had something like this and they didn't and, of course, eventually a lot of it deteriorated but it's coming back now, as a matter of fact, but, but it was a big center there.  Our first house was, was not too far away from that.  You know, there was another major thoroughfare [Easton Avenue], which now has become Martin Luther King Drive [Dr. Martin Luther King Drive].  You know, like all, the most major thoroughfares have become that in the country.
Story_ID: 307848
Speaker 1: But we lived on a street called Evans [Avenue, St. Louis, Missouri] and that was the first one and I went to grammar school, which was up the street.  That was the first house.  It was a two-family flat, we lived on the second floor, we were renting.  And then, a few years later, I guess, and I remember we lived there when I started going to school, I was five years old.  The war [World War II, WWII] was still going on.  I was born in '37 [1937] so this was '40--'43 [1943], you know, and, '42 [1942] actually, and the war was going on and I remember vividly that there were scrap metal collections there and that's what people, to help the war effort, come give your, your scrap metal and bring your paper there.  That was all part of the war effort.  As a little kid, I remember having a new, buy, a new little wagon I think I got when I was four or five years old, and I remember thinking, I had it for about a year, but it still was relatively new, and I was so touched by the necessity to contribute to the patriotism of this country, I came and took my little red wagon and put it on the scrap metal and I was so proud of myself that I think my parents [Alma Peoples Wilson and Olly Wilson, Sr.] were, thought I was crazy but I thought I was doing the right thing and so forth and I wondered why nobody else put any new stuff up there, all, it was usually rusty.  And so, but I did that, you know, in the throes of being patriotic and so forth because in those years there was a lot of, you know, patriotism all over the place (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, the garden, and the victory garden and everything.
Speaker 1: --propaganda and everything else.
Story_ID: 307849
Speaker 1: Then we moved [in St. Louis, Missouri], finally, in 19--that was, must have been '42 [1942].  In 1943, we moved to a new house and our fortunes, economic fortunes improved tremendously during the war [World War II, WWII] because my father [Olly Wilson, Sr.] was born in 1905, as I said, hadn't gone to college but he didn't, he didn't graduate [from Arkansas Baptist College, Little Rock, Arkansas] so he was working as a, as a domestic butler, you know, but during the war, opportunities arose in federal work and, and one of the things that people who could pass the test, had an opportunity to do was work for the post office [U.S. Postal Service].  If you worked for the post office, that was immediately middle class, you know.  So, he got a job working for the post office as a railway mail clerk and this was interesting because that meant that he had to travel a lot and, but it also meant the salary was very good and, and he, and there are two things that really make that very vivid to me.  One, was that he had a gun because in the railway mail clerks, they had to have guns, you know, and they had holsters and guns, little revolvers, and I wondered, you know, I often wondered, why does he have a gun 'cause we never had any guns in the house before?  Maybe an old broken up rifle that somebody got from the farm down, a thousand years ago, but this is a rifle and a, a revolver, and I was fascinated by that.  What's he got a gun for, you know?  And I wondered if he had bullets or if it was loaded.  I wondered if I should try to mess with it, you know.  It was all little things, you know.  I told, hey, my dad's got a gun, you know, and so forth.  So, and fortunately my curiosity didn't go beyond that so we didn't try to mess around with it or anything but he did have the gun and then he also had, he had a, a large box that had positions in it where he practiced throwing cards in the skein, so it could learn on the deck 'cause you had to do that.  And the reason why he had a gun was this goes back to the, to the 1880s, 1860s, you know, when the railroads were stopped by Jesse James and people like that.  So, still, in the 1940s, people worked on trains shuffling, getting the mail.  They'd get it in the morning, they get it, they throw the mails so by the end of the, by the time they got to, they had put it in the mailbox, put it out and the train goes by and grabs it and the hooks grab it and so forth.  And then they'd pick up new mail and they would sort that.  By the next time they got the, by the time they got to the next town, they would put it out and then this would be picked up by that.  So it was constant work, you know, but it was interesting because he was going all over the country doing this and it was a solid job and it made very good money.  So, because of that, we were able to buy our first house and he bought that house in 1943.
Story_ID: 307850
Speaker 1: It was a, it was, you know, like, just like in the plays, you know.  What's that, what's that famous--well there's several plays about buying a new house in a decent neighborhood.  This is an integrated neighborhood and it was a neighborhood where, and the line for blacks was about three blocks further east than we were, so we moved west.  Moving west was to mean, moving to a better neighborhood.  It was still in town [St. Louis, Missouri] but it was less, and there were boundary lines, you know, real estate boundary lines.  They didn't usually sell houses to blacks on, west of this line but there were always some people who, who would anyway. And I think, and the real estate man with whom he [Wilson's father, Olly Wilson, Sr.] worked, became to be a friend of his because I think he, this was a guy, who was white, who felt that segregation was wrong and so forth.  He was, you know, he took, and so he was a real estate agent and so when he would find a place, he found somebody who could, who he thought could afford it, he would sell the place but he wasn't part of the kind of neighborhood investors who were just selling it and selling for enormously high price.  He got a decent price for it and we bought a new two-family flat and it was a very nice neighborhood and so forth.  Our other neighborhood [The Ville, St. Louis, Missouri] wasn't really bad but this was better.  And so, as a matter of fact, this was primarily a Jewish neighborhood, an Orthodox Jewish, because there was an Orthodox Jewish temple here and there were other things and I, I discovered, after reflection, I discovered it was a predominantly Jewish neighborhood because we realized there were all these churches around and they were not Christian churches, they were Jewish temples and Jewish, you know, synagogues (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Synagogues.
Speaker 1: --and so forth and so forth.  So, and so that was, that was in 1943 and that was economically his, his highpoint of his life because he was able to buy that.  The two-family flat meant that there was, there was also income coming from the house because we, we rented it out to people so that helped too, and it was a nice place and it was very positive and we all felt very good about it and it was a very nice house.  That was, that was '43 [1943].  That was a very nice house.  The house itself had two bedrooms. Two bedrooms, it had a living room, a dining room, it had a bedroom, one bedroom in the front, it had, of course, a bathroom and then a kitchen and a back bathroom, a back bedroom.  The back bedroom was my mother [Alma Peoples Wilson] and father's bedroom.  The other bedroom was shared by the three girls and then I, you know, had, in the dining room, we also--there was a dining, a big dining room table and there was always nice dining room furniture, that's when things were doing good some, something.  Well, so they had some very nice dining room furniture. But what happened was that we also had a rollaway bed.  So after, after dinner, you know, and we didn't eat in the dining room except on Sundays, anyways, we would roll the dining room back, roll out the little rollaway bed and I'd sleep on the rollaway bed and that was, and it worked perfectly fine.  We often marvel about we lived very well in that little two-bedroom house with four kids, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's a wonderful story.
Speaker 1: So, it was, it was, you know, that's what we did.
Speaker 2: That's a wonderful story.
Story_ID: 307851
Speaker 1: You had mentioned that you--when you smelled milk, you think you remember smelling sweet milk.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Are there any sights and other sights and sounds and smells that remind you of your growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I mean I have a whole range of sights and sounds.  I mean I grew up--
Speaker 1: Could you tell us about one?
Speaker 2: --in the town in St. Louis [Missouri] where, depends on the neighborhood too.  When we, the first neighborhood [The Ville, St. Louis, Missouri] we lived in, there was a lot of, there were more people.  It was a nice neighborhood.  People had lawns.  People mowed their lawns, cut their lawns, the streets were clean, it was all that kind of stuff but you'd walk over on the other street, this Easton Avenue which subsequently became Martin Luther King [Dr. Martin Luther King Drive], this was a larger thoroughfare and there were, there were public accommodations, actually street cars running up and down the street.  It was a commercial district, you know, predominantly black commercial district and a lot of, you know, and I guess it was a vital kind of business area.  There, I mean, you would say sights and sounds are interesting.  I mean, you'd go by, you'd have live chickens, people would be selling and then they would, you go out a chicken side to get that.  You, you would have, up the street, you would have the grocery stores and you have little kids, you know, selling, had a little grocery carts to help make a little money taking people home with the grocery carts.  You would have, in the alleys, in St. Louis there were houses and between there, well, there were houses on a boulevard and then on the next corner over, there would be housing on the other side, between those two houses, there would be an alley and in the alley was a province of people selling things.  For example, people delivered ice 'cause in the early years, in the '40s [1940s], people had iceboxes (simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Iceboxes
Speaker 2: --rather than refrigerators.  Well the iceman would drive down there, the milkman would deliver your milk and the milkman would sometimes go in the streets, sometimes go in the alley, and the ragman, I mean would have horse and buggies and rags and they'd come down and they, and they all had songs and, "Hey, rags, rags," or somebody would sing something else and there was always these hollers, chants and hollers that the people, the various vendors in the area would use.  So it was very lively that way.  And then, sometimes, there were, there were record stores, you know, on the main thoroughfare and they would have the music blaring or sometimes in a weekend night, there would be, maybe an itinerant preacher out there preaching and so, and so you'd have all these sounds going on.  Go on that main street as a little kid, it was fascinating.  Here they was, always was worried that I didn't get lost because especially if it were a Saturday night when there were a lot of people out and there were photography shops and, and florists and a wide range of different businesses that had the sights and the sounds of all of that, you know.
Speaker 1: That's wonderful.
Speaker 2: And then all, and then often the churches, there was a church, around the church on a Saturday would be selling something barbeque.  Somebody would be barbequing something and they would sell sandwiches and making a little money for this usher board or this unit or that unit and so forth, so all of this stuff was going on.
Speaker 1: That's wonderful.
Speaker 2: A full rich sight, not to mention the clubs, you know, the taverns.  Once in a while you'd pass by a bar and a tavern and that would be going.  You had live music going on there.  You had people playing in the street.  You'd have blind musicians walking up and down the street strumming the guitar with a little kid or somebody holding a little cup.
Story_ID: 307852
Speaker 1: And so it was a lot of stuff going on, you know, and chickens, you know.  I mentioned the chickens.  I was thinking about the chickens.  You know, I don't know, I was just, for some reason I was reflecting about the neighborhoods in which I grew up and how it would seem normal, I mean people got chickens would get a live chicken.  Nobody bought a chicken that was not alive.  They'd go out and pick a big fluffy chicken, they'd take 'em home and then they'd have to kill the chicken.  Usually they might feed it a couple of days and then they'd kill the chicken and it was just sort of seen as, as that's what you did.
Speaker 2: That's what you did.
Speaker 1: You want a chicken, you want a chicken, you kill the chicken.  And often the women of the family and in the country, down south, usually the mother or the grandmother would go out and carry the chicken, wring the neck and throw it around.  And I remember that and I, and then they'd have a hot tub and they'd throw it and I was always struck by the fact that these very nice genteel people would take a chicken and literally wring its neck and then threw it in and now I love chicken as much as, as I said, it's one of the things I like, but the idea of killing a live thing and just twisting something and toss it away and then put it in this hot scalding water and then pulling the feathers out, that's what you had to do, but I thought, boy, when I thought back on this, you know, forty years later, sixty years later, I mean, and you think, gee, that was pretty brutal stuff, you know.
Speaker 2: That's what you did.
Speaker 1: Killing a chicken, you know, and, and these nice people doing it, you know, but I guess it's how if you eat meat (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's what you got to, you've got to kill it.
Speaker 1: That's what's going to happen, yeah.
Story_ID: 307853
Speaker 1: --You had mentioned that your father [Olly Wilson, Sr.] sang in the church.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Was the church very important in your family life?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, it was the center of the life--
Speaker 1: Was it?
Speaker 2: --when I was very young.  I mean, what happened, what happened is because he liked to sing and because after 1943, his fortunes were, were going up but they're still doing all right, even before, you know, the war [World War II, WWII], he was, he was always a well-dressed person and, and he always was well-known in church and at the church that we attended was the First Baptist Church in St. Louis [Missouri].  It wasn't the first black Baptist church, it was the first Baptist Church.  Now it was all black 'cause churches were not integrated in those years but it be--it got the charter.  There was a Second Baptist Church [St. Louis, Missouri] which was all white.  There was a Third Baptist Church [St. Louis, Missouri] which was all white but the First Baptist Church was black in St. Louis and that was because, in 1833, shortly after St. Louis became, getting settled, some missionaries came along and probably the predecessor said--the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel, which were active people after the Civil War, you know, but this is before the Civil War and these were people who were converting slaves, you know.  They believed in converting the souls of Satan.  There was always this big argument, historically, as you know between whether slaves were real humans or not and should their souls be saved or not and some people thought they were and some people thought they did.  Among those who thought that they were, then we have to save their souls so you, you convert them to Christianity.  And so, missionaries were going out converting people and so in the St. Louis area this little growing, burgeoning town, called St. Louis, they said, okay, we should, we should establish a church for these people because these are slaves and a few free blacks and we're going to, so they established the first Baptist congregation in St. Louis in 1833 (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 307854
Speaker 1: Before we left, you had told us how the First Baptist Church [St. Louis, Missouri] was founded.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now could you tell us something about your life in the church?
Speaker 2: Sure.  Okay, as an early child, my, as, my father [Olly Wilson, Sr.] and mother [Alma Peoples Wilson] were both Baptist and so they, although my mother originally was Methodist, she told us that and, and my father, and then after she married and he was Baptist, they both began to go to church. And they went to several churches in St. Louis [Missouri] and then they discovered this church, First Baptist Church, and because it was historically important and since the congregation was relatively large in the '40s [1940s], and it, it had, it was a kind of church that was, that ran the gamut, its parishioners ran the gamut from people who were, you would consider by today's standards, middle class and upper middle class black folks to hard working, every day people, the majority of whom, and that was the majority, but there was a wide range of social strata within the church.  As a matter of fact, the minister of the church, at the time, when I first remember the church which must have been in the '40s [1940s], early '40s [1940s], was a medical doctor.  His name was Dr. Bracy [Dr. J.M. Bracy] and he was, and it wasn't a doctor, honorific title, he was an M.D. and he also was a minister and he was also a very charismatic preacher and a good, and a good minister but he also was intelligent, you know, and there were a lot of people in the church who were either teachers or doctors or lawyers or that kind of thing, and then there was everybody else, you know, who participated and so forth.  So it was, it was a large and successful church because everybody was usually, there must have been, we had a large, the congregation was relatively large, the space--it was a spacious church and it had a large balcony upstairs and so forth.  And it was interesting because there, it was, it provided the inter-session [sic. intersection] of a lot of people from different areas of life and so while everybody in the church was not well-educated, people knew each other and some of the people were very, were very well-known, like some of the physicians and some of the lawyers and some of the educators were very well-known.  And so, people knew them and they knew this. So you, if there was something you were interested in, then there was somebody in the church that you could talk to and somebody would lead you.  And so it was very interesting from that thing.  You know like, Wilson talked about the sociologist.  Wilson talks about the role of, one of the, one of the results of segregation was that people who were in segregated things could see people up or down.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: You could see people who were successful.  You'd see people who had managed to move from one point to another as opposed to when things were integrated, people who could, moved out.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: And so now in the ghetto, it's, you know, they don't see people like that.  All they see is other people who have problems as bad as theirs or worse, you know, second generation pathological behavior, so second, third, fourth, fifth pathological behavior.  So you have that kind of situation.  Then it was different, you could see it and those are the people who were interested in moving up.  There were models around you all the time, and the church was important for that.
Story_ID: 307855
Speaker 1: Now, because of music, because my father [Olly Wilson, Sr.] was active in the choir, then we were active.  There was a children's choir.  There were actually three choirs in the church [First Baptist Church, St. Louis, Missouri].  There was a big, you know, behind the pulpit, there were a choir loft, which sort of went up in the ceiling and the church was probably forty, fifty feet high.  Well, it was a little higher than, it was really high, you know, the steeples and all that kind of stuff but then there were, there was a gosp- there was a senior choir which sat in the middle which sang primarily anthems and hymns.  There was a young person's choir, which sat on the right side and they sang maybe, they had a special Sunday they sang and they sang anthems, hymns and maybe some other songs.  Then there was the gospel choir that sang gospel music but that was a choir that was gospel, it wasn't particularly good but they were trying to sing gospel, okay, so, and gospel was relatively, people knew gospel but this was sort of the beginning of it.  Gospel had only been around as a regular church thing in about twenty-something years, you know, within that time.  There were other things around the turn of the century but gospel, as we tend to think of it as being separate and distinct from what everybody else sang, wasn't really true until the '20s [1920s] and then in the, in the '40s [1940s] and it also had a strong social aspect to it, that is, gospel, you associate it with storefront churches, churches and evangelical kinds of ministers and so forth and they would come and go.  You'd see a church that store or a barbershop was out and then the next day the windows would be painted and then somebody's M.B. church [Missionary Baptist], Baptist church or, or some kind of sanctified or A.M.- you know, something like that.  And so that wouldn't last.  This was a church that had rooted in history and so forth so you got a lot of people there who's large and a well-known institution but the gospel choir was there.  Now, because, because my father was a musician, he insisted that all of his children learn music very early.  And so we all at, before we were ten, certainly, most of us around eight, you know, seven, eight, I think I was about seven or eight when we started, he, and then also about that time, his personal economic situation was, was reasonably good.  So he insisted that we all take piano lessons from, what he thought was the best teacher, teachers he could and there was a school there, school of music in St. Louis [Missouri] called the Krieger School of Music [ph.] and this was a predominantly white institution but they did accept anybody that could pay the monies for the lessons.  And he had heard because he, he knew other musicians and he knew people who were educated musicians and so forth and, and because, though he sang, he didn't, he never learned how to play the piano well and he wanted his kids to be able to play the piano.  I often joke and say, well, he insisted that all of his children learned to play the piano because he wanted to raise accompanists, you know, and so forth.  So, at age seven, eight, we were taken over to this school and we were, you know, we'd learned piano and we were learning Western European music, you know, started out straight, straight to learned kind of music and so that's what we were doing.  And my oldest sister [Gloria Wilson], the one who was the, who was five years older than me, and then the second one [Jean Wilson] who was just a year and a half older than me and myself, we all, we were taking it all at the same time.  We studied with the same teacher, Mrs. Bergfeld [ph.], or something like that, and it was, you know, so it was a, it was, and so we learned quickly.  I guess we just, all of us seemed to have some natural musical talent and, you know, and it was also pleasing your father because he wanted you to do it, you wanted to do it and besides, if he said do something, you'd do it, you know, and so forth.  So, we got involved in that and after a while, we all liked it, you know.  So, I didn't have to be told you got to practice, I wanted to practice.  I wanted to please my father.  I wanted to please the teachers.  I wanted to do that and I happened to be reasonably adept at doing it.  So, you know, that's what I did.
Story_ID: 307856
Speaker 1: So, we started playing. Then that meant, this is why it's related to the church [First Baptist Church, St. Louis, Missouri], because of that, my oldest sister [Gloria Wilson] began to play first the piano for the Sunday school, you know, and remember on Sundays it was half the day was at church.  We went to Sunday school early in the morning, followed by church, followed by going back at a three o'clock Sunday program and then in the evening BTU [Baptist Training Union], or Baptist Young People's Union, or whatever it was called, so that, you know, and, and then perhaps night service.  So, it was a lot of church all day but because she was playing, she played the piano for the church first for the Sunday school, and then she got older and better, she was asked to be the pianist for the church and then I followed in her footsteps.  My second sister [Jean Wilson] didn't take to it as well.  She played and she could play and so but she didn't want to work at it as hard and so forth so, so she, and I was sort of trying to compete with my older sister so I wanted to do it so I played for the, for the Sunday school and then I played for the church and then, no, Sunday school and then the BYPU, the Baptist Young People's Union.  This was something that happened at six o'clock on Sundays and then on, on, pardon me, and then I played, then eventually I graduated and became the pianist for the church too, you know, so--
Speaker 2: How old were you?
Speaker 1: Oh, at that time, probably a teenager, fifteen, fourteen, fifteen, something like that.
Speaker 2: Really.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and so forth.  So, but and, see she now she's nineteen, twenty, you know and so it was, and after you played for Sunday school and so forth, you, you learned, you know, and we, remember, we were studying a lot so I could read music very well and so forth.  And most of the kind of music we sang were hymns, which were written out and anthems, which you could learn and none of it was as hard as the music that we were playing at a regular age.  So, you know, it was fairly simple to do, so we did that.  The hardest thing to do, and this didn't happen until later, was to play for the gospel choir because the gospel choir didn't use written music, it was all oral, and you had, and so, but see I was a learned musician in the sense of learning that but I also was challenged by being able to pick up that.  So I struggled to try to learn how to play well enough to pick up the gospel choir because sometimes somebody would start singing and they didn't know what the key, they didn't know what, they'd just start singing the notes and start singing it.  Well, you had to figure out which key.  If you were, if you happened to have perfect pitch, and some people do, then you know immediately what it is and you just sort of do it, but I didn't have perfect pitch.  I had good pitch but I didn't have perfect pitch.  So that meant I had to slew around, find out where they were and if the song I didn't know, but the songs were so often based on predictable patterns that after a while you learned that and so forth.  So, and we, and because of that, there were, there usually was a special person who played for the gospel choir but this was somebody who maybe didn't even read music, they just knew how to do this.  And so, so they did that and so they wouldn't have been satisfactory to do the anthems and all the other stuff you had to do but they could do this but sometimes they wouldn't show up or something.  Then, if you're the regular pianist, the gospel pianist, then you have to fit that, figure that out.  So it was great training for the ear and it was a challenge, you know, so you did it.  So I learned how to do it well enough to get through it, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's wonderful.
Speaker 1: I didn't consider myself a real gospel pianist, but I could do it well enough to do it and I was really very good in terms of doing that.
Story_ID: 307857
Speaker 1: And it also helped me in my other musical pursuits because I started playing piano and then this was at the church [First Baptist Church, St. Louis, Missouri] and, you know, we did that and then, then I started playing, by the time I was eleven, I started playing other instruments.  I started playing the clarinet.  So, and then, I took private lessons on clarinet.  So I played the clarinet and the piano.  You see, the clarinet and the piano and then eventually I did several other instruments but what happened is that that experience playing, which helped to really develop your ears and so forth and the church was, the church also had special choirs from time to time and it, and it was a, you know, big concerts that we did and we, and then we had the children's choir and we were all in the children's choir.  And so it was really, so there was music all around me and it was just, it was natural to me and it seemed so, so important.  So it's really vital to my development and I say, in large part, I think I became a musician partially because my father [Olly Wilson, Sr.] was an amateur musician who, who really was a zealous amateur musician, wanted to be good and he wanted his kids to be able to accompany him.  So, and literally, that's what we did.  That is, after we were good enough, you know, and then this is usually by, I started, I was about eight.  By the time I was eleven, twelve, I could play well enough to accompany him and he'd go out on a tea Sunday and we'd go out and he'd say, child number one, two, three, whoever, you're going to play for me today, okay.  So then, Saturday then I would go over and practice and we had a piano all the time and we'd go over and practice, practice whatever he was going to sing and then as, and then it also established a relationship between us because he worked all the time and even, you know, when he traveled on the railroad, he was gone but this was something special, it wasn't just, Daddy coming home and saying, you didn't do this or you did do this or something, it was a special kind of thing.  And Sundays themselves were special because that was the day that he was home and as a result we ate in the dining room and it was, and he, I think his sense of himself was such that he wanted us to have an elegant setting for the dining room.  We had water glasses and wine glasses, so we did, we usually had ice tea in the wine glasses but we had, and there was silverware, you know, and there was cloth napkins and all of that kind of stuff and it was, you know, and the only time we used that dining room, except when I slept in it with the rollaway bed, but it was, it sort of set a certain standard of what genteel life should be like and that probably comes from his background, from what he, you know, what he did as a work, as a butler, and, and also, and the people he worked for were very wealthy and he would see certain kinds of things that he thought, he said, let's try some of that too.  So, so that was kind of the, kind of the things that happened.
Story_ID: 307858
Speaker 1: In the break you were mentioning, we had talked about, you know, walking down the street in St. Louis [Missouri] and--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --we talked about how wonderful it was.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: And then also during the break, you were mentioning another side of life that you want to talk--that you said you wanted to talk about.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  There were, well, what happened is that I learned very quickly that, what I considered an idyllic life when we moved down on where we, you know, in Page, 4851 Page [Boulevard] in the house that we bought.  It was very nice and very pleasant and so forth.  I felt that, you know, that was really, and I was aware that this was special because there weren't many other black people living there.  We were about the second black family living within a, like a, a rather large radius, you know, and there, that line was another street which was around three or four blocks further down from us but also what I was alluding to when I mentioned that about the other side of life was my mother [Alma Peoples Wilson] had a sister that lived in Chicago [Illinois] and they used to come and visit us from time to time and we would go visit them.  Well, they lived on the South Side of Chicago which was a tough, busy, buzzing, you know I mentioned this Easton Street [Easton Avenue], which ultimately became Martin Luther King [Dr. Martin Luther King Drive], this was like, this was South Parkway [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive] in, in, I don't know if you know Chicago but South Parkway which was a busy street and then there was, they lived in the 3500 of South Rhodes [Avenue], which was another busy, and these were like large tenement buildings.  They weren't, you know, we had houses, you know, two-family flats.  These were big apartments, after apartment, after apartment, you know.  You have to go up three, four, five floors, some of the halls were rank and, and smelled of urine and, and whatever and so forth but once you got in the apartment, it's okay and so forth.  So that was a new experience when I went up there to Chicago to see that and it was kind of rough and there were crazy people walking down the street and there were probably teenage gangs, there were people in the sporting life and everything else was right there, you know, and though, you know, I knew there were places like that in St. Louis, I wasn't close to it and then, and suddenly here we were right in the middle of it.  So it was, it was tough, it was interesting, you see.  I, I escaped much of it when I went there, usually, I'd go there--
Story_ID: 307859
Speaker 1: I loved to see my aunt. I loved to see my cousins. She had one daughter and her husband is very, another, this is sort of, sort of a digression but I think it's an important one.  Her husband was a real big man, you know, he was a big, strong guy.
Speaker 2: What was his name?
Speaker 1: His name was, let's see what her name was.  I'll think of it in a minute.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'll think of it in a minute.  Her name was, let's see, Alma, anyway I'll think of it.  Her name is, anyway, the point is, that he was a very large man and he worked in the foundries, you know, and he, and he had, his hands were big, powerful hands but they were very crusty, you know, 'cause they had to push stuff and it was heavy and it was hard work and the like but he was a person who had done, you know, was a very bright guy and had actually gone to the University of Illinois for a couple of years, you know, and he was interested in a lot of things.  He used to like to read poetry, you know, and stuff like that and he used to say, and he had one daughter who was a very dutiful daughter and a very bright kid and did everything their parents said.  I guess we'd consider her very square, you know, but she was, she was very bright and did very well in school and so forth but that was the only child he had and they lived in this, this place, in this like tenement building.  He had come home on Friday and he'd, you know, the first thing he'd do is get drunk, you know, and he'd get drunk.  He'd come upstairs and then he'd say, if I was there, and I only stayed up, you know, a summer, a couple of weeks, but he'd say, boy, go get me that book, you know, and I want you to read to me.  So I'd get him the book of poetry.  He said, read that poem, you know, and some of it was stuff like the boy stood on the burning deck, you know, and all that kind of stuff but I learned it was different kind of 19th century poetry and, you know, I was reading this and I was wondering what this contrast between this guy who looks like a, you know, big, tough, rough guy who had this love for poetry and then he's out, and not only that, he's drunk.  So this is Friday night, go and give his check to his wife, she'd take care of all the business, he would start drinking on his way home, he'd go home and rest for a little while and then he'd go outside and say, okay, I'm going out.  And so he'd leave about, after he got me to read to him, he'd go down the three or four flights, whatever he had to, go out in the street, the teeming streets and he would start, he'd get on a soapbox and he'd start preaching.  He'd either preach about biblical things or some social stuff or whatever but he's one of those guys who goes out on the street and just talks, you know.  So that's what he'd do and then about 9:30 or 10:00 [P.M.], she'd go out to wherever he was, his place, and lead him home and he'd go to bed, you know, and then sleep, I guess, most of the next day and then on Monday he'd get up bright and early and go to work again.  So it was that contrast between that and then with all the stuff and it was dangerous out on the streets.  You know, there's ambulances calling, people fighting and all that kind of stuff.  So Chicago [Illinois] was a place that I, I found exciting but I didn't want to be out in the middle of it as a, I was what, ten, eleven, twelve, teenagers, early teenager.  And so when I was there, a lot of times I'd escape and go and I'd get on the bus 'cause you could get on the bus and ride around town.  I discovered the Museum of Science and Industry [Chicago, Illinois].  I used to go there because it was practically free to get in, ten cent, five cent or something like that for a kid and I discovered in that museum they had things like coal mines and things, and, and locomotives of different vintages and cars and all of that.  It was just fascinating to do that.  So I'd spend a lot of time there, then get on the bus and go back home.
Story_ID: 307860
Speaker 1: That was part of the other side of--other side of that.  The only other thing about that, and this goes back to the music side, is that as I grew up, you know, and I began to start playing the clarinet and then I started, I became interested in, 'cause I was playing this classical music and that was fine but suddenly I began to discover all this other music that's going on, indigenous music, it's like gospel music and in St. Louis [Missouri] it was a mecca for a lot of, a lot of pioneers in music.  I mean, you know, rock 'n roll, you know, Chuck Berry was living in, you know, was there, his wife, his sister was a hairdresser that had a place.  Everybody knew who Chuck Berry was and when this hit in the '50s [1950s], and in the '50s [1950s] now I'm in the early parts of high school [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri], so I started, and not only that, I always wanted to be cool, you know, and if you, and one of the ways to be cool was to be a good musician 'cause you could play popular music.  So I figured out how to play popular music just by listening to recordings and start playing and then I started gigging and playing around with different things and, and so I learned that.  Then I started taking jobs, you know, working around so I had this, this double life.  On some Sunday nights when I was playing for the church [First Baptist Church, St. Louis, Missouri], I'd play the Sunday services, I might have to play in the afternoon and then, BYPU [Baptist Young People's Union], and then the night service 'cause there was still the night service, it was night service, but there weren't many people at the night service, you know, and so it was all usually a short sermon and so forth.  So we'd get out of there about, about nine [o'clock], you know, and then I might even go down and play in a funky part of the town playing blues, you know, playing whatever that, and so doing that was also, I mean, I enjoyed playing, I enjoyed learning about how to do it 'cause I was still a teenager, you know.
Story_ID: 307861
Speaker 1: St. Louis [Missouri] had a wonderful, has a wonderful music history.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: You were talking about Chuck Berry.  Can you tell us a little bit about the St. Louis music scene (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure, sure, okay.  Let me, let me put it this way.  There was both the cult--so-called cultivated music tradition within the African American tradition and the old culture within the African American tradition which existed side by side, nowhere there're lines of demarcation between them, that is people who were musicians thought that you should be able to do both, that was in the black community.  In the white community, that wasn't the case.  Usually you did one or the other.  There were exceptions but by and large, it was, it was that way.  You either played classical music or you played popular music.  You could play the guitar or the piano or the violin or something.  Okay, now, what happened there, and one of the reasons why St. Louis is important is because historically, you know, it was the gateway to the West and, and it was also on the Mississippi River.  Well, a lot of interesting things, developments, going on in music happened on the Mississippi River.  Certainly the development of jazz we associate, not only with New Orleans [Louisiana] but with places along the Mississippi River.  New Orleans had to be the center but even before jazz, the ragtime tradition, which grows out of the whole Louisiana territory space and has to do with the fact that the French possession of those territories and the French with all those bands that they had and the whole Napoleonic ideal of music, you know, important, impressive military music, all part of the grandeur of France, you know, and so forth.  And as a result of that, and all those forts that the French had, you know, and throughout the Louisiana territory, there's always martial bands that they had.  Now, ragtime really becomes a kind of a developed, an African-influenced kind of march tradition.  The forms of ragtime are really like the forms of the written bands but what you do is you approach that and you subject them to certain aspects of African cultural propensities.  African, African American cultural events is about music and that's another long, long story but, but what happens is that that happens and out of that comes essentially ragtime.  So ragtime is that.  Now, up and down the Mississippi River, the people who played ragtime were two kinds of people.  There were certain people who just had the kinds of beers and learned how to do it but there were other people who not only learned how to do it but knew how to write it.  That's why Scott Joplin becomes important because Scott Joplin and, and all of his compatriots, you know, really knew how to write what they were doing and really, and wrote what they did and, you know, so you had the complete works of Scott Joplin that are in our library, you know, at Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] and then you have all of Tom Turpin and a whole range of other people who were associates with Joplin.  Joplin also worked in Sedalia, Missouri, that's when he published, published most of his things.  The person who published him was John Stark [John Stillwell Stark] who worked with Joplin and there.  So you had Joplin as a learned person and that's why a lot of the players were called professors 'cause they knew the written tradition and, and so this goes back to the, to the turn of the century and earlier before.  So, that first flowering, I like to think of the nineteen--end of the 19th century as the first flowering of the, of the black intellectual elite because most of the schools were established right after the Civil War.  So you get the end of that, you get this flowering and, you know, Dubois' [W.E.B. Du Bois] Talented Tenth and all that.  Those notions really occurs there and also, it also happens to be in the arts, a high part because the people, some of them learned in schools, most of them learned in schools.  Joplin went to school.  He learned how to do it.  He learned how to write it.  He learned how to do it and publish it.  So you had, and he becomes a prototype for people doing that.  So, so, the point is that you have this tradition of both of these, the written and the oral tradition going on simultaneously.  So, when I grew up in St. Louis, there were people still, that there existed in St. Louis, a black musician genre, okay, and that was again a result of segregation.  There was a musician genre, a white musician genre but the whites didn't want the blacks there so the blacks had their own musician genre.  That existed in many major cities in the United States until about the 1960s.  They also had a union hall so as a little kid loving music who played in the band, my band director had, was an educated musician although he could do other things too but he also, since I was playing clarinet and happened to be very good at playing the clarinet, I'm the first clarinet and the president of the band and all that kind of stuff, that I, you know, I was asked to play from time to time in this union band.  So I got over there and I met people who were, old as my father [Olly Wilson, Sr.], or older, who played in some ragtime bands that were still playing on boats going up and down the Mississippi River, people like Singleton Palmer and stuff like that.  So all of that was right there as a kid.  Now I didn't think anything about it, I just thought these guys were playing this old timey music but it does swing, you know.  I had to get, it does seem old timing music but it does swing.  I was more interested in the modern jazz of Charlie Parker and people like that but I was also attracted by this, this music but there were only a few people who were still doing it but they were there and they were real people and they were still making money so it was all part of the tradition and it was part of the tradition of thinking there's not this line of demarcation between the literal, between the literate and the, and the oral tradition and that's all part of them.  They feed one another.
Story_ID: 307862
Speaker 1: All right, we've been talking a little bit about your informal education, your introduction to music.  Could you tell us more about your formal--where you, a little bit about your schooling?
Speaker 2: Sure, sure.  I went to five grammar schools and I went to five grammar schools because of segregation and I was bused, I was, I was bused but at our expense.  We paid for the buses to go to segregated schools.  I mean, that's why when this, this business about busing, how people complained about being bused, about having their kids bused, I thought it was really ironic because we went to five grammar schools.  The reason why we went to five grammar schools was because, as I told you, my father [Olly Wilson, Sr.] bought our house in a, in a neighborhood and though there were neighborhood schools, they were segregated to us so we were not, unable to go to the neighborhood schools, it was not until we were, I was in the sixth grade, I think, that I was able to go to a school which was in walking distance from our house and able, was not until I was in eighth grade that I was able to go to a school that was the closest to my house.  So, that was the typical thing and that was fairly common at that time.  There was a school right around the corner but we couldn't go to that school because it was designated for white and then when it opened up, 'cause they opened up 'cause the neighborhood has changed, they opened up, we were able to go to the schools.  So I graduated from a couple of schools in St. Louis [Missouri].  I went to Sumner High School [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri], which was this high school I referred to earlier, which was a marvelous institution at the time.  There were about three, it was terribly overcrowded, there were about three thousand students but it was marvelous, it was, because we had excellent teachers and what happened while I was there, the, the administration decided to establish a school, finish school, essentially a prep school within the school.  And so they took kids who, on the basis of tests, but more importantly, on the basis of performance in school who had done well and they arranged for them to get the best teachers and so forth and so on.  So, I was essentially in the same advisory group from the freshman year all the way through the graduation.  We knew all the kids and we, and there was some friendly rivalry going on, competing and we had an excellent teacher whose name was John Buckner, an excellent advisor.  He was a math teacher and would challenge us and we would compete, you know, every semester, what your average was and what you should be and blah, blah, blah.  So we had excellent counseling and got excellent teaching and by the time we all graduated, I think out of the thirty-something kids that participated in that class, I think there were, in that advisory group, I think about, I think just about everybody got a scholarship to somewhere, everybody certainly went to college and that, and most of us got scholarships to go.  I graduated from high school in 1955.  St. Louis public schools, like public schools all over the world, were integrated in 1954.  The [U.S.] Supreme Court decision [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], I was a senior then and I could have gone to the white high school which was closer to my house than the Sumner High School was, but by then I'm a senior, you know, and I don't want to go to that school, become the only kids there and so I want to go to our school--
Story_ID: 307863
Speaker 1: So I graduated from Sumner High School [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri].  During that year, I actually started a little bit earlier. Washington University in St. Louis [St. Louis, Missouri], which was the premier university and a very expensive school, a very well established school and a very beautiful campus, had a summer music theory program that, but Washington University was also a segregated school.  So, and, but they invited, they reached out, the music department, people from the music department, reached out to all those schools in St. Louis [Missouri] and, and asked for, and they said they would admit any students from any of the schools to come to a special Saturday music theory class and the music theory is sort of a basic subject that you have to learn and if you're going to be a music major.  And so, and so they allowed to do that at the school that was still segregated but then in May of 1954, when the [U.S.] Supreme Court decision [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] said, they said okay, in 1955, we're open and anybody can get in, come.  Well, it was a very expensive school and so forth but since I had gone to that summer, that Saturday music class, I knew some of the people and also I had done very well on the exams and the, and all that kind of stuff.  So, I, I applied for Washington University and I was offered a scholarship to Washington University.  I went to Washington University in 1955, among the first, I think at the time, out of seven thousand students, there were certainly less than ten African Americans.  So we were, we were the Jackie Robinsons in that particular time.  There may have been a couple who went in the fall of '55 [1955].  In the, let's see, it happened '54 [1954], there may have been a couple who went to the fall of '54 [1954], but we went in the, in the fall of '55 [1955] and so it was the largest group that was at, all seven of us, seven, eight, whatever it was.
Story_ID: 307864
Speaker 1: And so, so that, I went to Washington University [Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri] and it was a liberal arts school, very solid liberal arts school and, and music was the subject within liberal arts and so that's what we did and so it was very much that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Did you have any trouble?  Was there any racial trouble there?
Speaker 1: Not, not really.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I mean there were little slights every now and then.  I remember a literature, an English course, yes, I do remember now that you mention it.  There was an English course that we had to, everybody had to take freshmen English and you know, you had to write essays every, every, write a paper every week and so forth and I know that I never had any difficulties in expressing myself, either verbally or in the written, in the written mode, and, and so we were writing about, the teacher said you wanted to write something about your experience and I had done well in this class, I was getting, and to get a B was good, you know, A's were rare but to get a B, and I was getting Bs and A's and, you know, doing very well so I was feeling very confident in the course, and the class had about twenty people in it.  And so I'm sure the teacher didn't know exactly who I was because we were just writing, you know, whatever, whatever the subject was and she had put the taped papers out there, at the desk and you just come up so the teacher wouldn't know necessarily who that person was.  They didn't call roll or that kind of thing.  So, but then she asked somebody to write something about their experience or something, their, their neighborhood something or so.  So I wrote about my neighborhood and about, and said there were two neighborhoods.  There was a neighborhood in which we lived and there was a neighborhood, neighborhood where our church [First Baptist Church, St. Louis, Missouri] was located.  The church was located down the center of the ghetto more and so forth and I wrote about some experience that I had down there which anybody reading would say, whoever wrote this was black, you know.  And I remember she did ask who was [HistoryMaker] Olly Wilson so I raised my hand.  She said, okay, and I never got a grade above C for the rest of the semester.  So I said that had nothing to do, that had everything to do with her, her preconceived notion about the kind of grade I was supposed to get, I guess, but, but that, that, with the exception of something like that, that was one of the, that's the most vivid experience I can remember.  Other than that, it was fine.  I mean we, you know, some people were good, bad and indifferent--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you know and so forth, so.
Story_ID: 307865
Speaker 1: So you graduate in 1959 [from Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri] and you went on to get (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I graduate in 1959 and went to University of Illinois [University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois], did a master's degree.  I graduated one week in '59 [1959] and got married the next weekend in '59 [1959].  I met Elouise [Elouise Wilson], my wife, when I was in my freshman year, in college, and so we went together for four years and then we got married.  I graduated one week and got married the next week and then I went to the University of Illinois and stayed there for a year, a year and a half, finished my master's degree.  Then I was, then I, by that time, I knew, I went to the University of Illinois to study composition because the sophomore year of college I realized that's what I wanted to be, a composer.  And so, I went there and I studied composition there and I also knew that if you're going to be a composer, then you had to have some writing, the kind of music, which was not pop music.  Then you had to, you had to teach in a university and that was fine 'cause I love the university, I love the ideas of the challenge and all that.  So, you know, I went to the University of Illinois and I graduated, still couldn't get a job.  You know, that was, at the end of this, you know, it was, these are in the days when you apply for a job, you just wrote to all the, you looked in the encyclopedia and found all the universities and wrote letters and sent out but there was this quaint, quaint practice of having people attach their pictures to their, every letter.  Okay, so out of the pictures then, and so I never got--heard anything back from anybody, you know, except from occasionally if I wrote to a traditional black school [HBCU], I'd hear back, sometimes, and so forth.  So anyway, it's, it's August, I've been there a year and a half now and I'm trying to get a job and, and no job, no bites or anything from anybody and I didn't know what, except I did get something, somebody did reply from the University of Puerto Rico, you know.  In fact, there were several, two universities in Puerto Rico, this was one on the other side of the, other side of the island which was less desirable.  At any rate, but I was considering that but I said, what am I going to do?  I don't speak Spanish. But what am I going to do?  So anyway, to make a long story short, I got a job offer from Florida A&M University [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University], a traditional black university in Tallahassee, Florida in 1960, August, of 1960 and school started September, you know, like three weeks or four weeks after.  I was glad to hear that.  So I went there, and I went there and that was the first, you know, that was where, I went there.  Then I taught at Florida A&M for two years and I went to graduate school at the University of Iowa [Iowa City, Iowa] and worked on the Ph.D. and then I came back to Florida A&M and in 1960--'64 [1964], because I still couldn't get a job out of a traditional black school, and for the same reason, you know, and, and there are some other interesting stories about what happened there but, but I did go back to, I did finish the Ph.D., I did go back to Florida A&M and then the next year, this is 1964, I get an offer from Oberlin [Oberlin Conservatory of Music, Oberlin, Ohio].
Story_ID: 307866
Speaker 1: So I go and teach at Oberlin [Oberlin Conservatory of Music, Oberlin, Ohio] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In Ohio?
Speaker 1: Oberlin, Ohio.  So that was the opportunity and, that was a big oppor--and it's no mistake it happened in the middle of the '60s [1960s] because social action and everything was going on and, and, you know, so it was, I was fortunate though because not everybody who, who had the kind of, you know, who had the Ph.D. and records were, was able to get a job outside of the Deep South and so forth.  And, but going to Florida A and M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida] was also good for me because I learned some things there that I could not have learned had I not had that experience and so forth.  There were still people teaching there who were, had been active in the Harlem Renaissance and understood from a long range viewpoint, and at first had information, the history of black intellectual history and black, int- artistic history, cultural history there, were teaching there and so forth.  So, because that's where they went except there, and places like my high school [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri], I meant to mention that before.  One of the things about this major urban high school, there were people with Ph.D.s and everything from, from teaching in that high school.  The reason why they were teaching there, they didn't want to live in the Deep South.  They couldn't get a job teaching at a regular, at, at one of the other universities so they taught in the high school (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) High school.
Speaker 1: And so, we were beneficiaries of that because we got people who really were solid in their field and they could, you know, they could help mentors and help us to be qualified.  I mean, the whole dynamic of growing up in the early '40s [1940s] was what, what we talk about the Jackie Robinson syndrome, that is you can't be, 'cause you've got to be better than and if you really think that, and you really, then you've got to work harder because you say, hey look, I know I'm going to be suspect and so in order to do that I have to better than the average person, you know, so.
Story_ID: 307867
Speaker 1: Got a very good experience at Oberlin [Oberlin Conservatory of Music, Oberlin, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Were you happy there (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)Oh, yeah, yeah.  Oberlin was, Oberlin was, well Oberlin was, there was a lot of turmoil at Oberlin because, remember, Oberlin--this is the middle '60s [1960s]--
Speaker 1: Middle '60s [1960s].
Speaker 2: It's right in the middle of the '60s [1960s], the war is going on, it's right near Kent State [Kent State University, Kent, Ohio]--
Speaker 1: Kent State.
Speaker 2: --where people were killed.  It's also, Oberlin's activism was also the thing.  I mean, Oberlin was one of the first students--students at Oberlin were one of the first group of students with the anti-Vietnam War that imprisoned some [U.S.] Navy recruiters who were coming there, imprisoned only by getting around their car, and so forth.  And so it was, it was, that was going on and then the whole cultural wars that were going on which was a part of that and the whole development of black studies was a part of that because, when I went to Oberlin, there was only one other black, black, there had never been a black professor in the conservatory.  I was appointed to the conservatory.  There was a black professor who was a professor of math who had been there, math, who had been there twenty years, who was in, you know, who taught there, but that was the only, we were the only two blacks there.  Now, he, you know, he's also about twenty-something years older than me and he was fine and so forth.  As a matter, he ultimately left Oberlin and went to Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] but, but he was--but, you know, there's a difference between when the kids have big Afros and he didn't have any, you know, he, that was, wasn't his thing, you know.  He's forty-something years old but here I am, a twenty-six, twenty-seven, you know, and I have a big Afro, I'm right there, I mean, and also we, you know, also, ideologically, I can relate to the kids better than he could.  So I became the, the faculty advisor for the development of black studies was starting then and so I became the faculty advisor for first the black student union, which was then and then the, then the development of the black studies department there and so forth and chartering that, the black studies program, how it's going to be and so forth, 'cause I believed in it and though I was not, I was appointed in, in music, and I stayed appointed in music, which made sense for me, but it also made sense to mentor and help and support the kids who were there and the kids at Oberlin were, I mean, it was your traditional talented tenth, you know, plus new kids who never would have been able to go to the school of Oberlin [Oberlin College, Oberlin, Ohio] until Oberlin started reaching out, Oberlin being a liberal place and, with a long history in the Underground Railroad and all that, really felt it.  It was a kind of place to be.  So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It certainly was.
Story_ID: 307868
Speaker 1: After you left Oberlin [Oberlin Conservatory of Music, Oberlin, Ohio], you came to--?
Speaker 2: After Oberlin I came to the University of California, Berkeley [Berkeley, California] and I came here in 1970 and, and came here as an assistant professor.  I had just been appointed associate professor.  Well, I was going to be appointed associate professor with tenure at Oberlin but I came to Berkeley because it was, I came out and saw this beautiful place and California was marvelous.  Oberlin's a nice place and very, but, it was small (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It snowed.
Speaker 2: --it was small, you know.  It's a different thing.  So, I went, I came to Berkeley and I was really happy that this worked out for me and then, and some of the same issues were happening out here.  The Third World Strike had happened in '68 [1968].  I came out--actually, my appointment was in '69 [1969].  I didn't, I deferred that 'cause I didn't want to come out until '70 [1970] so I didn't come out until '70 [1970] but I came out in '69 [1969] when the Third World Strike was going on, I talked to people and I saw, some of the craziness that was going on in the African American studies department because I was one of the creators of the African American studies program at Oberlin and then I said, wait a minute, you know, I said, my, that, since I was invited by the music department, I got the department of music, but I said look, I want to teach courses, and I had started a course in African American music at Oberlin while I was teaching everything else too, composition, theory and all that stuff, but I, I, I wanted to teach courses in African American music because here was something that was important that historically hadn't been covered here and so I wanted to do that.  And so the question, "Well do you want an appointment in African American studies?"  I said, "Well let me find out," you know, 'cause I could have a joint appointment.  I said, "Let me find out what's going on over in Africa- ."  So at that point I went over and talked to a few people.  I said, no, this is a mess.  This is a zoo.  There are too many crazy people with, with, with different things so I said, no, I will teach a course, I'll cross list the course if the African American studies department, wants me to, wants me to do that but I'm not going to get involved in that zoo at that point.  So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, there was a lot of infighting there.
Speaker 2: So, that's right, and by the time you guys got here, it was very smooth by comparison but in the, in the middle of the '70s [1970s], early '70s [1970s], it was still kind of crazy.
Story_ID: 307869
Speaker 1: Anyway, you know, I stayed here.  Fortunately my second year at Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California], 'cause I had been teaching for five years now, five years and, you know, well, year, couple years in Florida [at Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida], in fact, so I was ready for tenure, you know.  So I, I agreed to come here with the understanding I'd be reviewed within a year after I got here.  Fortunately, that year, I won a Guggenheim Fellowship which was great, you know, and my career went well as a composer so things were fine so I didn't have any problem with tenure.  So, so when I came back, and then, I had the Guggenheim Fellowship so I was, away the year, from '71 [1971] to '72 [1972].
Speaker 2: And you, what--
Speaker 1: When I came back--
Speaker 2: What'd you do?  Where'd you go once you got back?
Speaker 1: I went to, we lived in Africa.  We went to Africa and we went to--
Speaker 2: Where?
Speaker 1: --Ghana and we lived in Ghana from '71 [1971], '72 [1972], most of the year, and then we came, we went back to St. Louis [Missouri] and we spent, I guess, a couple of months there, you know, and then, then we came back to Berkeley.  And then also, the two advantages that, one was, I really got to study African music and African languages firsthand, then that helped me, you know, 'cause one of the, one of my career research interests has been the relationship of Africans, African American music and I knew the only way to really understand that was to go to Africa and study African music and understand music within the cultural context and music and languages and how they work and how they support each other and so forth and the whole cultural dynamics of, of African society.  So, so that was what I did there but I was also writing music, you know, my own music at, and some of my work was, was chosen and played by major orchestras so that's when things really started going well for me.
Story_ID: 307870
Speaker 1: Okay. We're going to finish your career--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --and then we're going to talk some more about your music.  So you've, you've come back to Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California], you become chairman of the music department in 1993 (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, '90 [1990], that was much later.  What had happened prior to that time, I had some administrator experience in the '70s [1970s].  Remember in the '70s [1970s], one of the big things was affirmative action, what happens and how do you define it and what is this and the Bakke case [Regents of the University of California v. Bakke, 1978] up at, at Davis [University of California, Davis, Davis, California] was, you know, was puzzling.  The court said, you can use ethnicity as a criteria, among other criteria, which the court still says, and however, in some people's mind, it was the wrong thing to do.  So, so, and yet the president, President Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] had entered, had entered a presidential order that, you know, people should take aggressive actions to make sure everybody has, not only an opportunity but take affirmative action to try to promote diversity and then in answer, so at Berkeley, you know, the question was, well what's going on because there were a handful of us, I think, when I came to Berkeley, what, there must have been twelve, something like that, faculty who were latter rank faculty but it's so--and we're talking about out of a faculty of 25, 2,500, something like that--
Speaker 1: It's small.
Speaker 2: --and so, it was, wait a minute, this is not working.
Speaker 1: It's small.
Speaker 2: And so, Mike Heyman [Ira Michael Heyman] had--
Speaker 1: He was the chancellor then.
Speaker 2: --yeah, well, no, he wasn't the chancellor.  He, he had been head of the faculty center, and he had been just appointed vice chancellor and one of his mandates was to sort of, the effort, the equal, not the equal, the, the department of, well, the education department, I think it was, and several federal entities were trying to figure out what do you do, I mean, how do you effectively do what Lyndon Johnson said he wanted you to do, you know, and, and have an affirmative action program.  What's right, what's wrong.  What do you do?  And so, Berkeley became, since it was a large major university, it became a test case how to do that.  So Heyman was trying to figure out what he'd do and, and so a group of black, black faculty got together with him and said, hey look, you know, we think some of the things that could be done are not being done here and if you really believe what you say you believe, then this is what the kind of things you need to do.  So we said, okay, well would you help me?  And so, they said, yeah, we'll help.  So they're, so then we had--but then most of the, many of the people, you know, had, we had only been here, most of us, two years, three years.  A few people had been here a little bit longer and many people didn't have tenure and so he said, well I need somebody to work with me as an assistant for affirmative action.  And so, can there, is there somebody and so then we got together, caucused and said, well we should have somebody who is tenured.  I had just gotten tenure and so forth and so, so anyway, to make a long story short, I was asked to do that--
Story_ID: 307871
Speaker 1: I was the first faculty assistant for affirmative action.  And that's when we were getting to establish things like the career development program, eventually the post-doctorate program, all these things were initiated here but they then became embroidered in the system and then they became a part of the whole nation and I remember arguing with the counsel, the legal counsel at the University of California about the, about the legality of, of things like the career development program which said--and the argument was simply that because minorities, unrepresented minorities and women, often are asked to do a lot of other things that other faculty, not asked to do, you know, more counseling, more this, be on committees, do this, that the institution had a responsibility to do that and one of the, and though we understood and didn't challenge the importance of having the qualitative level of their work judged by a group of their peers, which is a cornerstone of the university [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California], we thought the university had an obligation to make sure that they were given the kind of opportunities and the means to help them do it.  So we created fellowships.  Some were fellowships, sometimes yearlong fellowships, sometimes, and then post-doctorate fellowships for people who got a doctorate and need to turn that doctorate into a book and so, so all of this evolved over several years with that but, but I remember, since I was the first one arguing with the, James Holst I think was then the legal counsel, I don't know if he still is, but at any rate, arguing about this, whether this was discriminatory, that first notion of reverse discrimination comes up.  And so, I was for (unclear), I came almost convinced by it, Bowker [Albert H. Bowker] was the chair--was the chancellor and Bowker ultimately supported it and so we had to argue it with the university counsel but ultimately backed off and we were able to create those programs and therefore, and they were effective.  That's why we were able, over a period of time, to increase that number from twelve to twenty-four to thirty and forty and so forth.  Oh, that's over twenty years.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: But, but, and it's still small but it was able to happen because of that.  There's some places that never happened.  And so, as a result, you know, that was, you know, I recognize immediately as I had recognized from the beginning, that as an African American faculty member you have responsibilities, which exceed your academic, your responsibilities to your academic discipline.
Speaker 2: That's true.
Speaker 1: So that was all part of it.  So, that was, that happened, you know, over a period of time, it continued.  First I was faculty assistant to affirmative action and then shortly after Heyman [Ira Michael Heyman] be--and then Heyman became chancellor, then, and so then he asked me to serve as assistant chancellor to international affairs so that's what I did and that was working on agreements with--international agreements, you know.  We opened up exchange agreements with China the first time and so forth and that was, you know, that was an interesting thing.  We went to China and then, so that was, that was really great, you know.
Speaker 2: You said, that was like 1986?
Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty-six [1986], yeah--
Story_ID: 307872
Speaker 1: You've had a long career--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and now you're a professor emeritus, which means (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, which means that you retire. Which means that you retired and people say, emeritus is, you've done a good job, you've done a, you know, you've been a, you deserve to have the title emeritus, you know, behind your name, and so, and it's pretty common, it's pretty common.
Speaker 1: Right.  When did you retire?
Speaker 2: I retired in 2002--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but the other things at Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California], you know the Berkeley citation which is, you know, which is not automatically given, most--
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: --emeritus, is almost automatic, the citation is not.
Speaker 1: Not, right.
Speaker 2: You know, but, you know, it's not uncommon either, you know--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So, and that was fine and so, and then I served as chair to the department [Department of Music] and could have served more as chair but the chair of the department, as you know, is the toughest job in the university--
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Speaker 2: --and so forth.  It really is a tough job.
Speaker 1: You do not want to do that.
Speaker 2: It's a, I mean, you have to take your turn to do at least for it but you don't want to stay at it too long.
Speaker 1: No you don't.
Speaker 2: So I did it for four and a half or something like that years and that was it, yeah.
Speaker 1: That was enough.
Story_ID: 307873
Speaker 1: You had this wonderful academic career, but now we're going to talk about your real love--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --and your real career, your music (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure, sure.
Speaker 1: Okay, can you tell us something about the type of music that you compose?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess, for the lack of a better word, I guess what I do is, would be--I guess general (unclear) uses contemporary music in the written tradition and what this means is music that is influenced by all of the developments, historical developments and so-called modern music in the 20th century and so forth.  So this includes primarily the focus on the written tradition but my own tradition, as I said earlier, includes both the written and the oral tradition.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: So my music is influenced by that.  So on one hand I'm influenced by the music of certainly it's Schoenberg [Arnold Schoenberg], Webern [Anton Webern] and, and Bartok [Bela Bartok] and Stravinsky [Igor Stravinsky] and so forth but on the other hand, my music is also influenced by John Coltrane and Miles Davis and, and rhythm and blues--
Speaker 1: Blues (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Blues.  Ellington [Duke Ellington], and a whole lot of things in different ways.  It's all there and it's all partly filtered through my experience.  So it shows all of that and it sort of does that.  You know it's like, like, I often use this image of Du Bois' [W.E.B. Du Bois] double consciousness, you know, and the whole notion of things within The Ville [St. Louis, Missouri] and outside The Ville, you know, the learned tradition, the literate and I've often argued and the kind of research that I've done that one of the major contributions of African American music in the written tradition is that it's reconciled, these two ideals.  You're--Du Bois talks about two ideals and he also uses the term, warring ideals, you know, and I, and I don't necessarily buy the business about warring ideas, I buy the idea of consciousness, yes.  Any African American doesn't, person who's of our generation or any generation close to ours, is maybe the kids growing up now might be different, but certainly is aware of a consciousness of African American culture and that in contradistinction to general American culture.
Story_ID: 307874
Speaker 1: Okay, so, we were talking about--you're explaining music (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I was saying, I talked about how the literate and the oral tradition come together and I talked about that as a backdrop to the kind of music I do and what I do and how I think about it.  I think part of it is that I believe fundamentally, and I've written about this too, that music is--as any art--is a kind of expression of experiencing, of experience consciously transform, okay.  So you transform your experience by, by reproducing aspects of that by shaping immediate, whether it's sound or space or whatever and if that experience has been one of a double consciousness, then you use all of that.  That is, as an African American, as Ellison [Ralph Ellison] says, you certainly are American but you also are American with a particular viewpoint and that is the result of your experience and your experience includes a lot of conscious as well as unconscious things and as an artist, any artist knows that and you reach, you, you call upon that as you try to present what you do.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And so that's what I've done in my career and, and because I've, I was fortunate, though I didn't realize it at the time, to grow up in a rich, oral culture because my father [Olly Wilson, Sr.] was a musician and because I believed in the, in the power of music and the authority of music as, as an expression of a human experience that it was something natural for me and because my experience was so varied, I mean, I talked about playing earlier as a child, starting playing the piano and then starting to play the clarinet and I didn't talk about starting to play the double bass because I, I started playing the double bass when I was in high school [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri] and I played double bass in the orchestras, professional orchestras.  And so all the time I was also playing jazz, jazz piano and other stuff so it was, it was all part of a musical experience which constantly fed into it.  As I began to write music, I began to follow models, like every composer does, and I began to follow models in the written tradition and those are the contemporary music today, Bartok [Bela Bartok], Hindemith [Paul Hindemith], Stravinsky [Igor Stravinsky], and so forth.  As I became more comfortable with my own expressions, I began to incorporate other things that were informed by the work of 20th century composers in the written tradition, primarily European, white composers, but also informed by all of that rich, oral tradition that was part of me that fathered the spirituals that my father, that my father would say nor, or the, or the pop music that I heard or more importantly the jazz and the, and the kinds of expressions and means of expressions that were part of that tradition.  So putting it all together, and, but it's not necessarily obvious so that if somebody hears my music, in some pieces, if I write a piece and I call it, I call it 'Sometimes,' and it's based on the spiritual, 'Sometimes I Feel Like a Motherless Child,' but it's a piece for a tenor soloist who is a tenor soloist who is cognizant of the spiritual, knows the spiritual tradition, but it's in a context of an electronic piece produced, which can only be produced in the 20th century.  So on one hand, the latter part of the 20th century, you've got this very modernistic electronic media and that you're combining that with the very, very human expressive culture of the spiritual.  So doing that, moving back and forth between all of that because that reflects what I am, I came of life, I came of, of cultural maturity in the end of the 20th century, you know, and so forth so, and I bring all those things to bear on what I do.
Story_ID: 307875
Speaker 1: Could you please explain for those who are not musicians--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --when you say electronic media?  What exactly do you mean by that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, I mean music that is produced where the sounds are, are produced by--electronically.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, for example.  This keyboard over here is an electronic keyboard or more importantly, that keyboard is just a simple way of doing it but there are also, in the early years, I was a pioneer in that, so there were generators and oscillators that you did and then you would record and pre-record it.  The point is that it comes out of a loud speaker and that means it's a very different kind of experience and something comes out of acoustical engineer.  I've always been interested in reconciling these two kinds of experiences and making them so that they can, they can work.  So in the 'Sometimes' piece, which is recorded, you know, on New World Records [New York, New York], so it's something, anybody can go listen to, you have a live performer singing this very, very important spiritual--
Speaker 1: Spiritual, traditional spirit.
Speaker 2: --I mean the depth of the text is really interesting but he's singing it through a microphone so you're hearing his live voice but you're also hearing the, the voice as coming from a microphone and also he has pre-recorded some of the voices, some of his singing, on a, on a, through using tape recorders and then I modified them using electronic manipulation so that we get this whole universe of sounds that's at once dealing with the technology of the time and at the same time, looking back at the depth of that experience.  So, that's, it's that kind of reconciliation that I'm, I'm very interested in and what I've done and sometimes having worked the electronic music, there are other pieces that aren't electronic where they used, they approach the instruments having been informed by what happens when you modulate instruments, or change the instruments by working with the electronic media.  It makes your sensibility different.  In certain respects, when you're working with the electronic media, you're in a lab, you have oscillators, generators, you have things that are generating sounds, you can add them together, you can, you can subtract things and so forth but you're working like a sculptor in sound in that you're working and getting the final details yourself.  So it's like painting, you know like a sculptor or a painter or a sculptured look and then he stands back and looks and says, okay, I like that, I don't like that and let's do it.  So that's different from working the way a traditionally, a composer works because a composer then, in writing for normal instruments, you don't really hear the piece until after it's written.  So, now you have developed what, what Aaron Copland calls a sonorous image and that is the ability to imagine the sounds and so that's part of what you do as a composer.  You can imagine how it's going to work but you don't really hear it in the flesh.  You don't hear it really, physically, until it's actually done.  The electronic music, you can, you can feel.  You do, you make the final decision like a painter does, before a painter gives you and he knows it's all done and he or she knows it's all done and that's it but what I'm doing when I work with electronic and non-electronic, is take advantage of the advantage and disadvantage of the different media.  For the electronic media, I can work and I get very precise, exactly what I wanted.  The live media, you also have the advantage of having the spontaneity and the, and the collaboration of the performer who's listening to this but who also, at that moment, might be really inspired and do something really interesting.  So you have the possibility of that which is preconceived and fixed and yet you have something above that going on which is not pre--which is preconceived but it's, but there's also ample opportunity for the performer to interpret, you know, which is sometimes becomes a very exciting thing in any live, premier of any composition so working with both of that.  So what I've used in my compositions from chamber music, electronic music, orchestral music, vocal music, you know, is, is to try to capture this business of, of giving an expression of your own experience.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And that's what, that's what I do and so forth and it ranges in different ways and does that in different ways.
Story_ID: 307876
Speaker 1: You have some very wonderful, wonderful pieces.  When--well, because I'm a faculty wife--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Mary Lovelace O'Neal, is just a delightful person.
Speaker 2: Sure, sure.
Speaker 1: Absolutely a delightful person.  She's on the faculty at Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California], she's an artist and the two of you collaborated on a piece called 'Call and Response.'
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us about that?
Speaker 2: Sure, sure.  What happened, Mary has been a friend of mine for years.  When Mary came to the university, we had some mutual friends who, from Sacramento [California], so I got to know her before she came and then when she's been here, we've become friends with them, both she and her husband for a long time.  Now, Mary also came here, she had some real questions because, you know, her department, you know, was, was, is a relatively small department, she was not sure, you know, whether--
Speaker 1: She's a painter.
Speaker 2: --she really liked it at first and the degree to which she was going to participate, blah, blah, blah, and then this whole business about the bureaucracy at Berkeley was a big mystery to her, the budget committee and all those things.  And so, I, you know, so I was like a mentor, and I said, Mary, this is the way it works.  And I had been a former faculty assistant for affirmative action so I knew that there were a lot of things and new things she could do if she had questions about things.  So we became good friends but also I happened to love her work and I saw it, I've seen her work and always admired her work--
Speaker 1: Oh, yes.
Speaker 2: --I said, oh this is really beautiful.  So, we'd, we'd talk for years, "Oh, we should do something together" and then I was given a commission by the, well a commission by, I forget the name of the foundation right now but, to do this piece and I said, and I said I'd like to collaborate with, with Mary O'Neal and we called it, 'Call and Response' because the idea was that I would look at her work, her painting, and then I would write a piece in response to that and then she would then in turn do another painting (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) painting--
Speaker 2: --or a series of paintings in response to the pieces that I did.  So there were four, I think there were five pieces of hers that I did and, and I just gave my musical reaction to these things and the other thing is that we also shared some of the, her work is essentially abstract art.  My music is essentially abstract music so that, you know, and that is an interesting kind of thing.  We could understand the parameters of what we were trying to do, you know, and, and also, the idea was to simply do it and then let's, you know, let it, let it happen.  So it worked out.  I was very pleased with, with the piece and very pleased with our work together and so forth but as you can see, there's all, that's a Mary O'Neal painting right there, there's--
Speaker 1: There's one upstairs (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) two or three up--there are a couple of them upstairs and so forth.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: So we, you know, we were very, we're very, very good friends and then I retired.  Mary's talking about retirement very soon too.
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.
Speaker 2: Have you interviewed her?
Speaker 1: No I haven't.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: And we have to.  She would be a good one.
Speaker 2: Well, she would be, yeah she would be a good person to be interviewed.  So it's, it's you know, it's really fine and then I decided--well like our conversation with you, I decided it's great to have another place somewhere else and she decided that too.  She and her husband are both, you know, they both, he's from Chile--
Speaker 1: Chile and they're thinking about going back.
Speaker 2: --so, so they bought some property in Chile so they're going to live there part of the times, so, anyways, so that's good.
Story_ID: 307877
Speaker 1: Are there any other pieces of music you'd like to tell us about?
Speaker 2: Sure, there are a number, well I mentioned 'Sometimes.'  Probably one of the most important pieces, I think, I think of that when I look back at my work in, was a piece I, was commissioned by the Chicago Symphony [Chicago Symphony Orchestra] and was premiered, pardon me, I think in 2000 or 1999, it's called, 'Hold On,' it's actually 'Symphony No. 3: Hold On,' and 'Hold On' is based on the negro spiritual, 'Hold On.'  (Singing) "Keep your hand under the plow, hold on, hold on, hold on," et cetera and so I base this orchestral work on that spiritual because what I wanted to do was to deal with some of the ideas behind the concept of that spiritual which deals with the indomitable spirit.  It deals with tenacity, it tells all spirituals deal with that in a certain way of how to get over, what's going to happen, you know.  You're going to provide, you're going to, you are going to persist, you're going to, in spite of the terrible deprivations you have to suffer, you will overcome and you, and just hold on and work hard and that kind of thing is part of it but it's not only looking beyond, you know, it also looks inward, you know, it looks inward and it, and it requires you to develop the kind of fortitude to be able to overcome any, any part of that.  And so it's not passive necessarily, you're just going to hold on 'til somebody gets you out of the floods and no loss.  You, you got to, you're going to use some ingenuity to get past that, you know, which it obviously was, was one of the reasons these, the whole literature the spiritual deals with that.  So, in the course of this, I wanted to express all of that, you know, the whole business, the determination, the angst, the sorrow and more and most important, the transcendence, the ability to transcend whatever aspects you do and to do it in a way that is meaningful, musically.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: And so I don't literally give the, I actually, this is one of the few pieces where I do have part of the spiritual there but the whole first movement there's none of this, you won't hear the spiritual, it's only in the, in the last movement that you begin to hear references to the spiritual but what you do feel, hopefully, is the, the expression that is embodied in the spiritual, the sort of terrible, sorrowful kind of ire, what Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] calls the sorrowful song, that feeling, but then behind that, the strong personal ability, a portion--a fortitude, strength and, and the ability to transcend all of that, you know.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: And so that's what I dealt, that's what I pose as an issue to try to work out musically and that's what, you know, so and so, that was, that was with the Chicago Symphony--it's, unfortunately, it's a, I said only unfortunate, not artistic sense, but just for a reality part, the piece is about forty minutes long and that for an orchestra work is a lot --
Speaker 1: Is a lot, it's a lot.
Speaker 2: --and, and for, well, it's not really when you think of Mahler's [Gustav Mahler] symphonies are, you know, are hours, you know, Beethoven [Ludwig van Beethoven], I mean, it could, it could be long but people don't like to play that much contemporary music, you know, and so it's hard for people to program a piece that takes forty minutes.  The whole concert's going to be an hour and a half, you know, so that, so it's hard.  People expect certain formulaic adherence to certain formulaic aspects of programming so they want to hear a concerto, which is a 19th century concerto, maybe an 18th century symphony, and then we can have a contemporary piece but it should be better if it's fifteen, better if it's ten, you know, or something like that.  And so, so the dynamics of the concert will, and so forth.  The reason why I'm mentioning that is that the piece was premiered by the Chicago Symphony.  They did a marvelous job but it hadn't been performed since then but that's the, that's the way, but that's the reality in, in contemporary art.  You know, it may be posthumously, some of this will happen but, you know, and so, oh I can't complain because I've been fortunate in my career path.  Most of the, by the way, do you have a bio of me you need?
Speaker 1: I have, not, no, not a will, but--
Speaker 2: Let me give you a biographical sketch before you leave, you know--
Speaker 1: Okay (unclear).
Speaker 2: --so you can have that.
Story_ID: 307878
Speaker 1: Are there any other pieces that are just your babies that you'd like to talk about?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, each, well I mentioned, well one of the, in terms of career, one of the most important things happened to me was that in 1967 I won the first international competition for electronic music [Dartmouth Arts Council Prize] for a piece called 'Cetus,' you know, and, and that was an all-electronic piece and that was in the pioneering days of electronic music and I was, I'd done that, I went back to the studio for experimental music at the University of Illinois [University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois] where I'd done by master's degree and that was one of the, at the time, there were only about two or three places in the country where you could actually do electronic music and that was one of them.  So that, I entered that piece in a competition, the first international competition for electronic music and it won, so that catapulted me into, you know, some, some prominence in the field and so forth and so then I sort of, imagined it, so that piece is important.  And then in 1970, the year right before I came out here, I got a commission from the Boston Symphony [Boston Symphony Orchestra] and the, at Tanglewood, you know, at Tanglewood [Lenox, Massachusetts] to write an orchestral piece for the Tanglewood Festival Orchestra [Tanglewood Festival Chorus].  This was for a contemporary music festival and that piece was done and got good reviews and so forth.  So that then helped me and then I'm sure that had something to do with my coming out to Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California].  So that, you know, so that worked, worked very well for me.  And then, since then, I've, you know, I had a series of commissions (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.
Speaker 2: --and performances from a number of different pieces and different places, both chamber music and orchestral music and, and other things, including both San Francisco [San Francisco Symphony], Oakland [Oakland Symphony], New York Philharmonic, Chicago [Chicago Symphony Orchestra], Boston, Detroit [Detroit Symphony Orchestra], Cleveland [Cleveland Orchestra], you know.  So I've been fortunate--
Speaker 1: International orchestras?
Speaker 2: And international, yeah, including, there was something called the All Netherlands Orchestra [ph.] and the Moscow Philharmonic [Moscow Philharmonic Orchestra], you know, actually I was invited to come to Moscow [Russia] and this was right before the demise of the Soviet Union and they were in Tchaikovsky Hall [Tchaikovsky Concert Hall, Moscow, Russia] and they were playing my music, the piece called 'Sinfonia' which is probably the most well-known and it's also recorded at, you know, 'Sinfonia,' that was done, you know, by Seiji Ozawa and recorded by Ozawa and the Boston Symphony.  So, that was very, you know, so that, that all of that helped a great deal and so forth.
Speaker 1: That's wonderful (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But, you know, you know--
Story_ID: 307879
Speaker 1: You talked about your music, of course, built on the music that had gone on before.  Well, how do you see music evolving in the future with hip hop and other things?
Speaker 2: Sure, well, you know, I mean, there are two parallel--there are many parallel streams.  There's a whole range of different kinds of popular music so--'cause the categories are so funny--
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: --and they keep getting confused because people do, people merge them and do whatever they want to do.  I think the so-called popular music, since it meets a different kind of music, will always exist, it always has at least in one form or another and I think it will always and now that it's such a big industry, and it's so much money involved, you know, that, you know, that's fine, and since the technology goes along with that, I mean the whole Nano iPod [iPod nano] and everything and the latest thing that comes out of that, that all generates that and so forth and the thing you have to understand about popular music is that it's popular music.  That is, it does not necessarily mean it's good.  It does not necessarily mean it's bad, it means it's popular but you can create the desire for popular music, that's what, that's what used to be referred, payola, is about, and what about, radio's about.  I mean, if you listen to television or popular radio, they keep playing the same things.  If you listen, for example, like one of the biggest, there's something, a programming format now in radio called, what's it called, smooth jazz.  I guess you've heard of that term, smooth jazz, okay.  Smooth jazz is something, is a marketing tool--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --and what they do is they play Kenny G, every ten minutes, there's Kenny G.  Now Kenny G is okay.  Some of it's better than others but it's getting saccharine, it's getting more and more formulaic and there it is and so you get that but Kenny G is popular because it is easy and so people like, people want to see that and the biggest determinate of success in popular music is the reiteration of the piece that you play.  Think of all the popular music you've heard and you say, oh that's, that's terrible.  How did that happen?  But if it's played over and over again, people then, it's something that people who look at psychology will call it associative meaning in music.  That is, if you, if you play a certain kind, you know it's like Pavlov's dog, you play the same thing every time you, and use the stimulant for that.  Well, if you play the same music enough, people then associate that movement with, that music with popular or pleasant things so they want to hear it.  That's our song because that's when I met my wife [Elouise Wilson] and they were playing that song, I love that song.  I don't care how good it is, I'll bet you want to do that.  So, that's what happens.  Now this is not to say that popular music cannot be fabulous.  There's some, there's some popular music, popular music pieces and recordings that are fabulous.  I mean, you look at, you look at some of the Ray Charles stuff.  You look at some of the Stevie Wonder stuff.  You look at some of The Beatles stuff, this is really quality stuff.  It's popular format but it's got something that's really, really there and some substance there but that's not why it's popular, it's popular because they kept playing that, you know, and so, so that's why you can discover somebody fifty years later and say, oh, they were really good.  Well during their lifetime, nobody ever heard of them, you know.
Speaker 1: You, you, popular music, people buy it all the time.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: And, but when you look at record sales--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Classical music, contemporary, your serious music, seems to be having a smaller, smaller market.
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.  It always has because it's, it's similar to literature and painting.  That is, people think of certain aspects of our culture as a commodity.  You know, I can view it, I can have it, I can show I've got, you know, even the iPod.  Who needs a thousand songs, you know, and I, but you think I've got, I've got them all, here, I've got it all in my hand.  I've got a thousand songs, okay, or a thousand how much time or whatever it is on that, that you can put on there.  On the other hand, something that challenges you, something that makes you think in ways different, something that makes you realize something about the human experience which is outside of the ordinary, you know, it's something.  So you have a really interesting novelist or writer or playwright or songwriter who comes to something that makes you think in a different way.  Well, sometimes that could be a popular writer but sometimes it's not a popular writer at all, it's Toni Morrison or somebody but you have to read that and you have to, well it's not easy to read, you know, some of the things, and the same things true about art.  The same things true about music.  There's certain experiences you have to spend more time with, you have to even learn what the context is of this kind of music.  What are they trying to do?  You know, it's not an immediate gratification kind of thing and sometimes it is, you know, and the history is full of people whose music was extraordinary but was booed at the time it was done, you know, so, originally, originally, you know, Bach [Johann Sebastian Bach] is an example, Beethoven [Ludwig van Beethoven] is an example, Mozart's [Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart], Mozart was immediately popular and so, so, you know, and so, but Charlie Parker certainly was and so was John Coltrane was somebody who wasn't immediately held out to be a person of special vision, you know, so.
Story_ID: 307880
Speaker 1: Is there anything else you, when you think about the future that you want to do in your--both in your career and your personal life?
Speaker 2: Sure, I want to spend time with my grandkids and which we do, that's one of the things we do since we've retired.  I want to, there's still a lot of music I want to write and I'm hoping I have the strength and the, and the ability to still do that as long as I'm alive.  It's, it's also as you get older, you become, as I've become more self-critical.  I'm probably my best critic because you don't want to repeat what you've done before.  You want to reach that high state and when you, have you ever experienced of creating something that you come back to five years or ten years or fifteen or twenty years later and say, that's good, then you don't want anything less than that?  And so you, you become very, very self-critical of yourself and sometimes you have to watch yourself because you can be so self-critical that you aren't able to produce and you have to realize, so look, everything can't be a masterpiece.  You've got to do it 'cause the professional side of you says, okay, you're a professional, you should be able to do it.  Well, but, you've chosen to be a kind of professional that you don't have to do it by demand.  That is, if I wrote movies for the, music for the movies, you know, you're like an artisan.  I mean, they say, we want this to sound sort of like this and you've got to be able to do it and we've got to have a recording session next week.  So you've got to stay up all night and so what does that do?  That leads you to do stuff you've done before which you think will work that way.  That's why so much movie, music, sounds alike.  You've heard the movies, you say, well, once in a while somebody comes up with something which is really unique or television or something like that but most of the time it's like, oh I've heard that, you can take the same music and put it with anything else, you know, and it's these sounds, busy, angry, scary, you know, sad, compassionate, whatever, and so forth, and, but if you're trying to make a statement, you really, you think about what you're really trying to do, you're really laying out a part of yourself and that's, you know, takes a certain amount of courage to do that.
Story_ID: 304665
Speaker 1: Okay, we were mentioning all your wonderful accomplishments.  Are--do you have anything that you wish you had done or done differently?
Speaker 2: You know it's hard to, for me to answer that question 'cause I, I don't, I wish that I had been, I have been and I hope, still hope to be more productive, that is, it takes me a long time to finish a work and that's what I meant to, when I was talking about being self-critical and so forth.  So, I've, I've got a body of work that I think stands on its own and it's very, and it's--
Speaker 1: Yes it does.
Speaker 2: --yeah, I think it's good and fine and I'm very pleased with that.  If I were able to write faster and still be pleased with what I write, then that would be something and maybe I could but then I'm a kind of person who likes to do other things, you know.  I also like, as I said, the grandkids, we went down for my daughter's, granddaughter's tenth birthday and, my son's coming out on the 12th, bringing his three kids and--
Speaker 1: And their names are, 'cause you know, you have to mention your grandchildren, thanks.
Speaker 2: And so grandchildren, yeah, I mean, yeah, their names, yeah, you want the grandchildren?
Speaker 1: Sure--
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.  Well my daughter--
Speaker 1: --'cause you have to mention your grand--I'm a grandmother.  So you have to mention, so you're--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, good, you understand that.
Speaker 1: I understand, you have to mention, yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.  Well my daughter, my oldest child's my daughter--
Speaker 1: And her name is?
Speaker 2: Dawn, Dawn Lynn Wilson Johnson.  She's Wilson, she keeps Wilson, sometimes John--I don't know which she's using--
Speaker 1: Yeah, one of those.
Speaker 2: --but Wilson Johnson.  Her husband is Sheldon Johnson.  They have three kids.  One is Taylor Johnson [ph.], Taylor Grace Johnson--Grace like my mother's [Alma Peoples Wilson] name, Alma Grace--Taylor Grace Johnson and then she has twin brothers, identical twins.  They are, are Tyler Aaron Johnson and Chase Kent Johnson.  Okay, now, Kent is--those are the twins, they're identical twins, and they are now two and a half years old.  Now, my son's name is Kent Allen Wilson.  Chase Kent is, he's named after him.  Her husband has a brother whose middle name is Aaron so the second one is Tyler Aaron Johnson, so anyway, but my son Kent, who is three years younger than my daughter and his wife Philippa [Philippa Wilson] are, lived in New York for most of their life.  As a matter of fact, Kent went to Georgetown [Georgetown University, Washington, D.C.], well both my kids went east to school.  My daughter went to Wellesley College [Wellesley, Massachusetts] and my son went to Georgetown and he went to Georgetown largely because he thought that was a cool thing that she went, she was so far away from home and sort of grew up, so he was determined he was going as far as he could.  So she went to Massachusetts, he went to Washington, D.C.  She came back and she's an attorney and she, she went to Michigan Law School [University of Michigan Law School, Ann Arbor, Michigan] and then she, she worked out in, out in a San Francisco [California] law firm and then she worked, she moved to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and that's where she met her husband, down there.  So, and now Kent went to Georgetown and then he, he was in business, was in banking with Chase [JPMorgan Chase] Manhattan and then, to make a long story short, he's, he's in marketing now, but he, all of his life, he's lived in the East.  He's essentially an easterner and they recently just sold their house and he's got another position where, he used to work for Mott's Applesauce [Mott's LLP] and he's got another position in Orlando [Florida], so he's there.  His children are, the oldest one is Cass, Cass Moore Wilson [ph.] and his daughter is, is Zoe Elouise Wilson [ph.], named after my wife Elouise [Elouise Wilson] and then his youngest son, who was born in June, his name is Kai Olly Wilson [ph.].  So, I finally got a, out of the four grandsons, I got one with my name, but a part of my name so that, so that's it.
Speaker 1: And your wife, Elouise, is--
Speaker 2: And her name is Elouise and then she's got one with Zoe Elouise, Kent's second child, so--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --so we're represented.
Story_ID: 304666
Speaker 1: Are there any values that you've carried through your life that are really important for you to pass on to those wonderful grandchildren?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think basically, integrity, honesty, attempting to make yourself the best person that you can be in terms of being a decent, honest person and I think a person who has an enriched life but I believe in an enriched life comes from work that you do yourself.  That is, I think the development of the mind and the development of any talents that you have is really important.  And so, that's what I hope to pass on to all of them and they, they seem to be on the right track.
Speaker 1: Well, good.
Speaker 2: So, you know, although you can't tell it at two or three, but they seem to be there all in high spirited and all seem to have pretty good values as far as we can tell about.  So, it's good.
Story_ID: 304667
Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered as a person who was able to make an impact on the world in which he lived.  A person who was sensitive and hopefully astute about the world he, he lived in and a person who really believed in making the world a better place.  You know, it sounds like a cliche but that's the way, that's the way I've always been raised and what I really believe in.  And so, any way that I can make the world better, you know, I've always attempted to do that, you know.  And I think you do that not necessarily on a grandiose scale, although, you know, I've liked to, to tilt at the windmills too but, but by being the best of what you can do, of really understanding excellence and defining excellence for yourself and then proceeding to do that and pretending to reflect something as the best part of your experience to this and so that they're, they are there.  It's really, it's really important to me that people that I've known, and people in whose paths I've crossed, have positive things to say and that I've learned something from them and they've learned something from me that we really share humanly the best of each other.
