Story_ID: 493277
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: It's Charles, E for Edward, Walker [HistoryMaker Charles Walker], C-H-A-R-L-E-S, E-D-W-A-R-D, Walker, W-A-L-K-E-R.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you're Charles E. Walker, Jr., right?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm junior 'cause I put that on there.  My father [Charles E. Walker] and I share the same middle name, share the same middle initial, but not the same middle name.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: May 1st, 1951, Anchorage, Alaska.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your father was in the [U.S.] military, right?  That's what he was (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was, he was.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a lawyer.  And I'm presently--I recently joined the Deval Patrick [HistoryMaker Deval L. Patrick] administration.  I'm the general counsel and director of enforcement for the division of employment--I'm sorry, with the Division of Professional Licensure.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA INTERRUPTION).
Speaker 2: All right, and, sir, what is today's date?
Speaker 1: Today is September 10th, 2007.
Speaker 2: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 1: We are now actually in the foundation.  We are at the basement of the, of the historic African Meeting House, Boston, Massachusetts, 46 Joy Street.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, there was an interesting story about your middle name you wanted to tell.
Speaker 1: It's, it's just only because we're--this is HistoryMakers, and we're talking about names.  My mother [Marguerite Lee Walker] and my father--I'm the eldest son, I'm the first son.  And my dad wanted to name him--name me (laughter), after me--me after him.  And my mother wanted to have some say-so.  She's a budding feminist.  So, she did not like the name, Ealy, which is a family name, which is my--turns out that's my [paternal] grandmother's [Jane Ealy Walker] maiden name, E-A-L-Y.  And so, they compromised and says, well, he'll, he'll be named Edward.  And so, it's always been Charles E. Walker.  So, when my father got Alzheimer's, I wanted to just let him know that I was his son and then, you know, and so I put down Junior at the end of his name--as really, after I passed the bar examination.  So, I just started calling myself Charles E. Walker, Jr.  And, and so, people would associate me with him, and so he would know that I was his son during his, during the calamity of having that dreaded disease.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right, thank you for that.
Story_ID: 493278
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five perfunctory, lightweight questions we always ask as kind of a warm-up and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All right.
Speaker 1: --they don't require much of an answer, just a short answer.  The first one is do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: It really depends.  I do--I have a favorite color for a car.  I have a different color for clothing, and a different color for, you know, rooms.  I have--generally, I, I've always liked blue, I like blue, it's is a great color.  For my car, I like red on my sports car.  And clothes, I like black, I like a lot of dark clothes.  I don't like light colors for my clothes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: You mean, in terms of cultural food or just food, just food?  I like, man, I love, I love chicken, man.  I, I--what can I say?  I, I think, I think they brought slaves over here to work for white people, but I also think they had, they had us to, to get rid of the great infestation of chickens 'cause I love some chicken--I'll tell you.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall.  I love the fall (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I like, I like islands.  I like Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts] but I also like the Caribbean.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Any landing you can walk away from is a good one.
Story_ID: 493279
Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to ask about family history.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family, and your father's [Charles E. Walker] side, but we'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Marguerite, M-A-G- M-A-R-G-U-E-R-I-T-E, P, Lee, L-E-E [Marguerite Lee Walker], P stands for Pearl.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She lied to me so many times, but I, I think it's January 8th, 1927.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she was born in Columbus, Ohio.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: Maybe about three, three generations, maybe about three generations.  Her mother was Beulah Bates [Beulah Price].  Formerly, her maiden name was Beulah Johnson [ph.], and she was married, first to a gentleman named Bates.  I think it was Horace Bates [ph.], B-A-T-E-S.  And he had a shoeshine shop--I believe, and I'm not really certain about this.  I believe then, it was in Ohio or in Illinois.  My grandmother's parents were--the last name was Johnson.  And I did, I did it--is there any way I can call you back and get the exact names or--
Speaker 1: Well, you can give us a document later on (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: --that'll go in the library with your video--
Speaker 2: That will be a bit good.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But their last names are Johnsons.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I--there is that document.  I was trying to find it and I couldn't locate it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, what did they do for a living, or do they go all the way back to the--
Speaker 2: I can't get them back, all the way back to the slavery, but my grandfather--oh, I forgot.  My grandmother was married to three different, three different times--started off with a guy named Bates first.  She divorced him, then she married--my mother's mother, and then she married--
Speaker 1: Your mother's father?
Speaker 2: --my mother's father, right.  But my mother's mother divorced three times.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so, she married a gentleman named Bates, and married a gentleman named Pearl Lee [Homer P. Lee], and another gentleman named Price, P-R-I-C-E.  Then, it was Pearl Lee that she gave birth to three daughters.  And that was my grandpa that I knew the most and best.  And that was her father, her natural father, and the only father that her two sisters had.  And the only--no, that's not right.  Anyway, he subsequently remarried and had a, to a--her, her name, first name is Marie [Helen Marie Saunders Lee].  I want to say Saunders, but I'm not sure.  So, Grandpa Lee married Miss Marie.  That's what we always called her.  And Grandma Price was formerly married to Grandpa Lee.  And when Grandpa Lee and she were married, they gave birth to Marguerite P. Lee, my mother, which is--
Speaker 1: Is there any story about the name Pearl?  That's an unusual name for a man.
Speaker 2: It is, it is.
Speaker 1: Except if you're a basketball player.
Speaker 2: I know, I know, Earl, the Pearl [Earl Monroe].  The--that's a good question--I need to find that out.  He's passed on, but I, I hesitate to guess that it had something to do with one of his ancestors but, yeah, she kept it as her maiden, as her middle name.
Story_ID: 493280
Speaker 1: What did your ancestors do for a living?
Speaker 2: Grandpa Lee [Homer P. Lee] worked as full time for General Electric as, like a laborer.  He worked there for over fifty years.  He also maintained a, a small farm in Gahanna, Ohio and--
Speaker 1: How do you spell Gahanna?
Speaker 2: G-A-H-A-N-N-A, Gahanna.  Now, they call it suburbs (laughter), but it was a lot of farmland out there, off of Taylor Station Road.  And I remember we used to go out there and visit grandpa's farm.  And for a while, you know, because it wasn't inner city where Grandma Price [Beulah Price] would take us.  And, you know, in hindsight, it was probably not a cool thing to do, but we loved it.  She used to take us to, you know, they had visitation, you know, the grandparents.  And Mom [Marguerite Lee Walker] would make us, excuse me, Mom would make us go out to see Grandpa on, on the farm, and it was so boring out there on the farm.  You had to make your own fun.  But Grandma Price, you know, just to make it extra boring, would take us to the--every toy shop imaginable, get us comic books, load us with toys, ice cream, candy, and then drop us off at Grandpa Lee's farm.  And, you know, nothing to do there, but chores and work, and there was no air conditioning.  It was kind of--well, I will never say it was a shack, but it was a small little house.  And it had a little barn which he doubled as a garage for his tractor.  And he actually grew corn and some crops, had a--and when we get, when we get together even now, when we have these, like little family reunions or small get-togethers around Thanksgiving, we ended up reminiscing, not so much about the times we went to the toy stores and got the ice cream, but we always reminisce about Grandpa's place because you had to make your own fun.  And he had a little, he had a well, he had a pump, he had an artesian well.  It just went into the ground.  And you'd go out in the mornings, and no matter what temperature it was, and (laughter), that's where you pumped your water.  And it was, it was just the best water imaginable.  It was just fresh water, you know, it was right out of the ground.  And he had his own chickens and, you know, so he had fresh eggs.  And I remember when I was, I was late to court one day and I was prosecuting a case.  And I was, I parked my car in the basement of this courthouse, and I was running to get to the court.  This was a little side, but I remember there was this little oil slick--it's a state garage, and there was dirt and stuff and I don't know what happened.  But, anyway, I jumped over this little puddle of patch of oil.  And I was about maybe ten feet away and, you know, the little smell from the oil and the dirt just hit my nostrils.  And it took me right back to Grandpa's barn (laughter).  I mean, that odor with the gasoline and the oil and the dirt and the mud--it was just, it took me right back there.  And I was going to be--I, I had to be in court in five, maybe ten minutes to report for my hearing.  But I went on back--I said, now I want to go over and sit over this patch for a bit, and then just take in the fumes (laughter).  I might be a little late, and if the judge--and it was just a pre- a pre-hearing.  I wasn't going to be late for a trial.  But irrespective, I had to go back, and it was just that important--just that little aroma took me back to my family and took me back to the times we played hide and seek in that farm, you know.  We used to take the eggs and throw them at each other (laughter).  We got beat, and all the spankings we got (laughter) in that little garage, farm-barn.  Oh, man, it was just a wonderful, wonderful memory.  I know I've really gone off field, but getting back to my grandpa, that was a very rich time of growing up for me.
Story_ID: 493281
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Marguerite Lee Walker] grow up in Columbus [Ohio] then?
Speaker 2: She did, she grew up in Columbus, and went to Dunbar High School [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Early College High School, Dayton, Ohio], named after Paul Laurence Dunbar from your Dayton [Ohio] days.  She--let's see like, I'm sorry, I don't know the year.  I had--I knew the year she graduated.  I got her class picture.  But I, it's probably, let's see--
Speaker 1: This would be '45 [1945], I guess?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's about '45 [1945], yeah, exactly.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: My Grandmother Price [Beulah Price] has an interesting background.  I mean, just reel me in if I go too far off field.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Grandma graduated from--she, she didn't graduate.  She dropped out of school when she was thirteen or fourteen, and worked as a domestic in a brothel (laughter)--not as a prostitute and, but as a--she cleaned the rooms, and she cooked for them, you know, the ladies.  And they taught her all her recipes.  And she worked a couple of years in that brothel, first part-time, and then, you know, just doing that stuff.  And this had to be in the '20s [1920s], I guess, maybe, yeah, in the '20s [1920s] and, you know, through the Depression [Great Depression], and in the '30s [1930s], I think.  And those ladies taught her a lot of her recipes.  Grandma eventually put together a pretty successful catering business using the recipes.  And she catered to--and she was a very fair-complexioned woman.  I say that only because that was the kind of people the white people would hire.  And she was a caterer and she would hire all black staff.  And she didn't, she didn't play that game with, the brown bag game, with her people that worked for her.  And she was very elegant, very elegant, and she would serve just elegant platters using the recipes that these prostitutes gave her.  And she got to cater a meal with, for Richard Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] exclusively, and the governor of Ohio and who was hosted by the mayor of Columbus.  She, she was the exclusive caterer for that dinner.  And she had used the same recipes that those hoes, excuse (laughter), those prostitutes had gave her.  Oh, and if I ever said everything negative about a prostitute, she would whack me upside the head and remind me, God has no respect to people, Chuckie [HistoryMaker Charles Walker].  I remember that (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's an interesting story, so, yeah, so she--
Speaker 2: Yep, yep, that was my Grandma Price.  Now--
Speaker 1: What was the name of her business?  Did she have a--
Speaker 2: You know, she was Beulah.  And she operated out of her house, and she has--we still have all that kitchen, the big ovens--oh, God, the odors that would come out of that house.  We would play and, you know, they'd fix all these foods she had on a busy day.  She'd have all these--everyone working, cooking, you know, the trays (unclear)--I mean, ornate with ornaments and stuff like that, you know.  And then, and they're putting them in the cars and, and they would just get ready to go, and they always fixed us extra stuff.  And all the grandkids would come over--we'd eat, we'd play.  It was just a good time, all of us have done pretty good as well.  I mean, we, we, really--those are fond memories.
Story_ID: 493282
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Marguerite Lee Walker] work with the catering business, too (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, no, but she--my, my other two aunts did.  My mother, my--there was an [U.S.] Air Force base.  Boy, if you had asked me if, if I, if I was just talking--oh, it's right there in Columbus, Ohio is what--my dad [Charles E. Walker] was a Tuskegee Airman.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the segregated base was in Columbus, and I'm blocking on the name.
Speaker 1: That's okay--it'll come to you.  I think (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It'll come to me, yes, oh, my goodness, any--
Speaker 1: So, your mother worked at the--did she work at the base?
Speaker 2: No, my mother didn't work at the base.  What I was going to say was that my grandmother [Beulah Price], trying to hook up her daughters with men, would raid the Tuskegee Airmen, the base, and bring them over, and cook for them, and make my--her daughters, my mother, serve these men.  And that's how my dad got hooked.  And so, and she ended up marrying, marrying off her daughters to three military men (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: One Tuskegee Airman, my dad, and so that's, that was, that was the story behind that.  And that's how I eventually went to Alaska after the Air Force was integrated and--
Speaker 1: So, what year did your parents get married?
Speaker 2: They were married in 1946.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So she was just a year out of high school [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Early College High School, Dayton, Ohio] pretty much (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, she was nineteen or twenty.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was a young lady.
Story_ID: 493283
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your father then.  Let's go to his side of the family.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yeah, now he is Charles Ealy.
Speaker 1: Charles Ealy, yeah.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Charles Ealy Taylor [sic. Charles E. Walker].
Speaker 2: And if I get bold enough, I may just switch over to Ealy.
Speaker 1: And what's his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: August 1st, 1919.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where was he born?
Speaker 2: He was born in, he was born in--I want to say Manistee, Little Rock--I'm sorry, he was born in Arkansas.  But after about six months or nine months, before, before less than a year old, he was--they moved to Manistee, Michigan, I think it was.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, he was raised in Manistee, Michigan?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, where is Manistee, Michigan?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: By--
Speaker 2: I got to--
Speaker 1: Yeah, the name has--I'm trying to think of the cities along 94 [Interstate 94], you know, there in--
Speaker 2: You know--
Speaker 1: --but I'm not sure where Manistee, okay.
Speaker 2: --I have so much information right there.  I don't know why I didn't bring it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, anyway, what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side?  How far back can you trace them (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I know that my father was one of--let me count them in order--Elziora [Elziora Walker]; Alicestine [Alicestine Walker]; Sonny [Clarence Walker], and Jordan [Jordan Walker], and Pearl [Pearl Walker McNeil].  See there was a Pearl on his side, too--my Aunt Pearl, so that's six kids, right?  Yeah, Elziora; Alicestine, Sonny, that's three; Dad, four; Jordan and Pearl, six.  His father was Charles Alfa [ph.] and Walker [Charles A. Walker], and he married Janey, J-A-N-Y, J-A-N-E-Y Ealy [Jane Ealy Walker].  And the Ealys are from Arkansas.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And Grandpa Walker was a railroad man.  And he also maintained a still on the Great Lakes, and he got busted and served some time.  Interesting stories about the Walkers--Grandpa used to want to look like he was out there investigating the areas, he would jump trains and take his family with him.  And there was a story about one of my aunts, Alicestine was born on a train (laughter) in a boxcar.  But, yeah, Grandpa was quite a character.  He left my grandmother, and she raised all six kids by herself.  She died--gosh, I don't know how old she was.  I don't know her birthday.  And I just called my cousin to find out if he--she knew anything about that, but I can fill in those blanks later on, too.
Speaker 1: I imagine they were born in 1890s maybe or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --absolutely, 1890s.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was about right.  I got a picture of him in my study with my sister [Chelley Dean Litman].  But, yes, so they had Charles Alfa Walker, married to Janey Ealy, and don't have too much history beyond my, my grandparents on the Walker side.
Speaker 1: Any story about--let's see, well, the family in Arkansas on what, what they were doing there?
Speaker 2: No, I don't know.  I, I need to get a genealogy chart (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 493284
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is there a family story about they got to, how your father's [Charles E. Walker] family got to Manistee [Michigan] and why they chose Manistee.  Was it along the railroad?
Speaker 2: No, it was just along the railroad.  That's exactly right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: At one point, and I actually saw a picture of this.  I guess the railroad for railroad cars that were out of use--they would actually take them off the trestles and the wheels, and put them, put them on the ground, and convert them into homes.  And so, so they, my, and my Grandmother Janey [Jane Ealy Walker] was a real good horticulturist, and she had a big garden outside one of these boxcars, which she converted it into a home, and so they had a little neighborhood of boxcars out in--
Speaker 1: Now, was your father raised in the neighborhood with the boxcars (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: That's interesting, the story that, you know, that's the kind of thing you don't hear a lot about (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they, they eventually moved to Jackson, Michigan.  And I do have a lot on pictures about that.  They moved--
Speaker 1: Yeah, Jackson is on 94 [Interstate 94], not too far from Detroit [Michigan], maybe half the way--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --between Detroit and Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Jackson there.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and that's where he principally grew up.
Speaker 1: In Jackson?
Speaker 2: In Jackson.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Jackson is where the state pen was, where Grandpa [Charles A. Walker] served his time (laughter).  And so, they had to move down to Jackson.  And that's where they grew up during the time Grandpa was in jail.
Story_ID: 493285
Speaker 1: I can talk about their occupations if you want.  My--
Speaker 2: Yeah, what did they do on that side?
Speaker 1: Well, let's see.  There's only one living now and that's Pearl [Pearl Walker McNeil], and she, ironically, is the oldest.  Everyone else has died off.  She was one of the first black women to receive a Ph.D. in anthropology.  And one of the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is your [paternal] aunt, right?
Speaker 1: This is my Aunt Pearl.
Speaker 2: Pearl Walker--so you got two Pearls in the family
Speaker 1: That's right--
Speaker 2: Pearl Lee [Walker's maternal grandfather, Homer P. Lee], a grandfather--
Speaker 1: --that's right, exactly.
Speaker 2: --and an aunt, Pearl Walker.  Did she get married?  Did she have a married life?
Speaker 1: Yes, she married a very prominent Southern Baptist minister named Jesse Jai McNeil.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, did she go by Pearl McNeil or--
Speaker 1: Yes, she did, Pearl McNeil.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  First black person to get a Ph.D. in anthro--
Speaker 1: One of, one of the first--
Speaker 2: One of the first?
Speaker 1: --one of the first black women to receive a Ph.D. in anthropology, which I understand (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Did she get it from Columbia University [New York, New York]?
Speaker 1: I'm not sure what university she got it from.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But she got it, you know, she--
Speaker 2: I know that.  I just read that--oh, his name was just was in my--the founder of anthropology over here, Franz Boas taught at Columbia.  Yeah, they called him the nestor of American anthropology.
Speaker 1: Oh, is that right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Franz Boas.  He taught at Columbia and, you know, it's right in Harlem [New York, New York].  And they were like--I think a dancer--well, Zora Neale Hurston studied anthropology with him--so did the dancer, Pearl Primus.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And maybe even the other dancer that the--
Story_ID: 493286
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) We're were talking about your Aunt Pearl [Pearl Walker McNeil], right?
Speaker 2: Right.  Yeah, she had--I just made a phone call--and she received her Ph.D. in 1979 from American University [Washington, D.C.].  But I remember after she got married, this is the thing--she had started college, majored in anthropology earlier on--that's what I should have covered with her--and got married, raised a whole family, and then went back to school and finished her Ph.D. (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: So, yeah, she started in her forties.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was--so it was quite a--that, that was the feat, you know.  And I'm surprised that, yes, so she started and didn't finish until later on.  Wow.
Speaker 1: Do you know where she started, or where she was living when she started it out?
Speaker 2: Detroit [Michigan].
Speaker 1: Detroit, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, grandpa--I mean, Uncle J, Uncle Jesse Jai McNeil had a big church in Detroit [Tabernacle Baptist Church, Detroit, Michigan].  And so, she was the first lady and really prominent.  He's written a couple of books himself and he's a real scholar, a theologian-type guy.  And his family has kind of like followed the same suit.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he's written a couple of books, like I said.  And, you know, he married my aunt who is an administrator, I believe, at the American Baptist Association or something like that.
Story_ID: 493287
Speaker 1: Tell us about your father [Charles E. Walker].  Now, how did--now, he's come from a group of accomplished siblings.  And what was he interested in early on, and how did he become a Tuskegee Airman?
Speaker 2: That's a very good question.  He was actually a, a jack of a lot of trades.  He was a musician.  He went to Eastern Michigan [Michigan State Normal College; Eastern Michigan University, Ypsilanti, Michigan] and studied music.  Actually, I found a dictionary in our bookshelf, and it had his actual dormitory room in it with his name--Munson Hall in room 137.  But anyway, he was, he went to, he said he knew--he played all of woodwinds, he played the strings.  He couldn't sing very much.  And rumor has it--I've never seen this substantiated, but the goal was so he could come back to Jackson [Michigan], put together a church, be the music director and choir director, and all that stuff.  But he was smitten by a bug.  He had, he had actually written about this.  I saw this in a document he'd written when he was eighteen, yeah, seventeen years old--how he was running through a, on, on a field, and this plane buzzed him.  And he fell down and he saw that plane, and he wanted to fly, and it was, he was smitten by this bug.  And after he went, after he graduated from Eastern Michigan, he enlisted secretly, surreptitiously, in the [U.S.] military.  He wanted to get out of Jackson and the Detroit [Michigan] area, and much to the chagrin of his family.  Years, years, years down the road, when it came time for me to apply to colleges, he wanted me to go to the Air Force Academy [United States Air Force Academy, Colorado], and took me to Boulder, Colorado and Colorado Springs [Colorado], and got the application, met with the admissions director, lined everything up for me to go to the Air Force Academy.  And I got the letters from the congressmen and it was all set.  And I opted not to go.  And, and I, my mother [Marguerite Lee Walker]--I thought it would just devastate my father.  But it turned out that my dad did the same thing to his family, you know (laughter).  And so, therefore, it wasn't like a payback thing, but he understood, you know.  And he--I have within me, my own little genes that says, you know, this is--I want to do my own and plot my own course.  And so, his course is to become an Air Force [U.S. Army Air Forces; U.S. Air Force] pilot and not a musician and for the church.  And my course was to do something different.
Story_ID: 493288
Speaker 1: Did he finish Eastern Michigan [Michigan State Normal College; Eastern Michigan University, Ypsilanti, Michigan] before he enrolled in the service (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, he did, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Part of the, the resolve for the growing, growing, growing controversy of blacks going into the [U.S.] military for World War II [WWII], blacks have been fighting since the Revolutionary War and Civil War.  Every war the United States has been involved in, before it even became the United States, blacks have been involved.  And the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] brought an action against the military.  And Roy Wilkins--and I got a great picture of my father [Charles E. Walker] with Roy Wilkins, and Walter White, and Benjamin Davis, Jr. [Benjamin O. Davis, Jr.].  My dad filmed them.  Was that--okay, blacks have to graduate from college in order to enlist in the military because they don't, they don't have the mental capacity to take on the engineering.  Oh, it was just, it was sickening when you read the papers in the Pentagon [Washington, D.C.] from the War College [United States Army War College, Carlisle, Pennsylvania] where they actually take the cadavers of a white pilot and the black pilot, take the brain out, weigh the brain.  This is actual footage--I mean, this is actual documentation.  And because the white brain weighed more than the black brain, they assumed, and they, they deduced that blacks were incapable of operating machinery, like airplanes and tanks and things like that.  And so, they had a segregated Air Force [U.S. Army Air Forces; U.S. Air Force], and that's what justified it based upon.  And that's when I hear these stupid test scores, and how blacks come unprepared under these affirmative action rubrics to go to law schools and medical schools.  I said, you must be kidding me.  Are we going back there again?  And, you know, I mean the rest is history.  The Tuskegee Airmen was the most decorated Air Force unit in aviation history. They flew over 2,400 sorties, saved immeasurable a number of aircraft, shot down hundreds of German aircraft and, and planes, and, you know, received every medal imaginable, including the Congressional Medal of Honor last March 29th of this year.  And [U.S.] Congress bestowed upon that, upon the whole unit, but, you know, anyway.
Speaker 1: So, he enters in the military after he graduates.  Did he graduate with a degree in music?
Speaker 2: He graduated from Eastern Michigan with a degree in music.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And while he was one of the first black Air Force base commanders, it's called--he was called a base exec.  He would also work part-time and teach saxophone at the local music store in the little town we lived in.  And he gave music lessons.  That's how he made his little extra money.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Eastern Michigan is in Ypsilanti [Michigan]?  Is that right?
Speaker 2: That's exactly right--Ypsilanti.
Speaker 1: Ypsilanti, right, okay.  So, his parents think he's going on into a music career and he decides to join the--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, he joined the--did he join the Tuskegee Airmen as such or did he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, he did.  He's--that's when he went into the--
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is during the war, right--
Speaker 2: Yes, exactly--
Speaker 1: --'cause the war is going on, World War II.
Speaker 2: --World War II.  He was entered in class of '41 [1941], and he entered in '41 [1941], graduated in '44 [1944].  It was class of 44B.
Speaker 1: So, he joined the Airmen of '44 [1944]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He graduated in the class of '44 [1944].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He joined, I think, in '41 [1941] or '42 [1942].  It was like a three-year or two or three-year.
Speaker 1: Oh, the Tuskegee Airmen themselves?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he came out of Eastern Michigan in '41 [1941] then--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and then joined Tuskegee Airmen in '41 [1941]?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And became an officer, and that's how I got to Anchorage, Alaska.
Story_ID: 493289
Speaker 1: Was he there as an instructor, as a--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was an instructor.  He taught flight and--
Speaker 1: From what I've heard is that they were--they, the government, in their attempt not to let them fly, taught them so much that they became teachers of, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's exactly right.  They logged all this--this is how segregation raises, rears years back and slaps white folks in the face because you not only have college educated, as opposed to high school educated men.  You have them and they're flying, you know, hundreds of hours of experience.  And they master their aircraft, whereas these white guys are just grad- drop out of high school or graduate from high school, with just a couple of hours in the air, and get blown away.  And it's toward the end of the, and they just, by force, they had to send people out there that were more experienced.  And even then, they had, they kept them segregated.  Even in Europe, they had segregated barracks as in air strips.  It's just an incredible history.  And they'd meet their missions in the air.  They wouldn't take off at the same bases.  And the Red Tails, the fighter pilots would escort the white bombers.  And then, they'd meet, and then they'd go to their respective mission, to their mission.  And they didn't know that it was the black pilots that were escorting them for a minute there, for a while there.  It was really--so you think about race and how stupid this country has been.
Speaker 1: Now, did your father [Charles E. Walker] go Italy to (Unclear)?
Speaker 2: No, you know, what?  My father was a bomber, and the bombers had to stay stateside.  He just liked to--he was only 5'6, 5'6-1/2, maybe 5'7.  He's small.  He was not very tall, but he just--had loved the big things, loved big machinery, always had the biggest cars (laughter).  He always had--he loved to fly the B-52s [Boeing B-52 Stratofortress], but he flew everything.  He flew jets, single engine, double engine, you know, the big four engines on each side, the biggest, biggest airplanes.  And he was responsible for certifying pilots on what, what type of aircraft they could fly.  He had had that much experience.
Story_ID: 493290
Speaker 1: He met your mother [Marguerite Lee Walker] in '46 [1946], right, 1946 or '45 [1945] or '46 [1946]?
Speaker 2: Forty-five [1945], yeah, thereabouts, yep.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And he was stationed in, right outside of Columbus [Ohio] then?
Speaker 2: Yes, exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Does he have a story as to how, as to what happened, how they met?
Speaker 2: Well, just say [maternal] grandma [Beulah Price] would take them to, would invite them--she'd raid the base, and then bring them over there and cook.  And mother, my mother still is very good-looking, but she was really, really, really a knockout, man.  They were just really a handsome couple.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, no, he didn't say anything.  He, he was very quiet about that stuff.
Speaker 1: Now, is--when you look at your parents' personalities, which one do you think you take after the most--your mother or your father [Charles E. Walker]?
Speaker 2: Now, I get somewhat emotional.  I'm very much a teacher.  And my dad--and my work ethic very much parallels my dad.  My dad never knew how to retire.  He always worked and so I believe in working.  Dad, though, was not as, you know, I, I get a lot of spontaneity and storytelling from my mother and a little emotional.  And I, I got her little, I get--he was so even, even-tempered.  He hardly had, hardly had a temper.  I don't have a big temper, but I can get riled up.  And, you know, I get kind of, I get--the drama comes from my mother.  And the--I'd, I'd say, if I could be so vain, some of the leadership skills and the--some of the temperament, and some of the, and, and the passion for teaching stuff, it comes from him.  He's always been a teacher.
Story_ID: 493291
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Oh, I have a lot of memories.
Speaker 1: Did you, do you remember Alaska?  How long was the family there (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't remember Alaska.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was about three years old when we left there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I, I do remember about when I was three or four.  Every time Dad [Charles E. Walker] would come home, I'd ride his back, you know, horsey back ride.  And I do remember my mother [Marguerite Lee Walker] was telling, reminding me that the time of, you know, he had me.  And then, I was crying, and I was screaming, and turns out he had these little badges.  When he picked me up, he had these little badges on.  They were cutting me up.  He said, "Oh, it's okay."  I was, "Ah," (laughter), he was just tearing me up.  And so, blood all over his, oh (laughter), but I remember that, I remember that.  I remember, I remember we had a car accident.  I have a little, I have a, you know, if you could see it, but I have a little separation in my eyebrow.  And I was on my mom's lap and I hit the dashboard.  And it cut me, and I remember the doctors holding me down and stitching me.  I remember that.  But I've got a lot of good memories, we lived in France.
Story_ID: 493292
Speaker 1: Yeah, where did you go immediately after Alaska?
Speaker 2: Columbus, Ohio--is that right?  No, Tennessee, Columbus, and then from Columbus to France, and Germany, and then California, where he [Walker's father, Charles E. Walker] eventually retired.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you lived in a lot of different places, but were they mainly on [U.S.] military reservations--
Speaker 2: They were all on military bases, yep.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?  And I know you'll probably reflect back on your [maternal] grandfather [Homer P. Lee].  You reflect--there's some reflection on that already (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --but what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, man.  Well, we lived in a trailer at one point in France and it was real small.  I mean, it was a trailer, a trailer, it was on wheels.  I mean (laughter), I remember that.  I remember, and so, my mother [Marguerite Lee Walker] would cook.  And we had a dog, a little Dachshund, and we had--it was a home.  I remember my, I remember when we moved into a house, also base housing--this was in France.  It seemed so big.
Story_ID: 493293
Speaker 1: I remember my sister was adopted--Chelley [Chelley Dean Litman], I remember her coming in.
Speaker 2: So is it just the two of you?
Speaker 1: It's just the two of us, yep.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: As it, as it, it turns out, that was, that was my father's [Charles E. Walker] real daughter.  And he always kept it, you know, I mean it's all part of our history, so I, I share this.  She was--Dad had met this German woman, I guess, and this fraulein during one of his trips.  Dad was a good family man.  He was a loyal, loyal, devoted family man, but I don't know what happened.  But I remember that he was going to get--I know my mother [Marguerite Lee Walker] couldn't have any more children.  But I don't think that's why he, he had this relationship with this woman.  But after Chelley was born, Chelley was in a--in Germany at this very exclusive orphanage.  I found all this out in 2000 after my father had died 'cause I had her birth certificates.  And I remember dad had always said, never tell Chelley that she was adopted, never do that.  And my mother went along with the plan and I went along with the plan.  And after Dad died, I told Mom, I said, "Mom, you got to tell Chelley that she was adopted."  And I found, I found her birth certificates and saw her mother's name, and she was a shop, like a cashier, cashier or a shop--I think it's called a shopkeeper.  That's what they called it on the birth certificate.  And the father's name was on the birth certificate.  And it had her name and picture.  And, you know, there was always a rumor that, that might happen.  But it, at first, you know, and, you know, I asked my mother what she thought if Dad, if, if Chelley was really my father's daughter.  And my sister was having, you know, issues at the time.  She'd been married three times.  She's been abused by these men, and there were issues of drugs.  And I thought, well, we need to tell her, you know, just maybe this can help her in the rehab--I don't know.  And then, when I found out that it seemed to me that it was pointing to this action--was her father.  I, I shared it with my mother and my, and my sister.  And what I wanted, I'm sharing that with you because it really makes me love my father even that much more because he wasn't going to leave his daughter in Europe.  And she was about a year old, and my mother took her (laughter).  She--when she was reminiscing about it a couple of summers ago, she was saying, "Yeah, I was wondering why he said--he just came up one day and says, 'I think it's time for Chuckie [HistoryMaker Charles Walker] to have a sister' (laughter)."  He didn't say a brother or sister.  "Yeah, we should got--go and adopt them," and he was very directed.  He knew which adoption agency to go through (laughter).  He knew that one.  He knew which kid he wanted (laughter).  And so, my mother was just, you know, naive and everything else--, "Oh, that's nice, that's nice, yeah," he, she, "Do you like her?"  "Yeah, yeah, yeah."  "Well, we'll adopt her, we'll adopt her," (laughter).
Story_ID: 493294
Speaker 1: Did you ever notice a resemblance or did your mother [Marguerite Lee Walker] ever notice (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, there has always been a resemblance.  She's always been my sister and I told her that, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: "Chelley [Chelley Dean Litman] I'll tell you this--," (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you notice a physical resemblance or similarity with your father?
Speaker 2: Sure, she had his eyes.  I was very, very envious 'cause he had hazel eyes.  And my girlfriend, she used to just go mad over my dad [Charles E. Walker] 'cause he was handsome.  And he has a darkened complexion, he had hazel eyes, and she had his hands.  She--so there's something about, unique about my dad's.  You know, my--I have similar hands, but his hands were--they're a little stronger, and they were just better defined.  And she knew she had his hands.  And when I told her, she immediately started crying.  And then, and then she, then she took into account.  She--, "I knew there was something different, Chuckie [HistoryMaker Charles E. Walker], you know.  I have his hands, I have his eyes, and there's no baby pictures like you.  There's something."  And so, and then I'll just wrap this piece up of it 'cause it's a much longer story.  But when he died, my mother had had custom made jewelry for him, including a ring which had, which is gold and turquoise.  And actually, I have his Tuskegee Airman ring on right here, and this is his wedding band actually.  And so, I didn't want to give her any of his jewelry because, you know, her husbands were drug dealers and boyfriends and that.  I just didn't want any heirloom so valuable so I hoarded them.  And when it came time to telling her, I actually brought them to her.  And I said, "Honey, it's your dad and, you know, if, if you give it, if you leave them out, and they get sold, you're selling a piece of your father."  And she, she put that ring on and cried like a baby.  And she said, "It's never coming off my finger," and it's still on there.  So, she had two, she wears two of his rings, and they fit, fit, they fit her hand perfectly, just like his rings fit my hands perfectly.  It's the only, his wedding band fits my wedding band finger perfectly.
Story_ID: 493295
Speaker 1: Where did you go to school initially?
Speaker 2: Okay.  When you say initially, you're talking about college or high school or--
Speaker 1: No, grade school.
Speaker 2: Grade school, okay.  Well, I went to, I went to the segregated nursery school in Tennessee in Nashville (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is there a name--do you remember the name of it?  Is it Nashville?
Speaker 2: No, it was on the Air Force base [Sewart Air Force Base, Smyrna, Tennessee] there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then I, I went to, moved to Columbus, Ohio.  Let's see--no, no, no--moved to Columbus, Ohio first.  I am contradicting myself.  Then, we went to Tennessee, and that's where I went to nursery school, and then we went to France.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I was in France from age five to age nine.
Speaker 1: And what was the name of the school there?
Speaker 2: It's, it was Toule Rossiere, T-O-U-L- I think -E, Rossierre, R-O-S-S-I-E-R-R-E [sic. Toul-Rosieres Air Base, France], I think, Toul-Rosieres Air Force base public school there.  It's an [U.S.] Air Force high school--I mean Air Force school.  And I went to the kindergarten for the fourth grade--third grade there.  And then, from there, we were transferred to California.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I finished fourth grade through high school there in California.  And then from, then I went to junior college (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was the name of your high school there?
Speaker 2: Camarillo High School [Adolfo Camarillo High School, Camarillo, California].
Speaker 1: How do you spell it?
Speaker 2: C-A-M-A-R-I-L-L-O.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Is that in--that's in what part of California?
Speaker 2: Camarillo, California.
Speaker 1: Camarillo, California, okay, all right, okay.  So, you graduated from that in--
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-nine [1969].
Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-nine [1969], okay.
Speaker 2: And that's when I started this look for, you know, I was guided to go to the Air Force Academy [United States Air Force Academy, Colorado] from my father [Charles E. Walker].
Speaker 1: Now, before we get that far--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --I want to just ask you about school.  And did you--were you a good student in school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was a good student.  I ran track, played football, wrestled.  I, I was a C plus, B minus student.  I wasn't a great academic guy.  I was very active.  It was a school of about 2,200.  I was the first black student body president.  I used to do comedy routines at the assemblies.  They were all white, just about, and that's how I elected president actually, on some jokes.
Speaker 1: So, so you were a popular student (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was popular, yeah, I was voted most popular actually.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I had some, I had some, I was pretty good quasi-athlete.  I did pretty good in track, and in track and field.  And then, but I didn't have any college plans because of that.
Story_ID: 493296
Speaker 1: What was your favorite subject in school?  Did you have a favorite?
Speaker 2: In high school [Adolfo Camarillo High School, Camarillo, California]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I liked--one of the most impressionable classes was Mrs. Tiner's [ph.] English class.  And up to that point, I really wasn't much of a reader, much, much of a writer.  But there was something about Mrs. Tiner that really got me to read and write and understand 'cause I really thought I was, I thought I was stupid really.  I thought I was, I thought, I didn't think I was, I had the intellectual power to read and write with any force.  In fact, I was in--I wasn't even put in college prep classes.  And my high school counselor was Mr. Wozniak, Ed Wozniak [ph.], W-O-Z-N-I-A-K (laughter).  I'll never get him, I'll never get over him.  And I was just as happy--if I'm going too far off field, let me know.  But I was just as happy to come home at 3:30, get some Oreo cookies, drink some milk, watch 'Felix the Cat' and 'Sky King,' and all these guys, and then go to bed--no homework.  And then, my mother [Marguerite Lee Walker] complained.  And my father [Charles E. Walker] went to Mr. Wozniak, and he brought me in there with him.  And Mr. Wozniak had his chart 'cause he knew, and he showed where I scored on the standardized test--how poorly I'd done.  And he had this, even my names of my friends.  I'll never get over this.  My white friends, he says, you know, 'cause he knew who I hung out with, like Timmy [ph.] and Mickey [ph.] and, and John [ph.], Spon [ph.].  "They--this is where they are (laughter).  This is where you are, Chuckie [HistoryMaker Charles Walker]."  And, you know, like the nerve of you to come in here and act like, you know, you come.  You know, and he just humiliated me in front of my father.  And my father said, "Chuckie, can you excuse us for a minute (laughter)?"  And I used to tell this story, I used to well up when I thought about it.  But I would go out, and I went out in the little hall, and sat at the bench.  And this is coming in from eighth grade into high school.  And he was in there five minutes.  I remember we walked out and it was a little unusual.  Mr. Wozniak didn't, didn't come out with him.  And so, I was walking.  He said, "C'mon, champ."  That's what my dad used to call me--champ.  And we walked down the hall and I was wondering if he killed Mr. Wozniak (laughter).  That's all I was thinking about (laughter).  And I remember that Monday.  He says, "You're going to get in a few different classes."  And I remember, I remember (laughter), Mr. Wozniak meeting me at the, at the bus stop, and he took me to all these different classes.  You asked me about my teacher--this is how I got to meet Mrs. Tiner.  And Mr. Wozniak, you know, I think he did it out of just defiance and just sarcasm.  He put me in all these honors classes, expecting me to flunk out and really humiliate me.  And I shined.  I did really well in English.  And that was the class where I found myself.  That's a, that's a long way of getting to it.  And then I ran for student body president and I, and I was on the Key Club through the Kiwanis Club [Kiwanis International].  And I, you know, I became, you know, I really got to feel my oats.  I became an artist actually and I became a cartoonist.  And I had a couple of strips in the, in the local newspapers and stuff, and it was '65 [1965] through '69 [1969].  Well, you know, it was--those are incredible years because you had Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] assassinated when we have seventh grade, '63 [1963].  You get King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] assassinated when I was a junior in high school.  You have Bobby Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy], gets assassinated after King.  And I was in high school during all those times.  And the Watts riots in '65 [1965] out of, out of Los Angeles [California].  You know, it was just an incredibly turbulent race time.
Story_ID: 493297
Speaker 1: So, did any of the movement agitation reach your high school, Camarillo High School [Adolfo Camarillo High School, Camarillo, California] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, it did actually.  Yeah, 1968 is when I, when I got elected.  I think, I think the agitation leading up to '68 [1968] hit my high school and in a positive way.  Excuse me.  I mean, I was gregarious and nice but, you know, there was so much stuff going on.  And, excuse me, a lot of the white students didn't understand.  And, you know, you turn on your TV, and you'd see in Los Angeles [California], blacks burning down, you know, a significant part of the, their town in, in Watts [Los Angeles, California].  And, you know, I mean it was like nightly news, like a four-day or three-day riot.  And it was like thirty something odd people got killed and hundreds injured.  And you'd see firefighters, you know, fighting, and, you know, it was just like a regular--it was like an occurrence.  It was like a war zone.  And, you know, being one of the few blacks in the school, people just, you know, what's going on?  And, and, you know, you had some, you had some racists there.  There's no question about this as a conservative county [Ventura County, California].  And, and, you know, with me and my dad [Charles E. Walker] coming into Camarillo [California] from France, and he was coming in as an officer, so there was a big--a lot of talk.  And then, there was a, the mayor who was, name was Earl Joseph, he was a good man.  He welcomed my father.  This--the town only had like about five or six thousand people.  Now, it's like almost one hundred thousand people there in Camarillo.  To make a long story short, he had a reception for Dad and all that stuff.  But the short of it is you asked me if, during while I was in high school whether the racial issues hit.  I distinctly remember when I was junior class vice president, we were invited to Simi High School [Simi Valley High School, Simi Valley, California] for a campaign rally for George Wallace who was running for president of the United States.
Speaker 1: You were invited to a campaign rally (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes--
Speaker 1: --for George Wallace?
Speaker 2: --yes, yeah, and he was going to be speaking to the high school assembly.
Speaker 1: Now, this is where at, at--
Speaker 2: In Simi Valley [California].  Now--
Speaker 1: Simi Valley, oh, that's so, yeah, I mean--
Speaker 2: --yeah, see--
Speaker 1: --it resonates now 'cause Simi Valley is where the officers who--
Speaker 2: That's exactly right.
Speaker 1: --beat Rodney King--
Speaker 2: Rodney King, that's where they tried the case.
Speaker 1: --were tried, right.
Speaker 2: That's where they moved the case to Simi.  So, when I heard that they were moving to Simi, I, I knew what that was about.  And when they got acquitted, that did not surprise anybody.  And so, that was '68 [1968].  I think it was '68 [1968], '67 [1967], '68 [1968].  And Tom Benz [ph.], he was a good buddy of mine.  I was just selected student body president.  He was student body president of his high school and, you know, I had just a very active group.  We were against the Vietnam War and we went on up there.  And George Wallace was speaking.  And Tom Benz and his student body government, and my student body government, and all white kids.  I had one black guy on my staff who was sergeant-of-arms, Larry Wilson, and we gave a standing ovation to George Wallace.  And it was a big rally.  I'll never get over this, Larry [Larry Crowe] (laughter).  We were standing up.  We were raising--thank you, thank you, thank you.  And the students stood up and they were applauding, thank you, thank you, thank you.  We kept applauding, thank you.  We, we were going to applaud his butt off the stage.  That's what we--that was the plan.  You had over two thousand students just yelling and screaming and yelling.  George Wallace could not speak, and he walked off the stage.  It was, it was really quite a, it was really quite a moment if you, if you think about it.  This is all before King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated.  This is all before Bobby [Robert F. Kennedy] was assassinated, but you could see how there was just so much tension.  And these white folks had just really, really rallied to make sure that this guy was not going to be revered.  It was clearly, you know, someone from the boosters club or the adults or the parents that managed to get him to the school (laughter).  And the kids didn't go for it, they did not go for it.  And it was really cool.
Story_ID: 493298
Speaker 1: I was elected student body president.  And you might--well, this is an interesting piece.  Keith Wilkes, Jamaal Wilkes (laughter), he was student body president of Ventura High School [Ventura, California].  He was there (laughter) and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he became, he was a great pro-basketball player--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --with the Lakers [Los Angeles Lakers].
Speaker 1: And Golden, Golden State Warriors is where he started.
Speaker 2: Golden State, okay.
Speaker 1: That's where he--and they won the championship.  And he became NBA [National Basketball Association] player of the year.  And he made that movie, 'Cornbread, Earl and Me.'
Speaker 2: Right, Keith Wilkes, smooth as silk.
Speaker 1: Silk, Silk Wilkes, they call him, yep.  And he later went to Santa Barbara High School [Santa Barbara, California].  And his classmate was Sam "Bam" Cunningham who was--a lot, a lot of interesting times there.
Speaker 2: Football player played here in Boston [Massachusetts] for the--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --Patriots [New England Patriots], right.
Speaker 1: Sure did, sure did.  So, anyway, so my high school [Adolfo Camarillo High School, Camarillo, California] was charged with a lot of politicism.  And on a more local, also dynamic issue that was much more settled before this George Wallace thing.  I was a junior then.  The election had just happened.  This was in '67 [1967], and I just got elected student body president.  And I was taking this class called Civics and POD, Problems of Democracy.  And I had Mr. O'Connor [ph.] as my high school teacher.  He was a good guy, but he was one of these white liberals that just thought he had, he was the bee's knees and, you know.  He and he, and, and he thought he was good 'cause he could talk to me and say--talk to, and I just hated being singled out--being the spokesman for all black America in, in this stupid class.  And I remember, after getting elected student body president, Ronald Reagan [Ronald Wilson Reagan] was running for governor of California against Pat Brown.  And Mr. O'Connor says, "Chuck [HistoryMaker Charles Walker], which political party do you think the Negroes are going to vote within this election?"  And this guy had a big potbelly with his red flushed face.  His pants, I, I--when I tell the story to some high school students, I said he was the original homeboy 'cause his pants were like halfway over his butt, potbelly over his belt line.  You know, he couldn't see himself urinate if he had to, excuse me--I mean, tie his shoes, just one of those types of guys.  And I remember and 'cause, you know, I'm a military brat.  My dad [Charles E. Walker] is an officer.  I'm told to give penultimate respect to people, not just white people, but just penultimate--in particular adults, particularly adults.  And I remember muttering something under my breath when he asked the question--, "Chuck, which political party are the Negroes going to vote with?"  And that Negroes just resonated with me--I hated it.  And I said--I thought under my breath, I must have said it out loud 'cause I saw everybody going, ooh.  I said, "The same political party the fat people will."  And he (laughter), he sent me down to the office.  And I told the principal, who was Mr. Killingsworth [ph.], and he was a mean principal.  When I told him that story, he laughed so hard, and he gave me five dollars.  He treated me to lunch and he said, "Do not tell Mr. O'Connor I gave you this."  And he commended me, and it really made me feel good.  It wasn't that he hated, but then, he wouldn't tolerate, he wouldn't tolerate that stuff.  That was just unacceptable.  And that was the real first indication, almost like a validation that, you know, Chuck, you know, it's okay for you to challenge some type of authority and, and let them know it's unacceptable.  And when your principal validates you like that, it, it really made me feel good.  I was prepared to be suspended.  I was waiting for the phone call to my dad to come pick me up, but he didn't do it.  He treated me to lunch and I--so that, yeah, so, yeah, race issues hit the high school in a real dramatic way with a booing or plotting George Wallace off the stage and also, with Mr. O'Connor and Mr. Killingsworth.
Story_ID: 493299
Speaker 1: Did the assassination of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]--do you remember that day and what happened on that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I remember that.  God, I remember it like it was yesterday--whew.  Yeah, that was April 4th.  I was heading down to track practice with my good friend, Larry [Larry Wilson].  Larry was--he came running up and he said, "Walker [HistoryMaker Charles Walker], did you hear what happened?  Those f'ing crackers did it--they killed Dr. King."  I said, "What?"  And I remember he says, I'm not--and we were, we were CIF, California Interscholastic or whatever this Federation [California Interscholastic Federation].  You know, we had made our track team--our relay team was going to be competing in CIF, and then we had one last track meeting.  It happened to be at Camarillo High School [Adolfo Camarillo High School, Camarillo, California].  And I was going to go down to the track coach and tell him, Mr. Willhite [ph.], Coach Willhite, that I wasn't going--that none of us were going to run (laughter) the track meet.  And when I went down there to see him, no one was in the, no one was in the--no one was around.  And he, and he was writing a sign, and he had already cancelled track practice, and he was calling the schools.  He'd already--he was cancelling the track meet in honor of Dr. King.  And he says, "Yes, Chuck, what?"  And he had, and his eyes were red because he had been crying.  And I said, you know, "Why, why did you cancel the track meet?"  He says, "Well, you know, Dr. King was killed.  We can't have a track meet, we can't have a track meet tomorrow--can't do it."  I said okay.  And I didn't, I never know him until much later on what we were going to do.  That's the truth.  I went back.  They flew me to Oxnard, Cali- they flew me back to California, just a few years ago, to give the keynote for Martin Luther King Day [Martin Luther King Jr. Day].  And Mr.--I, I called Coach Willhight, and I asked him to come to this thing.  It was like three thousand people there.  It was at the Oxnard Civic Auditorium [Oxnard Performing Arts and Convention Center, Oxnard, California].  And I had him come on stage and I told the story.  And I, I told him I was going to embarrass him.  And that's when I told the story.  And I'm going to tell you, Larry [Larry Crowe]--whew, ugh, there wasn't a dry eye in the place.  You know, it was a very powerful time.
Speaker 1: So, so people felt it deeply all around you (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.  I mean, don't get me wrong.  There were some hardcore racists in Camarillo [California].  I would try to, I was trying to--the vice president who was a woman, Rhonda, gosh, I forgot her name--Rhonda Schneider [ph.]?  Anyway, I was going to have--we were going to go to each other's homes and have a meeting.  And her father wouldn't, wouldn't let us meet 'cause I was, I was student body president.  He wouldn't have a black guy in his house.  He never even, vowed he'd never have a black guy in his house, couldn't do it--just like that.  Yeah, it was, it was an interesting time.
Story_ID: 493300
Speaker 1: Were there any other black students in school [Adolfo Camarillo High School, Camarillo, California] with you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my class had about twelve.  It was like five hundred, close to five hundred in each class, and we had the biggest class, and there was like twelve of us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: Most of them associated with the [U.S.] Air Force, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, most of them are Air Force brats.  Good athletes, you know, consistent with the stereotype.  But, you know, we had some really good stars from great track stars, football.  We did really well in wrestling.  And it was just fun.  I had a--not everyone could say they had a--I had a wonderful track experience.  I had a wonderful high school experience.
Speaker 1: What did you run in track?
Speaker 2: The 220, 800, 880 relay, and that was it.  I tried to do a little pole vault--knocked my tooth out.  I said no more pole vaulting for me (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, you were running during the time of [HistoryMaker] John Carlos and--
Speaker 2: John Carlos, exactly--
Speaker 1: --and Tommie Smith and those, yeah.
Speaker 2: --Tommie Smith.  As a matter of fact, they had the Santa Barbara Easter Relays and they had O.J.'s.  USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California] had an incredible team.
Speaker 1: So, O.J. Simpson, right?  It was--
Speaker 2: O.J. Simpson was on the track team at USC.  And, man, that was unbelievable watching those guys.  This guy named Edesel Garrison.  Yeah, John Carlos, let's see, now who's on his team--how could I forget who was on that team?  Yeah, they had some stars coming out in California.  And California has incredible, incredible track people.
Story_ID: 493301
Speaker 1: You said that you didn't have a plan for college necessarily when you were in high school [Adolfo Camarillo High School, Camarillo, California]?
Speaker 2: No, not after the Air Force Academy [United States Air Force Academy, Colorado] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But you had started at the end of the college track though?
Speaker 2: Right--
Speaker 1: And your father [Charles E. Walker] saw to it that you--
Speaker 2: --right.  So, the only other option was junior college.  So, I went to Moorpark junior college [Moorpark College, Moorpark, California].
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Spelled M-O-O-R, P-A-R-K.  Some kids would be cute and spell it backwards--it spells krap room (laughter).  But, no, Moor Park junior college was a brand new college.  I think it was maybe three years old when I got in there, and that's where I started drawing my cartoon strips.
Speaker 1: Can I--had--did you already--had you already displayed a talent for art?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I, I, I started drawing in fifth grade.  I--fourth and fifth grade, I started drawing, Dennis the Menace, Peter Pan.  I liked people that flew.  I like Batman--I mean, I like, I liked Superman.  But, you know, make, make them look real, I couldn't do a very good job of them.  Making them cartoony was, was my forte.  And then, I had some strips.  They aren't great cartoons, but they look like Johnny Hart, B.C.  (Unclear) type figures.  They were big influences of mine.  Mad magazine, this guy named Paul Coker [Paul Coker, Jr.], I loved his, his artwork.  And so, I kind of like pen--.  A lot of my stuff is a blend between those two guys, Hart and Coker.  And then, now I've graduated a little more to Jeff MacNelly, you know, Shoe, those types of--my, my stuff, I hope, looks a little like that.
Speaker 1: So you're still a cartoonist (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I love drawing cartoons.  I was always threatening to do my own reading card set.  And I've been offered an opportunity to draw for the black newspaper, so I might.  I'm going to get into that again.
Story_ID: 493302
Speaker 1: So, you started doing your cartoons for the local, for the junior college newspaper?
Speaker 2: For the junior college newspaper, for a black newspaper also.  And there were two junior colleges I drew for--Santa Barbara CC [Santa Barbara City College, Santa Barbara, California] and Moorpark junior college [Moorpark College, Moorpark, California] and, and also this black newspaper in Oxnard [California].  And, gosh, I did, did a number of strips.  And I did one, had fifty frames, and guess who saw it?  It's just so--it's just by coincidence, not 'cause it's so widely circulated, but because he had--Charles Schulz [Charles M. Schulz] happened to be on campus.  And I tell you, Larry [Larry Crowe] that was one of the proudest moments of my life, too.  A good buddy of mine on the editorial board told me that they were having these two special receptions for him.  And here I am, the cartoonist for the newspaper.  And they weren't going to invite me to the, to the special reception with the editors.  They were just going to let me come to the reception with all the students.  And, and he was, and he was upset, and he had told me about the reception literally an hour before it was happening.  And so, I defiantly, with my big old Afro, my overalls, and sandals, and I was, I went on up there to the special little room where the deans and the presidents were.  The dean, President Collins [John Collins], was a good guy.  He didn't know about me being excused.  He was a really good guy.  He was principally responsible for this Ford Foundation scholarship I got.  But this editor made sure I came.  But when I got up there, I was clearly, besides being the only black guy in there, I had--I was not dressed for the occasion.  You had the trustees, you had all these people there (laughter).  And so, I walked in there and I said, oh, I, I got to get out of here, man, I got to get out of here.  And there was this, like punch bowl.  I was right near the entrance.  There was this big punch bowl.  It was really a posh place.  I said, and my friend let me in, and I said, I'm going to get out of here.  And just then, the crowd started going towards--I thought they were going to the punch bowl.  And Charles Schulz was raving about my fifty-frame cartoon.  And, and someone point--, "That's the guy who did it."  And Charles Schulz came right over to me.  And the whole crowd came over to me, and he said, "I really love your Jake and the Beanstalk [sic. Jack and the Beanstalk].  That was really--that's genius, that was really--oh, that was really cool, man."  That just validated me again in front of all those people.  They were applauding and everything else.  That was so cool.  But, you know, it's for, for that, for that moment, I was his colleague, man.  I was his equal (laughter).  That felt good.
Speaker 1: That's quite a story.  That is something.  And, hey, but they, initially, hadn't planned for you to be there.  They had, and--
Speaker 2: But that's just how they think.  I, you know, I want to say they as like this huge giant they.  It's not just white they.  It's not, it's just this arrogant privileged they that just automatically box you out.  I mean, you're going to meet with this national star, syndicated cartoonist (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And you have--
Speaker 2: Who would think to bring the cartoonist of your newspaper?  Who would think to do something like that?
Speaker 1: And it makes you wonder who wouldn't think of that as if they, and that's--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right.  And then Charles Schulz saw it, 'cause you know, naturally, he's going to look at the newspaper.  Naturally, he's going to look at the cartoons, but they didn't have the foresight to do that.  In fact, they excluded me from it (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, well, you, invisible man, here we go.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  But he--I mean, instantaneously, he didn't make me the greatest cartoonist in the world.  He just validated it.  Hey, this is my colleague, you know.  We have this art we love.
Story_ID: 493303
Speaker 1: I remember seeing and, of course, this goes in a different tangent, but I remember seeing James Brown and Pavarotti [Luciano Pavarotti] singing 'It's A Man's' ['It's a Man's Man's Man's World'].  'It's a-' did you see that?
Speaker 2: No, they were singing 'It's A Man's World' really?
Speaker 1: Oh, god, yeah, "It's a man's world"--oh, yeah, you can get it online.  I said, that is something.  You know, James Brown the first verse, and then Pavarotti did the second verse (laughter) with this tenor.  It was just beautiful.  I thought it was going to be schlock, or what do you call the 'Saturday Night' ['Saturday Night Live']--like parody or something?  It was, it was an open air concert.  It was somewhere in Europe and they belted out that song.  I never did like the song until I heard it that day.  That was something.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, it was always kind of a, a comedy song.  For a lot of black people now, it reflect, even James Brown fans, which I'm one, too, reflect on seeing him sing that song where he brings the house lights down.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: He sits on the stool and then he said, "It's a man's world" (laughter).  And it's in a kind of a croaking voice.
Speaker 1: But it was, it was just two artists, two musicians.  That's all it was, you know.  He's--certainly, James Brown is no tenor and, and, and Pavarotti is no Godfather of Soul, but they found a common ground there.  And the people just loved it.  They went bonkers and, of course, I did.  And when, if I can get the link, I will forward it to you.  It is something, but the same thing with the cartoonist.
Story_ID: 493304
Speaker 1: Did you see yourself as an art major at that point?  Did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I did.  I, I actually, when I went, that's what I was.  After I bounced the Tuskegee Airmen thing on, you know, Air Force Academy [United States Air Force Academy, Colorado], I just said, I'm, I'm just going, I'm going to go to college [Moorpark College, Moorpark, California].  I want to get high.  I'm going to (laughter), I'm going to smoke dope.  I'm going to play clarinet.  I'm going to draw cartoons and, you know, maybe do some standup comedy.  I said that and, of course, this was in the '70s [1970s].  And, you know, I've stopped all those things, of course, before I went to law school [Boston College Law School, Newton Centre, Massachusetts].  And I, I got a little religion under my belt, but--and but, yeah, I--my first major was to be was art.  I was an art major.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you get involved with the theatre or any at that, in those days?
Speaker 2: I, again, I did get involved in theatre.  I did some acting.  I was on the board for Wheelock College Family Theatre [Wheelock Family Theatre, Boston, Massachusetts].  I've been in a few plays.  I always aspired to be something, something in the movies.  And I always aspired to be, like you, an interviewer.  I wanted to be, I wanted to be the first Arsenio Hall.  I wanted to be a national Johnny Carson-type guy, but God had a different plan for me apparently.
Story_ID: 493305
Speaker 1: So, you're in junior college [Moorpark College, Moorpark, California].  Now, where, did you go?  So, I know you matriculated to a four year college (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --at some point.  Then where did you--
Speaker 2: UC Santa Barbara [University of California, Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, California].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And there, I, I, got really involved with political science and--
Speaker 1: Were you a part of black organizations or any kind of political organizations in junior college?
Speaker 2: I, I wouldn't, no, I, I'm not--in junior college, I was, in junior college, I was.  But when I got to UC Santa Barbara, I mean, I hung out with all the blacks, but I didn't do any fraternities, sororities--didn't have any hardly.
Speaker 1: They have a black student organization?
Speaker 2: They had a black student organization.  I got involved with that, but I mostly was there.  I did, I wasn't really active in it.  I didn't run for office.  It's, it's a horrible thing to say, but if I can't be an officer or a leader in an organization, I usually don't join (laughter), I don't join it.  Yeah, and I'm a member, I'm still a member of a number of organizations now.  But, which I've led in the past, but I'm still there because I, I believe in them.  This is one of the few, which I have not been chairman of any board or anything like that.  But this is my absolute penultimate favorite board, the board of the Museum of African American History [Museum of Afro-American History; Museum of African American History, Boston, Massachusetts].  This is such an important board to me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  We'll talk about that a little later--
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: --to get into deep depth with that.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: But UC Santa Barbara, so you were a--now, how did you make transition from the arts and to political science?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they, they--it's not like they are mutually exclusive.  I mean, the college education is just an eclectic thing.  I was also a deejay, an FM deejay.  Well, actually (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What, what--
Speaker 2: --they all blended together 'cause politics, the artwork which always had a political slant to it, and my deejay stuff all kind of blended in.  I liked music and--
Speaker 1: So, you played the clarinet, too, and (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I played clarinet.
Speaker 1: Were you in the band further?
Speaker 2: I was in a little rock band, but I played drums and I sang.  I didn't play my clarinet in a rock band.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's hard to do that (laughter).  The clarinet, it seems it only fits into band pretty much, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it does, it's true.
Speaker 1: --a marching band, and then, when you get out, or, or an orchestra and then--
Speaker 2: Exactly.  That's exactly right.
Speaker 1: So you were a drummer in a rock band?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was a drummer, yeah, I was pretty good.
Speaker 1: FM disc jockey, cartoonist, did you do stand-up too?
Speaker 2: I did some stand-up comedy, yep, absolutely--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], back, this is in the '70s [1970s].  This is '73 [1973].  I won a, I won a radio contest, KGFJ [KGFJ Radio; KYPA Radio] in Los Angeles.  And I got, and, and as a result of winning the little talent search, I got to open for Chaka Khan and Rufus.  That was my biggest at the Shrine Auditorium in L.A.  That was cool.  And I did a few other gigs.
Speaker 1: This is, so this is a standup comedy contest?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, it was, it was just a talent contest.  Everyone else sings (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, and yours was standup?
Speaker 2: I did standups--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --so there was hardly any other comedians, so that's how I was able to get in there.
Speaker 1: Did you have an idol in terms of the comedians that were hot in those days or--
Speaker 2: I liked Bill Cosby.  Richard Pryor, who I loved, was just too vulgar for me.  I, I just, I couldn't do his stuff.  Flip Wilson was very funny--I liked his stuff.  And I liked this guy, Franklyn Ajaye, who was really a colleague (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, that's right.
Speaker 2: --was, was a bunch of peer of mine, and actually I met him.  When they used to do the comedy club in L.A., I never was a star.  I was just an amateur, but I met a lot of good people, like David Brenner; Freddie Prinze, Sr., you know, Freddie Prinze, before, before he did 'Chico and the Man'; Jimmie Walker.  We'd all be backstage, you know, waiting to get up, you know, 'cause they were--on Monday nights, they would test out their comedy.  And they would also--it was just an open mic [microphone] nights.  Anyone can get up there.  You sign a list, and you get on there.  And (laughter) I was shaking like a leaf but, and they would console me.  And it was just, it was just, they were just a great, great, great guys.  I figured that some of the guys--his name, Fleischer [Charles Fleischer], Fleisher, Fleischer.  He eventually did the voice for Roger Rabbit.  Fleischer or Fleishman--I think it's Fleischer, he was a good guy.  But anyhow, I got to meet a lot of good people.
Story_ID: 493306
Speaker 1: I eventually had a church spiritual transformation, and I got involved with a Pentecostal church, Church of God in Christ.
Speaker 2: Now this happens around the same time, '73 [1973]?
Speaker 1: Seventy-one [1971], '70 [1970], yeah--no, '69 [1969].  Yeah, it's '70 [1970].  I got out of--
Speaker 2: Now, high school [Adolfo Camarillo High School, Camarillo, California] is '69 [1969] so you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, I graduated, that's right--no, no, strike that.  I got out of college [University of California, Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, California] in '73 [1973]--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and between '73 [1973] and '75 [1975] is when I was doing my standup comedy and stuff, trying to find myself, since I wasn't going to be in the [U.S.] Air Force.  And a good guy, a good buddy of mine, who used to--who I used to party with a lot really got involved with the (unclear) name, involved with the church.  And he invited me to a couple of his services, and I got hooked.
Speaker 2: So, this is in '75 [1975] or so?
Speaker 1: Seventy-four [1974] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Seventy-four [1974], okay.
Speaker 1: --right before I went to law school [Boston College Law School, Newton Centre, Massachusetts] here in '75 [1975], and--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --changed my whole life around.  I didn't lose my sense of humor, but I stopped doing the standup comedy.  And it just kind of, 'cause it was a really small conservative--I wouldn't say it was a storefront church.  It was a free standing church.  It wouldn't even be one-third of the size of this building--I mean, of this area.  I think the total capacity, full, was like a hundred fifty people.  I mean, you couldn't put that many people in that place.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But it was just an unbelievable transformation.  I grew up in a kind of, like I tell you in a white community.  And this is a small black church, Church of God in Christ, and, man, it was just a wonderful experience.  I met some of the almost unbelievable--I still stay in touch with them--people I've ever met in my life there.  Most of them died off, but it's a good group.
Story_ID: 493307
Speaker 1: So you got involved with the Church of God in Christ.  Now, that's a black denomination.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And we were talking off-camera about it having some roots in Chicago [Illinois] and other places, churches in Memphis [Tennessee], and around the--
Speaker 2: That, it's a, it's a--well, my family has always been involved in a church.  My mother [Marguerite Lee Walker] has not been a churchgoer.  My dad [Charles E. Walker] always--he taught me the Lord's Prayer.  You know, he was the one that would take me to church in this Methodist church.  Wherever we went, whether it was in France or Tennessee or Ohio, he'd find a church, and we'd take the family.  Going to Sunday school was important and so it was that.  So, the church was kind of like built into us--not drilled--built into us.  And, you know, and then I had, as I indicated my cousin, Genna Rae [Genna Rae McNeil].  And her father [Jesse Jai McNeil] was a very, very prominent member of the Southern Baptist church--Southern Christian Leadership Conference [SCLC], and was a good friend of Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]--not to name drop at all 'cause he was just, you know, he'd come to the house for dinner, and stuff like that.  And, like I said, an author and a scholar, and then, and he was, he was truly, you know--a lot, a lot of black ministers put doctor behind their name and they haven't.  The only, the only, only doctor they been to has been to the doctor's office (laughter) they haven't even been.  And he was a Ph.D. in theology.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Brilliant man.  Then, I have on my mother's side incredible--Larry [Larry Crowe], I'm going to tell you, man--maybe it's family.  I don't know, but the best singing I've ever heard in my life is from my Aunt Henrietta [Henrietta Lee Hairston], my mother's sister.  And she's got five sons--all my, all first cousins.  One of them is dead.  They all became ministers and they were unbelievable preachers.  And then, I was exposed to their cadence and their, just wealth of knowledge, and so they always inspired me.  You know, going to the Old Testament and telling those stories, and bringing those out always enriched me and always, and it made me always think about how--and, and it always fed and impassioned my, just my whole zeal for history and teaching, period, whether it's from the bible or American history books.  And so, I think all of that has just kind of like helped shape me.
Story_ID: 493308
Speaker 1: And then, when my friend, David [David G. Moore], who's not related to me, who I used to smoke a lot of dope with and party with--I hadn't seen him for a year, and he's just totally transformed, you know.  I follow his lead and--
Speaker 2: What was his name, David--
Speaker 1: His name is David Moore--
Speaker 2: David--
Speaker 1: --M-O-O-R-E.  I would strongly recommend you talk to him.  He's in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], and he works closely with Bishop Blake [Charles E. Blake].  As you know, the Church of God in Christ just lost its--tantamount to its pope, oh, goodness, oh (laughter) could I say--Bishop Patterson [Gilbert E. Patterson].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He died last year.  And he was like, he was the grand guy.  He was the main man.  And so, they're, they're now in the throes of trying to get a successor.  And Bishop Blake in Los Angeles is one of the heir apparents.  And my friend, David Moore, works very, very close to him.  He has two churches.  And I'm not letting any secrets out.  He would tell you the same stories about me.  We have a lot of affection for each other.
Speaker 2: So, what was it about the church that--
Speaker 1: The Church of God in Christ?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I think it's just the overall sincerity of it.  I mean it was just incredible love.  The, the elder, his name is Elder Quarles--what's his first name--Q-U-A-R-L-E-S.  He was a man--he was, he was, and when you say elder, I mean, you know, they didn't call him reverend.  They called them elders.  And he was an old man, and that's how I always pictured an elder person, an elderly person, and elder is a man with wisdom.  And he had, like yourself, big, thick brows.  And they were all, but they were furrowed.  And he had--not a scowl, and he just was very serious.  He had, had a stroke and his arm was limp.  And he, you know, he, he spoke like, out of the side of his mouth, and he had, and he was--but he had that Bible.  And I'm going to tell you--you are just captivated by his preaching.  He could turn to any page and just, and didn't even read.  He would just cite it (laughter).  And, and he, whether it--it wasn't this Sunday.  Some preachers save their best messages for Sunday or Saturday.  Every time they had service, there was something there.  And, you know, he chastised you, he scolded you from the pulpit, and, but he loved you.  And, and the whole church just kind of like had this ambiance of zeal.  That's the best way I can say it.  It was zeal and passion for Christ.  And you just, were just immersed in your mission as a Christian, what you had to do for humanity.  So, it was the zeal, it was the passion for humanity, the love they showed us and then, the real disciple that I, that I lost when I gave up the opportunity to go to the Air Force Academy [United States Air Force Academy, Colorado].  But, somehow, I found at this old church, and it was--now, I'm glad I went through it.  But, you know, at the time, 'cause that's what I needed, but I would never go to a church like that 'cause it was just rigid.  Women had to wear dresses, you know, you had to, you know, you had to, you had to wear, you had, you couldn't cross your legs.  You had to sit straight almost like a Muslim.  The--I mean there was a lot of shouting, you know, people passing out, hardcore preaching, but, you know, everyone was just so sincere.  It was really, really--that's what captivated me, I think, more than anything else.
Speaker 2: So, it was this sincerity and the social interaction then?
Speaker 1: Social interaction and it was just the lifestyle.  I, I, I can only equate to, like Quakers (laughter).  It was not a cult, but it was just a very, very--it brought you in.  I mean, people get roped in somehow, but this was just sincere for me.  And then, when I came to Boston [Massachusetts], they gave me a name and number of the preacher out here.  And when I got to Boston, I went to the Church of God in Christ and in 1975.  And assistant pastor then is now my pastor now (laughter).  And, you know, thirty years later, forty years later almost--is that right--thirty years later, thirty-two years later, and his assistant pastor just got appointed president of Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia].  And then, there were three of us.  His name is [HistoryMaker] Robert Franklin who's also from Chicago [Illinois].  But, anyway, it's just--we all--that's how we got connected to the Church of God in Christ.
Story_ID: 493309
Speaker 1: So, let me go back over the chronology just a minute just to make sure we're straight.  In '73 [1973], you came out of college at University of Santa Barbara [University of California, Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, California]?  Is that--okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It--University of California at Santa Barbara.
Speaker 1: Okay.  California, Santa Barbara.  And then you did some standup.  You were doing your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Christian standup thing until you got involved in the Church of God in Christ and--
Speaker 2: I did standup, I did standup--actually, I did standup through college, '71 [1971] to '73 [1973].  And it was, it was cool, I was good.  I ain't going to lie.  I can't remember 'cause I was stoned most of the time.  But I, I remember, I'm having them rolling in the aisles.  I remember doing some outrageous stuff.
Speaker 1: Did you have a routine?  I mean, that you, that you had?  I mean you had a definite routine, right?
Speaker 2: I had a routine.  I had voices.  I did cartoon voices, you know.  And I would just put them in, in compromising situations--let's just put that way.  And (laughter), it was some funny stuff.  It's still funny.  I did impersonations of John Wayne, you know, and in compromising positions, you know.  I did stuff off of TV shows, parodies like off of--what was the name of that with David Carradine, you know?
Speaker 1: 'Kung Fu,' yeah.
Speaker 2: 'Kung Fu,' yes, I did some stuff off 'Kung Fu' you know.  It was some funny stuff, you know.  And it was like Franklyn [Franklyn Ajaye] and Johnny [Johnny Carson] stuff, quite frankly, very much like his stuff, and just college life.  And it was just a very, very timely and, you know, it was, it was good.  I had a little following--not to boast, but someone came two years ago and called me up.  And we went to a--had, had some wine, went to, went out to drink, and took her to a little bar, a little disco, and we were dancing, laughing about things.  And she told me that her, her baby sister, who was just a kid, still has a blown-up picture of me in concert in her bedroom.  I don't understand the--it's, you know.
Speaker 1: Did you ever make an album or anything?
Speaker 2: No, I never made an album, no, no, no, but I had a rich experience.  It was a different life of mine.
Story_ID: 493310
Speaker 1: Now, but you really got serious about school.  Well, it says here you graduated summa cum laude (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --or magna cum laude.
Speaker 2: Magna cum laude, yeah, 3.47 [grade point average].
Speaker 1: Yeah, from the University of [University of California, Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, California]--yeah, okay.  So, what were you focused on when you graduated?  Did you--
Speaker 2: I was going--I wanted to go to law school.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: So, you taught high school though first?
Speaker 2: I taught high school, I taught high school before I went to law school [Boston College Law School, Newton Centre, Massachusetts].  And it was during that little transition between '73 [1973] and '75 [1975] before I found myself when I was teaching high school.  I have a kind of a young appearance.  I was doing the comedy stuff in L.A. [Los Angeles, California].  And some of the kids would see me on stage and would come down to these concerts.  And then, they'd want me to perform in class.  And, you know, it, it really kind of, you know, I'm trying to be a professional.  I'm trying to be taken seriously as I'm teaching, you know, reading and English and, you know, you know, it really was upsetting.  So, I applied to law school again.  I--that's when I applied to law school, took the LSA- took the LSAT.  And I, 'cause I, and, and then, and then I became a Christian.  And then, I left it all behind.
Story_ID: 493311
Speaker 1: Then you, you were accepted to Boston U [sic.] for--
Speaker 2: Boston College Law School [Newton Centre, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Boston College Law School, okay.  This was in '75 [1975]?
Speaker 2: Seventy-five [1975].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, why the passion for law--I mean of all things?
Speaker 2: Well, I think it goes back to Mr. Wozniak [Ed Wozniak (ph.)] quite frankly.  He just told me what I could not do--that meeting we had and he had that graph.  It was, it was a--I was fighting some incredible defiance--this inferiority thing.  And, you know, I wanted to go to law school and wanted to--people to listen to me.  I wanted to represent people.  I felt I had, and then people were--I would, I would draw upon what people were telling my family, my friends, and my standup comedy, and through my, you know.  It was more oratory stuff.  I used to participate in speech contests and stuff like that.  I got some trophies.  They'd say, "Yeah, you'd be a great lawyer."  You know, people don't know what a lawyer is.  "It's a--you'd be a great lawyer, you'd be a great lawyer."  So, it just started feeling on me--I mean, rolling on me.  I, I was not much of a reader.  And so, I, I stayed away from the thought about law school.  And I actually started talking to people about law school and how demanding it was.  And I'd say, yeah, but I, I, I got in and, and it was rough.  It was--law school was tough, had five very tough subjects.  And, but, oh, I worked in the D.A.'s office.  That's what I left out--I left out that very critical, important part.  Before I went to law school, you know, I don't think it's even on my resume.  Before I went to law school, I told you I taught high school.  But before I taught high school, my first job out of college [University of California, Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, California], I was a long distance telephone operator (laughter).  And I got a speeding ticket once, and I went to defend it, and I beat it.  And I went to the D.A.'s office and because I was, I was, I was, I had to go from Santa Barbara [California] all the way back to Oxnard [California] to fight this ticket.  And I started thinking about law again.  And then, I asked if I could, if they had any jobs there.  And it, it just--timing is everything.  And that's when the D.A., I met the D.A.  He had just gotten elected.  And he brought me in as his intern.  And so, I worked for the Suffolk County--I mean, sorry, the Ventura County [California] district attorney, C. Stanley Trom, T-R-O-M, C. Stanley Trom--I'll always remember him.  And he put me in an office.  I became an in-house investigator.  And, and I did that for one year.  And then, I, and then I taught high school.  And then, I applied to law school.
Speaker 1: So, this is the Ventura County prosecutor's office?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And that's what kind of inspired me to go to law school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, being around the lawyers, I mean you could see where you could so some of the things that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, oh, absolutely.  I--there were cases that I investigated and worked up that they would take the evidence I found.  And I saw them put it to use and convicting some guys--armed robbery, you know, some larceny cases, drunk driving.  I would get the police records and the reports, and sit in the offices and help break it down for the D.A. and, and it was just fun--watch them put that thing together.
Story_ID: 493312
Speaker 1: Boston College Law School [Newton Centre, Massachusetts], you said it was tough but--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was very--it was tough.
Speaker 1: Was it tougher than you thought it was going to be?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was tougher than I thought it was going to be.  It was tough (laughter) because--well, it was tough because, substantively, it was tough.  But daggone, it's coming from California to Boston, Massachusetts where rent was high, you know.  I just got saved, so I wasn't having sex anymore (laughter).  I didn't, I didn't have a car.  I wasn't--I left all my stereo and all my music there.  And now, I got--they have the nerve to have snow out here.  I mean, it was just an unbelievable cultural shock.  I mean, I, I--the only way I--the further seaside I'd been, I maybe visit New York [New York] once or twice.  But I used to, I was always enamored with the East.  And my mom [Marguerite Lee Walker] grew up in Ohio and she used to say, she's from back east--aw, shoot.  So, I would say, Ohio was back east and (laughter), how will you know?  Well, certainly, east of Ohio, but when we flew over Ohio, and made it all the way to Boston, I said, this is back east, this is really east.  So, I had no knowledge of anybody, so I had to start off on my own.  All these little defiant things--I'm going to be Chuck Walker [HistoryMaker Charles Walker] and not Chuck Walker, Jr.  I'm going to blaze my own trail and not be the colonel's [Charles E. Walker] son.  It really, really, really came to past.  I mean, it was more than just verbiage.  It was a reality 'cause no one knew me out here.  And I was always Chuckie, Jr. and Chuck Walker, Jr. and Colonel Walker's son, and all those other good things.  And there was a nice comfort zone that kind of surrounded me, but as I--when I said no to the Air Force Academy [United States Air Force Academy, Colorado], and then ended up going to junior college [Moorpark College, Moorpark, California].  And, you know, I was still under the California umbrella, and Dad was still pretty well-known in the area.  But when I made that big move, it was quite a, it was a 'Manchild in the Promised Land' [Claude Brown] type thing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was a new adventure.
Story_ID: 493313
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  We're interviewing [HistoryMaker] Charles Walker.  This is a second day continuation.  This is September the 12th [2007], continuing an interview we started on September 9th, right?  Okay, all right, the 10th--
Speaker 2: Tenth, September 10th, Monday (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tenth, right, the 10th.  Okay, now, we had you in Boston College Law School [Newton Centre, Massachusetts].  And what were--were there any--did you have any mentors there, any professors that really took an interest in your in those days?  This is 1975.
Speaker 2: Seventy-five [1975].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, bear in mind that I'd, I, I had worked two years before I went to law school.  I think I told you that, right, so I--
Speaker 1: Right.  You were teaching in California.
Speaker 2: I was teaching, and also working in the district attorney's office as an investigator.  And then, I went to church and got saved.  And, and that was the last eight months before I applied to law school.  And was there any, was there a teacher that had an interest in me who I would--I guess, you're looking for a mentor.  There wasn't so much one singular first year law professor that stood out, I mean during my first year.  The dean of the law school, however, was, was extraordinarily supportive.  And I, I might have mentioned that here I came in from California.  And, you know, I used to--I was enamored by the East Coast.  And I should think, I used to boast to my friends--yeah, I'm from the East--I'm from Ohio (laughter).  I'm from back east, and, and hang on my mother's [Marguerite Lee Walker] coattails.  And my dad [Charles E. Walker] was from Michigan--I said, yeah, my family's from back east.  I don't know, it's something about the back east that always fascinated me.  I remember when the Kennedys came in town, when Bobby Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy] came in town, I may have mentioned that, and how my dad greeted him at the airport--Bobby Kennedy, before he got assassinated two days later.  But, you know, seeing Massachusetts license plates were big deal for me in California.
Story_ID: 493314
Speaker 1: Dean Richard Huber [Richard G. Huber] was a phenomenal dean.  I entered law school [Boston College Law School, Newton Centre, Massachusetts]--I think there were two hundred and maybe sixty students in the first entering class.  Twenty-two of them were black.  And to put it in context, the second year's class had exactly three blacks in it.  My class had twenty-two.
Speaker 2: Now, how do you explain that?  What was there--?
Speaker 1: Well, this was '75 [1975].  In '73 [1973] or '70 [1970], yeah, in '73 [1973], '74 [1974], there was a guy named DeFunis [Marco DeFunis] who brought a case against the University of Washington School of Law [Seattle, Washington].  And it was the very first case challenging these affirmative action plans, which were just barely getting off the ground, to try and get more blacks into law school.  Chief justice and me just had a conversation about Earl Warren.  Earl Warren was an amazing [U.S.] Supreme Court justice.  Besides, as I told you, he being vice presidential candidate to Dewey [Thomas E. Dewey], the governor, he--but anyway, I'm going back--too much history.  But anyway, in 1968, he really was pushing more blacks to go to law school.  They created this CLEO [Council on Legal Education Opportunity] program.  And Dean Huber was very, very adamant about getting more, more black folks into law school.  And they brought that--there was this one guy who--it was the first time you heard the phrase, reverse discrimination because a lot of law schools had little seats set aside for black folks.  And when this one guy, a white guy complained, named DeFunis, that's when they, among all law schools, put their stops on it but--
Speaker 2: Now, that was the time of Allan Bakke, too, right, when they--
Speaker 1: No, Allan Bakke happened--that preceded Allan Bakke.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay--DeFunis.
Speaker 1: But his case was mooted.  You know, moot means, it means that if a, if they make it, if they render a decision, it's not going to do any good because the case in controversy is all over, you know.  So, you know, if, if someone is sentenced to death and he's executed, and you go to (laughter), you go to court to challenge the constitutionality of his execution, if he's already dead, you know, it's moot because, you know, it's not going to, it's not going--what's, what's a victory for him if, if he's dead already?  So--
Speaker 2: Okay.  Can you spell DeFunis for us real quick?
Speaker 1: D-E-F-U-N-I-S.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, I'm blocking on his first name and I hadn't--I didn't really prepare myself to go through this part of it.  But anyway, DeFunis--I think it's Alfred or Albert DeFunis [sic.], I can't remember--brought this claim and challenging the constitutionality of the Fourteenth Amendment of having set aside spots for black students.  He didn't bring a class action which hurt his case.  And, and what happened, he won essentially because the court--he filed an injunction to enjoin the school from denying him admission based on his race.  And he--and so rather than scuttle the affirmative action program, the school admitted him.  And the case went all the way up to the United States Supreme Court.  And by the time it was heard, he was graduating from law school, so the Supreme Court mooted the case essentially.  And so, it didn't really address the issue of whether race could be used as a criterion in admissions until Bakke [Regents of the University of California v. Bakke, 1978] came around.  And so, you asked me the question, why did you have--why was your class--how do you explain three in the previous class and twenty-two in my classes because that little grace period (laughter), they were admitting black, there were admitting black folks right and left.
Story_ID: 493315
Speaker 1: After this, I'm going to go teach in the program by a dear friend of mine, law school--I call him a classmate, even though he went to a different law school.  Because in 1975, there was an incredible influx of black students going through, not just Boston College [Boston College Law School, Newton Centre, Massachusetts], but Boston University [Boston University School of Law, Boston, Massachusetts], Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts], Suffolk [Suffolk University Law School, Boston, Massachusetts], New England [New England School of Law, Boston, Massachusetts]--you name it, all the law schools throughout the country.  And so, this class of '78 [1978] has some incredible people coming through it.  [HistoryMaker] Charles Ogletree is a class of '78 [1978].  It's David Hall, who I hope you get a chance to see, was the first black dean of a Northeast Law School, Northeastern School of Law [Northeastern University School of Law, Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: Tall David, yeah, I know him (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, tall David, class of '78 [1978].  Ozell Hudson [Ozell Hudson, Jr.], a lot of federal judges.  What's his name, head of American Express [American Express Company], Chenault [Kenneth Chenault]--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --class of '78 [1978], all these black folks--
Speaker 2: Ken Chenault, yeah.
Speaker 1: --came into law school, class, and entered in '75 [1975] and graduated in '78 [1978].  And it was because they opened up the doors, not to just put any black folks in there, but, you know, they, they put us in there.  And then, they took, they took people who did well, had good academic records, maybe didn't do as well in the LSAT.  And that was my case and they admitted us, and so we had a big entering class.  And so, that might be a partial explanation for that.  Did you--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so how long did it last in the--I mean in this window (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, it lasted for a couple of years.  You had, you know, good entering classes, you know.  My class was twenty-two, but, you know, there was never less than ten or fifteen for, you know, over a decade.  And now that, you know, but they've always been playing and tossing around this term of affirmative action, using race as a criteria for admission.  And, you know, and in, in many ways, the conservatives have won that battle because they have so much tarnished the notion of race that even though in this recent case, Grutter [Grutter v. Bollinger, 2003], this Michigan case, even though the [U.S.] Supreme Court has finally said you can use race as a criteria, along with a multitude of other factors, law schools, graduate schools, undergraduate schools, and now public schools are very, very skiddish about set-aside programs to, to redress affirmative action.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And just to cut to the chase and wrap it up into a nutshell.
Story_ID: 493316
Speaker 1: Did you choose to focus on any particular branch of law or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Law?  No, I think the branch of law kind of like focused in on me.  I was, I went to law school [Boston College Law School, Newton Centre, Massachusetts] ironically, Larry [Larry Crowe]--it was, I  wanted to be an entertainment lawyer.  A few friends that were in high school [Adolfo Camarillo High School, Camarillo, California] that were good college basketball players--I mean high school basketball players and good baseball players.  And back then, they were making $150,000 coming out of high school in '68 [1968].  That was--nowadays that's a find but, you know, they were making them goo-gobs of money, and I wanted to represent them.  Jamaal Wilkes was a classmate of mine.  Sam "Bam" Cunningham was--I went to high school in Santa Barbara [California], he went to high school in Santa Barbara [Santa Barbara High School].  We competed against them.  But, anyway, I wanted to become an entertainment lawyer, plus I had my own little aspirations of becoming a standup comic and a cartoonist and, you know, representing myself.  Just going to make millions.
Story_ID: 493317
Speaker 1: I ended up somehow in the public sector.  I flunked the bar after I, after graduating [from Boston College Law School, Newton Centre, Massachusetts].  It took me two attempts to pass that daggone thing.  That humbled me (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is the Massachusetts bar?
Speaker 1: Yeah, the Massachusetts bar.  I also took the Pennsylvania bar.  I, I passed them, and it did, it really worked out well (laughter).  I clerked for judges and which, which is pretty prestigious.  You know, I--
Speaker 2: Which ones did you clerk for?
Speaker 1: I clerked for Judge Fred Brown [Frederick L. Brown]--to me, I think one of the most brilliant judges to grace any bench, probably in the country.  But I can own--my, my sphere of influences are here in Massachusetts, probably one of the most brilliant judges ever to sit on a bench in, in Massachusetts, Fred Brown, and he was my mentor and still is.
Speaker 2: Now, this is a black judge?
Speaker 1: He's a black judge.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The superior court [Massachusetts Superior Court], I clerked in the superior court for Chief Justice Lynch, James Lynch [James P. Lynch, Jr.], also a brilliant judge, a white judge, but he was brilliant, he was really good.  And that was, those experiences just vaulted my confidence to such a stratosphere.  It really made me feel like I can conquer the world.
Story_ID: 493318
Speaker 1: But we're getting back to--I'm getting a little ahead of myself. Going back to law school [Boston College Law School, Newton Centre, Massachusetts], you asked me about who was a mentor and, you know, it's Dean Richard Huber [Richard G. Huber]--was just incredibly committed to getting more and  more black folks into that law school.  And leadership, when they say the leadership comes to the top, it is.  It's, it's one of those things.  He--you know, I ran out of money (laughter) and I, I said, "Are there any grants or loans I can apply for?"  And he says, "Yeah, there's a presidential scholarship."  And I said, "Okay, where's the application?"  "Oh, it's--you just go to the front desk."  And he had written a check, a personal check out of his own checking account, and that was the presidential scholarship.  I mean, that's how--and, and he did that with a number of people.  We found that out years and years later.  On his retirement, we did a standup, you know, open mic [microphone], you know, people talking about Dean Huber.  And a lot of jokes and a lot of--but when people started giving their personal stories, you realized, you know, 'cause he said, "Don't tell anybody about that."  He did it for classes of people.  He even dipped into his own pocket, just to make sure we got through that damn law school.  Sometimes I water up when I think about that guy.  He's, he's still around, but he's, he's way up in age but, you know, it's, it's folks like that.
Speaker 2: How do you spell his name?  It's a--
Speaker 1: H-U-B-E-R, Richard Huber.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But, you know, he, you know, he was the dean of the law school.  He fathered--he followed Father Robert Drinan, another pillar, and did it--one that was--this white man who was really dedicated to redressing that damn racial, racial issue, particularly in the area of law.  Even Thurgood Marshall, Charles Hamilton Houston--they, they knew that.  I mean, there are some, so many ways you can skin a cat.  You can, you can get to the race issue through medicine.  You can get through it through sociology and training up social workers.  But the law, that's the citadel.  That's the foundation.  That's--the law is a, is a combination of social policy, social mores, public policy--all of that comb--and these are, these are orders by which of conduct which were supposed to abide by.  And so, you know, and, and the dean of the law school really wanted to make sure black folks had an active voice in it, and made sure that we are in law school.  So, I--that was one of my biggest influences--Dean Richard Huber.
Story_ID: 493319
Speaker 1: Now, at the time were you--I mean, did you envision your--now, you thought of yourself as becoming an entertainment lawyer representing athletes and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and you want the legal aspects of entertainment and sports and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But had you thought at all about civil rights law and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: I--actually, I did think about it, but I thought about it from a negative standpoint. I thought, I said, no, man, I'm not going to get cornered into that, you know, stereotyped into that, you know, because I mean, you expect a black lawyer is going to--he's going to go in there and represent people in the ghetto and represent criminal defendants and free them.  And, you know, I mean, forget that stuff, you know, I'm not going to be a lawyer, I'm not going to be any civil rights lawyer.  And you must be kidding me.  I got greater fish to fry.  I want to make some money.  And, and just--I'm going to tell you, Larry [Larry Crowe], it's, you know, this is a great stuff 'cause it makes me really realize what happens.  It, it almost puts logic behind some of things I did.  I worked, after clerking for Judge Brown [Frederick L. Brown], my first job was in this attorney general's office.  And a good buddy of mine was an assistant attorney general.  His name was Craig Browne [Craig R. Browne], brother.  Craig, (laughter).  Went into a bar right down near Faneuil Hall [Boston, Massachusetts], a night club.  It was, yeah, it was a Hooligans--Houlihan's [Houlihan's Old Place, Boston, Massachusetts], I'm sorry, we used to call it Hooligans, Houlihan's.  And this was--Jesus, this was, forgive me, Lord Jesus.  This had to be in 1981 right after I finished clerking.  And I, I represented the Alcoholic Beverages Control Commission.  And Craig Browne had gone into that bar with a friend, a white friend of his, a classmate of his, to get some drinks.  You know, the white guy can--got on in that, but they stopped Craig because he was wearing jeans, you know, black designer jeans.  And his friend was already in the--mainly among the crowd.  And he came back to the door and said, "What, what are you doing?  Why aren't you here?"  He says, "Oh, I, I can't come in because I'm wearing this."  He said, "What are you talking about?"  It wasn't because he was wearing designer jeans.  And Craig demanded to see the manager, and the manager--and he says, and this bozo says, "I am the manager."  And he, and he says, "You're too stupid to be the manager," and he punched out Craig.  Blood broke his nose, threw him down on the sidewalk--this is a, a bouncer right there at this bar.  And Craig, an assistant attorney general now, a black lawyer, and this guy, you know, he's not wearing a badge--I'm a lawyer.  You know, he's a regular black man and, you know, a Negro, as far as this guy was.  And he, instead of pressing--he pressed charges, and then he went after their liquor license.  And that's how I got involved.  And that was my first taste of a civil rights type of a violation.  And, Larry, I mean, it was--he was my boy, for one, and he was a black lawyer for another, and there were only four assistant attorney generals, black assistant attorney generals.  I said, they're going to attack us--I mean, come on.  And people said I was screaming in the court.  You can hear us in chambers 'cause they were trying to settle the case.  I went after those, I went after those guys.  Something--it just, it just bubbled up in me.  And, then, the judge--oh, oh, the Boston Licensing Board [Liquor Licensing Board] yanked their license for like seven days.  Great!  That was great 'cause it's like five thousand, four thousand dollars gross receipts for liquor.  I said, wow, this is a powerful tool--it's, that liquor license stuff.  Civil rights violation of the public accommodations laws.  So that got me very interested in the stuff--
Story_ID: 493320
Speaker 1: And then, even the trial court judge reduced the sentence from seven days to three.  Now, you know, everyone would say, okay, that's cool.  I was mad at that trial judge.  I said, "No, you can't," and I, and I talked to the attorney general.  He let me appeal the case.  And before I appealed the case, I had cases.  I wrote this memo, and I gave it to the trial judge.  "Before you let me appeal this case, I'm gonna--the, the court is going to spank you because you're supposed to defer to this--excuse me I'm sorry--to this licensing board [Liquor Licensing Board] and their penalties."  And he reversed himself, but it was because I was so impassioned about this thing.  And so, I knew there was some civil rights blood in me.  And I'm going to tell you, Larry [Larry Crowe], it comes right back down to my daddy [Charles E. Walker].  And he's standing in the breach for, you know, Bill Terry [Roger "Bill" Terry], he, he, as a Tuskegee Airman, and ready to go get court-martialed.  I guess, if it's in you, it's just in you.  And that, and, and it's been in me ever since.  And when the Governor Weld [William F. Weld] made me chairman of the MCAD [Massachusetts Commission Against Discrimination]--oh, man, I had a lot of fun in that, in that agency.  Oh, it was a lot of work, but we really spanked a lot of people for discrimination.  But, yeah, so civil rights, it kind of like came to me.  It wasn't, it wasn't something I, I went after.  And when I realized it really was, it really--I could really blend this passion for the law to really help in this thing, this fear of discrimination just a little bit.  It really, really, it really was a good thing for me.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, you worked as an assistant state's attorney (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Attorney general, right.
Speaker 2: --attorney general for--
Speaker 1: For Francis Bellotti [Francis X. Bellotti]--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --phenomenal attorney general.
Speaker 2: That, okay.
Speaker 1: From 19--I worked for him from, let's see, '81 [1981] to '87 [1987] for six years.
Story_ID: 493321
Speaker 1: Tell us about the Roxbury Defenders Committee.
Speaker 2: Okay.  That was just one of my civic volunteer groups.  I was on the board of directors for the Roxbury Defenders Committee.  It is, in and of itself, and I had really little to do with the history of it, but you should talk to this guy named Wally Sherwood [Wallace Sherwood].  It was the first all-black owned legal criminal defense, a black law office that represented indigent criminal defendants.  And, and they fed off of court-appointed work and, and so, they really were, they represented black defendants in district court and were tried as crimes who couldn't afford lawyers.  And they, and I became--they invited me to become part of the board of directors.  I eventually, after the state passed the law that brought all these legal services organizations, these splintered or legal services type organizations under one state umbrella, the Committee for Public Counsel Services.  You didn't have to join them, but, you know, we--our board of directors voted to become a part of the state.  They would subsume all the personnel and civil service responsibilities and it gave all the employees, you know, benefits and everything else.  We thought it was a good thing and so, we gave up the ghost and gave up our independence and maintained a certain autonomy by--as being an advisory group.  And we owned the building that we were in in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts].  So, that's--I was simply an administrator through the board of directors and essentially, and eventually became the head of the executive board of directors (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  Is there a particular case that came through there that comes to mind that you--
Speaker 2: No, because we really didn't oversee as many cases as we did.  We're making sure that the thing ran, and ran effectively.
Story_ID: 493322
Speaker 1: Now, at the same time, now you're teaching, too, according to the notes here, you taught at Suffolk University [Suffolk University Law School, Boston, Massachusetts], taught law, and also at New England School of Law [Boston, Massachusetts] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I taught a lot of--boy, I'm just an old guy, I taught, yeah, I taught, I taught full time at the New England School of Law.  I left the attorney general's office to become a full time law professor.  Prior to that time, I used to teach in summers.  I used to teach, teach at night.  I used to teach legal research and writing.  And, you know, I'm, I'm running into people now, who used to be my law students, are now prosecutors, judges, partners at major law firms.  It's kind of funny--makes you feel pretty old.  But yeah, I was a legal researcher and writing professor, and then in 1987 or '88 [1988], '87 [1987], I was invited to join the full time faculty at the New England School of Law.  And there, I taught torts and administrative law.
Story_ID: 493323
Speaker 1: Now, I have a note here that you wrote the Liquor Control Act or some part of the Liquor Control Act in '86 [1986]?
Speaker 2: I didn't write part of the act.  What I did is I wrote, I wrote an article that I talked about liquor license enforcement 'cause that's what I, that's what I specialized in.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I carved out that little specialty, but I, I'd written laws.  I'd written some laws later on, but not the Liquor Control Act.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that was an article about the Liquor Control Act?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah, I was on a panel and had to talk about that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What, is it significant?  I mean, is it something that we need to talk about it or is it--
Speaker 2: No, not necessarily--no, no, that wasn't a major, major piece of my--other than the fact that it really got me interested in administrative law, and made me realize the significance and the power that a liquor license has.  Just as an aside, you know, I, I, at that, through that article, I uncovered some interesting history.  I didn't think I was a much--I never really was a history student until I really got to Boston [Massachusetts].  And then I really--and the history was just fascinating.  And it was like 351 cities and towns in this state, and each one has its own licensing board and/or board of selectman or a mayor, you know,  And, and these are the people that dispense liquor licenses through the state ABC [sic. ABCC], Alcoholic Beverages Control Commission.  But there's only one liquor licensing board in the state who appoints--whose chairman is appointed by the governor of Massachusetts, and that's Boston.  And so, I did a little research and said, why, Boston?  Why is the governor appointing this little position, chairman of the Boston, this liquor license board [Liquor Licensing Board]?  Why in Boston?  Why, why the governor?  And it was because of the Irish.  And, and the Yankees had pulled all the power away from the Irish.  This is the mayor and these liquor licenses were powerful.  And so, they vested that authority in the governor.  And the governor, I think, maybe to this day, is still appointing the chair of the Boston, Boston Licensing Board.  They may have changed that law, but it emanated from a racist thing against the Irish.  I thought that was pretty interesting.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, it was designed to where the governor would appoint an Irishman into the spot, or someone other, someone other than (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, no, no, he, he would say wouldn't appoint an Irishman to the spot--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --because Boston was controlled by the Irish.  They were second, they were second class--
Speaker 1: Both of the governor--I see, so governor, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were second class citizens.  They weren't the mainstream white folks.  They were the, they were the Negroes of the white folks and, you know, they were hated by the Yankees.  And so, instead of letting them have all the power, and say, they controlled the voting and they controlled precincts and stuff like that.
Speaker 1: So, let the governor appoint the liquor licensing commissioner for Boston, yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, he would appoint whoever he wanted throughout the state and so, he didn't have, he wasn't, he wasn't, he wasn't restricted to Boston.  He just, it took the control away--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --from the Irish in Boston 'cause the liquor license was a very, very powerful political tool, and so the governor would appoint him.
Speaker 1: That's interesting, okay.  Now, let's see.  So, okay, now, it says here, you're also editor, that you joined in 1990, you joined the editorial board of the Massachusetts Law Review.
Speaker 2: That's right, wow, gosh.  Yep, I was associate editor for a couple of years.  And that was just a nice little spot to the Mass Bar Association [Massachusetts Bar Association] and print out a magazine.  Any time you publish scholarly articles, you know, it's published in the, in the Mass Bar--you can publish it in the magazines.  It's a journal and I was on the board of directors--board of editors for the, for the Mass Bar, so that was pretty good.
Story_ID: 493324
Speaker 1: Tell me about the Massachusetts Commission Against Discrimination.  Now, you were, you served with that organization for six years--first, as commissioner, and later as chairman, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think that's where I really carved a lot of my teeth.  People kind of freeze frame me based upon what I did at the, at the MCAD.  I have a lot of history before that, but something about I was in the news a lot, depressed a lot, and not looking for it, but it just happened.  It's the, it's the premier, and the second oldest--I want to--in some circles, people would say the oldest anti-discrimination state agency in the country.  It's charged in overseeing anti-discrimination laws in the areas of employment, housing, and public accommodations.  And established in 1945, I believe or '44 [1944], which when you think of it, was pretty significant.  That's like twenty years before--I mean, ten years before Brown v. Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954].  And you had a real--it's almost an acerbic tradition of segregation in this country.  And you had, even in Massachusetts, you had a lot of discrimination.  And so for the mayor, Maurice Tobin [Maurice J. Tobin]--I mean, mayor--the governor, Maurice Tobin, committed some state funds to this federal fair employment practices act [Civil Rights Act of 1964, Title VII] which had been defunded by [U.S.] Congress.  And it was originally established to stop discrimination in the employment arena, at least to address it a little bit, through the Fourteenth Amendment and equal protection clauses.  And they codified it for states by making a fair employment practices act--Congress did.  They had some money behind it and to give states the incentive to bring this fair employment practices law into fruition.  And, like I said around 1944, they defunded it.  And Maurice Tobin stepped up the plate and says, oh, no, no, no, this is very important.  And he donated--I mean, he allocated money or appropriated money to keep, to maintain its continued existence.  And over the years, all the way up through the, up to the '70s [1970s], its, its jurisdictional base was expanded to include public accommodations laws, you know, can't--where you can't be denied a right to sit in a restaurant or something like that, and housing discrimination.  It's called a Fair Employment Practices Agency or FEPA, F-E-P-A.  And then, they had fair housing, a FHAP agency, F-H-A-P, Fair Housing Act [sic. Fair Housing Assistance Program]--I forget what everything stood for.  But, anyway, prohibiting discrimination in housing as well.  Anyway, despite that history, I was, I was commissioner and in 1994, and one of the reasons I wanted my interview here was that I selected this venue to be sworn in by the governor, and right upstairs, in 1994.  It was such a stressful time.
Story_ID: 493325
Speaker 1: Just pause a second here, and go back to the history.  Now, why is the African Meeting House [Boston, Massachusetts] of such significance to you, and why do you think it's important that you be sworn in here?
Speaker 2: Well, William Lloyd Garrison, Frederick Douglass--I mean this is where the birthplace of the whole abolitionist movement, was right here.  It had the Robert School--I mean the Abiel Smith School [Boston, Massachusetts] was here.  The first black organized church in the United States was here.  And it's right here in Beacon Hill [Boston, Massachusetts]--a lot of indentured slaves, called them indentured servants, who worked with [U.S.] Merchant Marines and everyone else, here on Beacon Hill.  They had their own little places to stay, and while they're serving these people, and this was their church.  They organized this church.  There was so much racism in Boston [Massachusetts].  Black kids couldn't go safely to school, so they put, they collapsed everything, and they brought all their black kids to this place, and this is where the school came.  And it was also the place I just, you know, where the movie 'Glory' is based, where the 54th Regiment [54th Massachusetts Volunteer Infantry Regiment] was in- inducted, you know, that's where people signed up to go to the Civil War (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is this where they were mustered in--they were mustered in here?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were mustered in here, yeah, yes, they were mustered in here.  And, and, you know, some of the most unbelievable abolitionist speeches were here, and Frederick Douglass especially.  So, I just thought it would just be, it would be a great venue.  If I'm going to get sworn in beyond the State House [Massachusetts State House, Boston, Massachusetts], I'd rather get sworn in right here.  It was just beautiful.  My aunt, who's since passed, came.  She's quite a gospel singer, and people talked about this still to this day.  Ha, my Aunt Henrietta [Henrietta Lee Hairston].  You know, I asked my friend of mine--actually, a colleague, a church member, who plays piano, and he would accompany her, and he didn't show up.  And so, she just got on up there, and without even a microphone, she sang, you know, 'How Great Thou Art.'  And, Larry [Larry Crowe], the place--it, it put you right back to where it was.  It had to be back in the 1800s, no microphones, and you could just feel the walls just trembling.  And she, (singing) "How great thou art, how great," and I mean it was just oh, man (laughter), they would hold on to their chairs.  And there wasn't just a dry eye in the place 'cause you really felt like you were at a place, you, you just felt history.  It just came, it just float all over you, man.  And that really ignited me in a way that I can, I will never forget.  [HistoryMaker] Charles Ogletree, who I just mentioned, officiated over the ceremony.  The governor was here.  The chief of police was here--just all the dignitaries.  It was just an amazing event, put together on a shoestring budget, but people just wanted to be a part of it.  And, you know, I had some relatives here.  And anyway, it really colored my administration as being, you know, a new commissioner, 'cause you usually don't get sworn--you don't swear in commissioners, you know.  It's just a little jive job, you know, you don't, you know, you might swear in a judge, you know, a judge will ask so, you know, for the family apparently.  No, I said, I wanted, I wanted to make this big.  I wanted, you know, I wanted to bring civil rights into the fore and it really had that effect.
Story_ID: 493326
Speaker 1: I'm thinking here as you're describing this, this feeling.  And I was wondering if this is what--and I hate to put it like this, but I wonder if this is how white people feel, being sworn in, in [U.S.] Congress or something (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: This is, this is where their ancestors did these things.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And we've been cut off from all that.  And I know that some people might think--well, black people, you know, some black folks will say, we're just as patriotic as white people and stuff.  But there's a difference, isn't it, between where your ancestors did something and where somebody else's did something.
Speaker 2: No, I, I wouldn't narrow down just black and white, but it really is.  I mean, this is September 12th.  This really is ground, our ground zero.  This is where it really did ignite because, you know, it wasn't just black people--I mean, it was our first church and everything else, but it was a white abolitionist that came here [African Meeting House, Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Well, you mentioned Garrison [William Lloyd Garrison] and all those, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Garrison even printed his hundreds of issues of papers.  And, you know, he, and, and he brings sterling speakers here--black and white abolitionists all over the place.  And then, you know, over the years, it had an incredible force.  This was a magnet for just progressive thought in political activism and--
Speaker 1: So, you got a women's movement takes place.
Speaker 2: Women--
Speaker 1: Yeah, march (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think there was women's suffrage--certainly was addressed here, a lot of things.  So, yeah, this was, this is, this is an exciting place.  They had weddings here and funerals here.  It was, it was very much a community forum.  And the new executive, the executive director, Beverly, Beverly, the executive director of the board of directors.  How could--oh, Beverly, please forgive me.  I just wrote a sterling recommendation for her.  Anyway, she's really done a phenomenal job in bringing all the culture and--Beverly Morgan-Welch--in really bringing that to the fore.  I mean, I'm on, I've been on the board of directors for over a decade.  And I've been on a few boards, but this is the most important board I've ever been a member of, and that's why I wanted to have it here.
Story_ID: 493327
Speaker 1: So, with all this, the force of all this history pushing you into the future, now, what, what happened when you were the chair of the commission?
Speaker 2: The MCAD [Massachusetts Commission Against Discrimination]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Shoot.
Speaker 1: What were some of the issues--I guess, and cases of--
Speaker 2: Well, the one that really kind of like, I guess, collapses everything.  Now, I had--well, I had race cases.  I had sexual harassment cases, disability cases.  But there was one case that really--I think capped everything, and which brings the museum [Museum of Afro-American History; Museum of African American History, Boston, Massachusetts] into the fore because, anyway, this is a good example.  There's a bar in South Boston [Boston, Massachusetts] called the Tom English Pub [sic. Tom English's Cottage, Boston, Massachusetts].  And there was this, there were these two patrons sitting at the bar.  And they noticed this display.  It had figurines, black figurines with spears, and it had coconuts with black face and red lips, and it had (laughter), it had monkeys dangling from the ceilings and palm trees.  And this is like in February and these, these white patrons asked--they said, "What's that about?"  And the, the bartender leaned in and he says, "Oh, you know what this month is?"  They said, "No, what month is this?  Black History Month, yeah, that's, that's our, that's our dedication to Black History Month."  They said, "Ohh," and they baited him some more, and they laughed.  And he said, "Yeah, you missed it."  And once he got a little comfortable with that, "You missed it, you should see our January celebration.  You see that big orangutan down at the end of the bar.  That's a big stuffed gorilla, we put a crown on his head.  We call it Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] Day," okay.  Well, these were two Boston Herald reporters.  And I got a call right after this interview.  And I was just heading out to go teach my class, Race and American Law (laughter).  And they asked me what I thought about that.  I said, "Thought about what?"  What--you know, and I, and I rattled off something.  I said, "That's inexcusable," and I immediately contact--and this is after, it was like seven o'clock at night.  I contacted my general counsel and asked him--I gave him the address.  I wanted him--I made him go to down there.  And I said, you know, why--it--well, I said, "What was their reason?"  They said, "Oh, they wanted to create a, a warm summer scene."  I said, "Why Africa?  Why are they trying to, you know, demonize or, you know, just, you know, portray an African jungle?  They're--no, no, that's unacceptable, that's racist.  That's a violation of the public accommodations laws.  I--we're going to look into this."  And I sent someone down that night, but they got tipped off and they yanked the display down, and didn't matter.  They had the pictures of it in the newspaper, a big article.  And so, I am, it's unprecedented, you know, you had--usually, when you're a victim of discrimination, you know, you come in, you know, you're, you know, you're harmed.  But, here, these were newspaper reporters.  They weren't victims.  So, they just reported it--they got their story.  But I brought a claim on behalf of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts on behalf of the MCAD and (laughter), and they said, "Why do that?  We already yanked it down."  And then, it got into a First Amendment shouting match, you know, freedom of expression.  And, you know, I did, I stared him down and, and I demanded they fire the bartender, that they make a public apology, and that they institute a scholarship program, an essay contest, on talking about the rich legacy of blacks and Irish to the City of Boston [Massachusetts].  And to make a long story short, I had them host a forum right here at the African Meeting House [Boston, Massachusetts] (laughter).  And they had, successfully, gone to the Boston Licensing Board [Liquor Licensing Board].  And the licensing board dismissed the case 'cause no one testified.  So then, they came to me and said, "Well, Mr. Commissioner, it doesn't look like you have much of a case because there's no one going to testify."  I said, "Well, that's, that's, those are my terms."  And Beverly Morgan-Welch put that under this millennium conversations program that Fleet Bank [FleetBoston Financial, Boston, Massachusetts] and a few other major, major funders, and they hosted this huge citywide forum.  And it really brought people together.  It wasn't just a, you know, a punishment thing.  It turned into an educational forum.  And you had the two historians, Thomas W. O'Connor [sic. Thomas H. O'Connor]--I think that's his name--the historian of Boston College [Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts], and Mr. Horton [James O. Horton] who's written a number of books.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Horton from University of Virginia [sic.], I guess?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And they both came, and Ogletree [HistoryMaker Charles Ogletree] moderated that discussion.  It was just beautiful and it was paid for and hosted by the Tom English Pub [sic. Tom English's Cottage, Boston, Massachusetts].  And it was done here at the African Meeting House right back to the forum where you have town and community discussions over the very, very cutting edge issues.  You know, we got to relive history.  And that, that was a proud moment to me.  It was a state agency that brought the case.
Speaker 1: Now, what year is this?
Speaker 2: That was 19--that was in the year 2000, 1999 or 2000 (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 493328
Speaker 1: But that was just one of a number of cases.  I had a case where there was a--and it was the highest damage award at the time.  And I still think it's still the reigning highest damage award ever issued in Massachusetts.  It was my decision.  It was called the Lule, L-U-L-E, Said case [Lule Said v. Northeast Security, Inc., 2000].  Lule Said was a Muslim.  (Laughter) Oh, this is--where, and he was a security guard at a hospital.  And his, his colleague, also a security guard, took his prayer rug and used it as a shammy, and threw it in the trash can.  And I gave him a five hundred--and most of the stress damages up to the time that I had my tenure, you know, hovered around if--it was an egregious case, you know, twenty-five to thirty thousand dollars, all right--emotional distress.  And you don't have to prove emotional distress.  It's really what the fact finder thought, you know, the amount of money he was entitled to, you know, how much he emotionally suffered--he or she--emotionally suffered from this event.  And I gave him $500,000 in emotional distress damages, plus 12 percent interest from the time he filed his complaint.  And he filed his complaint, Larry [Larry Crowe], twelve--ten years earlier (laughter).  And so, it was close to, you know, like an $800, $700, $800,000 case, plus attorneys' fees.  And, and the city went up, and there was a lot of commentary nationally about it, that these weren't emotional distress damages.  These were punitive damages, and that MCAD [Massachusetts Commission Against Discrimination] didn't have authority to issue punitive damages.  And I stood by my guns on that.  I said, "Now you, how could you, how could you have the audacity to tell me that, tell a black man.  And, here, a Somalian guy, a guy from Somalia, Somalia--you're going to trample upon the very core of what his--of his existence, his item of faith, his prayer rug, you know.  You don't do that," (laughter).  At the press conference--aw, Larry, he was so beautiful.  He was so eloquent in broken language.  This was just a security guard.  He says, "You know, I, I didn't care whether it was $500,000 or like $5.  The point, the principles here, you can't do this in America."  He said, in broken English, he says, "This is not supposed to happen in America."  And it just really almost brought my tears to my eyes because this is a guy that--who is both hosting and sponsoring his family, who most of them have been killed or executed in Somalia.  And he was working as a security guard and funneling what little money he did--and have this big bozo just trample on his, his prayer rug, man.  And management, when he complained, it wasn't so much of what that guy did--it's what management did.  Management would ignore him and say, "Don't--stop that f'ing praying.  You're not supposed to pray, you know, and if you keep on praying, I'm going to--we're going to fire you."  And, you know, and it just enabled this racist guy that continued to harass him.  And so, the decision wasn't so much against the racist guy that's a colleague.  It was against management for not coming to the aid of this guy who was being harangued, harassed--I mean, just outrageously abused.  And so, it was a message to management and to employers to, to work with and protect your employees.  It was a message to human resources to do something, you know, in recognizing the rights that these people had.  Sorry, I got a little off on that.
Speaker 2: Oh, no, that's, yeah, that's important.
Speaker 1: That was an important story, that's a story.  And then, that decision, by the way, was identified as one of the most important decisions as--lined up, it was beautiful with the United States Supreme Court decisions, the federal district court, the first circuit court of appeals, the state supreme court's decisions, and then my little old decision from the MCAD as this is one of the top most important decisions of the year.  And it was, and I felt good about that.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, that was in '98 [1998]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that was '99 [1999] or 2000--I can't remember.
Speaker 2: Ninety-nine [1999], two--okay.
Speaker 1: It was one of, it was one of my parting (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) About the same time as the other one?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Tom English bar case?
Speaker 1: Right, right (laughter).  Yeah, I went out with a bang.
Story_ID: 493329
Speaker 1: But it was leading to that 'cause I had also gone after a police department who discriminated against a black cop in Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts]. I was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What happened in that case?  Tell us briefly about that.
Speaker 1: Well, and actually I just saw him not too long ago at a funeral.  This guy was his own--the police chief would--well, wanted to get rid of him.  And so, he would--instead of staking out criminals, they'd stake out this cop--not because he was engaged in any criminal activity, but, you know, the rumor was that he was sleeping as, at a, in his, in, behind his car wheel or, you know, or, you know, going off track and, you know, chasing women.  And they never found him engaging in any impropriety.  But they did catch him sleeping, you know, while he was sitting at, you know, at a stop, looking for speeders sleeping at a wheel.  And, you know, it was just a--and they kept denying him promotions, and they were harassing him.  And I--
Speaker 2: Was he the only black cop on--
Speaker 1: He was the only black on--yeah.  And what, what made that a unique case is that, you know, this is Boston [Massachusetts].  You know, Martha's Vineyard is, you know, an island.  And, you know, you know, who would bring a case against, you know, cops at Martha's Vineyard?  So, I went to Martha's Vineyard.  And I used one of their courtrooms, and I held a hearing in the courtroom right there at Martha's Vineyard.  And it would have gotten a lot of publicity.  It got a lot--it made the Martha's Vineyard's press like crazy (laughter), and it got a little mention in Boston Globe [The Boston Globe].  And the case settled and he got a good sum, settlement.  And they fired the police chief.  And that was a good case.  It would have got a lot more, but the same weekend, the same week I did that--how could I forget it?  Oh, goodness, gracious, I'm blocking.  One of the Kennedys was contemplating running for governor--Joseph Kennedy [Joseph P. Kennedy II].  And that same week, he had--that my case came out, Joseph Kennedy announced that he wasn't going to run.  And so, it took my case off the front page, but that's all right.
Story_ID: 493330
Speaker 1: I made my presence known throughout the state, you know, you know, usually the stuff that happens in Boston [Massachusetts], but I wanted to show that how broad our tentacles were.  I would go to Springfield [Massachusetts].  I'd go to the Berkshires.  I'd go all over the state to hear these cases, and not just race cases--sexual harassment cases.  And it's just a little agency of about a hundred investigators and, and the like but, but the legislature, 'cause we kept on making the press, the legislature hit us with a lot of money.  They gave us $1.2 million in our appropriation.  Yeah, we took a fight.  It's interesting, the governor had vetoed to send money to the legislature--gave, he gave, and, and he, instead, gave us $250,000 which was more money than any governor had ever given that agency [Massachusetts Commission Against Discrimination].  And they, they, instead of giving the $250,000, they upped it to $1.2 million.  He vetoed that, and then they overruled his veto.  And that, that made me look like I had a lot of juice politically.
Speaker 2: Who was governor then?
Speaker 1: Governor Bill, well, Bill Weld's [William F. Weld] successor, Cellucci, Paul Cellucci, and but, you know, it's, it's an interesting thing.  Paul Cellucci is a good man, too, he really is a good man.  Say what you will, but it's a very parochial state.  I went to Boston College Law School [Newton Centre, Massachusetts].  Guess where Paul Cellucci went--Boston College Law School.  Guess where Frank Bellotti [Francis X. Bellotti] went--Boston College Law School.  And so, you had that connection.  And Cellucci was--when he appointed, elevated me to chair, you know, it was like, it wasn't just Boston College Law School, but I'd done, you know, I'd done a pretty good job.  And but, you know, there was nothing personal about things that happened.  And he saluted me and he, he appreciated what I did, and there were people that just didn't understand.  They thought I lobbied against the governor--I'm not loyal.  But he said, you know, "Chuck [HistoryMaker Charles Walker], that's what you're supposed to do.  I really respected you--you really, really advocating for your agency."  He really respected that.  And so, I made a little name for myself of being very, very, you know, strident and, you know, vociferous.
Story_ID: 493331
Speaker 1: I gave speeches throughout the state.  My administrative assistant, Karen Charles [sic. Katherine Charles], reminds me of the time--we get together.  I gave a speech for the Boys and Girls Clubs [Boys and Girls Clubs of America].  And they called in a bomb scare, and they had to evacuate the place 'cause I was speaking there.  Can you believe that?  Uh, man, I was state official and I'm talking against racism.  They're going to blow the place up (laughter).  So, the fire department had to come in, and I was on a roll.  I was in the middle of my speech when I, when they called in the bomb scare, and I was on a roll.  You think I'm animated now--oh, I was on, I was on fire that day.  And it was cold outside and they had, they had to interrupt me.  "And Mr. Walker [HistoryMaker Charles Walker] (unclear), sorry, we got a bomb (laughter)."  I said, "What?"  And I had, we had to stand outside.  And people were, you know, said, "Oh, you're going to go--." I said, "No, no, I'm going to finish that speech."  And don't you know, Larry [Larry Crowe]--well, people had to leave.  Well, there were more people that came back into that place.  Oh, and I just started all over again, and it was, it was, there was another exciting time.  I had threats on my life just going to my hearing sometimes.  It was just so ridiculous--state troopers would show up at my courtroom.  And I said, "What are you here for?"  They said, "There's been a death threat."  I said, "Oh, really--on the plaintiffs?"  "Plaintiffs, defendants, you."  I said, "What?"  It's crazy, just crazy, but, you know, for every bad thing, I must say, there are like eight, four or five great things.  There are people just really came to my assistance.  And they'd--this is pretty much--I was really shocked to see the people that came to my--they really supported me.  There were some really good people, and they weren't all black.  Yeah, it was a good time.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Massachusetts seems to be a place where you really find extremes of opinion (unclear)?
Speaker 1: Yeah, but it is a state of extremities--of extreme, I should say.  But, you know, I've always thought, you know, why am I staying here?  How long is it going to be?  I got married [to Dorothy Walker] in New Jersey--twenty-four years, it'll be twenty-four years next Monday.  But I always, I always knew, Larry, that once I--I was only just going to come out here to go to law school [Boston College Law School, Newton Centre, Massachusetts] and then bolt, and go back to California, take the bar, you know, get together with some of my girlfriends, you know, maybe marry one of them.  And, you know, set up my own little talent search agency and become an entertainment lawyer.   Man, it's amazing what the Lord have in store for you.
Story_ID: 493332
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, tell us about serving as administrative judge with the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.  Now, did--you left the job at the MC- the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, MCAD [Massachusetts Commission Against Discrimination].
Speaker 1: MCAD?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: In 2000, I guess?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And I always wanted to be a judge, judge, a real trial court judge or appellate court judge.  And, but the new governor, Jane Swift, wasn't, wasn't hearing it.  And when I came to cash in my chits for all the, you know, all the work I'd done because when I--frankly, when I first got the job, I was, I was--it was Governor Bill Weld [William F. Weld] who appointed me.  And then, I was reappointed and elevated by Paul Cellucci.  And then, and then Cellucci had--his term had run.  And there was a new governor, Jane Swift, who the Republicans pulled, and invited Romney [Mitt Romney] to come in and run for governor instead of her because she was a very unpopular governor.  She didn't want to make me a judge, so all that to say is, but her, her advisor was [HistoryMaker] Charles Ogletree (laughter).  And when he found out that she wasn't going to appoint me, to reappoint me to the MCAD, he was very, very, he was very instrumental in me becoming administrative judge, law judge, for the workers' comp [workers' compensation] board.
Story_ID: 493333
Speaker 1: That was a very difficult time in my personal life.  My father [Charles E. Walker] had died.  I started in September.  And my father, who I'd worked so earnestly in trying to relocate from California to, California to Ohio to Dayton [Ohio]--died in his sleep.  And it was just a really rough time.  My, my lovely wife [Dorothy Walker] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, was he stationed and (unclear) and--
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is the right (unclear)--had left to go, tend to her mother.  And I had two girls [Sydney Walker and Courtney Walker], age ten and the other one, fourteen.  And so, my wife would commute on weekends, but I would--I had them, you know, for the whole week (laughter).  And so, I had, I had to learn how to braid hair and, you know, cook, and all that stuff.  And it was just a good time but I--it really, it slowed me down a little bit now.  And I was an administrative judge at that point.  I had a--I guess, my biggest case.  How can I forget the date of it?  It lasted weeks, and they're only supposed to last maybe a couple of days.  I'm blocking on the name case.  But it involved an air traffic controller who had claimed that he had been, that he was entitled to workers' compensation because of mental distress.  And the mental distress that he had incurred, the mental distress that he had incurred, was he was not a shop steward, but also on deck, one of the original air traffic controllers during September 11, 2001 [9/11].  And, you know, Boston's [Boston, Massachusetts] been viewed as a ground zero.  So, he was, he had been scapegoated.  And I let them bring in all kinds of evidence.  And it, and it was one of the longest hearings in Massachusetts history.  And I found in his favor, psychological damage in workers' comp is one of the most difficult forms to prove, and I found in his favor as I was heading out.  I don't know whatever happened to that case.  I lasted there three years.  You know, it, it was a mixed bag.  I think that it was difficult, challenging work.  The--it was not nearly as to me, personally, as gratifying, you know, fulfilling as the MCAD [Massachusetts Commission Against Discrimination] work.  I was a fact finder like I was at the MCAD but, you know, you're like building widgets.  And I felt like I'd been kicked to the curb.  Even though it was good, honest work, and I had made some very important decisions at the time, there was--I, I made a decision that was in, that was challenged because this guy had a, the guy who's claiming benefits was an illegal immigrant.  And so, they are claiming that, you know, "How can you get, if you're not even a U.S. citizen, how can you get workers' comp, you know?"  But, you know, it's not his fault that he's illegal.  It's not even his fault that he was employed and hired by this employer.  This employer was, you know, exploiting him and so, you know, if he gets injured on the job, he's entitled just like anyone else.  And that was affirmed.  There were other decisions like that.  But I always kind of like to pride myself in thinking outside the box.  I was a little on the progressive side and still am.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, so you did that and you were the judge, administrative judge, until when or--that's from 2000 until--
Speaker 1: Two thousand [2000] to 2004.
Story_ID: 493334
Speaker 1: Then from 2004 to 2005, I was a consultant and mediator and arbitrator.  And, you know, I made a little money, but I didn't make as much as I needed to make.  And then, I got, and then I got picked up as executive director of the Lawyers' Committee for Civil Rights [Lawyers' Committee for Civil Rights and Economic Justice, Boston Massachusetts].  And I went from November of 2005 to November 2006.  And now I'm in my new job as general counsel and deputy director of enforcement for the Division of Professional Licensure.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It's a great position.  I'm now in the Deval Patrick [HistoryMaker Deval L. Patrick] administration.  And it's under the secretary of consumer affairs, but I--what I'm responsible for is I have about sixty lawyers and investigators charged to enforce the consumer protection laws against and, and administer them, administer them as against these 330,000 licensees, who are licensed by like about forty boards of registration and two hundred trades, so it's a big responsibility.  I just started two weeks ago.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  So, that's why it's not on the papers we have (laughter).
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I apologize, yep.
Speaker 2: All right, but that's interesting, okay.  So, well, you've also been involved in writing some of the history of the black lawyers in the State and the City of Boston [Massachusetts] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 2: And how did you get--now, you said, you first got involved in history--I guess, a while back, and when, let's see, we were just discussing it a minute ago when (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Story_ID: 493335
Speaker 1: There's another case from MCAD [Massachusetts Commission Against Discrimination] you wanted to talk about that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well it actually happened in the beginning of my term.  When MCAD was first, when we were first, I was commissioner and I was not chairman.  The chairman, great guy, Mike Duffy [Michael Duffy].  He's only a twenty-seven year old white guy and he was gay, openly gay, but, you know, a gay twenty-seven year old white guy, Republican, and me headed up the commission.  And I'm going to tell you--the two of us just rolled with that agency.  We made a lot of history together.  I, I was shocked at how much I had in common with him.  I learned so much more about, and an appreciation for, the gay rights movement.  And he certainly learned so much more--engaged in the appreciation for the Civil Rights Movement, you know, and the history I brought.  And we got along extremely well.  I'll always remember Mike Duffy.  That was a wonderful experience for him.  Anyway, and when I first started, he would put me up there.  And they have these little conferences, and I had to preside over these conferences and I was nervous.  I didn't want to preside over these conferences (laughter).  And this one brother appeared before me, and he was like in his, maybe late sixties, early seventies.  And he was a custodian at one of the local hospitals.  I won't, I can't remember the name of it, so I'm not going to try to guess, and risking misnaming it.  And he was--his claim was that he was denied his overtime pay based upon his race.  I said, "What do you mean?"  He says, "Well, you know, my overtime pay was, was always late."  And he had, he had English--yeah, he had--I think he was Haitian.  My over- my over- and he had a very deep, very nice melodic voice--"My overtime pay was always late, and I believe it was because I was black."  I said, "Well, do you have any proof of that?"  And then, you know, they, they had a human resources person, and a lawyer.  And they had, said that, you know, there are white people who had delayed their unemployment.  And so, I gaveled.  They might--I dismissed his case right there on the spot.  He appealed.  And back then, the commissioners actually hear their appeal, but you can't just appeal to appeal.  You have to bring in some new additional evidence to show that you have some proof.  So, the--a month later, he came before me, and I was with him.  And this time, it was in my office.  That's where I heard all my cases.  And this time, they brought the manager, his co-manager, white employees, and even had a black guy in there, a black employee, and the plaintiff.  And I said, "Do you have any additional evidences?"  "No sir, I have no additional evidence, but the, but I will say that the reason I believe it was racist."  I said, "Yeah, it--well, do you have any reasons why?"  You know, I was probing.  He says, "Well, whenever I go in to complain, he would come over and rub my head, and he'd make fun of me.  He'd say, 'Aww, coconuts, coconuts, ma ha ha ha,' and impersonate [HistoryMaker] Geoffrey Holder."  And I looked to the manager--I said, "Is that what you did, sir?"  He says, "I would never do something like that."  You know, whenever they said, "I would never do something like that," I said, that's what, you just walked right into it, buddy.  That means you did it (laughter), but I didn't say it.  I said, "Oh, you would never do anything like that, sir?"  He said, "No, I would never do anything."  And there's no--and then the lawyer jumped in and says, "That's--this is not, Mr. Commissioner--," he got a little indignant.  He says, "Listen, I have brought So and So here, and So and So here, even, even So and So."  And he pointed at the black guy.  He says, "All these people would have been denied.  And I have received their unemployment--I mean, their overtime pay late and, you see, they're black, they're white, and so, there's no racial claim here, and, yeah, affidavits."  And, you know, it's like, it's a done deal.  And I said, "That's, that's probably true," and I turned to the claimant.  I said, "Sir, you don't have any additional evidence.  There's no affidavits, and you got witnesses here."  And I looked at the manager, I said, but, and I'm looking at the manager, I'm talking to them--the plaintiff, I said, "But if I ever hear of anything like that where you're mocking this, this gentleman, rubbing his head, mocking his accent, I want you, sir," and I'm looking at the manager (laughter), I said, "I want you, sir, to call me."  And I gave him my card, and I passed it over to the brother, "And I want you to call me.  We will personally investigate this, but now, I have to dismiss your case 'cause there's no evidence."  And then, I gaveled and left.  Then I dismissed it.  Okay, went out for my coffee.  Now, that was the last case of the day.
Story_ID: 493336
Speaker 1: And I got in the elevator, and we're on the fifth floor, and the elevator door was about to close.  This big, big black arm stopped the elevator door, and it was the guy, and he got in the elevator.  I said, oh, my god--he's going to be mad 'cause I dismissed his case.  And his eyes were beet red, and you could see the little pools of water in them 'cause he looked like he'd been crying.  And he came and he shook my hand, he says, "Thank you, Mr. Commissioner, thank you."  I said, "Well," I said, "you know, I, I dismissed your case so."  "Oh no, thank you very much," that's all he said.  And you could not tell him that he lost that case.  He was so, he was, he had been validated just by my scolding his manager in front of all--everybody.  And it was quiet, it was quiet.  And I know, to this day, that was the night, that was almost like '95 [1995] right after I started working there--2007, it's been twelve years.  I know if he had had one incident, he would have called me up.  And so, I was just--and when I use that as an example, the MCAD [Massachusetts Commission Against Discrimination] was like that, you know, it would bring you--it brought people forward, you know.  If you just listened to these people, and you give them some dignity and some respect, you can get some resolution there.  And that was, that was--I just wanted to--it's a small little matter, but it really resonated with me.  And it goes right back to what you and I talked about, what really got me involved, and got me incited about civil rights.
Story_ID: 493337
Speaker 1: You've sort of embraced the black history of Boston [Massachusetts] and supported the institutions.  You're on the board here at the African museum [Museum of Afro-American History; Museum of African American History, Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You've also written about black history.  You've written some papers on the history of black lawyers in Boston, which is a significant history, I believe.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about that and--
Speaker 2: Well, I did a series of papers on black lawyers--John Smith [John J. Smith], Rock [John S. Rock], Macon Bolling Allen, Robert Morris [Robert Morris, Sr.].  And, and I published them in the Massachusetts Lawyers Weekly.  When I became president of the black lawyers association [Massachusetts Black lawyers Association], it surprised my colleague, Eddie Jenkins [HistoryMaker Eddie Jenkins, Jr.], who was vice president--didn't mention this.  It was a--there was a--I was president in 1994 to 1996.  So, 1995, and I did a little history research.  There was a fellow--May 3rd, 1995 was exactly a hundred fifty years to the date that the first black lawyer in the United States was admitted to practice.  And I felt we had to do something about that.  And so, we re-enacted the swearing-in of the first black lawyer.  And I went to the chief justice of the state supreme court.  His name is Paul Liacos [Paul J. Liacos] at the time, the great Paul Liacos.  And I went to the governor's legal counsel and, and who represented, who played the attorney.  Back then, you were admitted on motion.  They didn't have law schools in the, in 1845.  And so--
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so we're talking about--now, this is the first black--
Speaker 2: Lawyer in the United States.
Speaker 1: --in the United States was sworn in (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Macon--sworn in the Massachusetts Bar [Massachusetts Bar Association].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And that was in 18--
Speaker 2: Forty-five [1845].
Speaker 1: Eighteen forty-five [1845], okay.
Speaker 2: Now, Massachusetts, ironically, was not the first state he was admitted in--1844, he was admitted to practice in Maine, but he couldn't get any work there.  And he came to Massachusetts, you know, on May 3, 1845.  Thomas Sewall [sic. Samuel Edmund Sewall], one of the descendants of, of Justice Sewall [Samuel Sewall], who sat on the Salem witch trials, was an abolitionist type lawyer.  And he, he moved to have him admitted to practice.  And so, I approached the, the chief justice of the state supreme court, the governor's legal counsel.  And they played the roles of these two people who admitted him.  And we got the original papers, and we invited the bar and the whole community and everybody.  And we did it at Faneuil Hall [Boston, Massachusetts] and it was packed out.  It was amazing.  All the federal district court, the federal bench showed up, the first circuit court showed up.  All the black judges throughout the state wore their robes and they walked down the center aisle.  They had someone sing 'The Star Spangled Banner.'  It was just really a moving ceremony.  And we used the actual motion, the actual words used in the motion.  And the governor's legal counsel--he, in tails, you know, and wearing the garb, made, wearing the uniform of the day, the suits, and what they wore--had memorized the motion.  And he recited his petition to admit this black lawyer.  And Judge, Judge Leon Higginbotham [A. Leon Higginbotham, Jr.] gave the keynote address.  And it was really an unbelievable, unbelievable moving ceremony.  And it's never been replicated.
Story_ID: 493338
Speaker 1: What was his name again--the first (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Macon--
Speaker 1: Macon--
Speaker 2: --M-A, like bacon, with an M as in Mary.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Macon Bolling Allen.
Speaker 1: Bolling Allen?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And that was, that's what got me really started.  And now, I'm working on a series of papers or a paper, a major paper, on Robert Morris [Robert Morris, Sr.].  His story has to be told.  And there's, there's parts about, but he, he argued this, this first school desegregation case in the country in 1850, lost that case, Roberts v. School Committee of Boston [sic. Roberts v. City of Boston, 1849].  And, based upon the, the holding, our United States Supreme Court in 1896, forty-six years later, relied upon its, the holding to establish the separate, but equal doctrine of the United States, and plus Plessy v. Ferguson [Plessy v. Ferguson, 1896].  I can elaborate on that, but I wanted to cut to the chase on that, but it was, it's really a fascinating case.  Little Sarah Roberts was about five years old, lived in the North End [Boston, Massachusetts].  She had to bypass five white schools to get to this, get to this school right here [Abiel Smith School, Boston, Massachusetts].  This is the center of it.  This is where it happened.  This is ground zero for school desegregation, school segregation in the United States.  And, yet, all these black families create a black school for kids, for their kids, because like I mentioned earlier, all the violence that they were exposed to, and the hostile, all the hostilities.  And she had to walk past these five white schools.  And, and her father was a printer, Benjamin Roberts, hired the second black lawyer admitted to practice in the United States.  This is my man, this is my hero, Robert Morris.  And Robert Morris argued--he hired Charles Sumner, you know, who became a senator--
Speaker 1: You're right, he's a famous abolitionist senator (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Abolitionist--
Speaker 1: --who was being beaten down in [U.S.] Congress--
Speaker 2: --beaten down in Congress by--
Speaker 1: --by Preston, Preston Brooks.
Speaker 2: --by Preston Brooks, South Carolina, right?
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And Charles Sumner was an abolitionist lawyer back then, whatever office.  And Robert Morris knew that after he lost the trial, that if he argued for the state supreme court, he'd better bring a white lawyer up there with him.  So, he hired Charles Sumner to co-counsel it.  And, and it's the first time in United States history where a black lawyer and a white lawyer teamed up together, filed a brief together, and argued the same case.  And they argued three things, and I'll just try to cut to the chase.  He said, "Look, you know, you have, you have an ordinance by the Boston School Committee that says, you can't, you have to, you have to--the, the student has to attend the school nearest his, his or her residence."  Secondly, they argued that the distance, which was about a little more than a mile, was just too treacherous and dangerous for her.  And there in the Massachusetts constitution, the Body of Liberties [Massachusetts Body of Liberties] said, and this is in 1849--it said way back then--I mean, the Body of Liberties said, said, you know, all men are created equal.  You know, the United States constitution borrowed from the Body of Liberties because Massachusetts was a colony before, obviously, before the United States met in Congress in 1787.  And they used the language from the body of liberty to establish the United States Constitution--all, all people are created equal.  So, they argue those three things.  And this, our Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court held essentially--and I'm going to cut to the chase--that so long as you're not denying them an education, it's okay to separate colored kids from white kids.  That was the holding of the Massachusetts state supreme court.
Speaker 1: Separate but equal.
Speaker 2: Separate but equal.  This is ground zero for separate but equal.
Story_ID: 493339
Speaker 1: Forty-six years later, 1896, the United States Supreme Court looked for a case that where Homer Plessy was riding on a train, you know, you need a case that says, so long as you're not denying him transportation, it's okay to separate blacks from whites in railroad cars.  And they used the precedence set by the Roberts v. School Committee of Boston case [sic. Roberts v. City of Boston, 1849].  So, so Massachusetts set the standard.  And that's just a little piece of history that people don't recognize, but they also, but you know what?  What was so exciting about this, Larry [Larry Crowe], this is what really--it's because Thurgood Marshall argued the same thing--oh, the last argument they made was to separate colored kids from white kids.  And they made this argument in 1850--to separate colored kids from white kids creates a feeling of inferiority.  It's an unfair caste system that you're developing.  That was before, you know, you had psychological tests.  It was even before the Fourteenth Amendment.  This was before the Civil War, eleven years before the Civil War was even fought, fifteen years before the Fourteenth Amendment was even passed.  They're arguing equal protection of the laws.  And they're saying that you're creating feelings of inferiority between black and white kids.
Speaker 2: It's 104 years before--
Speaker 1: A 104 years--
Speaker 2: --Brown [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954].
Speaker 1: --before Brown was even argued.  They're making the same identical argument.  They lost.  Thurgood Marshall won on that argument.  I just--that's an interesting piece of history.  It all happened right here--
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: --and being in the basement (laughter), of that African Meeting House [Boston, Massachusetts], we really are truly at ground zero.  Yeah, and so, that's, that's got, that has me excited.  Another thing that excites me about Robert Morris [Robert Morris, Sr.]--and I'll be real brief--is that he argued.  And I think Steven Spielberg missed out a great opportunity.  They did a great job with 'Amistad,' but the story that has to be told was this case that he had, where he actually represented a fugitive slave, a slave that escaped from Virginia, not Anthony Burns.  But he had, yeah, he, he represented Shadrach Minkins.  And I'll just really cut to the chase.  He, when his case was called at the federal customs house, which is down near Faneuil Hall [Boston, Massachusetts], which that's where the federal district court was, he orchestrated his escape from the courtroom.  And the newspapers said a dark cloud descended into the courtroom (laughter).  It was only like seven black folks, and they orchestrated an underground railroad, and he whisked him all the way out to Canada.  And he's buried in a, in an unmarked grave--I think in Canada, Shadrach Minkins, but--
Speaker 2: A dark cloud descended upon the courtroom.
Speaker 1: Yes, a dark cloud descended upon the courtroom.  I mean, there's newspaper articles about it.  And it's, it's--the stories are kind of starting to come out, but Henry Dana [Richard Henry Dana, Jr.], oh, I was going to say (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Richard Henry Dana, yeah.
Speaker 1: --Robert, uh, [President] Millard Fillmore, the president of the United States, issued an executive order against all those, that dark cloud of folks, all seven of them, to be tried for treason which carried with them the death penalty.  And all of them, including Robert Morris, and they were all acquitted.  And so, the story I'm trying to rewrite and write is about Robert Morris, and about what he and his efforts, and about that one particular case.  I think it's just an interesting piece of history that has to be immortalized.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: I'd like to, I'd like to re-enact that trial when he was on trial for that.  And oh and, he was acquitted by an all-white jury.  And Henry Dana represented him, so that's what I'm trying to get into.
Story_ID: 493340
Speaker 1: It seems like there's a book on the horizon for you (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, there is, there is.  I'm, I'm ready for it, yeah, I'm ready for that.
Speaker 1: And what are some of your other future plans now?
Speaker 2: Well, right now, I'm with the Division of Professional Licensure.  And I love my--I've only been there two weeks, but I love my staff.  And I love working in the Patrick [HistoryMaker Deval L. Patrick] administration, and I really want to help in every which way I can.  Eventually, I'd like to become a judge, trial judge, and appellate judge, you know.  I have other--I'd like to write a book, write this book.  I'd like to have a screenplay and we also talked about--I'd like to become a syndicated cartoonist.  So, those are the, my four major things, and to watch my grandchildren grow up happy.
Story_ID: 493341
Speaker 1: Sir, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: I really do, I really do hope that we will spend some time really reflecting on where we came from.  That's--I mean, everyone has a hope that we get better employment, and that we have better schools and education, that we, we take care of our health more.  But if, in all that, you know, comes from a deep and profound, abiding commitment to ourselves, for ourselves, by ourselves.  I mean FUBU's is doing it with the clothing.  But I think that by having a real strong sense of history, and just really getting, getting a thirst for history, I'm hoping that, that we have a--we can create a more of a thirst of history of why we, how we got here, why we got here, and from that, we can develop our own kind of a purpose for why we're here.  You know, I, just as an aside, I saw a wonderful documentary on--this brother did this documentary, and you're probably familiar with it.  Following up from the Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] thing when they, when they--who was the rap artist [Nelly] who they said, no, you can't come and give a benefit concert on bone marrow cancer because you demonize women?  And the Spelman College people said no.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know who you're talking about, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And so, this brother did this thing on black images.  And, you know, I really appreciated what he did with that.  And it really got and really, it made everyone accountable and realized--think, you know, what are we doing here?  Why are we creating so many bad images and just perpetuating?  And we realized that they are really being exploited, that these record companies had nothing, had no interest in seeing the richness, and the fullest of the African American race.  They just simply wanted to promote and throw the money at people the gangster rap, the bling-bling, and the, you know, the misogynistic stuff.  But this documentary guy really, really made me feel personally responsible.  Even though I'm not a rap artist and I don't swear that badly.  And I definitely don't use the N word that much, if any.  I'm in, I'm in N word rehab, so I told everybody, but I'm, I'm beyond that.  And it really made me feel, I have a real responsibility, and a lot of it is based upon my, my growing, understanding, and appreciation for our history, and where my ancestors came from, you know.  Why do I need to behave like this 'cause I really, 'cause I'm tarnishing the legacy that they left for me, if I perpetuate.  So, that's one big thing that I'd like to see us do is have a better appreciation for our history, so we could see so we could have a forward thinking message that we want to leave our, our, as our legacy for our, for our descendants.
Story_ID: 493342
Speaker 1: Now when you look back at everything you've done to this point in your life, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could?
Speaker 2: I think I would--I, you know, I, I think we all kind of like have a cookie-cutter kind of plan.  I mean, sure, there's things I would like to have done differently.  I think I would have liked to have gone to divinity school.  I think I would have liked to have really pursued the stand-up comedy with a, with more of a vengeance.  But I think, I think by putting it all in God's hands, I, I think I'm doing pretty much, with all the flaws and the faults and the, and, and I think I'm pretty much doing what I'm supposed to be doing.  I wish I would have applied for a judgeship a little earlier.  But I think I'm, I'm, I think I'm pretty much on track on what I'm supposed to be doing.  I'll see what happens.
Story_ID: 493343
Speaker 1: Now, likewise, when you look back at everything you've done to this point, what today would you say is your legacy?
Speaker 2: I think people will look at me as a, a guy that always wanted to bring people together, that was really passionate about being an African American, passionate about the African American history, passionate about knowing what a lawyer is, and what it means to be an African American male, how, what a significant role that we play in the society.  And I'm hoping, I'm hoping people will look at me as someone that did more than just get along, go along to get along, that I really did try to change some things, and that I inspired and sparked an interest in trying to improve the station of people.  And that's not just for men.  It's not even just for women.  It's for, you know, all people of color, and even and white folks.  I just, I would hope that that would be one of the examples.  I hope my kids would look--my grandkids and great-great-grandkids would say, yeah, yeah, there's still a man, there was a daddy, my great- was that he really stood for his principles and didn't really back down to, to too much.  I remember--maybe I'm talking too much, but I, I liked what Frederick [Frederick Douglass]--no, no, Lincoln [President Abraham Lincoln] said in the Gettysburg Address.  He said, "The world will little note, nor long remember, what we say here today, but it cannot forget what we did here.  It's for us, it's for us, the--it's, it's for us to, to continue--," and I can't remember the exact words--, "the unfinished work of those who fought here.  It's for us, the living, rather, to continue the unfinished work of those who fought here and, thus far, so nobly advanced."  And, you know, so I, I would hope that they would look at me as an unfinished work trying to look, constantly looking for his completion.
Story_ID: 493344
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your family here.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I know we, your--we talked about your father [Charles E. Walker] in the beginning.  But you've--there's some other information about your father you discovered?
Speaker 2: Yes, I got to correct some stuff.  Yeah, he, he was--first, he, he was born August 1st, 1919, but he was born in St. Louis, Missouri.  And I was right that he was, he moved--I said Arkansas before, but it was St. Louis, Missouri.  And it was just a few months after that, six months or seven months later, he moved to Manistee, Michigan.  He was a member of the 477th Bombardment Squadron, and an active participant in the, in the Freeman, Freeman Field mutiny out there in Kentucky [sic. Freeman Army Airfield, Jackson County, Indiana].  And he, when he was court-martialed along with several other hundred black Tuskegee Airmen, he stood in, and was one of the leaders who stood by the two black officers who brushed against these military policemen who were dishonorably discharged.  And they all got acquitted, except for a Bill Terry [Roger "Bill" Terry].  And Bill Terry eventually got acquitted four years later by Bill, President Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton].  I like that piece of my dad's history.
Speaker 1: Now how--did your parents get a chance to see you get involved in the civil rights cases with, in MCAD [Massachusetts Commission Against Discrimination] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, yeah, my--actually, ironically, my mother [Marguerite Lee Walker] came out.  And, and it coincided and it was, and people think I did it on purpose.  If I did, it just was by pure coincidence that I issued that decision.  My mother came during the week the decision came out.  And when it hit the press, the press took a real interest in it.  One of the cameramen--one of the news people who happened to live in Sharon [Massachusetts] came by my house, and it was during my birthday (laughter).  And my mom was there for my birthday, and so they interviewed me on my birthday when the Lule Said case was decided.  So, she saw that, you know, she read papers, and she kept up with some of the, you know, people would tell her about stuff.  But, you know, I was always Chuckie [HistoryMaker Charles Walker], still am, you know, you're never too old for a spanking, Chuckie.  But, yeah, she, she was pretty proud of me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, and your--now you have children, too, right?
Speaker 2: I have two lovely daughters, Sydney [Sydney Walker] who's twenty-one, and she's a senior at Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia].  I have Courtney [Courtney Walker] who's seventeen, will be eighteen, January 27th, and she's at Milton Academy [Milton, Massachusetts], and aspiring to go to college.  Both dynamic, beautiful, smart, gregarious, very driven, very principled--they're just top notch daughters.  I'm really proud of them.  Yeah, those are my girls.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, is there anything we have not touched upon we need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: I think we've talked about quite a bit.
Story_ID: 493345
Speaker 1: Well, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Oh, that I tried to do things.  I tried to change a few things that I was, that I'm a man of very--I'm very, very strong in my faith and my convictions that I did, that I did meet God's calling for me, that I was humble, and that, that I was eternally grateful for the blessings that God gave me.  I, I'd like to be remembered for that, that I tried to help the station and the statute of black people, not just locally, but throughout the world.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Thank you very much for sharing with us (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Thank you.
