Story_ID: 373061
Speaker 1: I'm Shawn Wilson for The HistoryMakers. I will be the interviewer today. And this is Neculai Burghelea he will be the videographer today, and I will just have you state your name and spell it out for me your full name?
Speaker 2: Edgar Thomas Williams Junior [HistoryMaker E. T. Williams], E-D-G-A-R, T-H-O-M-A-S, W-I-L-L-I-A-M-S, J-R.
Speaker 1: Do you have a nickname?
Speaker 2: Yes, I'm known by my old friends as Tommy, and I'm known by my business associate, and later friends as E.T, E.T. phone home (laughter).
Speaker 1: Your date of birth?
Speaker 2: October 14, 1937.
Speaker 1: Place of birth?
Speaker 2: New York City, Brooklyn.
Speaker 1: Today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is December the--
Speaker 1: Thirteen.
Speaker 2: Thirteen, 2006.
Speaker 1: And the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: My apartment is 145 E. 74th Street, Apartment 9B as in boy.
Speaker 1: And your occupation?
Speaker 2: New York, New York my occupation?
Speaker 1: Yes go ahead.
Speaker 2: My occupation I am a retired banker, real estate developer, retired in 1991.
Speaker 1: And now?
Speaker 2: And, and now I, I sort of run a little family investment company which, which deals in real estate.  And mostly cooperative apartments I'm trying to think of the other two things oh we have a large art collection and investment portfolio.
Story_ID: 373062
Speaker 1: Okay so I'm going to ask you very short answer five questions that we asked and these answers appear on our website.  So your favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is blue.
Speaker 1: Favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is chicken.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Is spring.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Paris [France].
Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: My favorite saying?  That's a little hard.  I can't think of one.  Do I have a favorite saying?  I don't really think I have one actually.
Speaker 1: Okay, well if one comes up doing our interview.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 373063
Speaker 1: So we will start with your, your childhood and as much as you can remember of your childhood and your parents.  So why don't we start with your mother and your mother's side of the family your mother's full name and your mother's date and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Elnora Bing Williams Morris my mother was, was born in South Carolina in a small town called Yemassee [South Carolina].  And that was an old Indian [Native American] town in South Carolina.  Was born in 19, 1911 and she died at that age eighty.  She moved to New York [New York] with her dad [Thomas Bing] and mother [Irene Bing] when she was one year one years old actually.  My grandfather and two of his brothers were given money by their dad [Henry Bing] to move to New York because he didn't--well my grandfather was a farmer.  A very, very successful farmer dealing in--they had rice plantations and, and peanut farms and but he thought it would be best for his sons to come to New York.  And they were part of the early migration in the, in the early--in 1910, 1915.  He gave each of them a sum of money they moved to New York.  Then my grandfather bought a house in the Clinton Hill section of Brooklyn [New York], fourteen room house where my, where I then had my mother then had four siblings during that period of time over a period of eight years.  And she--my mother then went on to Girls' High School [Boys and Girls High School] in Brooklyn, which was the academic high school for young women.  She was probably one of three or four blacks in the entire school.  She fell in love with my dad [Edgar Thomas Williams, Sr.] after high school and instead of going on to nursing school which she had wanted to do she got married.  And my sister was then born she was twenty, and I was born when she was twenty-two.
Speaker 1: So it's just the two of you, you only have one sister?
Speaker 2: Well I, I must say then it was a lapse of fifteen years and then my younger sister was born my younger sister Thea [Thea Williams Girigorie].
Story_ID: 373064
Speaker 1: So you spoke about your grand- your mother's [Elnora Bing Williams Morris] father.
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That bought the house in, in Brooklyn [New York].  What was his name and do you know his date and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My, my grandfather's name was Thomas Franklin Bing [Thomas Bing], B-I-N-G and he was born in Yemassee, South Carolina.  As was his father and was his father before him they were originally part of--they were of mixed ancestry but originally part of the Yemassee.  The Yemassee Indian [Native American] tribe that really controlled all of Charleston [South Carolina] in the early 1700s.  But there were wars in South Carolina called the Yemassee Wars I think they were between 1710 and 1730 in which the Indians fought the settlers and of course lost.  They were then resettled in a place which I--which we now call Yemassee and were all were given large, large amounts of land.  And that's where my family basically lived and, and prospered in that, in that area in South Carolina.
Speaker 1: So your grandfather was a farmer?
Speaker 2: My grandfather my, my great-grandfather [Henry Bing].
Speaker 1: Great-grandfather, your mother's father your great-grand?
Speaker 2: My great-grandfather was a farmer, my grandfather came to New York [New York] and was the entrepreneur he ran a candy and stationery store.  He started his own business his brother started his own business as well, and they each bought a couple of houses and had rental property.  And they really sort of controlled the corner of Gates Avenue, and Nostrand Avenue in Brooklyn they had two corners on that property across the street eventually was an IBM [International Business Machines Corporation] building.  And that's where they held court with people coming into my aunt and uncles cousins and so forth and so on.
Speaker 1: So do you have any story I mean are there any stories in the family going back into slavery were there any legends in the family?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, the whole issue of slavery and free blacks the family was considered a free black family and they were listed in the first census of 1830 of free blacks.  The, the Bing family, the Jackson [ph.] family, which was my grandmother's family as well as the Banfield [ph.] family and the Cordry [ph.] family they were all part of my, my family.  And they had large acres of land, and many of them actually owned slaves themselves.  And this was law that was passed on through, through the family it's not a subject that the blacks today really talk very much about, but the whole issue of slavery and, and free men and free blacks is a very complicated issue going back into the 1700s.  And, and so the only way they could prosper was the same way the other planters and people who, who were of land, had land and gentry in the South were able to prosper by owning, by owning slaves.  I'm sure I've got--there are some slave ancestors in my family certainly on my father's [Edgar Thomas Williams, Sr.] side.  On my mother's side, I'm not, not that sure, to be honest with you.  There was a lot of Indian, white and certainly some black ancestors.
Story_ID: 373065
Speaker 1: That's really interesting history though on your mother's [Elnora Bing Williams Morris] side.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's an oh--yeah there was a book that was called 'The Yemassee' ['The Yemassee: A Romance of Carolina'] it was actually a novel by someone named Simms [William Gilmore Simms] that talked about the, the whole relationship of the Indians [Native Americans] it was in, in South Carolina.  In all South Carolina history books, they do talk about the, the Yemassee Indian Wars.   Again this was--it, you know, these--some of these things started in the late 1600s or 1700.  A lot of it was going on before there were segregation laws and there's a lot of intermarrying with, with white men.  There were a lot of white men who had come to America and without wives, and they intermarried with Indians, intermarried with, with blacks.  And it was at only at a later point in, in the 1800s that the segregation laws begin to form and develop.  But prior to that, it was a lot of intermarriages and mixing very much in the, in the South.
Speaker 1: How close is it to Charleston [South Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Yemassee about seventy miles to Charleston.  My family went to the colored schools in Yemassee, South Carolina, that is, my ancestors.  But the schools only went up to sixth grade so, in order to go on to high school, they had to go to boarding school, they all went to Savannah [Georgia] to boarding school.  Those that went on to college went to South Carolina State [South Carolina State College; South Carolina State University] in Orangeburg [South Carolina].  And we have relatives that live in Orangeburg and relatives that live in, in, in Charleston and in, and in Greenville [South Carolina].  By--and my [maternal] grandfather's [Thomas Bing] first cousin was president of the South Carolina Teachers' Association.  A major undertaker in, in South Carolina and had a high school named after him many years ago (background noise) Harold Vinson Bing [ph.] was his name.  The Bing family is well known in South Carolina.
Speaker 1: So what's the, what was the name of the boarding school in Savannah that the family went to?
Speaker 2: It, it did--I don't, you know, I don't really know the name of the school.  It, it was I think then I think then it--they said boarding school, but I think they may have boarded with people and went to public high school in, in Savannah.
Speaker 1: But Savannah was the only place that they could go to further their education (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Savannah was the nearest--it was the nearest town that had high schools, so that's where they went.
Story_ID: 373066
Speaker 1: Then on your father's [Edgar Thomas Williams, Sr.] side of the family your father has you're--the same name but your father's date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My, my father was, was born in 1909 he was born in New York City [New York, New York].  And his, his father [James Williams] was in the [U.S.] Navy was a Korean Navy man.  And of course, what that meant he was a cook because you could that's the highest rank you could get in the Navy.  But fortunately, when he retired, of course, he retired with a pension, and they had their own house in, in Brooklyn [New York].  And my grandfather came from Virginia I don't really know where he came from, but I know that his wife my grandmother Lucy, Lucy Watkins Williams came from Norfolk, Norfolk, Virginia.  And she was of mixed ancestry there is a picture I have a picture of her mother.
Speaker 1: And the mix was, the mix?
Speaker 2: White and black (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: Essentially, I don't know of any Indian [Native American] particular in that in my father's family.
Speaker 1: Then who was, who was her father?
Speaker 2: Her father was a Mr. Watkins, and I don't know anything more about him.  I do have a cousin that is dealing with that side of the family.  And I, I don't think she's fully completed family tree yet.
Speaker 1: So what can you tell me about your--any other any stories of legends within your father's family going back?
Speaker 2: I don't have any legends except that is one of the nice things was that one of his brothers was on the support staff at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama].  And he supported the Tuskegee Airmen as, you know, I guess about three hundred or a thousand airmen I don't remember the exact number of the airmen.  But, but you can't just be an airman you've gotta have a support staff, and I had an uncle that was part of that support staff.  And he often wrote letters back to, to my mother [Elnora Bing Williams Morris] and father talking about what it was like being a support staff of the Tuskegee Airmen and he's, he's now deceased.
Story_ID: 373067
Speaker 1: Did your father [Edgar Thomas Williams, Sr.] never talk about his childhood growing up in New York City [New York, New York]?  What was it like (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, my father grew up he was born and raised the address 59 Jefferson Avenue.  I remember it quite well in a brick house three-story brick house.  And he often talked about is growing up and he was very involved with the Carlton Y [Carlton YMCA], which was the black Y [Young Men's Christian Association (YMCA)] in Brooklyn [New York].  He was on a, a basketball team called the Y Aces [sic. Carlton YMCA Bees] and eventually he ended up coaching that team in, in the '30s [1930s] and in, in the early '40s [1940s].  When he finished high school, I forgot which high school in Brooklyn he--during the Depression [Great Depression] got a job working for the federal government, and he worked with the Brooklyn Navy Yard [New York, New York].  So he was feasibly comfortable (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What did he do in the Navy yard, what did he do in the Navy yard?
Speaker 2: He worked in--he started in, in, in a trade dealing with making cells and then moved on into their real estate division.  And he was he was there for I would say for a period of about ten or twelve years on through the Depression.  So there was never any concern about where you next (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Meal or dollar is coming from.
Speaker 2: --meal was coming from or dollar exactly.
Story_ID: 373068
Speaker 1: So your father [Edgar Thomas Williams, Sr.] was an insurance broker as well did he sell insurance (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) After the, after the after he finished the--after World War II [WWII] with the help of my grandfather [Thomas Bing] my mother's father, my father got into real estate which was my grandfather had been in real estate.  You know, he ran a candy stationary store but he had real estate on the side.  And my father took it to the next step got a broker's license.  And did, and then did buying and selling houses in Brooklyn [New York] bought apartment buildings managed them and, and he also he was also an insurance broker and he had an office on, on the corner of Ralph [Avenue] and Macon Street for well about for thirty-five, forty years.
Speaker 1: Now was it unusual for him to have a broker's license during that time were there other black people practicing realty?
Speaker 2: There were other there were other there were a few of them there wasn't a lot, but there were, you know, there were there were some because they dealt principally in the black community.
Speaker 1: And there were no laws preventing them from having a license?
Speaker 2: No there was no laws--in, in many ways it was a segregated situation in Brooklyn and housing was very segregated.  And we all--I grew up in what is called Stuyvesant Heights [Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, New York], and I was born at 597 Jefferson Avenue, in a four-story brownstone where we lived for a number of years.  And then on to, to Macon Street, which was just a few blocks away.
Speaker 1: So when you were a kid did you or do you remember your father during any real estate transactions did he talk about real estate at home?
Speaker 2: My father talked about real estate all the time and at dinners we talked about real estate.  We talked about rent control and how awful rent control was, and it just made people want to give up buildings.  And I grew, I grew to hate the concept of rent control because people were in the real estate business disliked when all those laws came into being, and then I think they came into being after World War II.  So yes there was a lot of discussions about real estate, lots of discussions about insurance.
Speaker 1: Now what types of insurance did he work for with?
Speaker 2: He did mostly automobile insurance for the people.  He was, he was an agent for a number of, of companies.
Speaker 1: So you remember when that rent control laws came into being?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes and I think that's when he was really buying apartment buildings.  And I think he was in hopes that they would last for just a few years (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And they're still here.
Speaker 2: Yes and they still here yes absolutely.
Speaker 1: We was just talking about that earlier, you know, you know, I have--just the business once someone is in a rent controlled apartment it's very hard to get them out (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes.
Speaker 1: And you trying to sell the building it becomes an issue that, you know, you have this tenant, and you can't get em out.
Speaker 2: Yes it was really quite, quite something so.
Story_ID: 373069
Speaker 1: So that was, that was a major topic of conversation. And then we, we had lots of conversations about, about being black in a, in a predominantly white world.
Speaker 2: What was his [Williams' father, Edgar Thomas Williams, Sr.] advice?
Speaker 1: His advice were that, you know, you, you, know you, have to be yourself, you know, you, you do the best job you can as a as an individual and, and be very comfortable with yourself.  And we were always very comfortable my sister, and I was very comfortable ourselves.  And I was very comfortable going through school and met and had lots of friends both in the black community and outside the black community.
Speaker 2: Did your father ever talk about different classes did he, did he talk about?
Speaker 1: Yes, he talked about that was a discussion we were the second black family to move on, on the block that we lived on Macon Street.  We moved I think its 7061 Macon and my father became president of the block association within a few years.  Well, there was obviously mass flight whites were leaving, you know, fairly rapidly, and it was a very solid middle--upper middle class it was a upper middle class block.  And, and, you know, we talked about--we talked about that and my, you know, mother [Elnora Bing Williams Morris] belong to one of the oldest blocks in Brooklyn [New York].  And my father was the founder of the, of the Oldtimers [Brooklyn Oldtimers Foundation, Inc., Brooklyn, New York] which is a, a group of, of black men in Brooklyn who gave scholarships to, to kids.  And they raise money every year and, and still going today, and it's going doing very well today as a matter of fact.
Speaker 2: And it's still it's called the Oldtimers?
Speaker 1: You know, yes it's called the old the Oldtimers Foundation, yes.
Speaker 2: So what, what I mean did he ever talk to you about where you guys stood about what--where you stood within the community and what your class may be?
Speaker 1: Well we, we sort of represented the elite class in the, in the community.  I grew up with a very small group of people, and I belong to a club called the Centurions [ph.].  And this particular club we were all teenagers and maybe even fifteen of us.  And parents were all educated they were doctors, lawyers, you know, judges, real estate, teachers, and we were, we were all very well connected.  And we kept in touch we went to different schools--some went away to boarding schools some went away to college, others of us stayed home, but we were always in close connection with, with one another as we were, as we were growing up.
Speaker 2: And with then--I mean, within that class, you know, considered the elite class.  Did you ever have discussions amongst yourselves about where you were what you wanted to do with your lives did you ever what were your dreams within that group of people (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah we all knew well, first of all, we all knew we were going to college.  We all knew we didn't have to pay, you know, our parents were gonna put us through school.  It wasn't--that wasn't an issue we all got allowances.  We traveled around to various parts of the country meeting other friends, and we were involved in clubs like Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.] growing up which is a teenage club of, of parents and, and children.  And so we got to meet people in different cities on, on the East Coast.  And we all knew we were going to college, and everybody went to college.  And we're all doing various things I think most of the Centurions, as we were called, have all been successful in one way or another some more successful than others but all leading, you know, a fairly nice lives today.  And we're, and a lot had to do with, with our parents in the way we were brought up.
Speaker 2: And what would you say that the--what would you say I mean what you say our parents in the way we were brought up?  How would you describe the way we were brought up (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well we had a solid financial background to begin with and so that was not a big issue.  And, and as a result of that you, you know, you could move about and do a lot of things.  You didn't have to worry about; you know, where your next meal was coming from certainly at the end of the Depression [Great Depression] and what not.  And, and as I said we knew, you knew that you were going on to school, and you knew that you would someday be a success.  And that, you know, and those kind of things happened.  You know, your parents always talked about success how important it was your grandparents talked about it.  There were close family units you got to know your grandparents.  I got to know my grandparents and some of my great-grandparents.
Story_ID: 373070
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What are your very earliest memories of your childhood?  Did you work in your [maternal] grandfather's [Thomas Bing] store do you remember the stationary store (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I did that, I did that sometimes on occasions and, and my grandfather suggested that that I start, start a business as, as a teenager.  And I said, "Well, you know, I don't know what kind."  He said, "Well, you know, well I think it'd be good for you to make some money on your own.  Why don't you why don't you try a window cleaning business 'cause people always need their windows cleaned."  So I started a window cleaning business in, in Brooklyn [New York] and--
Speaker 1: It's okay she can--it's okay if she passes.
Speaker 2: Okay, and work and it worked out pretty well for about a year and a half and I, you know, I saved some money.  And then when I was doing windows at someone's house, and I took a storm window down, and I think I broke the window (laughter).  And I sort of gave it up, and I said I don't wanna, you know, I'll go back to just getting an allowance from my father [Edgar Thomas Williams, Sr.].  So but, but they thought that instilling a work ethic, my grandfather especially thought that that was important.
Story_ID: 373071
Speaker 1: But that's when you were a teenager what was some of your earliest memories as a child (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My--some of my earliest memories as a child was going into my [maternal] grandparents' [Irene Bing and Thomas Bing] house and going up to the fourth floor in this old rambling frame house on Waverly Avenue the Clinton Hill section of Brooklyn [New York] that wasn't used.  The top floor was just sort of cobwebs, and stuff and I used to be I used to find it fascinating going up to the top floor of this, this old frame house.  And hiding, hiding there and eventually when some relatives started coming up from the south the floor was opened.  And then eventually I, I had a set of electric trains that we kept, kept there on that floor.  And they were Lionel trains and they were--it was great, and they were a lot of fun I enjoyed that I enjoyed that very much as a, as a kid.
Story_ID: 373072
Speaker 1: So what were holidays like in the household when you were a child?
Speaker 2: Well we were--my--the Bings had houses in a place called Greenwood Lake [New York] they had country houses.
Speaker 1: Where is, is that in Upstate New York?
Speaker 2: It's Upstate New York it's on the border sort of what New York, New Jersey yeah Upstate New York.
Speaker 1: Is it a black community?
Speaker 2: It was a black community it was started in the '20s [1920s].  And my great aunt and uncles, grandparents they all had houses there, and that's where we would spend most of our most of our summers.  I have pictures of my mother [Elnora Bing Williams Morris] horseback riding during the Depression [Great Depression] up there. And letters from my father [Edgar Thomas Williams, Sr.] who would write to my mother with just her name and Greenwood Lake and apparently she would get the get the letter.  And that was a I found that to be very, very enjoyable doing the summers in my early in the early--this is before we started going out to the Sag Harbor [New York].
Speaker 1: Right, but talk--does that community still exists?
Speaker 2: Not really no it has really there are still a few people who are there but very few.  It's has really--just it's become very integrated, and it's almost like a bedroom community now of New York City [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As opposed to a summer colony.
Speaker 1: Is it in is it in the mountains or how far outside the city (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, yeah it's on the lake called Greenwood Lake.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah it's in the mountains (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That sounds, sounds interesting that that community existed in the '20s [1920s] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes very much so and it continued on until about I think my last relatives sold there maybe ten years ago.
Speaker 1: So why do you think the community started to sell, and people became less interested in going upstate to vacation (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well the later generations like my generation were not particularly interested we would prefer to be at the, the beach.
Speaker 1: At the beach.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: As opposed to the mountains?
Speaker 2: As opposed to the mountains yeah and I think that's one of the reasons.  And then, you know, I know people then, you know, they were selling.  There were there were a lot of people moving in--I don't know if you would call it gentrifying because it was a lovely spot but anyway but it became very integrated, and we didn't have the same (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Haven. It wasn't a haven anymore.
Speaker 2: --cachet that he had that had in the late '20s [1920s] and even before my time and '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s] I would say.
Story_ID: 373073
Speaker 1: So how did you--what was the daily life like in the family, the f- your, the daily routine of the families when you were a child?
Speaker 2: The only routine was we'd get, you know, I--we would get up my mother [Elnora Bing Williams Morris], or someone would fix us fix the children breakfast.  And off to, you know, off to school of course if we were going to going to elementary school with our mother or whoever was taking us to school in the morning.  And then we would come back from school in the afternoon do homework mostly spent a lot of time doing homework.  And, you know, on occasions go, go to the movies visit, visit with friends on weekends--have very social with friends but a lot of time sightseeing.  And going places like the Brooklyn Museum [New York, New York], the Brooklyn Botanical Gardens [sic. Brooklyn Botanic Garden, New York, New York], the Brooklyn library [Brooklyn Public Library, New York, New York].  My sister would play the--at a little auditorium at Carnegie Hall [New York, New York] in the '40s [1940s] piano because we all had to take--we all had a piano teacher named Mrs. Vannexel [ph.].
Story_ID: 373074
Speaker 1: So we were talking about the pianos (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So we were talking about the--yes.  We had a piano teacher that taught most of the, the black upper-middle and upper-class name Mrs. Vannexel [ph.].  And how I remember was because I just found something the other day that, that showed a concert recital that she was having that was a dollar at Carnegie Hall [New York, New York].  And that was interesting now this is in the early '40s [1940s], and they were going to Carnegie Hall for recitals.  And my sister--I asked her she said yes she played in that particular recital.  So, you know, the whole cultural thing was, was very important we learned and we learned how to, how to play the, play the piano.  We, we were reasonably articulate, you know, we, we learned the social graces there were, you know, we've involved in cotillions and so forth (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Talk to me about the social graces and the cotillions?
Speaker 2: Well in, in Brooklyn [New York] there was a group called The Girl Friends [The Girl Friends, Inc.] which is a very old social club in, in which is nationwide.  And they--The Girl Friends consisted of a small group of women usually thirty or thirty-five in each city or borough who were very interested in doing things civically as well as socially they were very social.  And, and they in Brooklyn, the Brooklyn Girl Friends, did the cotillions.  And as a young men we were very involved in, in going to the armory, learning how to waltz and, of course, it was beautiful girls there so, you know, we were all very excited.  And I did this for I think I guess two--I was in two cotillions here in New York [New York] and the Washington Girl Friends, Washington, D.C.  I went to Washington to be with my friends in Washington friends who were coming out, and somebody asked me to be their escort, and they do it like a dance, and I knew the waltz, and that's why I did it in Washington as well.  And they--the cotillions went on for probably four, five, six, seven, ten years perhaps.  And then it, it started to fade because there wasn't that interest in the younger generation coming along like my children and girls were not particularly interested in that.
Speaker 1: Why were your children not interested in it?
Speaker 2: Well I--my wife [Auldlyn Higgins Williams] before I answer that my wife was queen of Me-Do-So Cotillion in, in Baltimore [Maryland], her father [I. Bradshaw Higgins] who was a surgeon in Baltimore.  Was very--the Me-Do-So was a group of doctors and dentists who did the cotillion in, in Maryland.  And usually, the cotillion were done to benefit some charity and the one in New York, for example, benefited the McDonald Street community center [ph.] which was part of one of the old churches in, in Brooklyn.
Speaker 1: So you were just also telling me why you're--your opinions on why you felt the younger generations was not interested in carrying on traditions?
Speaker 2: I think the younger generation mainly got heavily involved in their own--for example my two daughters [Brooke Williams and Eden Williams] went to the Spence School [New York, New York] here in New York.  And one then went on to Andover [Phillips Academy Andover, Andover, Massachusetts] they both went to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and they just had different interests I mean they weren't, you know, they weren't interested in the whole kind of social segregated social scene because they didn't have to be.  I mean the social scene was very, it's very integrated now.  And you, you know, your friends are based pretty much on, on who you like and who likes you and your background and their background similar backgrounds.  So they weren't interested in the whole society black society scene as of course I was, you know, coming up as my mother [Elnora Bing Williams Morris] was and my [maternal] grandparents [Irene Bing and Thomas Bing].
Story_ID: 373075
Speaker 1: Now you touched on something else that I want you just comment on briefly is that your wife's [Auldlyn Higgins Williams] father was a surgeon in Baltimore [Maryland]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: My wife's father was I. Bradshaw Higgins, and he was actually Jamaican and whose father--his father was an architect in Jamaica and sent him first to England to school to college King's College [ London, England] and then to Meharry Medical school [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee].  When he finished Meharry Medical school, he didn't--he wasn't sure he want to go back to Jamaica.  So he came to Baltimore, and he met Lynn's mother [Hilda Moseley Higgins] who was a fifth generation Baltimorean, and African American Baltimorean and then they fell in love and, and married.  And he was one of properly three black surgeons in the '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s] in Baltimore and did extraordinarily well as a surgeon and, and real estate.
Speaker 1: And real estate as well? (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah he invested in real estate and stocks (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 373076
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now do you think your, your grandfather--your [maternal] grandfather [Thomas Bing] owned several buildings (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's correct.
Speaker 1: --as well as your father [Edgar Thomas Williams, Sr.].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So do you think there is a tradition in the family of real estate?
Speaker 2: I think there is I think, I think real estate seems to be the thing that most upper-class black families got into with extra cash, you know, they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And why do you think that it's what they could see?
Speaker 2: Well land, land and when I say real estate I mean land and buildings and what not because, you know, it's always there.  You always have it.  It's always, it's always available to you.  I, I remember somebody asked my sister JoAnne Williams Carter at a party at a party at the City Museum [Museum of the City of New York, New York, New York], I think we had donated some money.  And Kitty Carlisle Hart said to my sister, "Now where does your money come from?" No, she said it to my wife [Auldlyn Higgins Williams] my wife was so aghast at the question she didn't know what to say.  And my sister turned to her and said, "Land" and that was the end of it--you know.  So it's true, you know, you need land.  Land is always good to have, and you can always sell it and or you can hold onto it.  It always appreciates sometimes it goes up high then it goes down a little, and it goes up to another height.  But real estate is always something that's been very much apart real estate in our family.  And the land in South Carolina is still helpful.  I mean we have we have land around US Highway 95 [U.S. Route 95] and, you know, the big huge signs that are up.  And we have a hundred acres here and hundred a there that is, just waiting at some point to be developed.  So we're, we're very excited about some of the prospects also in South Carolina.  They'll either be developed or they'll, or we will give them to something like The Nature Conservancy, which I'm on the board in New York and, and they have Nature Conservancy in South Carolina.  So, you know, some of it a--be preserved, and some of it will be sold to, to help family members that need money to continue educating their children.
Story_ID: 373077
Speaker 1: So when you think about your childhood what sights sounds or smells remind you of growing up in Brooklyn [New York]?
Speaker 2: Sights what do you when you say sights you mean (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well I guess--
Speaker 2: --like the Brooklyn Museum [New York, New York] or?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah those kinds of sights.
Speaker 2: I was always impressed with things like I was always impressed with, with the museum.  I was always impressed with--I always liked coming out of the subway at Fulton [Street] and, and Stuyvesant Avenue.  If you coming out of the subway there, there's a park called Fulton Park [Brooklyn, New York].  And as you right on the other side of the park are these gorgeous brownstone and limestone houses which is the area I grew up in when you come out of the subway, it's a, it's a great very peaceful kind of sense and feeling.  And the housing there today is as nice as it ever was it's now called Stuyvesant Heights [Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, New York] because they're all historic houses.  And properties are selling well in excess of $1 million, but that, but that was always a great comfort coming, coming and seeing, you know, being back home in your own, in your own neighborhood and a very nice neighborhood at that.  And as a result, a lot of--many people just stayed several generations I mean instead of moving to, to St. Albans, Queens [New York], which some of the people did do moving further out to Flatbush [Brooklyn, New York] or something like that.
Speaker 1: So what's smells or what's smells that you smell today that takes you back to your childhood?
Speaker 2: Well the smell of, of frankfurters take me back to my childhood because we did go to Coney Island [New York, New York] a lot.  And, and we went on all the rides, and we loved the rides, and I loved Nathan's [Nathan's Famous] hot dogs, and it was always a very exciting place to, to go.
Story_ID: 373078
Speaker 1: Who was it that (background noise) introduced you to art when you were a child you said you would go to the Brooklyn Museum [New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: I think my mother [Elnora Bing Williams Morris] really kind of introduced us to art they were not particularly big collectors, but, but they had some pieces of art in, in the house.  And I really started collecting when I went to India--in after I finished college [Brooklyn College, Brooklyn, New York] I was given a trip as a, as a gift to India.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Talk about your school you had mentioned that you went abroad after college for six months to India.
Speaker 1: That's correct.
Speaker 2: But let's go back to elementary school to P.S. 70 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --in Brooklyn [New York].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Your first grade or thereabouts who were the teachers that influenced you or that stood out during those elementary school years?
Speaker 1: Well my--I don't really remember the, the teachers at, at P.S. 70 because that was the first couple, couple of years.  I was, I was then sort of wrenched out of that school and went all the way downtown to a whole different location during the war [World War II, WWII], while my father [Edgar Thomas Williams, Sr.] was working for the, for the government.  And I had a couple of teachers one was Ms. Bardell [ph.], who was my seventh grade teacher who I remember very well.  And I was in a class of--where they had men learned how to cook. Men, the boys--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --learned how to cook I should say. And so I not only did you take woodwork, but you also took cooking.  And the girls and the girls it was an experimental class and the girls did both as well.  The, the teacher was the home economics teacher also taught my mother.  So I think she was in her last couple years at the school, and her name was Ms. Bardell, and so I've never I've never forgot her.  And she and I--of course I became the teacher's pet 'cause she just loved my mother, and my mother was one of two black kids in the school, and I was probably one of about six or seven in my class (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So that didn't change much between you and your mother?
Speaker 1: No, no it didn't change very much no exactly.
Speaker 2: And you what was the name of that school?
Speaker 1: It's called the Elliott School [P.S. 67, Elliott School, New York, New York] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Elliott School.
Speaker 1: --it was P.S. 67 yeah in the Fort Greene section of, of Brooklyn it was not far from the Navy yard [Brooklyn Navy Yard, New York, New York] actually.   And we lived down in that section for about five or six years.
Speaker 2: And then from there you went to junior high school?
Speaker 1: From there no I went directly to a high school. The school went to the eighth grade and then I went to high school was 9, 10, 11 and 12.  And I had four years at a school called Eastern District [Eastern District High School, Brooklyn, New York], and I went to Williamsburg [Brooklyn, New York]. And I took, and I took the elevated line from our house on Macon Street to Williamsburg.  And that was the school--Williamsburg was a predominantly Jewish area at the time.  There was--the school may have been 5 or 8 percent black.  I think we were the only blacks and mostly Jewish and other white ethnic groups predominantly Jewish.  And it was interesting school, and I got to know a number of people that I know still occasionally see today.  And I was president of the high school I was president of the general organization in my high school in my junior year.  And I was captain of the track team, and I was on the fencing team.  And I was president of the Brooklyn Junior Red Cross the Brooklyn-Staten Island Junior Red Cross during that same period of time.  I was also on a TV program called 'Sense and Nonsense' which was in the in the '50s [1950s].  And you would appear on television, and they would make certain sounds you were blindfolded.  And you'd have to say what it was for example if the refrigerated doors is closed you would have to say, "Refrigerator door closing" on it.  And then and--you and I was on it for about three weeks on TV for about three weeks.  And I was raising money for the Junior Red Cross [American Junior Red Cross] at that time along with I had, and there were two others who were with me on the team.
Speaker 2: How were you selected to be on the television show?
Speaker 1: They selected officers of the, of the Red Cross and I was since I was president I was the person I was one of the lucky person to do it.
Story_ID: 373079
Speaker 1: Now did your family have a good standing within the community you said people knew who you were? Did that benefit you?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, it was very helpful--it was always very helpful.  And I, I often tell a story that, that I was when I finished college [Brooklyn College, Brooklyn, New York] then went on to went abroad came back, and I taught for about a year in a junior high school not far from where I lived.  Now I--well, you know, I was young, and I would arrive at school and, you know, it was the only black school.  And everybody knew who Mr. Williams' [HistoryMaker E. T. Williams] parents were because my father [Edgar Thomas Williams, Sr.] had a real estate office and they knew that he was in real estate it wasn't far from the school.  And I've arrived in school, and I'd see a picture of Mr. Williams' mother [Elnora Bing Williams Morris] they would draw a picture of Mr. Williams' mother on the blackboard.  And occasionally when I was disciplining a student they would say they're gonna go tell my father.  And, and so it didn't seem to be working out very well.  My father got a big kick out of these kids occasionally coming into his office to complaining about, about their son about his son and he said he would take he would take care of it.  So it really didn't work so I spent about a year doing that, and then the Peace Corps came into existence, and I went into the Peace Corps and in, in Ethiopia as a Peace Corps volunteer.
Story_ID: 373080
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So before you go to Ethiopia the--were there during the high school years [at Eastern District High School, Brooklyn, New York] you're very active on the track team you said?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Junior president where did the--what other sports were you involved in where did that side of you come from were there other athletes in the family?
Speaker 2: My father [Edgar Thomas Williams, Sr.] was a very big basketball player very active and, and then was a basketball coach for the--for the Carlton Y Bees [Carlton YMCA Bees] they were called.  And my uncles were all involved my, my mother's [Elnora Bing Williams Morris] brothers played football in, in various high schools and around New York [New York].  So then we were all into I, I did, I did track, and I did fencing.  I enjoyed fencing (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now why fencing why did that appeal to you?
Speaker 2: I don't know I really don't know why fencing it was a kind of gentlemen's sport and I, I think I saw it on television a couple of times.  And I thought it might be fun to fun to learn, and the, and the school offered fencing so I did that.  I also played the clarinet and so I was in the school, school band so I, I (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Marching band or symphonic band or orchestra?
Speaker 2: In the orchestra, orchestra so I was very active in school in high school and--
Speaker 1: What type of a student were you?
Speaker 2: I was an average student I was probably a C plus, B minus student.  I was more interested in the whole social side of the things and doing all of these other things and, and then studying I said I would study hard enough to, to go on to college and, and get a degree and then do something.
Story_ID: 373081
Speaker 1: So once you get your, get your--you're a senior, and you're getting close for you to go to college do you start to have conversations with your parents [Elnora Bing Williams Morris and Edgar Thomas Williams, Sr.] about which colleges you would apply to how does that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes that became a big controversy in my family because my grandfather [Thomas Bing], my mother's father wanted me to go away to college.  And he thought, you know, obviously Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] was the school I know friends of mine were applying to, and so I visited, and I applied to Harvard I applied to Syracuse [Syracuse University, Syracuse, New York] and maybe two or three other schools.  My dad, on the other hand, went to Brooklyn College [Brooklyn, New York].  Graduated from Brooklyn College and wanted me--he went to Brooklyn College it was good enough for him it was good enough for me.  And this was, you know, the father-in-law a father my grandfather versus my mother's father versus my dad who was really supporting us.  My grandfather wasn't supporting us, and he wanted his son to go on to Brooklyn College.  Well, I got on the waiting list at Harvard, Harvard at that time was admitting two or maybe three blacks there was a quota system in the '50s [1950s].  And I knew the people who had gotten in (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who were the people who gotten in?
Speaker 2: A guy Joe Hoffman [ph.], who was who lived in Charleston, South Carolina.  And again since he was South Carolinian and from an old Charleston family his father was a physician we knew, we knew him.  And Terrence Bannister [ph.] from Brooklyn [New York] as a matter of fact his father was also a physician in Brooklyn.  And, and I think the third one was I think Carter Marshall [Carter Marshall, Jr.], who was New Haven [Connecticut] his father was also a physician he got in those, were the three.  And it was interesting because, you know, these are, these are three black kids that were not on scholarship.  And as you may know, if you read Larry O. Graham's [Lawrence Otis Graham] book 'The Senator and the Socialite' ['The Senator and the Socialite: The True Story of America's First Black Dynasty'] it deals with, with blacks going to Exeter [Phillips Exeter Academy, Exeter, New Hampshire] and on to Harvard in the, in the mid-1800s.  And they were all they all paid their families all could afford them attending these schools.  So I, so that was a little diversion but getting back to, to me I then went on to Brooklyn College and then went by subway to school every day.  I had a nice big large bedroom with a lounge area where I studied.  And I also studied at the, at the Brooklyn Public Library [New York, New York], which I enjoyed very much.
Speaker 1: And then you went home every day didn't you?
Speaker 2: And I went home every day yes.  And I, you know, occasionally changed my, my bedroom was changed around.  And I had a very enjoyable time.  I enjoyed vacation time because my friends would come home.  I had friends again that were at Harvard, they were at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] and then was far away as the University of Idaho [Moscow, Idaho].
Story_ID: 373082
Speaker 1: So did you socialize outside of the social circle you'd grown up in?  Were you friends with say white people that were in Manhattan [New York] or Queens [New York] or--?
Speaker 2: No I, I mean I was friendly with the people at school when there were school events, for example, I was named teenager of the year.  I was a black guy, and the girl name- Rella Ticeberger [ph.], who's, is named Rella Anderson [ph.] she was the girl, and I was the boy.  And, you know, we had this big birthday, and there was a big celebration so we were and the two of us pushing this down this is '55 [1955] now.  And I talked to her just last week she had had a reunion with some of the other girls.  And they were asking what happened where I was and what I was doing so forth?  And so we spent time partly at school they often they came to my house on occasions for, for meetings as we were running all of us were involved in running for the--I ran on a party called the Lucky Party [ph.].  When I was running for president of the G.O. For General Organization which is the student body.  And, you know, we would meet at my house and, and review our, our speeches and plans and what not.  So that was the only that was the only socializing that I did with kids from school.  My socializing was done in a very insular, very small group of people that I grew up with in basically in New York [New York].  And similar young people who were in other cities Atlantic City [New Jersey], in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], in Washington [D.C.], New Haven [Connecticut], Boston [Massachusetts].
Story_ID: 373083
Speaker 1: So when during your time in Brooklyn--at Brooklyn College [Brooklyn, New York] whose decision was it to--for you or was it your decision to major in economics or was it something your father [Edgar Thomas Williams, Sr.] had (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no it was my, my decision it didn't matter what my father didn't care what I majored in as long as I was going to college.  And, and I was gonna, you know, get through and then decide whether I was gonna go on to grad school or just have a career or [U.S.] Foreign Service.  I often thought I was going to the Foreign Service that was something that truly intrigued me and interest me.  There was all--some, some discussions of my going into politics and ultimately being a congressman running for [U.S.] Congress in the area that I, that I grew up. Shirley Chisholm was became a congressman from that area, but as I watched politics, I thought that was too invasive in your personal life.  And I didn't think that I wanted that in my life, and so I just shied away shied away from that and decided I would take a different turn.  Initially was a diplomatic issue and then I, I ended up becoming a banker.
Speaker 1: Well let's just go back a minute you said that there is a, there's a diplomatic issue?
Speaker 2: I was thinking of, of the diplomatic of the diplomatic corps.  I, I like the idea of a Foreign Service and being an ambassador or, you know, something.  And in, in terms of public service.  And I thought about it as a career, but my father didn't think very much of--he thought it was fine.  You know, to do for a couple years but maybe be appointed later on in life but not to continue, you know, working for the government.  You know, all, all your life because you, you know, you really couldn't live the way I was accustomed to or the way I wanted to continue living later on in life (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) On a government salary.
Speaker 2: On the government salary yeah so--
Speaker 1: Yeah okay that was smart of him.  Were they ever any talk between the two of you about you taking over the family real estate business?
Speaker 2: Oh yes the business was named Edgar T. Williams & Son [Brooklyn, New York] so it was always that, that prospect and indeed I did during my college years my father had a very serious stroke.  And so I had to leave college for a year and take some cram courses to get a real estate and insurance broker's license.  And of course, manage a salesman and a secretary and everyone who was in his office because my father was, was quite ill.  He--after a year's time he recovered enough to come back to work and then I went back, back to college.
Speaker 1: So doing that time you said you cram to study for the real estate and get your broker's license?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: To take over the business for your father how many salesmen do you have on board at the time?
Speaker 2: There were three or four salesmen. And a secretary (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And they were all working within the community?
Speaker 2: Yes pretty much.
Speaker 1: Buying and selling within the community?  Getting listings, selling property?
Speaker 2: Yes that's exactly what they did.
Speaker 1: And then what was your job then to overseeing?
Speaker 2: My job was the same thing and overseeing, and I had--someone have to, you know, someone has to be an active broker my father because he was, you know, was not an active broker.  And at that time, you had to have an active broker in the office supervising the salesman.
Story_ID: 373084
Speaker 1: So then what year did you--were you able to return to college and then to finish (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I returned in fifty--I think it was '57 [1957] that I was out for that year.  And then I returned in '58 [1958] the year of 58 and '59 [1959] I graduated in 1960.
Speaker 1: And (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) From, from Brooklyn [Brooklyn College, Brooklyn, New York].
Speaker 1: And, and during 1960 during the time you were graduating how did it come about you would go to India to live for six months is that something that had come up before, were you interested in traveling?
Speaker 2: I was always interested in travel because I had been abroad before I've been to Europe once summer after school.  And, and I had took a course in economics on the, the economy of India by a Vietnamese professor named Martha Stephanie Brown [ph.].  I'll never forget her she had a wonderful accent.  She always talked about, ze oil and ze--you know, that kind of thing and I just loved her accent.  And I was very excited about India at the time, and I said, you know, I would really--tell my folks, you know.  They said, "What you want for your graduation?"  I said, "I want to go to India for a little bit" because I had this course that I took on India it sound fascinating.  It gave me a really different perspective on, on another part of the world they said, "Fine."  So off I went on a program called the Experiment in International Living, and I went to India, and I lived with Indian families.
Speaker 1: Now do you know the history of that program who--I mean it was a prequel to the Peace Corps?
Speaker 2: Yeah it's an old it's an old program it doesn't--it exists now under a different name which I forget what the name is, but it was--it had a model people learned to live together by living together.  And people would come to America mostly from Europe to live with Americans.  And then there were a few other countries that were added like India and what not more exotic and more different.  And I found that when I went to India, it was such a different cultural experience.  That when you went through the worst slums or what we considered slums of Harlem [New York, New York] they were like palaces compared to what the slums were like and then the poverty that you would see in places like India.  Of course, today it's changed significantly but in the '60s [1960s] and the '50s [1950s] it was just--there were the basically the very rich and the poor.  I live with a maharaja and his family, and I live with an insurance person and his family I lived with an engineer and their family and in, in Bombay [Mumbai, India].  I lived in Bombay I lived in Mugelot [ph.] I met a Nehru [Jawaharlal Nehru], the prime minister, and there were about twelve of us who were on this particular group.  And we, we would meet periodically, and we would then be dispersed to various Indian families.  It was an extraordinary experience for me.
Story_ID: 373085
Speaker 1: And then from that experience you come back [from India] and decide that you're going to teach?  Why do you decide teaching is it that you can't get a job doing anything in economics at the time?
Speaker 2: It was, it was easy thing to do there was the issue of the draft whether I was going to the [U.S.] military.  And I wasn't particularly interested in going into the military.  And I knew that if I taught school, I could probably be deferred, and that was true.  A friend of ours a Mrs. Margie Costa [ph.] was head of the draft board in, in Brooklyn [New York] that what I was handle.  Another good friend John King [John B. King, Sr.] was associate superintendent of schools and so with that combination and my parents and my teaching skills, they seem to like what I did I was named--
Speaker 1: teacher of the year.
Speaker 2: Teacher of the year, you know, I mean (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And what did you teach exactly?
Speaker 2: I taught geography.
Story_ID: 373086
Speaker 1: So we're just talking about the point you were talking about geography, and you were teaching geography, but you said something interesting is you've had your bouts with segregation even though you were in the upper class you still had to deal with issues.  Were they prior to you--I mean as a child or as an adult?
Speaker 2: No I didn't really have any as a child mainly I guess my, my parents [Elnora Bing Williams Morris and Edgar Thomas Williams, Sr.] sheltered me from it or I never really ran into it except once when we were going down to South Carolina.  And we got to the Mason-Dixon Line, and we had to change cars my mother had, and the two of us had to go into a different car.  And my two uncles stayed in the car that they were in and I could--I didn't know what, what that was all about--well of course obviously they were fair, so they didn't know then they were connected and sort of with us.  And of course, they were laughing and what not they just got a big kick of it--my uncles, because they were fooling everybody.  And that was my first, first experience with it but in New York [New York]--my wife [Auldlyn Higgins Williams] had a lot of experience it because they could not try on clothes in Baltimore [Maryland].  So they had to go to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], so the Baltimore stores really lost out on all the upper class families.  They all went to Wanamaker's and other stores in Philadelphia to buy to buy clothes, clothes and whatnot for their children.  In New York, we did not have that problem we had a large store in Brooklyn [New York] called the Abraham and Straus [New York, New York] which was a wonderful store.  And I remember when I was a youngster going down with my mother and, and arriving at that store and they would--the elevator operators, most of them, were black would greet her, "Oh Mrs. Williams it's nice to see you" and on and on.  And we'd go on through the store and what not it was very, very exciting.  And it wasn't all--everything was very interracial.  I then started facing it as I got a little older and was--had to go into the business world.  When I first plied, applied to several banks here in New York in the early '60s [1960s] with Morgan Guaranty [Morgan Guaranty Trust Company of New York; JPMorgan Chase and Co.], Chase [Chase Manhattan Bank; JPMorgan Chase and Co.] and a couple of others and I got--I was turned down that they didn't have anything available for me.
Story_ID: 373087
Speaker 1: And this was before I actually went on Peace Corps staff in the--so I went on Peace Corps staff in Washington [D.C.], and I did that for three years.
Speaker 2: But before then you went to--you actually worked?
Speaker 1: Before that I had been a volunteer yes I became a (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A volunteer at that time.
Speaker 1: I became a Peace Corps volunteer in 1962 and after my teaching experience in the Peace Corps came into being, and I thought that that would be a wonderful way for me to see parts of Africa and to do something good for the country. And so I joined the Peace Corps, and I was in the first Peace Corps group that went to Ethiopia.  And there were 350 high school teachers we doubled the high school staff in Ethiopia.  And I taught in a little town south of the capital Addis Ababa [Ethiopia] called Waliso [Ethiopia].  It was--had two names Waliso and Ghion [Ethiopia] about seventy miles southwest of Addis on the road to Jimma [Ethiopia].  Jimma was the next biggest town south of Addis, and there were four of us, five of us who were there including Paul Tsongas, who was the U.S. senator for Massachusetts, who became U.S. senator of Massachusetts.  Paul often said in, in his letters to me, that I was very helpful and influential in him going into, into politics, I thought he'd be a very good politician then.
Speaker 2: Did you tell him that like that back then (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I told him that, and I have, I have a letter I still have in my safe deposit box that I will be giving, giving to his--he has a library they have a library [Paul Tsongas Congressional Collection, University of Massachusetts Lowell Libraries] for him in Lawrence, Massachusetts [sic. Lowell, Massachusetts].  And he was a wonderful person and, and a great roommate.  The school that I was in I taught geography again, and I was discipline master.  So if any kids were unruly for any reason, they would come to me, and I would use the switch or something on them.
Speaker 2: Of the three hundred teachers that was, that were sent out how many were black?
Speaker 1: There may have been ten, ten or fifteen blacks in, in our group.  And in Ethiopia they kept saying you, you Ethiopian you Ethiopian, you know, they kept saying that to me and, you know, they loved me.  And I, and I love them, and but the medium of exchange, of course, was English.  So they, they spoke English by the time they reached high school they were fairly fluent in, in English.  And they were the elite because only 10 percent of, of kids from elementary school went on to high school.
Speaker 2: Wow.
Speaker 1: So they were very interested in learning the, the contrast of teaching in ninth grade Ethiopia and the U.S. was so different.  Because when you walk into the room everyone would stand, and they would bow, and you would bow, and then they would sit, and you would begin your lesson.  When you walked in the classroom in, in Brooklyn [New York] they'd hardly even acknowledge that you actually entered the room and what not.  And they're still making noise you have to scream at them to get them to calm down and to get, you know, be serious about what's going on.  So it was a wonderful, exhilarating experience teaching in Ethiopia and of course, we got a chance to meet the emperor, Haile Selassie he was still there at the time.  And we had an I used to go to Addis, and got to know the, the American ambassador the head of the Peace Corps there, and it was--for me, it was very exciting.
Speaker 2: Did that increase or decrease your taste for wanting to be a diplomatic or to be involved in politics?
Speaker 1: Well that sort of made me feel as though I've been involved.  And my father [Edgar Thomas Williams, Sr.] said, you know, it's nice to do something for the government for a few years, and then you need to get on to a real life.
Story_ID: 373088
Speaker 1: Now what was--Paul [Paul Tsongas] was teaching also?
Speaker 2: Paul was also teaching, yes, he taught English and mathematics. At the same school (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was--did--what did you see in him that led you to say to him that he'd be a good--?
Speaker 2: Well I saw how he interacted with people very well and how he interacted with all of us.  And he was always helping all of us solve any problems that we had.  We had--we--there were five of us that lived in this house in this particular town [Waliso, Ethiopia] and he was always the problem solver.  And I said, you know, you're gonna be a good politician one day.
Speaker 1: Did he have aspirations at the time of becoming a politician (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yeah, yeah because he yes because he knew the Kennedys and Bobby Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy] and he was very excited about the possibility he was gonna go back go to law school.  And when he finished law school go into politics and that's exactly what he did.
Speaker 1: Now did he run for president or he was thinking of?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: He did run (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, he was on the circuit for a while yes.
Speaker 1: So that would have been the primaries he was (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was on the primaries that's correct.
Speaker 1: He was on the primary.  And did you have any contact with him during that time?
Speaker 2: Yes, I contacted with him of course before, but he was U.S. Senate.  I was sitting in his office once when they were considering the Chrysler bill [Chrysler Corporation Loan Guarantee Act of 1979].  Chrysler motors [Chrysler Corporation; FCA US LLC, Auburn Hills, Michigan] was in very serious trouble, and the government bailed them out.  U.S. government bailed them out, and they got back on their feet.  And I remember sitting--going to Paul's office, and he said, you know, we gonna have dinner he said, "Why don't you just wait here.  I'm gonna go off and vote on this Chrysler bill."  And I was just lounging in his office I was looking at all the great pictures and what not, and it was marvelous he was U.S. senator.  And he came back, and we ended up going out going out to dinner.  And it was a, it was a very exciting time, and I remember the Chrysler stock was four dollars a share.  And I just I was sorry that I hadn't bought a lot of it because it really went up significantly after the government bailed them out.  And the government got all its money back and then some, so it worked out very well for everybody.  Nobody lost their jobs and then Chrysler got back on its feet.
Speaker 1: Now during that--during the time you--was it what time did he run for--get involved in, in running for president what year was that was in (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't have it I really don't have the years.
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm thinking the '80s [1980s]?
Speaker 2: In my--yes it would've been the early--yeah, yeah before Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] so it would've been in the '80s [1980s] late '80s [1980s] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, and how was he has a roommate?
Speaker 2: Well I mean as a roommate but we, we all had separate rooms but as a, as a housemate he was he was fine.  You know, he, he on occasions got, got moody, and I had to kind of, you know, straighten him out.  I think I was the oldest one in the group.  And so but he was very personable a good--most of the time and he was always amazed at how easily I, I got to know people.  He was very interested in the language to in learning Amharic, which didn't have a lot of appeal to me.  And I knew and was told that they brought us there for them to learn English not for us to learn Amharic he was wanting to learn Amharic.  So that was a dichotomy in terms of that the two of us had different emphases on what we were doing--
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: --as volunteers.
Story_ID: 373089
Speaker 1: Did that experience [in Ethiopia] lead to coming back to Washington [D.C.] to actually working on staff at the Peace Corps?
Speaker 2: Yes that experience led to me coming back to Washington and, and, in fact, they asked me before I left to come back and, and recruit nationwide and I (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Volunteers?
Speaker 2: Volunteers. And I and I went on recruiting surrogate and taught in classrooms and assemblies and what not all over the United States.
Speaker 1: And what and what years did you work for the Peace Corps in Washington?
Speaker 2: Sixty-four [1964], '65 [1965], '66 [1966] and '67 [1967].
Speaker 1: And then--go ahead continue.
Speaker 2: And then, and then when I after working as Peace Corps staff I went into my started my banking career in Baltimore [Maryland].
Speaker 1: But I guess during the same time you at the Peace Corps you took classes at John Hopkins [Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland]?
Speaker 2: I took classes at John Hopkins on Africa because I worked on the Africa desk [African Regional Division].  And I, I was the desk officer for Somalia, Tanzania and Kenya after I finished the recruiting I would then work became a program officer.
Speaker 1: So how do you make a transition from this government institution, Peace Corps, into banking this private--or, or the banking?
Speaker 2: Well it wasn't really that difficult someone on Peace Corps staff had been a banker, and he knew the scene in Baltimore.  He knew that I, I lived in, in Baltimore that I had married Baltimorean [Auldlyn Higgins Williams] it was a number of people from Peace Corps staff came over to our wedding.
Speaker 1: Because you were married in 1960?
Speaker 2: No I married in '64 [1964].
Speaker 1: Sixty-four [1964]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, 1964, yeah.  And that--and not when I was on Peace Corps staff I was not married when I was a volunteer I came back from Peace Corps staff.  And they had seen the set up in Baltimore and how we were and how we lived and my, my in-laws and what not.  And they said well, you know, they're looking for a black to, to join one of the major banks in Baltimore.  CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] had been picketing the banks because there were no black officers in any commercial banks no one in any supervisory positions.  And so the banks realized that they had to find somebody.  Well, it was perfect timing for me I was interested in the possibility of going into banking.  I had a degree in economics, and the banking sounded intriguing and the idea of, of being the first black I found that exciting.  And so I, I agreed to, to join the Maryland National Bank.  They couldn't find anybody in the whole city of Baltimore who could become a trainee, so I became a trainee.
Story_ID: 373090
Speaker 1: I trained for about a year, year and a half and then I did then I went into branch banking.  I was assistant manager of a branch for about six months and then I became (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Where did you become assistant manager where did you go?
Speaker 1: At, at Mondawmin shopping center [Mondawmin Mall] which is in Baltimore [Maryland] and at a large branch it was in the black area.  And then I became manager of the branch, and I got to know everybody, grant it was one of the busier branches and a very profitable branch.  And I did that for a couple of years and then I and then I was asked to take a leave of absence to go to work for the American Bankers Association in Washington [D.C.] which was eager to start getting banks to make loans to African Americans because the bank industry had been, had been redlining when they started it way back when or making no loans to blacks.  And so the association had a few of us go around to, to various banking areas in, in the country to meet with bankers to discuss with them about, about loans and loans to blacks.
Speaker 2: Can you talk with one of those discussions did you go on with discussion points to things that you wanted to discuss with them?
Speaker 1: Well yeah, yeah I think, I think we, you know, we would, we would first look at demographics of the particular city.  And say, you know, you know, a third of the people in the city are black.  You know, there's an affluent community here and, you know, you really need to start letting--if it doesn't start--if we don't start doing it the government's going to, to move in and at best various regulations and what not.  And it was really just to kind of give them a sense that they needed to do this, and they needed to do a little more integrating of their, of their staffing.  And, and look up Baltimore has done it I'm the person who did it in Baltimore.  And I'm running a branch, and it's extraordinarily successful and so and so on.  And while I was there I met David Rockefeller and he got to know me and he said, "You know, if you want to come back home just let me know."  Well after two or three years I called, and I said "I'd like to come--I'm ready to come back to New York [New York]," and he said good all right then come on.  So I resigned from Maryland National [Maryland National Bank], and I went to came to New York and started at Chase, Chase Manhattan Bank [JPMorgan Chase and Co.] in 1970.
Speaker 2: What do you what--when you look back what do you think about your accomplishments you were able to make during the early days of banking in the black community (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well I integrated--I, I became the first black officer of a commercial bank in the State of Maryland.
Speaker 2: What year was that?
Speaker 1: That was in 1969, '68 [1968], '69 [1969] and that really I really opened the way to other blacks to come into the bank banking world in Maryland.  I was very active in CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] because I, I've really felt that it was because of CORE that I, that I got the job to start with and so when I arrived in Baltimore, I ended up becoming treasurer of the local chapter for the entire time that I was in Baltimore.  I did a lot of other things to help, but that was something I really enjoyed very much (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But you were at the very early days of, of opening the doors--institution opening their doors to black soon Corporate America.
Speaker 1: Yes, very early days especially in the commercial banking field.
Speaker 2: And advertising and.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's right they were all pretty much closed (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Black Enterprise magazine started in the early '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: That's correct.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so you were in the forefront of it.
Speaker 1: Yes it was really in the early days and I found it all extremely exciting.
Story_ID: 373091
Speaker 1: One of the things--to digress just a bit was in '63 [1963] the March on Washington which I found extraordinarily exciting.  And I ended up right behind the podium with Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and my picture is where they took a picture of him there I am standing behind the podium, and I'm very excited about that, and I, I hadn't seen it for a long time.  And I was telling Lynn [Auldlyn Higgins Williams], you know, I think I was right behind the podium because she was with me and she said, "Well I'm not sure you were right behind the podium."  And then it appeared in Vanity Fair maybe in the last four or five years and there I am you can see me right behind the podium.  So I'm--I've now asked the new houses who really owned Conde Nast magazines to get me a copy of it so I can have it framed, I wanna enjoy (unclear).
Speaker 2: What can you tell me about that day?
Speaker 1: Well we were, we were in Baltimore [Maryland] I was in Baltimore at the time and Lynn, and I came over by, by car.  And parked at a friend's house named McGuires, Mickey McGuire [Robert Grayson McGuire III] his parents were--the McGuires they were undertakers.  The McGuire funeral home [McGuire Funeral Service, Inc.] was the largest black undertakers in, in Washington [D.C.].  And they lived in a beautiful house in what they called the Gold Coast, Northwest Washington and we went there.  And then from there we took transportation downtown and got in, in the crowd it turned out we were pretty much of front in the entire march to the, to the Lincoln Memorial [Washington, D.C.] where people were carrying banners.  And then it was a very exciting crowd I mean, you know, 250,000 people there.  And to--just to be in his presence to hear him give I Have a Dream speech was something that I will absolutely always remember and, and treasure it was very exciting, very exciting day.
Story_ID: 373092
Speaker 1: So following that back to your career Rockefeller [David Rockefeller] brings you back to New York City [New York, New York] and to transfer (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He brings me back to New York City, and I entered--it's a two-year credit training program that I had to do in about a year, a year and a quarter, and it was very intense.  I mean I saw very little of my wife [Auldlyn Higgins Williams] at that time and family, and (unclear) I had two girls by then.
Speaker 1: When were the two girls born?
Speaker 2: Brooke [Brooke Williams] was born in '66 [1966] and my younger daughter Eden [Eden Williams] was born in '68 [1968].  Brooke was born in Washington D.C., and then we moved to, to Baltimore [Maryland] and bought a house not far from where my in-laws [Hilda Moseley Higgins and I. Bradshaw Higgins] were and, and Eden was born in, in Baltimore.
Speaker 1: So you're, you're in the program, accelerated program (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So I'm in Chase [Chase Manhattan Bank; JPMorgan Chase and Co.] I'm in the accelerated credit training program I completed it in a year and a quarter.  And then I was named assistant vice president and was assigned to call on institutions in the bank in California, Oregon, and Washington.  This was the banks in those particular cities in, in Los Angeles [California], San Francisco [California], Portland [Oregon], and Seattle [Washington].  Many of the banks in those cities borrowed money from the large monies in the banks, and I had to approve the credit of the deals happening.  I remember when there was a bank called the US National Bank in San Diego [United States National Bank of San Diego, San Diego, California] that was about to go under (background noise) and it was the, the chairman of the bank named C. Arnholt Smith had asked Chase to buy some of their portfolio consumer loans it was about a $15 million portfolio.  And Chase said that they would be they'd be interested in it, and they were sending out one of their people to, to meet with him and to see.  And of course, I arrived on the scene and, of course, his teeth almost fell out when he saw this black man walk into his bank.  And I said I'm the officer from Chase, and I'd like, you know, and I this is my territory.  And I'm to meet with you and some of your other people to go over--well after he got over the initial shock, you know, well we ended up taking--buy the loans from him, and the bank managed to survive as it turned out.
Speaker 1: So who else was--who were the other--were there any other black bankers that you?
Speaker 2: Yes, Hughlyn Fierce was a, was a black banker he was actually preceded me he was there before I was and he was in doing a lot of international banking.  And he, he was he was the guy that really got things started at Chase.  And, and I was in, in one end one end of the bank--the institutional bank, and he was he was in the international side of the bank.  And then I moved from the institutional bank after several years as I was winding my way up to the top of the bank, you know, you have to go through different departments.  The next one was, was the private banking.
Speaker 1: Were you always the only African American in the particular (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I was.
Speaker 1: --level that you were in at the time?
Speaker 2: Well I was except I, I think Hugh, Hugh became a senior vice president of the bank, and I became, I became a vice president when I moved to my next to second assignment (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But I mean he was ahead of you, but you always was the only one within your rank?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes those that was there were I, I understand there was there were one or two in the operation center but not on the lending and, and the customer service side.
Speaker 1: So talk me through the rising within a bank.  So you have to work in the different departments, so the first department is you were in the accelerated training program?
Speaker 2: You going to start in the training program in the you assigned to either the institutional bank,  the commercial bank, the international bank or human resources or something like that, you know, one of those whichever one they think make the most sense and you think are the most comfortable what you want to do in your first assignment.  And I and so I liked the idea of the institutional bank.  And I'd done some--in my training, I had done some analysis of banks, of hospitals who borrowed money private hospitals and what not.  And so I liked the institutional side, so I did that for a few years.  And then I--it was time for me to move on to another assignment and be promoted.  And I went to the private bank international private banking where you dealt with very high-end people.  And David Rockefeller wanted me in this because he would bring his friends from abroad to my office at 410 Park Avenue and say, "Tom [HistoryMaker E.T. Williams], you know, take care of so-and-so and so-and-so."  And I'd entertain them at the University Club [University Club of New York, New York, New York] or one of the clubs and, and see what they needed what they needed done and so forth and so on.  And I did that and then I became the senior loan officer for the international private banking group out of 410 Park Avenue.
Story_ID: 373093
Speaker 1: When you become something like the senior loan officer when, when that position is yours are you then able to open doors for African Americans that have been closed before?
Speaker 2: You know, I think the doors were being opened by my performance and I was performing well, and they saw that the clients and whatnot liked me.  And therefore, personnel knew that they could bring more people on, and all the old sterotypes that they had were just falling by the wayside.  And I think Hugh Fierce [Hughlyn Fierce], you know, led that way, and then I kind of like followed behind him in it.  And this was especially true in dealing with wealthy individuals 'cause I dealt with--in my group were all corporate executives who lived abroad and of course, they were 99 percent white.  And they were when they came to town [New York, New York] I was the guy that they one of the guys that they had to deal with and, and it all worked all very easily and, and very well actually.  And then that was basically my last assignment at Chase [Chase Manhattan Bank; JPMorgan Chase and Co.].
Story_ID: 373094
Speaker 1: Now why did you leave Chase [Chase Manhattan Bank; JPMorgan Chase and Co.]?
Speaker 2: I left Chase because I had--while I was at Chase and I had--there were about fifty people that worked for me and I, I was interested in the real estate business my father [Edgar Thomas Williams, Sr.] had died--
Speaker 1: What year did your father die?
Speaker 2: My father died in '77 [1977], and he has some property that still needed to be managed and I was kind of helping, helping my mother [Elnora Bing Williams Morris] and whatnot on that property the real estate office have been sold.  And I just kind of thought that I, you know, that I probably now should probably think of real estate, and I got--moved into a building that was converting to a co-op.  And I got involved in the community, the co-op committee, and I got to know the officers at Citibank [Citibank, N.A.], who, who had foreclosed on the building.  They said, "You know, you know, would you like to do a tenant sponsored plan here?"  And I said, "Well I don't know I don't know what a tenant sponsored--well yes whatever it is I'd like to."  So I just brushed up on it and so five of us were investors.  And we did a tenant sponsored plan at a building at 1215 5th Avenue it's at a 102nd just north of Mount Sinai Hospital here in New York [New York] and it was a successful eviction plan conversion, and we did that conversion.  And I had a nine-room apartment in the building, and I moved my family there, and I became president of the board [of the Fordham Hill Owners Corporation, Bronx, New York].  Citibank was very happy because they were now out of it the tenants owned the building.  There was a firm name Douglas Elliman Gibbons & Ives [Douglas Elliman Real Estate] that was--they were the managing agent and they, and I got to know them.  And they said to me, "Well, you know, we've got this development in the Bronx [New York] that really need somebody like you to develop it.  The South Bronx [Bronx, New York] is creeping north, and we would really like to stop it at Fordham Road.  This development is just north of Fordham Road there are nine building, and it's starting down, and, you know, downhill people moving out.  There not getting in the same kind of people that they want.  And maybe if we convert it into a co-op and people owned it we could stop the deterioration of the area."  The institutions were concerned in the area Fordham University [New York, New York] had its Rose Hill campus there, the botanical garden [New York Botanical Garden, New York, New York] was in the area the veterans--the VA [Veterans Administration; U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs], veteran's hospital was there.  And the presidents of those institutions all got together and met with David Rockefeller and asked him if he would give me a leave of absence to come and convert this development Fordham Hill [Bronx, New York] since I'd had some experience in conversion in New York [New York] and I had Citibank behind me.  And David met with me I remember it very well it was two days before, before the Chris- I think it was 22 December he had flown up to Hartford [Connecticut] to meet with General Hague [ph.].  And I was told--I was in my office, and they said, "Mr. Rockefeller is coming back.  We don't know whether he's going downtown, or he's gonna meet, or he's gonna come into the Rockefeller Center 5600 was their office, or he was gonna go to One Chase Plaza [One Chase Manhattan Plaza; 28 Liberty Street, New York, New York].  But we will let you know within the hour you standby in your office."  Well he came to 5600, and they said, "All right you go to 5600 be there at such and such and time."  I arrived discussed it with David.  They had already talked these men had already talked to him from the institutions.  And David said, "Look, Tom [HistoryMaker E.T. Williams], this a great idea and, and I'm all for it. We'll give you a leave of absence if it doesn't work out, you know, you just come back to the bank."  So I went up to Fordham Hill, and again this was a nine-building and development that was built by Equitable Life [Equitable Life Assurance Society of the United States; AXA Equitable Life Insurance Company] it was very similar to Peter Cooper Village [New York, New York] which is, which Metropolitan [Metropolitan Life Insurance Company] had.  It was a middle, good middle solid middle-income development a lot of elderly people there of second and third generation Irish.  There was probably about 70, 70 percent white and 30 percent black.
Story_ID: 373095
Speaker 1: Okay picking it up the makeup of the building (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, the makeup of the buildings were approximately 70 percent white and 30 percent black, and these were pretty substantial middle income people.  When Fordham Hill [Bronx, New York] was built in the '50s [1950s] they would not rent to blacks.  And we knew some very upper middle class blacks and upper class blacks who wanted to move there, and they denied them entrance.  So it was ironic now here we are in 1980 a black coming along and doing a conversion of this development.  Well the conversion took two years, and it was the, it was the largest tenant-sponsored eviction cooperative plan in the history of the City of New York [New York].  There were nine buildings and about twelve hundred units and at the end of the conversion I took possession of 65 percent of the units and I had no partners except my mother [Elnora Bing Williams Morris] and two sisters [Joanne Williams Carter and Thea Williams Girigorie].  And City Bank [First National City Bank; Citibank, N.A.], which lent me most of the money. We had to put up between five hundred and seven hundred and fifty thousand [dollars] and City Bank lent me 7, 7.5 million [dollars] that I needed to buy the 65 percent.  The, the complex sold for about $11 million--entire complex at the time.  The owners of the complex lived in London [England], they were worried that the South Bronx [Bronx, New York] was creeping north, that there were beginning to be--there were robberies going on.  They thought they were going to have a property that they were going to have to abandon.  And so they were very happy to have somebody come along and, and buy it.  A lot of the older tenants were against it even though they--it was an eviction plan and they were not affected.  If you was sixty-two or over you could stay on for the rest of your life.  There were a number of professors from Fordham University [New York, New York] who were younger who were opposed--
Speaker 1: Why were they opposed?
Speaker 2: Because they liked renting. They didn't like to be forced out. At the end of their lease they had to leave.
Speaker 1: Or buy.
Speaker 2: Or buy yes, those that bought were extraordinarily happy ultimately because when we really went on the open market, we began selling them first for twice the amount then for three times then for four times.  And, you know, it just went up and up, and it was, it became a very successful conversion.  The newspapers all picked it up, you know, The New York Times did a couple of stories on it.  The Daily News [New York Daily News] did one or two stories on it.  Black Enterprise, I was a cover story on Black Enterprise dealing with this conversion and I was called the co-op king. I took (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well what--go ahead, you took?
Speaker 2: I took my family up there we lived there for about three years.  And then my wife [Auldlyn Higgins Williams] said well, "You know, I came to New York to live in Manhattan not in the Bronx" even though it was a lovely development.  But, but our life was here in Manhattan, and so she was a trooper.  And she came up with me, and we put two apartments together. We had a lovely apartment, and we then moved back, moved back to the city.  And I just stayed up there as the president of the board for a number of, of years.  And it was during that time also that I got very active in, in some--a lot of nonprofits.
Story_ID: 373096
Speaker 1: What were the challenges in those first two years of the, the conversion?  What were the major challenges you came up against?
Speaker 2: The major challenges were getting people interested in buying and, and getting them to have the sense that it made a lot of sense to buy.  And that we could really turn this property around. There was a lot of fear that it could not be turned around.  And I promised them that we would have a large reserve fund, and the first thing that we would do was to put up the iron fencing around the nine acre campus of this development.  We'd have a convenience store sort of right in and, you know, and new lobbies and so on and so on new elevators.
Speaker 1: So do you hire an architect to--
Speaker 2: We had an architect yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Draw up a plan?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we had a plan.
Speaker 1: Do you showed it to them?
Speaker 2: We showed everybody and we did the conversion. And we did we put this iron fence around it.  We had an entry-level where everybody had to come in at that entrance.  We had a gatemen; we had a gatemen at the exit entrance.  The robberies stopped essentially the development began to take on a whole new life the institutions around us were happy.  David Rockefeller said to me, "Well, you know, you've done such a good job, and you obviously gonna make a lot of money.  I can't let you stay on a leave of absence because we don't give leave of absences for things that are gonna make a lot of money, so you have to resign from the bank."  So I resigned from Chase [Chase Manhattan Bank; JPMorgan Chase and Co.] in 1982 after the conversion.
Speaker 1: Gratefully were you--(laughter)?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I was very happy I was thrilled, and David Rockefeller was happy.  And my family was--everybody was, was happy and so it, it worked out very well.  The, the older people many of whom were beginning to look around for other places a lot of retired school teachers, some retired judges, retired lawyers they were looking around for other places to live--all changed their tune and decided to stay on as renters because the families felt safe.  They could walk around within the complex.  They could order things food and stuff in, and it was just a wonderful atmosphere.
Speaker 1: That is a huge co-op twelve hundred apartments (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It is huge, it's huge it was a huge co-op.  We, we opened up an entrance between the co-op and the, the VA [Veterans Administration; U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs] hospital which was our next door neighbor.  And a lot of people worked there, and a lot of doctors begin to buy apartments at Fordham Hill [Bronx, New York], so it, it was ve-, it was very, it was very successful.
Story_ID: 373097
Speaker 1: And staying on as president [of the Fordham Hill Owners Corporation, Bronx, New York] for ten years.  Do you stay on to, to manage it basically to oversee to make sure that (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I stayed on to over, to oversee it and near the end it got a little difficult.  I think I probably, you know, you, you need to do things, and you need to probably leave at a certain point.  And I didn't I probably should've left--
Speaker 1: Sooner (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) a little earlier than I did and I, you know, and people began to resent the fact that I was there, and that I owned so many apartments and so--
Speaker 1: And that you were president (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And that I was the president, yeah.  And what I--and some of the things that I was doing and so for and so on.  And so it was time--I knew it was time for me to go at that point.  And I had gotten involved in some other investments on the east end of the island some that were good some weren't so good, you know. Life isn't always full of all ups, you know, sometimes you have some downs, and I had, I had a down period in the, the end of the '80s [1980s] early '90s [1990] with a property I bought in, in East Hampton [New York].  And I had some partners in that, and then I ended up owning it myself and then I ended up selling it at an enormous loss of, of money.  And, and it was at that point that I decided that I probably should just look and see what I have amassed and what I have--what money I have and what not.  My wife [Auldlyn Higgins Williams] had from a trust and, and how we could live comfortably on, on our present earnings.  And comfortably meant that we had--would have a apartment in New York [New York].  We have the house Sag Harbor [New York]; we have our house in Maine, and we have (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Where in Maine do you have a house?
Speaker 2: Dark Harbor [Maine] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Dark Harbor.
Speaker 2: Off the coast of Camden [Maine] on the, the island chain is called Islesboro [Maine].  And at that point, we had a place in Jamaica, and we had a penthouse apartment in Jamaica.  And so we, we juggled everything we said if we keep--save our pennies and we live reasonably--well not frugally but, you know, we live the way we wanted to we, we can manage.  And so I decided that I would then start devoting myself to doing a lot of other things a lot of, a lot of nonprofit things.  And running a little family company called Elnora Inc. which we named after my mother [Elnora Bing Williams Morris] after she died.  And my two sisters [Joanne Williams Carter and Thea Williams Girigorie] and my two daughters are basically the owners of that company.
Speaker 1: When did you sell the last apartment of that you owned of the--of town (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We have not--we still have some apartments.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you still own those?
Speaker 2: Yes, we still own--we have a few (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, and then they so they're part of Elnora?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --they're apart of Elnora as is the family compound in Sag Harbor.  I have a house my--the caretaker cottage just became my--one of my daughter's houses, Brooke [Brooke Williams] and she's renovating it.  My younger daughter Eden [Eden Williams] has my mother's little cottage which was really just a summer cottage 'cause she only used it for two months out of the year.  My mother then spent the rest of the year in, in her house.  A townhouse in Brooklyn [New York] or in her apartment in Ocho Rios in Jamaica.  My sister each of my sisters have houses, and then there were two houses that we rented one that my wife ran a bed and breakfast out of--
Speaker 1: Where was that one on?
Speaker 2: That's on the, on the grounds in Sag Harbor.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There were seven houses on the grounds (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Wow.
Speaker 2: On four and a half acres.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That house now we sold to the Episcopal bishop, Herb Thompson [Herbert Thompson Jr.].  He was black and was an old friend of my sisters.  He recently died, and he loved the house, and his children will now use it.  And then there's another little house next to it that; that's a rental cottage.  So we, you know, we live comfortably, and we're having a great time.
Story_ID: 373098
Speaker 1: Where did your interest in art come from to collect the way you have?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Franklin Williams [Franklin H. Williams], who was an ambassador, he was an ambassador to Ghana.  He and Nkrumah [Kwame Nkrumah] were roommates he was a very close family friend.  And he also painted and, and I liked some of his artwork he was also working on Peace Corps staff he headed the whole African region division.  And he had a couple of very interesting paintings, and I just liked them.  I said, "You know, Franklin I think these are great, and I would like to, you know, won't you sell me one of those."  And so he sold me one for, you know, a few dollars, whatnot.  And then I started looking around and, and I, you know, I well let me see now we had some paintings at home but it wasn't--no one was a very serious collector.  And when I went to Baltimore [Maryland], my mother-in-law [Hilda Moseley Higgins] belong to a club called the Pierians [The Pierians Foundation, Inc.].  And this was a club that was devoted to art.  And so we got to see a lot of art around and I--Lynn [Auldlyn Higgins Williams] and I started collecting.  And then I started having putting up artwork at the branch that I that I ran.  And getting to meet local artists in, in Maryland and so we started collecting in the '60s [1960s].  And then of course came--when we came to New York [New York], we started collecting some of the major artists here in who lived in and got to know Hale Woodruff who lived in the Boule [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity] with me.  And got to know Romare Bearden who lived down on Canal Street and who was interested in diversifying his portfolio.  So he traded me some--he gave me some paintings and I gave him some apartments at Fordham Hill [Bronx, New York].  Got to know Jacob Lawrence who was very anxious to move back from Seattle [Washington] to New York but it never quite happened 'cause we could never kinda often him the kind of housing that he really wanted.  So he ended up staying in Seattle, but I got to know him and got--and bought some his artwork.  And so we were really collecting the old masters. Lois Mailou Jones whose painting is there and she was in Washington [D.C.] and she grew up in Boston [Massachusetts].  And the fine arts museum in Boston [Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, Boston, Massachusetts] sent its curator here one time to look at our work and said that this is the finest piece they thought she'd ever done.  And they wanted--well they like me to give it to the fine arts museum in Boston, but I told them that if they did a show it I'd be happy to, to lend it to lend it to them.
Story_ID: 373099
Speaker 1: And then, of course, we bought Hale Woodruff's estate in the mid, in the mid-'80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: How did that come about? What made you buy it?
Speaker 1: Well again, you know we knew Ha- Hale had died, and we had heard through a dealer called Larry Hilton [Lawrence Hilton] who's out of New Jersey he was, he had heard that the estate was goning on the market and that Bill Cosby was interested in buying the estate.  And would I, would I have an interest, and I said, well yes I knew Ted [Woodruff's wife, Theresa Baker] well, you know, I knew Ted and, and Hale.  I knew Hale very well, and I knew his, his wife as an acquaintance, and so I got in touch with her through Larry Hilton.  And she said yes she wants to sell Hale's estate she has a son, and she wanted to leave him enough money because he was an artist and, and basically wasn't doing anything else.  And she wanted to be sure that he was comfortable in his life so, so while she was living she wanted to sell Hale's estate.  So--but she wanted to sell it to somebody who would be giving, who would give a lot of it away.  She didn't want someone to buy it who was going to keep it in their collection.  As I understood at the time Bill Cosby wanted to buy it but he wanted--he didn't want to guarantee that he was going to give any of it away at that particular time.  But when she met with me obviously liked me, we were all connected.  And when she and Ted got married--when she and Hale got married they had a thousand people at their wedding in Topeka, Kansas.  This was, you know, in the--I don't know the '20s [1920s] sometime.  So anyway, so we got along famously well, and she said yes she would sell it.  And I agreed to give paintings to the Studio Museum [Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York], to the Schomburg library [Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York], to Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia], to the Brooklyn Museum [New York, New York], to the Metropolitan Museum [Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, New York] and just maybe three or four other institutions.  So we gave more than half of the collection away.  What I really ended up keeping aside from a number of oil paintings that will now travel in different museums, were some prints that he did.  He did some lino prints. They're linoleum cut prints. He did them out of linoleum, and then he would print them.  And we gave--we were trying to decide what we were gonna do with these with these lino blocks.  And a decision was made that we would have three hundred made three hundred copies of each of the eight prints, and they were from what he called his Atlanta period.  And there were two scenes that were dealing in, in lynching and how rural blacks lived in the '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s].  And they were very provocative and fascinating prints and so June Kelly, the gallery owner, Thurlow Tibbs [Thurlow Evans Tibbs Jr.], who was in Washington [D.C.], and Bob Blackburn [Robert Blackburn] who was the foremost black African, African American printmaker collaborated and said do three hundred sets.  So Bob did the printing, and these are posthumous sets, and so we did three hundred sets.  Hale wanted--had been a teacher in Atlanta [Georgia] he started the Atlanta Biennial where, wherever they started black art shows in Atlanta in the '30s [1930s].  And he'd wanted his work as widely distributed as possible, and we thought that this would be an opportunity.  So when the prints were done, they were really beautifully done, and we started giving them to certain museums.  And friends were buying them to give to museums in memory of their parents or, or cousins or aunts or whatever.  And the museums all took them into their collection which meant that they were of museum quality.  The Metropolitan, the Brooklyn Museum, the Carnegie Museum [Carnegie Museum of Art, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], the Baltimore Museum [Baltimore Museum of Art, Baltimore, Maryland], the Whitney Museum [Whitney Museum of American Art, New York, New York], the Cleveland Museum [Cleveland Museum of Art, Cleveland, Ohio], Agie Gund [Agnes Gund], who was president of Museum of Modern Art [New York, New York] of which I was on their board.  Board (unclear) for the Cleveland Museum 'cause our family was originally from Cleveland, they took them to their collection.  The Chenaults, Ken [Kenneth Chenault] and Kathy Chenault [Kathryn Chenault] bought forty sets to give to all the United Negro College Fund schools.  And all the school presidents wrote them back saying how wonderful they were, and they were using them as teaching tools and displaying them in their libraries or in their museums if they have one.  So it's, it's been a very successful program and, and I know Hale Woodruff would've been very, very proud that this, this was done.
Speaker 2: I was caught up in the story (laughter).
Speaker 1: I know it was, it was a great story.
Story_ID: 373100
Speaker 1: So it's been--we've been very fine.  And then, of course, we just started collecting other artists.  There's an artist called Mark Tansey which we have some paintings on the wall and some prints on the wall.  He, he's not an African American but he--we let him use our cottage one of the little colleges in Sag Harbor [New York] one summer.  And he gave us these six--his paintings are now the size of this other painting you see at the end here now sell for an excess of $1 million dollars.  And so these have become very valuable and so for me it's been--and Lynn [Auldlyn Higgins Williams]--for the love of art and as an investment it was a, it was a good investment.
Speaker 2: Do you know David, [HistoryMaker] David Driskell?
Speaker 1: I know David Driskell quite well.  David Driskell is, is involved we're involved with Talladega College [Talladega, Alabama], who has the Hale Woodruff murals.  And they're, they're trying to decide what to do with the murals because the school is looking for some--need some, some cash.  And there's a possibility of a traveling show with the Hale Woodruff murals.  And so I'm working with Hale Woodruff I mean with Hale Woodruff--I'm working with David Driskell on that and, you know, we'll see how it goes.
Speaker 2: So you mentioned June Kelly we--she--we met her because she represent--we interviewed [HistoryMaker] Elizabeth Catlett in her studio.  Do you know [HistoryMaker] Peg Alston?
Speaker 1: I know June Kelly I knew Peg Alston, Sherman Edward [sic. Sherman K. Edmiston, Jr.] a number of the black art gallery--I think, I think June Kelly is the only black gallery owner that is a member of the Art Dealers Association [Art Dealers Association of America].  And she also represented Romare Bearden and, and that's how I got to know her really very, very well.  And she has a very successful gallery.  Peg Alston has a very successful gallery.  And Peg Alston is the curator for the Chenault collection Ken [Kenneth Chenault] and Kathy Chenault [Kathryn Chenault].  Peg is very well known and has very high-quality work, you know, that if you gonna buy something from Peg or from either of them or from June, you know you're going to get really good stuff.
Story_ID: 373101
Speaker 1: We were talking before, and I was talking about your interests in art.  And you, you were going to tell me a story about the first time that you went to India you were--this is at the start of the interview, but you never completed that story?
Speaker 2: When I went to India, and I was telling you about a--bought art in India and, and I bought several--five or six pieces of art that I brought back to the states.  And some of it I still have today, that, that it's quite interesting and because, you know, you have limited wall space, you know, you can't put everything up.  So I offered it to the--there were--I have three drawings of Eritrean women.  At that--when I bought them Eritrea was part of Ethiopia now of course there two separate countries.  So the, the Eritrean embassy is, is interested in my lending them to them.  So I'll gonna probably do that and then they'll go on loan to the Eritrean embassy here in New York [New York].  I don't want them to go abroad yet because things aren't settling in Ethiopia and Eritrean and, you know, until they really get settled well look what happened in Iraq with their national gallery and what not (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I was just about to say I was thinking about Iraq.
Speaker 2: I was just, just awful so I, you know, I'm gonna lend it to them because I'd like people to see them, they're really just beautiful, beautiful works of art.
Story_ID: 373102
Speaker 1: What do you think about the--what's happening with the, the co-op what is it Stuyvesant Town [New York, New York] that's on a major?
Speaker 2: That's Peter Cooper Village [New York, New York] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Peter Coo- is it Peter Cooper--?
Speaker 2: And, and Stuyvesant Town (simultanoeus).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And Stuyvesant Town.
Speaker 2: I think it's the right move for the owner I think Metropolitan Life [Metropolitan Life Insurance Company] own those two.  And, and to have sold them to a developer makes sense because they don't--they're not--for them to be in that kind of real estate business doesn't, you know, doesn't make sense for them to be in it.  But I think the people who, who bought it are going to do a very good job in, in converting it.
Speaker 1: Do you still think that they were offered (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Jerry Speyer is the guy that bought it.
Speaker 1: Jerry Speyer.
Speaker 2: And he and I were on the board of the Museum Modern Art [Museum of Modern Art, New York, New York] together.
Story_ID: 373103
Speaker 1: What are the boards that you've been on? Or organizations you've been a part of the Boule [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I have been on--well the Sigma Pi Phi Boule, which is the oldest, you know, black, black fraternity.  And part of the Talented Tenth that Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] always talked about and they're now about four thousand members in the Boule.  I've been a member of the Boule now it would be forty years and two years.  I went very young in my twenties, but I'd already started moving in terms of achieving and whatnot.  And so a guy named Frank DeCosta [Frank A. DeCosta, Jr.], who is from an old Charleston [South Carolina] family and I, went into the Boule in Baltimore [Maryland].  And I've been very active in that throughout the years.  We have a Boule Foundation that has, you know, I think almost 10 or 12 million bucks [dollars] and they are in the process--they give scholarships to young people to, and it's a wonderful it's just a wonderful group.  We meet we meet monthly here in town [New York, New York] and, and we have speakers and, you know, Mayor Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins] belongs.  And the number of a number of the judges and Vernon Jordan [HistoryMaker Vernon E. Jordan, Jr.] and Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was a, was a member Earl Graves [HistoryMaker Earl G. Graves Sr.] as you know is, is a member.  Most of the people that you--who you--well Ken Chenault [Kenneth Chenault] is a member.  And some of the some of our leading people in the industry are members of the Boule.  And, and Boule is social and use to be just social, and now it's social and they giving a lot back to the, to the community.
Speaker 1: Which is gotta feel good to you, to go beyond the social (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh it's a great feeling it's a great feeling, but I belong to a lot of organizations are giving back I belong to The Nature Conservancy.
Speaker 1: And that's here in--?
Speaker 2: And that's here in New York it's a Long Island [New York] chapter which covers all of Long Island, and I got into that through living in Sag Harbor [New York].  And we are trying to, to buy as much land as possible to keep--to preserve the, the quality of life.
Story_ID: 373104
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is there a black community in Sag Harbor [New York] that (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: There used to be.
Speaker 2: No-
Speaker 1: There still is (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There is very much a black community in Sag Harbor.  It's there, there really three the three oldest communities are Azurest, Sag Harbor Hills, and Nineveh Beach.  And those are the summer communities, but Sag Harbor's black community started with free blacks in the early 1800s, late 1700s.  When, when Sag Harbor was a major whaling port. Thirty percent of the whalers who did whaling between New England and the, the east end of Long Island [New York] were black. Thirty percent of the whalers.  If you, if you looked in the textbooks when I was come along you never saw a black face as a whaler.  But yet 30 percent and there was a black whaler named Cuffee [Jeremiah Cuffee] who was a captain a black captain whose house we actually owned in Sag Harbor.  And recently sold to someone in Brooklyn [New York] and he had a house in Sag Harbor and a house in New Bedford [Massachusetts].  And so this community has been there for, for a long time the first black summer resident in Sag Harbor was a lady named Ms. Holly [ph.] who was a schoolteacher in Brooklyn and she bought her house in 1910.  And that house is on our grounds just as an aside historical aside.  Langston Hughes used to write poetry under a major mulberry tree behind our house, and they're, they're about to get a plaque put a plaque out for that.  So the black community summer community started then. During those days, people weren't interested in being right on the water.  And certainly the black whalers didn't want to be on the water because they been on water, you know, all the time (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All day long.
Speaker 2: When they came back they didn't want to be looking at water.  The waterfront community's completly got started in the early '40s [1940s].  And there were some white families that owned a good deal of the land along the water, and they had--they get mad with the village for some reason.  And they said we're going to fix you we're gonna sell this land to blacks.  And they did that in the, in the '40s [1940s] and early '50s [1950s] and blacks bought up essentially all this land and then they began then they subdivided it and started selling it to other blacks.  And that's how the summer communities began and during the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s] the black community in Sag Harbor were really the upper class of Sag Harbor we really saved all the merchants.  When we went into a store when they saw a black face come into a store, they assumed you were rich which is so different from everywhere else.  The police chief would say if you were--when I was a teenager and if we went into the five and ten and did--took something that we shouldn't be doing, you know, kids did little mischievous stuff.  They would report us to the police chief; he would come and get us he would take us to our parents.  And where we would get a good licking and whatnot but that's what it was like I mean, you know.  And he--I remember it to this day I remember when he died a few years ago.  He was wonderful to all of the kids.  You know, there wasn't any locking up or anything like that.  You know, you just took them home to their parents and parents really, you know, you didn't, you didn't do it again.  So Sag Harbor was, was where the black upper class from Brooklyn, Manhattan [New York], New Jersey from as far away as Washington [D.C.] came to summer.  The houses be closed up after Labor Day, and they'd be reopened again in the spring.  All the service people were white all the people that took care of your laws that, that cleaned your houses.  That were your; your caterers were all white because they were principally the working people (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Class people they had no--
Speaker 2: In Sag Harbor your working class people your plumbing, your electricians were all white.  And they took care of all your needs just like they did for the wealthy people who were in East Hampton [New York] and South Hampton [New York].
Story_ID: 373105
Speaker 1: Continuing, we left off we're talking about Sag Harbor [New York].  What I wanted to know is how much of that community still exists today that you spoke about in our conversation?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well of course, certainly the whaling community doesn't exist because whaling is not, not around but, but all the old whaling houses the small whaling houses are all now summer houses.  The ones that are outside the developments that I mentioned earlier are probably 50/50 in terms of racial makeup.  The ones in the development are probably 70/30 because whites are now moving into the area and moving on to the beach and what not.  As, you know, the beachfront in Azurest [Sag Harbor, New York] you have Earl Graves [HistoryMaker Earl G. Graves, Sr.] has a house Johnnie Cochran has Ken Chenault's [Kenneth Chenault] old house Johnnie Cochran obviously now deceased, and his widow now has it.  Alma Brown [HistoryMaker Alma Arrington Brown] who is a widow of Ron Brown the secretary of commerce has a house on the water in Azurest.  Chester Redhead very prominent dentist from Manhattan [New York] and Scarsdale [New York] has a house on the water.  And so it's a very interesting and there about ten houses on the water in Azurest and that's the oldest of the black summer community waterfront communities.  And then you have Sag Harbor Hills [Sag Harbor, New York] where you have B. Smith, and Dan Gasby have a, have a house and then going up further you have Nineveh Beach [Sag Harbor, New York] which is high on the bluff.  And there a lot of--some doctors and lawyers and others who have houses up there it's quite, quite attractive.
Story_ID: 373106
Speaker 1: So while it's in my head let's talk about Brooke, Brooke Mrs. Brooke As- what's--Atkins?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Astor.
Speaker 1: As-
Speaker 2: Brooke Astor.
Speaker 1: Yes, Brooke Astor.  Brooke Astor came into our life when I was chairing the Schomburg library [Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York].  She was chairman at the board of trustees at the New York Public Library [New York, New York].  And the library is New York Public Library Astor Tilden fund [Astor, Lenox and Tilden Foundation], you know, she is the widow of Vincent Astor and lives around the corner here on Park Avenue and was always very interested in doing things in Harlem [New York, New York] and, and very interested in the Schomburg library.  So if she had a party at her house or something, she would invite Lynn [Auldlyn Higgins Williams] and myself.  So I got to know her that way very socially.  In the early--in the mid-'80s [1980s] when we were--she knew that we were buying this property in Dark Harbor, Maine she has a house in Northeast Harbor, Maine.  And she said, "Well I have friends that are there I want you to meet some people who live up there.  And I'm gone have a luncheon for you at Le Cirque [New York, New York]."  So Brooke Astor had a luncheon for Lynn and myself and at Le Cirque and invited about six other couples including C. Douglas Dillon, who was secretary of the treasury under Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy].  Charles Dana Gibson, who was a illustrator and cartoonist who grandchildren who were air to a fortune in Cincinnati [Ohio] and two or three other people.  And we had this wonderful lunch and so we were introduced to, to these marvelous people, and we was always very grateful for her for doing that.  And so she would--the Citizens Committee [Citizens Committee for New York City, New York, New York] would have a, have a dinner.  And I remember one time they had a dinner and Elliott Osborn [sic. Osborn Elliott], who ran the Citizens Committee was a good friend of Brooke Astor, and she bought a table.  And I sat on one side of her and Kofi Annan sat on the other side, you know, and there were lots of pictures taken.  It was all very, very exciting we were always very grateful to her for what she had done introducing us to this group of people in Maine because it just meant it was very easy for us to--and we'd always get an invitation.  Everybody wants to know when we're coming and, you know, and would like to see us.  So it worked, worked out very nicely.  As a result, I use to--when the lilacs came out we have a lot of lilacs on our grounds.  I would always bring in a huge bunch of lilacs to her, and she would always write me some very nice notes all of which I've saved.  And every fall I would make applesauce from some of our apple trees, and I would always take in a jar applesauce to her for her and her staff and her and her house.  So it was very disturbing to hear the, the problems that she was facing.  Well, now she's survived--her son was faced with Tony [Anthony D. Marshall], who I always thought as a very kind of nice and admirable person.  And that, that her grandchildren were--had brought some suits against, against her son.  And that happens when there's second marriage and, you know, and things and end up not going to the, to the grandchildren but to the second wife's children.  And those are things that so I mean I did write to her son and got a nice response back.  The last time I took some, some flowers about two years ago, she was really out of it at that point.  And he wrote me a very nice note back and said that, you know, we let mother smell the flowers and then hopefully she could recognize where they were from and it, it--we had a wonderful experience with her.  She wrote a book, and she autographed it, and she said to us with great love and affection, "It's, it's been wonderful having you and Lynn in my life" and signed Brooke Astor.  And I've always thought that that was such a very sweet thing to do, and she just loved people she loved New York [New York] and people in New York, and we were part of her life, and we enjoyed being with her.
Story_ID: 373107
Speaker 1: What do you think about that and this is kind of--real estate but, but just the condo that they put right there on the corner of Astor Place [New York, New York], and have you seen it the new glass structure?
Speaker 2: I have not seen it (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: No, no I haven't been down for a while.
Speaker 1: And I think the apartment started at something like 3 million [dollars].
Speaker 2: Oh, boy.
Speaker 1: And you have six subway trains running underneath so they still feel the rumbling.
Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Of the train but it's a beautiful structure.
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sure.
Speaker 1: And yeah.
Speaker 2: But that's amazing and people going to buy them too.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and people are going to buy it, yeah.  What you think about the market overall now in Manhattan [New York] is this surprising what it's become?
Speaker 2: No because this is so typical of New York [New York] and what happens, you know, you have a, you have a low period, and then you go up high, and you know you have another low period, and you even out and then you go up even higher, and I've watched that market in New York from the '70s [1970s] to the present.  And it continues that way that's why land and real estate are so good are such a good investments because long as you don't have to sell and, you know, during the trough year when there's a down cycle.  There's always going to be another cycle it's gonna go up higher than the last cycle.  And this is typical of what's happening in, in New York now and now it's sort of leveled off.  There are a lot of apartments on the market now, and I suspect that it'll, it'll stay at a level point maybe even dip a little but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Because there is a lot.
Speaker 2: --in couple years it's gonna just go up.
Speaker 1: Skyrocket because there're so many new condos constructions downtowns in my neighborhood. I mean--
Speaker 2: Yes I'm sure.
Speaker 1: --I can count twenty like, just surrounding where I leave, and you said it yourself now is the time, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the next couple of years, you know, if you're gonna buy in--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 373108
Speaker 1: So just reading through our kind of--people, some the things they've written about you and some the things we didn't cover is that you're on the board of the Museum of Modern Art [New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Yes, I've been on the--David Rockefeller asked me to go on the board of Museum of Modern Art board in about 1984.  And I went on, and I said, "Well, you know, David I'm on the Brooklyn Museum [New York, New York] board and, you know, perhaps there's a conflict being on two major museums in New York [New York]."  My sister [JoAnne Williams Carter] and I was the first brother and sister team to go on a major museum like the Brooklyn Museum.  As you know, the Brooklyn Museum has the second largest collection in the country.  The Metropolitan has the first the largest the Brooklyn Museum has the second-largest collection but, but getting back to the Modern, David and I--David said, "Oh no, no It's not a conflict at all.  We have a different focus," and I said, "Fine I'll go on the board."  So I went on the board of the Museum of Modern Art, and I stayed on it for about eight years.  In 19--in the early '90s [1990s] when the museum decided that it had to raise $650 million for the new structure which is all completed and what not now.  They asked each of the trustees to give seven figures and then it was at that point where I just simply--it didn't make sense for me to be on, on that board.  I--if I were gonna give a large sum of money I would rather--it was gonna to be given to the Schomburg library [Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York].  Or to the Studio Museum in Harlem [New York, New York] or Legal Defense Fund [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] or, or United Negro College Fund.  Or some black institution who don't have access to all the cash that the Museum of Modern Art had because the, the board was very substantial it has very substantial people on it.  And so it was time to for them to put a black on that board who either was going to give that kind of money or who worked for the company.  Well, Dick Parsons [HistoryMaker Richard Parsons] is on the board.  They seem to just have one black at a time.  Why, I'm not quite sure just why that's the case.  Or maybe they've begun to make changes but there's always been Dolores Wharton [HistoryMaker Dolores D. Wharton] was the first, Cliff Wharton [HistoryMaker Clifton R. Wharton Jr.] was her husband.  Dolores Wharton was the first black.  I was the second black, and I think Isabel Stewart [Isabel Carter Stewart] came home for a year or two, and now Dick Parsons is on the board.
Speaker 1: It's not that many.
Speaker 2: No, you can count em (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, what about the structure? It's been completed?
Speaker 2: They've raised over $650 million Jerry Speyer, who we have just talked about and bought Stuyvesant [Stuyvesant Town, New York, New York] down in Peter Cooper Village [New York, New York] and Tishman Speyer [New York, New York].  And a group of people like that helped--and Brooke Astor and others, you know, all raise the money.  And the--all the Rockefellers participated the Gunds, Aggie Gund [Agnes Gund] whose family is from Cleveland [Ohio] and they were involved with Standard Oil [Standard Oil Company].  Philip Johnson the architect, you know, did extraordinary well and a lot of quiet wealthy money.  The Lauders [Ronald S. Lauder and Jo Carole Lauder] not quiet money but they put a lot of money into the museum and they raised over 650 million.
Story_ID: 373109
Speaker 1: How substantial is their [Museum of Modern Art, New York, New York] collection of black art?
Speaker 2: There are no museums that have substantial collections of black art except black museums.  It is one of the sad commentaries of America.  They all have collections black art probably the museum that has the least amount is the Guggenheim [Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, New York, New York].  When Romare Bearden was painting as, you know, he was a collagist.  The Guggenheim sent out a notice to a lot of people, and I was on their on their real estate council that they were gonna have a show tracing collage from the early 1900s through the--into the '80s [1980s].  And they listed all the artists, and Romare Bearden was not listed as one of the artists.  I called the chairman of the board, and I said, "You know, this is very disingenuous. I mean Romare Bearden certainly he's a great collagist, and I said he may even be our greatest collagist."  So he said, "Well, you know, I don't know why he's not on here I guess the curator didn't know or something."  I said, "Well, you know, he should be in the show."  He said, "Well we don't have any."  I said, "Well I'm on the Modern [Museum of Modern Art, New York, New York] board.  The Modern has a wonderful piece of Bearden put it in the show.  So they went to the Modern, and they got the peace and put it in the show.  So I was telling my wife and Lynn [Auldlyn Higgins Williams] said, "Well, you know, why you say he's maybe the greatest collagist well, you know, maybe he's not the greatest collagist, but he is very good." "Well," I said, "I think he's wonderful."  Well a year later, Romare Bearden died.  In his obituary the art historian who wrote his obituary said, "Romare Bearden, America's foremost collagist is dead."  And that basically vindicated what I had said that he was indeed, and this made them look even more like fools.  When I, I met with [HistoryMaker] Carrie Mae Weems in Miami [Florida] last week I said what museum that you're not in that you'd like to be in she said the only one I'm not in, in New York [New York] is the Guggenheim.  So I, I really don't know what's, what's going on I don't know if they even have a black director.  And I think that's the problem most of the other museums now have blacks who are directors and the museum are now moving in the direction of building their collection of African American art, but they're far from where they really should be.
Speaker 1: And you feel the change would be putting black directors in places at these museums that there haven't been before (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Black trustees is what I meant.
Speaker 1: Black trustees.
Speaker 2: That's what I meant, I meant black trustees.
Speaker 1: To make them aware of, of the art that's (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah absolutely I think it's the essential I think some of the museums need to deaccession some of the work that they have in order for them to buy a work of African American artists.  I mean, you know, they should all have substantial work by Hale Woodruff, by Bearden, by Jacob Lawrence, by Lois Mailou Jones, by William Carter from Chicago [Illinois].  By Betye Saar all those people I mean they should have all, all their works.  And so I, I think that they're beginning now to move in that direction certainly in the major cities.
Story_ID: 373110
Speaker 1: As an artist what did you think about someone like Basquiat [Jean-Michel Basquiat]?
Speaker 2: What do I think as Basquiat as an artist?
Speaker 1: The work the work itself yeah and then how he was accepted.
Speaker 2: Oh incredi- I mean, I don't like his work personally I mean, you know, because I was very much well I told you I really started collecting (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah you did.
Speaker 2: And it was only when I went with them to the Modern [Museum of Modern Art, New York, New York] on the Modern board and on their and or acquisition committee that I began to have an interest in sort of modern relatively modern art.  Basquiat was way beyond anything that I could even think of that would be great and now I was in Miami [Florida] his last piece sold for $5 million.  And my only hopes are that he has enough family that are gonna share in that, in that money that's coming in now because he's dead I mean and he didn't do that much work.  So he's in great demand and, and I think there a great deal of interest in, in that kind of art today. An enormous amount of interest.  And my hat goes off to him for what he was able to accomplish during his lifetime and of course, since, since his death.
Speaker 1: What about some of the outsider artists what's the big guy Bill Tray (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Bill Traylor.
Speaker 1: Traylor.
Speaker 2: But I think the biggest is Thornton Dial we have a piece of his in the library.  Thornton Dial has asked a huge, huge-there's a collection there's a person in Atlanta [Georgia] name Bill Arnett [William Arnett], who has most of Thornton Dial's work and has, has a whole warehouse of outsider art.  He used to go into small towns in Alabama and elsewhere and see people drawing and doing things and, and the quilters the Gee quilters [Gee's Bend, Alabama] and all this doing things on small paper.  And he will supply them with art paper and with an income and then they would give him a portion of the artwork.  Well, some people were criticizing him, but nobody else was doing it, and so they were just there and not really making a living.  And living in poverty whereas he kind of brought them out of property, and they continued to do their stuff.  And he had amassed a huge fortune of outsider art.  And I think that that's the next area that's really gonna develop it's almost like, like jazz it's very American.  And, and is, is really gonna start taking off.  I think it's already started to take off.  I know there's a Houston [Texas]--the fine arts museum [Museum of Fine Arts, Houston] in Houston actually did a Thornton Dial show made a Thornton Dial show.  The, the Indianapolis art museum [Indianapolis Museum of Art, Indianapolis, Indiana] is getting ready to do one on him.  And then he'll go abroad I think he's the next big person to watch.
Story_ID: 373111
Speaker 1: So is there anything we've left out today before we start to talk about like the wedding and sort of the issues of segregation?  Anything you can think of we--that we didn't cover that we should have?
Speaker 2: Oh I, I can't think of anything actually at this point.
Speaker 1: So let's go back to talk about your wedding and then talk about some of the challenges you faced being African American and living in the country in which we live?
Speaker 2: We, we had--when Lynn [Auldlyn Higgins Williams] and I got married in 1964 we invited there were a thousand people that were invited to the wedding.  My father-in-law [I. Bradshaw Higgins] was an as I told you one of the most prominent surgeon bar none in Baltimore [Maryland].  And lived in a huge Georgian mansion I think it was a twenty-six room house that was owned by really the Hoffbergers who owned the Baltimore Colts football team [sic. Baltimore Orioles], and they were I think in the beer business and whatnot, beer batter.  And, and my father-in-law bought this house in the early '50s [1950s].  We got married at, at an Episcopal church [St. James Protestant Episcopal Church] in Baltimore and the reception was held at my in-laws house.  All the newspapers had been notified when we got engaged a few months before, and the engagement party was at the house.  The Baltimore Sun, The Baltimore Sun refused to print the article in spite of the fact that my in-laws were top black family in Baltimore.  Henry Parks [Henry G. Parks, Jr.] was another who was who had Parks Sausages [Parks Sausages Company] his family they were very pretty well known.  And we were all very concerned that this happened, but that's what, that's what segregation is all about, you know.  They just didn't, they didn't care how wealthy you are or how educated you were if you were black you just couldn't be on the society page.  Well later on maybe five years thereafter my wife joined the Baltimore Junior League [Junior League of Baltimore], and she was the first black member of the junior league in Baltimore, Grace Parks was the second.  And she joined the Women's Committee [Women's Committee Acquisitions Endowment for Contemporary Prints and Photographs] of the Baltimore Museum of Art [Baltimore, Maryland] and The Baltimore Sun began to change its tone.  And she--my wife's picture was in the society pages of The Baltimore--in The Baltimore Sun.  And then they started printing blacks probably about six or seven years after.  The irony of it all is we got to meet one of the owners families here in New York [New York] of, of that company.  And, and he's a good friend of ours guy named Rob Garrett [Robert Garrett], who was one of my sponsors at the Knickerbocker Club [New York, New York].  The Garretts were big Baltimore fan who owned The Baltimore Sun.  So we told him the story and he, he just couldn't believe this had happened but, you know, it did, you know, that was one of the big, big things that happened in those, in those days.  We probably had the largest social African American social wedding ever in the history of the city it was just, just incredible.  We were exhausted when we left at the reception at my father-in-law's clubhouse called the Me-Do-So club on Eutaw Place 350 people mostly out-of-town guests came for dinner.  And then we got on a plane and went down to Jamaica and stayed at a, a friend from New York, a Dr. John [John Moseley] and Louise Moseley, who had a house on The Queens Drive in Jamaica.  She--they lent us a house--gave us a house as a wedding gift for a week with two maids and car, and we had a wonderful time.  And it was after that trip to Jamaica that we then decided we wanted to buy a place down there for the winter.
Story_ID: 373112
Speaker 1: Where else did you see discrimination where else did you face it?
Speaker 2: When I came back from Peace Corps staff I looked and before I--when I--after I got engaged I looked for an apartment on Connecticut Avenue, and it was the 5400 block I'll never forget it called the Legation Apartment Building [sic. Legation House, Washington, D.C.].  I saw a sign that said apartment available call the broker, so I went down to the real estate firm and filled out an application.  They called me the next day and said they were sorry the apartment had, had gone somebody had taken it and I was a little suspicious.  And I mentioned to some people on the Peace Corps staff, and they said well let--someone on the staff said well let me go and apply for the department, so they went and applied for the apartment.  And, and they took somebody who, who they thought these people would think, you know, would agree with their attitude.  And lo and behold they said to the person, you know, a colored man came in here yesterday.  So if you don't mind, we have to predate your application to the day before he came in.  And that was it we went to the Human Rights Commission [DC Commission on Human Rights] we went to the press we picketed the real estate firm it was in all the newspapers, and I got the apartment.  Long story short we were there a couple of years trying desperately to find another black who'd be interested in the apartment, and it just converted to all white again, so that was our first experience.  But we moved to--we looked at several apartments on Park Avenue [New York, New York], and we sent resumes or bio datas first some, that didn't necessarily indicate that we, we were black.  And then and then we finally went into a building--my wife [Auldlyn Higgins Williams] went to a boarding school in New England called the Westover School [Middlebury, Connecticut].  And someone who was at her boarding school lived in the building and said oh you guys interested in an apartment we think an apartment is coming up and our buildings this is 11 75th Avenue.  So we told the broker to check it out the broker checked it out.  So won't you--let's go look at it so we arrived at the building and the super saw us and said to the broker, "Oh I don't think there's an apartment available in this building."  And the broker said to him--said to us, "Why don't you wait here," and she told the super to come to the back.  And so she said to him, and she read the riot act to him she said, "Look these are very fine people.  And, and I know this apartment is available and if you don't let them--if you try to prevent them from going in there you gonna go to jail."  So he backed down we looked at the apartment, and we bought forty thousand dollar six room apartment on 5th Avenue in 1972.  And so we moved into that into that apartment after facing, you know, that kind of, that kind of thing.
Story_ID: 373113
Speaker 1: Where do you think that stuff still exists today: discrimination?  Where do you think it still exists today?  Because, you know, Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] and Al Sharpton [HistoryMaker Reverend Al Sharpton] were on Paula Zahn ['On the Case With Paula Zahn'] last night and the whole hour was devoted to race and discrimination.
Speaker 2: Yes and there was, there was a woman there from Texas, who had her teeth out in the bottom and whatnot and said she draws the line--she didn't mind seeing them at work and whatnot.  But she draws the line about socializing or eating with them, the blacks.  And she's from the lowest, lowest class white family you'd ever want.  I doubt any blacks would even want to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Eat with her.
Speaker 2: --eat with her and so I've heard about that.   Unfortunately, we missed, we missed a lot of it, and I hope they'll replay it (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) I only saw the last ten minutes of it. Yeah.
Speaker 2: I think they'll replay it.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But I think, you know, in, in upper class white circles there's very little of that it's, it's the middle class (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What is it then?
Speaker 2: Well because they're not, you know you're not a challenge--
Speaker 1: No, okay go ahead.
Speaker 2: I was gone say you're not a challenge to them in any way, and it's the middle class and people who've just kind of arrived where you really get the heart of all that today.  Upper class families upper class now they're so used to dealing with people like me and others in these clubs and what, not that that, you know, it doesn't mean anything to them.  So, you know, you don't--I can move to any building in New York [New York] that I want to today.  Where and in the '70s [1970s] I couldn't.  You just look at our background and credentials and in you go (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.  So you think it's that it's just in, in the middle class and working class?
Speaker 2: I think it's more, think it's more in, in that group then the upper class, upper class.
Speaker 1: In the upper class.  What about in institutions? What you think about the banking world has that changed since you were in it?
Speaker 2: Oh significantly, oh yes I mean in every (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What changes have they made?
Speaker 2: In every font I mean in lending, in hiring. (Background noise) And then if you are qualified you can go right into any major bank, and, you know, major banks in this country.
Story_ID: 373114
Speaker 1: And I (unclear) any, any, problem at all in the banks.  You know, the clubs could still be a problem 'cause there aren't a lot of, I mean you can get in.  I mean if, if you have certainly my background I can go into the club in New York [New York].  We were in the River Club [New York, New York] on which is down on 52nd Street which is a Mr. and Mrs. Club.  You know, we were the first black in that club we were in--I was the second black in the University Club [University Club of New York, New York, New York] that David Rockefeller put me.  I was in the Knickerbocker Club [New York, New York] the second black in the Knickerbocker Club.  I was in the first black in the Tennis and Racquet Club [sic. Racquet and Tennis Club, New York, New York].  And I'm looking at all these clubs, and I said, you know, I--once I decided I was gonna stop being actively engaged in working.  I don't need to belong to all these clubs I mean I've integrated them, and I've done my share now I'll just get out and let some other people go in.  So I just stayed in the University Club and the Knickerbocker Club.
Speaker 2: And are there any other blacks in those clubs today?
Speaker 1: The University Club probably has fifty blacks fifty maybe a hundred out of, out of thirty-five hundred.  Cliff Wharton [HistoryMaker Clifton R. Wharton, Jr.] was the first black I was the second.  Then we brought Vernon Jordan [HistoryMaker Vernon E. Jordan, Jr.] in no then no then Dick Parsons [HistoryMaker Richard Parsons] then Vernon Jordan and then and then it just opened up.
Speaker 2: So do you sport today any sporting do you--?
Speaker 1: I was a big squash man I played squash at the University. I had an office on Tennenblock Avenue [ph.] at the bank [Chase Manhattan Bank; JPMorgan Chase and Co.] and then in the '80s [1980s] I went to the University I played two or three times a week.  Well, I had two hips replaced last year in May and December and as you can see you'd never know it.  And I had to stop, stop that I play--I used to play a little tennis.  I used to ski used to ride don't do any of that now I do a lot of walking and swimming and, and, you know, watch sports.
Story_ID: 373115
Speaker 1: Okay making sure we cover all of our bases we'll talk about Mr. Rockefeller [David Rockefeller] who we learned was your mentor?
Speaker 2: Yes, as I as I told you I got, I met David Rockefeller in Washington [D.C.] at the American Bankers Association.  David Rockefeller was chairman of the board Chase Bank [Chase Manhattan Bank; JPMorgan Chase and Co.] and, of course, they all came down to an association meeting.  And we were at a cocktail party and, and I, I start talking, and the Rockefellers have an interest in, in minorities.  And, and so David--it was, it was very kind of natural thing for us to kind of start talking.  And he said, "You know, if you like to come back to New York [New York] please let me know" and I did, and I and he arranged for me to join Chase.  And go on, you know, go on the credit training program and as I went through the program, I always had access to David.  I could always go--I knew his secretary, I knew him whenever I had a problem in the bank for some reason I would go, go and see him.  He got to know me he was interested in the Harlem School of the Arts [New York, New York].  His wife Peggy [Peggy McGrath Rockefeller] was very interested in Harlem School of the Arts.  And so my--and Lynn [Auldlyn Higgins Williams] was on the board of the Harlem School of the Arts so when they did something we invited the Rockefellers.  And when the Rockefellers did, did various things think they invited us to, to their house or, or elsewhere.  And he was just a, a great person and to the extent that he then had enough confidence one to give me a leave of absence from the bank to, to work on the Fordham Hill [Bronx, New York] project.  Raised a lot of eyebrows in the bank. Oh, there goes there Rockefeller's pet.  You know, I mean I knew it was that kind of, you know, 'cause people knew that I was--oh you can't touch him because that's one of their Rockefeller's boys, of course, I loved it all of course.
Speaker 1: Who were his other boys?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: I mean just in general not only--white guys.
Speaker 2: Oh white oh sure, sure I'm trying to think of there was someone who was very close to him at the bank but I've forgotten.  I forget his name and, and he was connected to, you know, the upper class white guys who were at the bank because the families were just connected, connected socially.  And he was very, he--as I said he gave me a leave of absence to do that he--to do the Fordham Hill project.  He asked me to go on the Musem of Modern Art [New York, New York] board.  He asked me if I want to join University Club [University Club of New York, New York, New York].  He was also a sponsor of my joining the Knickerbocker Club [New York, New York].  Well, see my primary sponsor that was the Baltimore--heir to Baltimore Sun [The Baltimore Sun] fortune he was the principal sponsor.  And so, you know, and I, and I as I say in fact I wrote him a long letter about six months ago I mean he's nin- I mean ninety-one or something, and he's a good friend of Brooke Astors.  And I saw him about two weeks ago, and we talked about the whole Brooke Astor scene, and he's, he was--got a great deal of concern about how things are going with her now.  And, and I told him that, you know, I told him my opinion about what was happening.  And he said well, you know, how are things going, and I told him.  He said, you know, let's stay in touch, and he says he hears about me from David Rockefeller Jr., who I've gotten to know very well.  We see them on occasionally in Maine, and he's just been a very--he really help me get through, through my days at Chase I always knew that I had somebody in my corner.  And, and, you know, sometimes it's not always what, you know, but who, you know, can be helpful, and it was very helpful to know David Rockefeller, and it still is.
Speaker 1: Well, maybe that's you're saying. It's not what you're--sometimes it's not what, you know, who, you know (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yes, right yeah it is a combination of both but if you something and you know somebody too then you're then you're on your way (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, then you're your way to someplace. Yeah.
Story_ID: 373116
Speaker 1: I think the Fordham Hill [Bronx, New York] development was I think my greatest--will probably end up being my greatest legacy in terms of my real estate involvement because we really made a difference in that neighborhood.  And we were really seriously criticized by the borough president [sic.] at the time (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Who was the borough president?
Speaker 1: Oh Bernstein [Abraham Bernstein] and he said where there's smoke there's fire, and they did not like the idea of eviction co-op plans 'cause it was not a thing of the people.  And I felt that if we didn't do an eviction co-op plan we didn't want people there who weren't interested in co-ops.  And we didn't want to do a condominium 'cause we didn't want people moving in who may have been drug runners, you know.  We really want to check very carefully who was coming into this development 'cause we didn't want to tip, tip the balance in any way in terms of the kinds of people that were living there.  So and they were I mean there were neighbor people who were picketing us and a picket big signs: David Rockefeller, [HistoryMaker] E.T. Williams.  You know, all two names, of course, David Rockefeller gets linked to everything.  You know, if they if they hear that he's involved then of course in some way, and he was not really involved with Fordham Hill, he was just involved in seeing that I got up there and since I had been at Chase [Chase Manhattan Bank; JPMorgan Chase and Co.] and they knew it, and that got his name involved.  Well, Mayor Koch [Ed Koch] came when we had our--when we had our first anniversary we had a great celebration.
Speaker 2: Was he the mayor during the--?
Speaker 1: Yes he was the mayor yeah.  Yes, he was the mayor, well he, he thought it was fine (unclear).  So I got to know him pretty well and of course, David did get to (unclear).  So I think that was the greatest thing that I've done from an economic standpoint in terms of preserving family.  Yeah, the family's position in the community.
Story_ID: 373117
Speaker 1: And then--
Speaker 2: And wealth.
Speaker 1: --so, on another front, so that's on, on that's you feel your greatest accomplishment on that front?  And other areas of life what stands out?
Speaker 2: Well, I think getting married to my wife Lynn [Auldlyn Higgins Williams] who was--is a, is a great debutante.  And very private in her life, you know, she's not interested--and, and very elegant and, and having two wonderful daughters [Brooke Williams and Eden Williams].  I had a very good time when the girls were going through Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  We would go up, and we bought a new Peugeot.  We were friends of the, of the people who owned Peugeot in France they were gas gorgers and we got this friend Andre Citroen 'cause the Citroen car was brought up to New York [New York], and he stayed with us in our apartment in New York at one point.  He got us this new car, and we drove our daughter up with the Louis Vuitton trunk on top of the car.  And we arrived at, at Harvard Yard. And remember, I wanted to go there.  So it was very interested to be able to take my both daughters up there.  And then they asked me to go on the visiting committee at the Graduate School of Design [Harvard Graduate School of Design, Cambridge, Massachusetts] that's the architectural school.  I went on that board for about six years while my daughters were going through school then I came off.  And so when I had my fiftieth birthday party we rented the penthouse of the Charles Hotel [Cambridge, Massachusetts] for that, for that weekend.  And I entertained, and my family came up, and we had a wonderful black tie I did a party for my fiftieth birthday, and that was fun.  So that, that was a wonderful, wonderful time in my life.  And then when I was coming along as a teenager I had the best friends I mean there, there a group of them there that I'm still very close with and until this day we all meet we're in Sag Harbor [New York] our children are in Sag Harbor.  Our parents were friends.  Ken Chennault's mother [Anne Quick Chenault] and my mother [Elnora Bing Williams Morris] were friends.  Our grandmothers were friends and, and it's just a wonderful kind of sense of, of togetherness and family-ness amongst all of us.  You know, we've all come from very good stable families.  And it's been a wonderful, wonderful life I have no, no regrets.
Story_ID: 373118
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In the art world and what, and what you've done with your art what stands out? It's--what you think will be the legacy?
Speaker 2: One of the legacies I would like to have is helping people like Cinque Gallery [New York, New York] which was formed by Romare Bearden, Ernie Crichlow [Ernest Crichlow] and Norman Lewis and they were helping struggling artists.  Cinque Gallery was about to go out of business and I--and they were having problems with their taxes and what not and, and they 501(c)(3), which is the non-profit status.  So I got my accountant to pull all that together get it all--see that it all got paid out.  And, and bring them into the Romare Bearden Foundation [New York, New York], of who's board I sit.  As a program of the Romare Bearden Foundation.  And that particular program would be, since Romare was one of the founders of Cinque that program would be to help emerging and struggling artists.  And money to be raised, I mean the Rockefeller--the Ford Foundation [New York, New York] is giving us a grant.  And we know that the Bearden Foundation is going to be around for a while the estate is fairly well to do.  And, and we're gonna be able to get grants and what not to that going.  So the legacy of helping emerging artists and saving some of the all-black institutions like the, like the Cinque Gallery.  Working with Bob Blackburn [Robert Blackburn] who ran the printmaking workshop I really helped them get it into shape.  Elizabeth Foundation [Elizabeth Foundation for the Arts, New York, New York] took them over and then promoting the work of, of Hale Woodruff and, and other American artists.  And getting the museums involved in Afro-American art world that's a major interest of mine.  And I, and I do that through getting to know African Americans who are on museum boards and telling them about my experiences especially the younger people coming on the boards now.  And I think a lot more is gonna happen because, you know, you have to, you have to pay to play as they say.  And that I remind them that they got to give art if they gonna make a statement at the, at the museum trustee level that means they should be collecting more.  So those are the things that I think we're very, very importing and promoting Hale Woodruff's work has been very, very important for me.
Story_ID: 373119
Speaker 1: We usually ask what, what are your hopes for the African American community but I think you've stated them in, in the programs you're involved in and your legacy we usually ask that but I think you stated that in talking--but I didn't ask at the end of the day what is it you want to be remembered for when you're no longer on this planet, and you're some other?  What is it that you want to be remembered for?
Speaker 2: Well simply on my tombstone I have--I always said that I want on it: investor, art collector and entrepreneur essentially and then a list of, of all the various boards that I've been on actually.  As, as a person who really got involved in the main, in the main scene community.  And something that everybody can get involved in and that we can all sort of be Americans together because we're, we're really going to have to if we're going to try to take our place back in this world.  And we can't be not liking in each other if we're gonna be this great democracy that's going abroad.  And, and if that's gonna happen we have to do a lot of things--well I've already accomplished and, and I feel very proud about that.
Story_ID: 373120
Speaker 1: The first picture is of my wife Auldlyn Higgins Williams and myself leaving St. James Episcopal Church in Baltimore [Maryland] after our wedding in 1964, May of 1964. We're on our way to a reception.
Speaker 2: Next, please.
Speaker 1: That picture is my mother's brother Edward Bing married to a Margaret Hayes Bing [ph.] that was taken in 1947.  They got married in Brooklyn [New York] at St. Philip's Church [St. Philip's Episcopal Church].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my mother Elnora Bing Williams Morris taken in 1960 and she was considered one of the most beautiful women in black society in Brooklyn.
Speaker 2: Next, please.
Speaker 1: This is the junior committee of the Looking Glass Ball Extravaganza [ph.] that was put on in the fall of 1959 to raise money for the sit-ins in the South.  From left to right standing is a Roger Bennett and my sister JoAnne Carter [JoAnne Williams Carter], Terry Bannister [ph.], Helene Ergens [ph.], Doug Speaks [ph.], Charlie Culer [ph.], Betty Ann Fitzgerald [ph.], Lena Horne's son, Ted Jones, Janet Martin [ph.] and myself [HistoryMaker] E.T. Williams on the end.  Seated from left to right is Marilyn Circus Whiting [ph.], Maryellen Hart, [ph.] Glenda Manley [ph.], Yvonne Carrie Taylor [ph.].
Speaker 2: This picture was taken at the Hello Friend Benefit in New York City [New York, New York] in 2001 by my daughter Brooke Williams, who's a freelance photographer.  On the left going from left to right is, of course, Bill Cosby and myself E.T. Williams.  My good friends from Sag Harbor [New York] Earl Graves [HistoryMaker Earl G. Graves, Sr.] and Johnnie Cochran and to the far right peeking over is my wife, Lynn.
Speaker 1: This is a picture in our home in, in Brooklyn we were getting ready to go to the Coleman's Club [ph.] ball in 1959.  The lady seated are Isabel Johnson Stewart [sic. Isabel Carter Stewart], who is the wife now of the former president [Donald Stewart] of Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia].  Bernadette Carrie in the center Bernadette Carey Smith whose father was a physician in Mount Vernon [New York].  And the last lady in front of me is [HistoryMaker] Sheila Gregory Thomas whose father was superintendent of the colored schools in Atlantic City [New Jersey] at the time of this photo.  The men are left are Frank A. DeCosta Jr., from who is a lawyer and he's from--family from Charleston, South Carolina.  The center photo is Mickey McGuire [Robert Grayson McGuire III]--Grayson A. Maguire Jr. [R. Grayson McGuire Jr.], who's finally owned the Maguire Funeral Home [McGuire Funeral Service, Inc.] in Washington [D.C.].  And then next, to Mickey Maguire is E.T. Williams, Tommy Williams myself.
Speaker 2: This picture was taken it Orangeburg, South Carolina this is my great-grandmother Ella Cordry Bing [ph.].  And you can--the pearls that she has on are still in the family today.  This is my a picture of my great-grandfather who was a planter in Yemassee, South Carolina this was taken around 1934 in Orangeburg or Yemassee, South Carolina.  And his name is Clevin Jackson [ph.] was my, my grandmother's father.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my ushers taken at my wedding in front of my wife's house in Baltimore on Powhatan [Avenue] and Hilton [Street].  From left to right standing in the back is Dr. Joseph I. Hoffman, Jr. from Charleston, South Carolina.  The center is John R. Martin [ph.] from Jersey City [New Jersey] whose father owned Nu Nile products the cosmetic firm.  Next to him is my brother-in-law Robert L. Carter from Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.  The next row starting from left with the framed glasses is the Dr. Warren H. Goins [HistoryMaker Dr. Warren Goins] a longtime friend from Brooklyn, New York.  Myself, E.T. Williams my then best man Frank A. DeCosta, Jr. from Charleston, South Carolina, a lawyer.  And next to him just behind him is a Bill Pickens, William Pickens III also from Brooklyn and the grandson of William Pickens one of the founders of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  On the bottom step from the left is my brother-in-law Dr. Ivan Bradshaw Higgins, Jr. [I. Bradshaw Higgins, Jr.], who lives in Portland, Oregon now and practices as orthopedic surgeon.  And on the far right is a Dr. Stuart R. Taylor, who is a researcher at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota.
Speaker 1: Who this might be?
Speaker 2: This was a picture of my [maternal] grandfather who is standing Thomas Franklin Bing [Thomas Bing].  Unfortunately, I don't have the name of the person that he is standing with, and this was the, the picture was taken before he left for, for New York to live in or on about 1915.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Speaker 2: Me, E.T. Williams when I was about two years old sitting on the steps of our house in Brooklyn at 597 Jefferson Avenue between Lewis [Avenue] and Stuyvesant [Avenue], 1939.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Speaker 2: This picture was taken in 1941 in front of my grandfather's, Thomas Franklin Bing, candy and stationery store.  From left to right my mother Elnora Bing Williams her brother Eddie, Eddie Bing [Edward Bing] her cousin Alonzo Bing and the shorter guy on there is her brother Herman Bing.  I do not know the identity of the person not facing us on the left.
Speaker 1: Will you tell if these were the brothers that were on the train?
Speaker 2: These are the brothers these, these two brothers Herman and Lonnie Bing [ph.] were on the train with my mother and her two little brown babies when we were going south.  My mother and my sister and I had to move to the back of the train while my two uncles stayed in the, in the first class section with all the quote whites.  They laughed about it all the way down when they--when we finally arrived in South Carolina.  This is a picture taken in, in Dark Harbor in Maine on Seven Hundred Acre Island [Maine] of people who were introduced to us by Brooke Astor and who have houses near our house in Maine.  To my left is Ethan Emery, his cousin Susan Post [ph.] myself, Tom Williams, Arinne Goodare [ph.] who was seated next to me.  And the pink shirt is a local artist whose name I don't remember at the moment that was taken in 1988.  This is a picture taken in Riis Beach [Jacob Riis Park, New York, New York] in 1939 with my mother Elnora Bing Williams on the left me, E.T. Williams, playing, Tommy Williams playing, and my sister JoAnne Williams Carter.  We were visiting Reese beach as we did frequently when we were not up in Greenwood Lake [New York] or in Sag Harbor [New York].
Speaker 1: This picture was taken in 2003 at the, at the Lacamas Dance [ph.], and I am on the left E.T. Williams these are all members of the club called the Centurions [ph.].  We were teenage friends actually since we were, we were born everyone on here are all friends.  I'm on the left E.T. Williams, Roger Bennett then Warren Goins, Dr. Warren Goins and Bill Pickens--Bill Pickens III and Stuart R. Taylor it was the last one on this picture.  Three of the four were ushers in my wedding in Baltimore in 1964.
Speaker 2: This is a picture taken in 2005 in the center, of course, is Loida Lewis [Loida Nicolas Lewis], the widow of Reginald R. Lewis [sic. Reginald Lewis].  It was in connection to the new museum [Reginald F. Lewis Museum of Maryland African American History and Culture, Baltimore, Maryland] in Baltimore named after her husband and endowed by, by the Lewises.  To my left is [HistoryMaker] George Russell an attorney and chairman of the board of the museum.  Then Congressman Mfume [Kweisi Mfume] and myself on the, on the right E.T. Williams.  This was taken at the residence of Loida Lewis' Reginald Lewis' widow at of an occasional cocktail party.  And I am talking, E.T. Williams talking to Michael Milken, the investment banker.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my wife Lynn Higgins Williams and myself E.T. Williams taken at a party given by the Northeasterners [Northeasterners Inc.] of which Lynn was national president.  The club which was founded in the '20s [sic. 1930] used to be called the Gay Northeasterners.  They have thirteen chapters in the in the East, but they had the change the name when my mother-in-law [Hilda Moseley Higgins] and some of her girlfriends appeared at the hotel, and the hotel wanted to know were they a gay group.  And it was a little disconcerting to them these very serious black society matrons.  So the club they weren't happy but they had to change their name to the Northeasterners from the Gay Northeasterners.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of me E.T. Williams standing in front of actually my high school [Eastern District High School, Bronx, New York] when I was seventeen years old.  And I had just completed my stint as president of the, of the school.
Speaker 1: Do the last one thank you.
Speaker 2: This is a picture taken in September 1938 with the caption: Expecting Tommy.  It's a picture of my mother and dad at our house at five, at 650, 657 Jefferson Avenue where my mother is, is pregnant with me taken in September a month or so before I was born with my mother and dad E.T. Williams [Edgar Thomas Williams, Sr.] and, and Elnora Bing Williams.
