Story_ID: 629146
Speaker 1: Okay, we're going to get started.  My name is Sasha Daltonn and I'm your interviewer, and Neculai Burghelea is your videographer, and Miss Adrienne Jones is observing today.  Please state and spell your name including your middle name.
Speaker 2: Benjamin Winans [HistoryMaker BeBe Winans] is my given name.  I don't have a middle name but it's B-E-N-J-A-M-I-N W-I-N-A-N-S.  Now, BeBe is just a nickname, a nickname that only my family circle and my church family call--call me and my sister BeBe and CeCe, so.  It was just a nickname given from birth, that's why.
Speaker 1: We want to talk about how they came up with BeBe, and her name is Priscilla?
Speaker 2: CeCe, CeCe's name is--given name is Priscilla Marie [Priscilla Winans Love].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Mine, as I stated, is Benjamin, and ever since we've known each other or known ourselves, it's always been BeBe and CeCe, a nickname that--my father [David Winans, Sr.] was famous--I guess because it was so many children, for giving nicknames.  And so, at an early age he named me BeBe, and then when she came along, who was the first girl after seven boys straight, he nicknamed her CeCe.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your birth date, and where were you born?
Speaker 2: I was born in Detroit, Michigan, on such a wonderful month (laughter), September the 17th, 1962.
Speaker 1: And today's date is November 2nd (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Today is November the 2nd, 2007.
Speaker 1: Okay. And your occupation?
Speaker 2: My occupation, I have been--well, I've been doing what I do now, which is a singer, songwriter, producer, for twenty-six years now.  Before that, I did just like anybody; I did odd jobs, I worked at Burger King.  But I remember working at Burger King and I called my mother [Delores Ransom Winans] one day, I said, "Ma, God didn't call me to Burger King."  (Laughter)  She told me that, "Honey, you can quit."  (Unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How old were you then?
Speaker 2: I was sixteen.
Speaker 1: And you were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was sixteen years old living in Detroit, Michigan, and I was working, you know, after school because my father really taught us, as long as you have your health and strength it's important that you work and that you occupy your time, then you--you'll have that ethic of giving and doing.  And so, it was always in us to not sit back and be lazy, but to work.  So, you know, I sold shoes and worked at Coney Island hot dogs and--but Burger King was my last occupation (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 629147
Speaker 1: And before we get started, I want just a little warm-up and ask--but you're very warm already (laughter), and ask you five kind of People magazine-ish type questions.  What is your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: My favorite time of year--it would have to be Christmas, and because it is that day that millions have placed aside and celebrate the birth of Christ.  I, over the last ten years of my life, I've celebrated the birth of Christ in the Bahamas.  So now I'm almost convinced that, you know, that Jesus was born in a warm place (laughter).  It has, Christmas has to be, indeed, my favorite time of the year (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What's your favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is blue. Favorite color has always been blue.  It's my mother's [Delores Ransom Winans] favorite color, too, so maybe that's where I picked it from, but blue is my favorite color.
Speaker 1: And where is your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: My favorite destination for vacation, hands down, is Hawaii.  Hawaii.  You send me to Hawaii and I'm a happy brother.
Speaker 1: Which island?
Speaker 2: Any island.
Speaker 1: Any island.
Speaker 2: Any island in Hawaii.  I like Honolulu [Hawaii] simply because I have so many friends there.  Families that, you know, that I've been knowing before their birth, to tell you the truth, but it's my favorite place to go.  You know, honestly, between Hawaii and Rio de Janeiro [Brazil], just the handiwork of God is beautiful.  You can just sit there and say, "You know what, somebody else made these mountains.  Man didn't make these mountains."  So my favorite place to go.
Speaker 1: What about your favorite phrase, saying or scripture? Or all three?
Speaker 2: If I--if I choose one scripture that would be my favorite, it has to be "I can do all things through Christ who strengthens me" [Philippians 4:13].  And that's simply because in this world that we live in, there's a lot of hurdles, there's a lot of storms, and there's a lot of things I think as African Americans, we're taught that we could not, we could not.  And so to have I can, you know, strike all those I cannots, I think, a powerful tool that we were taught as children.  So that would have to be my favorite scripture of all.  And, saying, it will have to be: no pain, no gain.  You know, these days, I think the generation coming behind us, we want things without any pain, we just--we don't want to work for it; we just want to have that success. And, and I think that hurts us more than helps us.
Story_ID: 629148
Speaker 1: BeBe [HistoryMaker BeBe Winans], tell me about your mother, what was her name?
Speaker 2: My mother, Delores Amelia Ransom [Delores Ransom Winans], before she became Delores Amelia Winans, I think is my favorite female in the world.  This is a woman who I have watched all my life, a woman who is steadfast, a woman who's full of courage and strength.  To watch my mother lose her father [William Ransom (ph.)], to watch my mother lose her only sister [Bernice Ransom], to watch my mother lose her mother [Frances Ransom] and my brother, her son [Ronald Winans] and to stay even keel, has been trem- a tremendous lesson to me.  She's been an example--but just a powerful quiet, but powerful woman.
Speaker 1: Where was she born?
Speaker 2: My mother was born in Dearborn, Michigan, which was a suburb of Detroit, Michigan, born and raised there.  And my father [David Winans, Sr.], as well, was born in Detroit, Michigan.
Speaker 1: What do you know about your mother's background, the years she grew up, her education, anything?
Speaker 2: I at-- maybe three years ago, maybe four years ago--oh, maybe five years ago, I decided, you know, I'm my mother's favorite son, and you can ask her and she'll tell you that's true.  I decided one day to interview my mother and so she started laughing.  I said, "No, no.  I want to interview you.  I know you as Mom.  I want to know what you were thinking--I mean you have ten kids, so when you were growing up." I asked her this question, "How many kids did you want to have?"  And she said, "Two."  I said, "Ma, only two?"  She said, "Yeah.  All my girlfriends, we would talk and they wanted this many, I wanted two."  And I said, "Well, I mean, what happened?"  She said, "I met your father.  And he just really, you know, wanted a lot of sex."  I said, "Okay. (Laughter) Interview's over. Too much information here, Ma."  But most importantly, she was raised Baptist.  My father was raised Pentecostal, and at that point contraceptives were prohibited; so there, you know, it was the luck of the draw if you got pregnant or not.  And, but she loved him so much that she accepted it, and therefore, ten children later--ten children later was what she ended up with.
Speaker 1: How many years have they been married? How many years have they been married?
Speaker 2: My mother and father have been married for fifty-five years now.  And what's funny, I think is my mother, every now and then, will give us a call and say, "Oh, I'm coming and visit you.  This man is on my nerves."  (Laughter) For fifty-five years, and I asked her as well, "Ma, how did you--" because my father's mind changes like the weather.   We used to always say, "If he said it, it ain't gonna happen," you know.  And she--I said, "How did you handle that, I mean, how did you become--how did you guys make it this far?"  And she told me once, she said she was having a discussion with him and they were disagreeing, and she said it was a voice that spoke to her and said, "Be quiet.  Learn him."  Then she said from that day on she sat down and for the next month or so she learned my father.  And after learning him, she knew exactly when to ask, how to ask, what time, and she--in that, she got everything she wanted.  And so he thought (laughter) he was doing the leading and it was my mother that was doing the leading.  But she's a very wise woman, very wise woman.
Story_ID: 629149
Speaker 1: Did she ever share any stories with you about her early childhood or the Ransom family history?
Speaker 2: My, my mom's [Delores Ransom Winans] history, as far as I know, my, my grandmother was a very stout--she has Cherokee Indian [Native American].  My great-grandmother is a very sweet woman, but music was a part of their life (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, what was her--what was your grandmother's name?
Speaker 2: Oh, you got me on that one now.  Not Laura--oh, I got to--I have to come back to that one.  I can't remember her first name (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you ever meet her?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But very, very strong-willed people, both my great-grandmother and my grandmother Frances Ransom.  Very strong women.  And--
Speaker 1: Now, Frances is your--
Speaker 2: Mother's mother.
Speaker 1: Your mother's mother, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: And the grandmother whose name you have to think of is your father's mother? Is that correct?
Speaker 2: No, was my mother's grandmother.
Speaker 1: Grandmother, okay.
Speaker 2: My mother's grandmother.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And very strong-willed people.  And to tell you the truth, my mother was so different from her sister and from her mother and from my grandmother--her grand- my great-grandmother, her grandmother.  Very, very different.  We used to--I always asked my mother, "Are you sure you came from that family?"  Because she was so quiet and even keeled.  Where my Aunt Bernice [Bernice Ransom] and my Grandmother Frances, they would--they would--they would live for confrontation.
Speaker 1: Now, Bernice is your mother's sister?
Speaker 2: Bernice was my mother's sister, my only (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Her only sister.
Speaker 2: --her only sister.  She had no brothers.  One sister, Bernice.
Speaker 1: And what was the difference in their ages?
Speaker 2: My mother was the baby girl--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Two years between Bernice and my mother.
Speaker 1: And what is--do you know your mother's birthday--your mother's birth date?
Speaker 2: My mother was born in September the 22nd; that would be 1934.
Speaker 1: And her sister, Bernice, was born in what year?
Speaker 2: In 1932.
Speaker 1: And her last name?
Speaker 2: Ransom.
Speaker 1: Ransom. Now, are there any cousins on that side of the family (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Bernice, my aunt, had five children and those are our only first cousins.  We only had one set of first cousins.  Bernice had five children:  Dwayne [ph.], LaRhonda [ph.]--no, four.  Yeah, four children. Oh.  History make you think. (Laughter) Four, four.
Speaker 1: Dwayne, Rhonda--
Speaker 2: Dwayne, LaRhonda, Henry [ph.] and Christa [ph.].  Dwayne, LaRhonda, Henry and Christa.  Was our--what?  There still is, our first cousins--our only first cousins (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now--
Story_ID: 629150
Speaker 1: What about your mother's father?  Your grandfather, do you know him (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My--my mother's father, that was another series that my, my mother [Delores Ransom Winans] was determined to have him in our lives.  Now, her father and her mother [Frances Ransom] divorced years ago, I think when my mother was only four years old, my grandfather and her mother got divorced and he was not in our lives.  And, a nice man but did not get involved with my mother or her children.  And that really broke my mother's heart in the beginning, and then at one point we just remember her forcing us every now and then, maybe Thanksgiving or Christmas, to go and visit him.  And we used to laugh at my mother.  My mother was the type of person that you could really be friends with as well.  I mean, she ruled with an iron hand, but you could--she had that kindness about her that you felt very comfortable speaking to her and saying what you felt.  And so, we used to tease her, "Ma, I mean, why do we have to go see him?  He don't even like you."  (Laughter)  She would say, "It's your grandfather, we're going to see him."  So she was determined.  So even at his death.
Speaker 1: And what was his name?
Speaker 2: Now, his last name was Ransom, but--William [William Ransom (ph.)].  But even at his death, I, I, I never will forget.  My mother called us up and said, "Everybody has to come to his funeral."  And we would call each other and say, "Boy, she is--she was--she's determined until his death."  And over the years prior to his death, she really did form a relationship with him, and we saw him more than we did all our childhood.  But even at his death we all was there and my brother, Daniel [Daniel Winans], spoke because my mother was determined that one of us has--is going to have some words.  So my brother got up there and he spoke.  We, we, we were all amazed in the beginning because he started saying things that our grandfather did for us.  And so, we're looking at Daniel saying, "What are you talking about?"  He said, you know, "You took us to the park, you took us, you know, on dinner and lunch dates."  And we're saying, "What?"  "You loved us undyingly."  And near the end of the speech, he says, "You did this all through my mother."  And we sat there and said, "Okay.  You deserve applause here," because my mother was definitely his extension to us.  And so, it's--it was interesting to see how determined she was to build that relationship, and she did.
Speaker 1: And what year did your grandfather die?
Speaker 2: This is 2007, my grandfather died in 2005.
Speaker 1: Was he also from Michigan?
Speaker 2: He was from South Carolina.  Don't know what part, but he was from South Carolina.
Speaker 1: And your grandmother died in what year?
Speaker 2: My grandmother died ten years ago, so it's 1997.
Speaker 1: Ninety-seven [1997].
Story_ID: 629151
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about your stories, any stories that your mother [Delores Ransom Winans] may have shared with you about her growing up.  You have any remembrances of that?
Speaker 2: The only stories that my mother shared with us as far as her childhood was almost mirrored our childhood, which was music.  Music was always a part of her life.  She talked about the different struggles, especially in Dearborn [Michigan] where she was born.  It was a lot of racial tension.  But yet and still, she was shielded.  She would talk about--see, her grandmother, I mean her mother, my grandmother, Frances [Frances Ransom], was, you know, tough and rough, so she really didn't take a lot of the---one of the stories she told us about my grandmother was, she was a nurse, and so she went to work at this new hospital, lot of racial tension, and she was on, like, the fourth floor.  And my mother told us that she went in, and she was a very kind woman until you did the wrong thing, you crossed that line; but my mother told us that she told the nurse who did something wrong, and she took her to the window and she said, "You need to ask people around here who I am."  She said, "My name is Frances, and what I will do, I will throw you out that window but then I would catch you right before you fell and hit the ground."  And from that moment on, the woman never crossed my, my, my grandmother, and that was the kind of childhood--so my mother didn't come up in fear with racial tensions all around because her mother was very protective and she didn't take anything.  And so her childhood was, you know, beyond the racial tension; was a very happy childhood even when my father--my grandfather [William Ransom (ph.)] left because my grandmother just became everything.  She was not afraid to take on the challenges of raising two children without a husband or anything.  So my mother only knew love.  She only knew support.  She only knew strength in her upbringing, and music was always in the house.
Story_ID: 629152
Speaker 1: Did she work outside of the home?
Speaker 2: Yes. Oh, yeah. In her, teenage years (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In, in her--in her early years prior to her marrying your father [David Winans, Sr.], and then let's talk about during the time of the marriage.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well, when--before my father and my mother [Delores Ransom Winans] met, when they joined this choir, this chorus called The Lemon Gospel Chorus [Lucylle Lemon and the Lemon Gospel Chorus] in Detroit, Michigan.  And that's how they met.  And my father used to sing with--what's the man's name--Sam Cooke.  My father used to sing with Sam Cooke and Lou Rawls in the Chitlin' Circuit, I guess you can it, and they used to go around and the quartets would sing around, and my mom [Delores Ransom Winans] and dad met in the Lemon Gospel Chorus.  And so, beyond when they married, my mother did odd jobs as well, but she became a secretary at a hospital for years, and so she did transcripts.  So that's what she did, with a couple of odd jobs, but her main job was a secretary for doctors at the hospital.
Story_ID: 629153
Speaker 1: Now, you say your father sang with Sam Cooke and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My father--Lou Rawls--
Speaker 1: Well, let's talk--let's talk about your dad.
Speaker 2: Oh, my dad.  My dad was a character, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And then we'll talk about his singing, okay?
Speaker 2: My dad was a character.
Speaker 1: How would you describe him, okay?
Speaker 2: I, I, I would--you know, when people ask us about my father, we automatically smile because my father, to describe him, we would tell people, "Bill Cosby has nothing on David Winans [David Winans, Sr.]."  My mother [Delores Ransom Winans] used to call him Skippy.  That was his nickname.  Oh, and, Skippy, he was cool, he was funny; he didn't try to be funny, he was just automatically funny.  And beyond that, he would say anything that came to his mind, so--I mean, for instance, Stevie Wonder.  My father met Stevie Wonder, and we--we, seriously, we warn people about my father.  "Don't take it personally, he's just, you know, he's Skippy, he's my father."  And so, I remember when my brother introduced Stevie Wonder to my father, and my father looked up and said, "Oh, good to meet you, but now, your, your name is wrong."  And I said, "Oh, here it goes."  He said, "Wonder."  He said, "It's not a wonder other than God.  He's the only wonder. Your name is wrong."  (Laughter) There he goes.  So, you know, how can you tell Stevie Wonder your name is wrong?
Speaker 1: And what did Stevie say?
Speaker 2: Just laughed.  He knew and he just laughed, and he just grabbed my father's hand and says, "It's a pleasure to meet you."  But that was my father.  My father, a great man, a great role model but a character.
Story_ID: 629154
Speaker 1: Now, you say your father's name is David [David Winans, Sr.]--
Speaker 2: My father's name is David (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and where was he born?
Speaker 2: He was born in Detroit, Michigan, as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was born to a wonderful woman named Laura Glenn [Laura Glenn Howze] and Carvin Winans [ph.] was my father's, father's name.  They were never married.  And as the story goes, my great-grandfather, Isaiah W. Winans was his name, and he was a great preacher.  He--the W stood for Wise.  That was his name, Isaiah Wise Winans.  And when my grandmother--my father and my mother [Delores Ransom Winans] told us as well, that my grandfather denied that it was his child, and he--so when my father was born, it was discovered it was definitely his.  He looked exactly like my grandfather.  And my great-grandfather told him, "Because of your lies, you will never have another child."  And my grandfather never--remarried, I mean got married, never had another child.  And so, my father took on my grandmother's maiden name which was Glenn.  So up until me, which is the seventh child, our last names was Glenn.  I was Benjamin Glenn, my brother Ronald [Ronald Winans] was given the name Winans as a middle name.  So his name was Ronald Winans Glenn.  Now, my great-grandfather, who my father came to really, really love, asked my father in 1964, right before my sister CeCe [Priscilla Winans Love], was born, to honor him.  And my father decided, "I'm going to honor you," and took us down and changed our names from Glenn to Winans.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.
Speaker 2: And, so Ronald ended up being Ronald Winans Winans (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Very interesting.
Speaker 2: R.W.W., so it was 1964 that our names was changed from Glenn to Winans.
Speaker 1: Now, the--your grandfather--your great-grandfather, is he also from Michigan? So your roots (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My great-grandfather was from South Carolina.
Speaker 1: From South Carolina.
Speaker 2: So my grandmother and--my grandmother Laura Glenn, which is my father's mother, she was from South Carolina.  My great-grandfather Isaiah W. Winans, was from South Carolina.
Speaker 1: What, what part of South Carolina?
Speaker 2: Greenville [South Carolina].  In Greenville, Columbia [South Carolina], in that area.  And my brother Marvin [Marvin Winans] has been taking that trip back and forth and seeing the books of slavery and where my father--my great-grandfather was during that history.
Speaker 1: How far do you think you can trace your family tree?
Speaker 2: My brother Marvin has traced it back to my great-grandfather's father, and my great-grandfather Isaiah W. Winans was never a slave but his father was.  And the land that my great-grandfather's father worked, he ended up buying that land.  And so, I think that's what became the strength of my great-grandfather and my grandfather and down the line because he was never a slave.
Speaker 1: Now, do you know your great-grandfather's name?
Speaker 2: My great-great-grandfather? No (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Your great-great-grandfather, okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know his name, but he was born in South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Now, has there been any research on your mother's family tree?
Speaker 2: Not that I know of (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Not yet?
Speaker 2: Not that I know of. Yeah, just Winans.
Story_ID: 629155
Speaker 1: Tell me about the neighborhood that you grew up in?
Speaker 2: Well the neighborhood, up until, let's see, after my birth--you know there were seven, as I stated, seven boys consecutively.  We lived in the ghetto in the Brewster Projects [Brewster-Douglass Housing Projects; Frederick Douglass Homes, Detroit, Michigan].  And my father [David Winans, Sr.] moved us from there to the west side of Detroit [Michigan], seven miles to Woodingham [Drive], 191--it's amazing how some things you never forget--19131 Woodingham, Detroit, Michigan, Seven Mile Road.  And, at that time, we, maybe another African American family, lived in the neighborhood.  And we remember very swiftly our neighbors started packing up and leaving (laughter).  But it was a wonderful neighborhood that I have the greatest memories of.  And that's where we lived, the west side of Detroit.
Speaker 1: Now, you mentioned a little earlier that your father sang with Sam Cooke.  He was not always in gospel then (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, you have to understand, what we recognized in growing up, especially in a household full of music, and my father used to line us up at night and we studied all these quartet numbers, you know, and--and, and so in that--in learning all that we learned that all these people, the Sam Cookes of the world, the Lou Rawls, they grew up singing gospel music.
Story_ID: 629156
Speaker 1: Tell a little bit more about your, your dad's [David Winans, Sr.] relationship with Sam Cooke?
Speaker 2: Sam--Sam Cooke, as well as Lou Rawls, they were good friends.  As a matter of fact, my father used to tell us how they were very broke in those days, and my father's mother [Laura Glenn Howze] had a little cash and she would feed them.  They would come and she would cook meals, especially for Lou Rawls.  And so, they would go around different places (background noise).  Oh, that's me, ain't it?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And so, my father--my father's mother would cook for Lou Rawls and Sam Cooke, and they would go to different churches and they would sing.  And so, my father was in a quartet--he still is a quartet lover.
Speaker 1: Now, let me ask you this.  Back in those days, we're talking about the '50s [1950s]?
Speaker 2: Yes, we're talking about the '50s [1950s].
Speaker 1: In the '50s [1950s], um-hm.  Okay.  So your dad was also a quartet singer.  So then during that period, Sam and Lou would have still been singing gospel--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) is that correct?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: This is what--my father used to tell us all the time, before Sam decided to start singing R and B, he was singing gospel.  That's, he was born and raised in the church just like my father was.  And my father thought--my father thought Sam Cooke was the greatest singer, and still thinks Sam Cooke was the greatest singer that was ever born.  And you can hear when my father sings, especially when we were coming up, he would do that (singing).  You know, it was always that, and it was--he was a Sam Cooke lover.  He would, that signature (singing).
Story_ID: 629157
Speaker 1: Now, the name of the group that your dad [David Winans, Sr.] sang with was--
Speaker 2: What--I don't think my father had a group, a name of a group.  I don't remember him having a name.  The Lemon Gospel Chorus [Lucylle Lemon and the Lemon Gospel Chorus] is the only main group that I remember he was singing in.  But they used to have all these other quartet groups, you know.  I don't--I don't think he ever sung with the Nightingales [Sensational Nightingales] and all those other groups.
Speaker 1: But Sam and Lou sang with The Soul Stirrers (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The Soul Stirrers, um-hm.
Speaker 1: So back in that time then they were kind of on the same church circuit--
Speaker 2: Circuit, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: They were on the circuit in the '50s [1950s], and you know, that's when the Four Tops and all these groups were birthed from those--those groups.  And so, my father used to always line us up at home before we went to bed.  We couldn't go to bed unless we sung one of those songs.  And those harmonies were difficult.
Speaker 1: Describe that.
Speaker 2: Oh, Lord.  My mother would be on the side--my mother would be on the side of the bed saying, "Skippy, Skippy, they gotta go to bed, they gotta go to school" (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, Skippy is your--
Speaker 2: Skippy is my father's nickname.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he would say, you know, "Loris," her name is Delores [Delores Ransom Winans], but he would call her Loris, "I'm gonna send them to bed, but they gotta get this."  And so we would be lined up and he would say, "All right," and we would say (singing).  "No, no, no, no, nah.  You gotta get that (singing) up there."  I'm saying, "Daddy, Daddy, let us sleep"  (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So that would be--
Speaker 2: It would be like eleven o'clock at night, you know, and we could not go to bed until we got it right.  And then he would say, "All right.  Go get some rest."
Speaker 1: Now (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Skippy (laughter), I love him for it.
Story_ID: 629158
Speaker 1: How many brothers and sisters do you have?
Speaker 2: Ten--I had--you know there's ten siblings.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There were seven boys: David [David Winans II]; Ronald [Ronald Winans]; Marvin [Marvin Winans], Carvin [Carvin Winans], which were twins; Michael [Michael Winans]; Daniel [Daniel Winans]; myself, Benjamin [HistoryMaker BeBe Winans]; Priscilla [Priscilla Winans Love], better known as CeCe; Angelique [Angelique Winans Caldwell], and Debra [Debra Renee Winans Lowe].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were the seventh child?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: From the first to the oldest--
Speaker 2: This means complete, then CeCe came and just messed things up.  Yeah (laughter).  I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: So David is the eldest?
Speaker 2: David, Jr.
Speaker 1: And he's how old?
Speaker 2: David, Jr. is fifty-three years old.  Wow.
Speaker 1: And then Ronald?
Speaker 2: Fifty--no.  David is fifty-four.  David turned fifty-four September the 24th.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Ronald who passed, he would be fifty-two.  He was born June the 30th; then it's Marvin and Carvin who are forty-nine at the time--right now; and then there's Michael who is forty-seven.  He was born June the 5th.  Daniel is forty-six.  He was born July the 22nd.  I'm forty-five, born September 17th.  What a wonderful day (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What a wonderful day.
Speaker 2: What a wonderful day.  Nineteen sixty-two [1962].  CeCe is now forty-three.  She was born October the 8th, 1964.  Angie, which is Angelique Lynette, and I know she was born on March the 3rd in 1967.  And then last of the Mohicans which is Debra Renee.  She was born September the 3rd in 1970.
Speaker 1: So you have the ten children--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You lined up--Pops [David Winans, Sr.] lined you up at night--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --to sing, and then how many would--that would have been all (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That would have been--no, not all ten of us at that time, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That would have been--
Speaker 2: He--as he became older he would, you know, rule less (laughter).
Speaker 1: So this started in what grade (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This was like the four older brothers, the four older brothers and then me and my--we were like stair steps.  Every two years there were siblings.  And so, me, my brother Daniel and my brother Michael as well as CeCe formed a group.  So the quartet--the girls never had to be tormented by quartet music--it was just the elder brothers and my brother Michael, Daniel and myself got a little bit of that as well.  But the girls, they got away with murder.
Speaker 1: But every night you had to sing?
Speaker 2: We had to sing.  We had to sing.
Speaker 1: I want to go back to the brothers' and sisters' birthdays, again.  It's amazing that you remember everyone's birthday.
Speaker 2: You know, it was--it was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do all of you remember each other's birthdays like that?
Speaker 2: Yes.  We, we, we all remember our birthdays because I, I, I, I think, couple of reasons, and that is, first of all, when you're raised in a home of so many siblings birthdays were important, but we didn't get materialistic things.  So we were taught to love each other, so you never would let somebody's birthday pass and not call or not wish them a happy birthday.  So it was, it was that kind of, of importance to us.
Story_ID: 629159
Speaker 1: You know, because we didn't have the money to buy simply--the only birthday we celebrated was sixteen.  It was sweet sixteen, so that was the day, and that was the birthday that we had a blow-out party.  My mother [Delores Ransom Winans] made sure, you know, sixteen; I'm going to give my child a birthday party.
Speaker 2: What do you remember about your birth- sweet sixteen?
Speaker 1: Sweet sixteen?  Couldn't wait (laughter).  Couldn't wait because it was the moment--you know, we always celebrated in one way, but that was the moment that my mother gave in a way that she wasn't able to give in those other years.  And so, I remember the big party, the friends from church, because that--that was--that--it was something all--all we wanted was our church friends to come over and the people we grew up with, you know, to come and celebrate.  So to have the balloons, and the hats, and the whistles--you know, not a whole lot of things, but that was the moment--and it was the moment that I saw my six elder brothers celebrate.  So wanting to be like them is what--well, it was like, this is my day now.  I'm becoming like my brothers, you know.  So it was, you know, and, and, and it was okay with all of us that we didn't have to have a seventeenth year old birthday or eighteenth.  Sixteen was it and that's all we needed.
Story_ID: 629160
Speaker 1: Tell me about a normal day in the Winans-Glenn household?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I know when people ask me often what was it like growing up in the Winans' household, and the first word that comes to my mind is noisy.  It was noisy.  It was noisy.  But it was a difference between a joyful noise and just noise.  In my household it was a joyful noise at all times.  And, and, and even when my mom [Delores Ransom Winans] and dad [David Winans, Sr.]--my mom and dad were very, very stern when it came to fighting, you know.  We couldn't fight each other.  We, we did but they didn't know about it (laughter) because you didn't want to get beat up by your brother and then Mom comes home and you find they find out and you get another whipping from them, is like, you know, one whipping is enough.  But it was a houseful of joyful noise.  We had a house full of examples.  And I think that, itself, is as I'm older now, was a blessing that I had both my parents, you know, in the home and they were examples to us on how a mother and father should be, you know.  It was a real household.  It wasn't the Huxtables.  Things didn't go always smooth or easy, but, you know, to watch my mother through various stages of life, for instance, I don't know if it was my father, he was turning forty.  My father left that day, what I'll always remember, with a station wagon and he came home with a Kawasaki 500.  So we heard this noise (makes noise), and we all went to the window and we saw my father on a Kawasaki 500.  And I remember my mother just going to the window and she looked out and she saw my father on a motorcycle and she just looked at us and said, "I'm going to bed." (Laughter) And she went upstairs and went to bed.  You know, that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And so what did--what did--what did the kids say?  What did you all say?
Speaker 2: Oh, we were excited yet in shock, too, because we're wondering, well, how are we all going to get to church (laughter)?  And at that time, you have to understand, my father, barber by trade but he worked, you know, at GM [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company], Chrysler [Chrysler Corporation; FCA US LLC], and he also did every other odd job there was.  So as a child, you know, you're excited.  We went--we did some janitorial work at various corporations and McDonald's.  I remember my father putting me on the motorcycle at eleven o'clock at night and taking a belt and tying me to his waist and riding off to the McDonald's where we cleaned and did work there.  So for us it was like, "Oh, this is fun."  But--
Speaker 1: How do you all get to church [Mack Avenue Church of God in Christ; Zion Congregational Church of God in Christ, Detroit, Michigan]?
Speaker 2: Well, in that period when he was the Kawasaki man (laughter), we had some close families called the Weatherspoons [ph.] and the Mackies [ph.] that still had their station wagons (laughter).  They would come pick us up for church.  And, and, and, and also, you know, we used to take the bus.  We used to take the bus, my mom and dad, especially, before we even had a station wagon.  She would line us up at the bus station.  We would take two buses to church and two buses home.
Story_ID: 629161
Speaker 1: So how often did you, did you all, did the family go to church because you said you were Pentecostal? So (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, when it comes to church, we--we went to church sunup, sundown.
Speaker 1: How many days a week?
Speaker 2: Sunup, sundown.  We would go to church on Sunday morning, we would go to church on Tuesday night, we would go to church on Friday night, and we would go to church on Saturday where we would go to choir rehearsals and various other things that were going on.  Now that was just a regular week.  Now, from, look, like January through October, we were always in revival.  So we stayed at church, you know, but to us it was fun.  To us it was fun.  If my mother [Delores Ransom Winans], honestly, if she wanted to punish us, she would tell us, "You can't go to church," and we would start crying.  And we would do whatever was needed that she told us we had to do in order to go to church.  Say, "Ma, please, please, I'm sorry.  I won't do it.  Please let me go to church."
Speaker 1: What church did your family attend?
Speaker 2: We were raised in--it was called Mack Avenue Church of God in Christ [Zion Congregational Church of God in Christ], which was on Mack Avenue in Chene [Street], east side of Detroit [Michigan], and it was founded and built by my [paternal] great-grandfather Isaiah W. Winans.  He built it and was the pastor, co-founding pastor of Mack Avenue Church of God in Christ.  And so that's the church we were raised in and we went to all our lives.
Speaker 1: And you said that only your mother, when your mother and father [David Winans, Sr.] met, she was Baptist?
Speaker 2: When my mother--yeah.  When my mother and father met, she--she was going to a Baptist church and my father was going to his great-grandfather's church, which is I.W. Winans, and so they got married at the church, my grandfather's church--my great-grandfather's church, and she became a member there.
Story_ID: 629162
Speaker 1: So your father [David Winans, Sr.] and mother [Delores Ransom Winans] met singing in--
Speaker 2: In the Lemon Gospel Chorus [Lucylle Lemon and the Lemon Gospel Chorus] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in the Lemon Gospel Chorus?
Speaker 2: That's where they met, yes.
Speaker 1: Your mother's family--your mother came from a family that was musical, your father came from a family that was musical.  So this was like a merger of music--
Speaker 2: A merger--
Speaker 1: --of love and music--
Speaker 2: Yes, indeed (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and then produced ten children--
Speaker 2: Ten siblings.
Speaker 1: --who all sing.
Speaker 2: And my--and my father, that's the thing that used to tickle us, is that my father is an only child.  There's no brothers or sisters.  My mother only had one sister [Bernice Ransom].  And then they came together in their union and produced ten children, and all musically inclined.  But beyond the talent, all of us had such a love for music.  But growing up in the church, in my great-grandfather's church [Mack Avenue Church of God in Christ; Zion Congregational Church of God in Christ, Detroit, Michigan], I mean, we used to watch our mother sing in the choir, and my mother could tear the church down.
Speaker 1: What song do you remember her singing that may have been her signature song?
Speaker 2: Well, she would sing a lot of the Hawkins family.  The Hawkins family, Andrae Crouch were some of our heroes.  But she would sing some of the songs that Shirley Caesar would sing, and you know, Tramaine Hawkins, 'If Anybody Asks Where I'm Going,' [sic. 'Goin' Up Yonder'] or 'Changed' that Lynette Hawkins [Lynette Hawkins Stephens] sang--
Speaker 1: So then she didn't reach back to the Shirley Caesars gener- to the Albertina Walkers or the Rosetta Tharpe [Sister Rosetta Tharpe] because those would have been the singers of--
Speaker 2: Of her day, but--
Speaker 1: --of her day.
Speaker 2: Not--the songs though that I remember.  You know, at that point I'm seven, eight years old, it was those (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So then she was--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was those--
Speaker 1: --she was singing a little more contemporary gospel--
Speaker 2: --more contemporary songs.
Speaker 1: --songs?
Speaker 2: Yeah. But she would tear the house down.  My father would always sing the congregational songs, that we grew up as children in the church singing. He would take one of those gospel songs (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) For example?
Speaker 2: He would take a song, 'I Don't Know What You Come to Do' ['I Don't Know What You've Come to Do'] (singing), and he didn't have to have any help.  My father was the singer and he was the congregation.  He would get so involved.  You couldn't help but get involved watching my father.
Speaker 1: Do you think that either of your parents had aspirations for--to be professional singers?
Speaker 2: I--I really do believe my mother (laughter)--I laugh because I just thought of my father.  My father--my father one time gave me a compliment, and he said, "Benny [HistoryMaker BeBe Winans]--."  He calls me Benny.  He says, "Benny, you got a great voice, boy, you got a great voice."  He said, "Between you, Luther Vandross, and myself (laughter)."  I'm sorry, my father (laughter)--
Speaker 1: And you said?
Speaker 2: I, I, I just say, "Amen" because my father did have a smooth--he was smooth.  He was smooth like Sam Cooke.  And so, he--but a firehouse or powerhouse.
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into this next segment, did you remember your grandmother's name? On your mother's side.
Speaker 2: My grandmother [Winans' maternal great-grandmother], Narcissus [ph.], and she was born in Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Mississippi?
Speaker 2: Mississippi, not the South Carolina, I thought.  My, my--
Speaker 1: What part of Mississippi, do you remember that?
Speaker 2: Baloney--Balzoni?
Speaker 1: Belzoni [Mississippi].
Speaker 2: Belzoni.  I never heard of Belzoni.  Belzoni, Mississippi.  And Narcissus.  Narcissa [ph.].  Narcissa was her name.  But she was Cherokee Indian [Native American].  So I did get that right from the beginning (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She was a Cherokee?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Cherokee.
Story_ID: 629163
Speaker 1: What school did you attend, BeBe [HistoryMaker BeBe Winans]?
Speaker 2: High school (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Elementary?
Speaker 2: Elementary school?
Speaker 1: Tell me--elementary.
Speaker 2: Elementary school, I attended a school called MacDowell Elementary [MacDowell Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan].
Speaker 1: Is this where all of the kids went (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And this was in Detroit, Michigan. No.  My--my--Pasteur Elementary [Pasteur Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan] is where my--see this--the older six and then the younger three after me, the older six and I in the beginning, too, we went to Pasteur Elementary.  And then we left Pasteur Elementary with the zone, and me, my brother Daniel [Daniel Winans], and Michael [Michael Winans] and the rest of my siblings went to an elementary school called MacDowell, which was right there on Outer Drive on the west side.
Speaker 1: What do you remember about those--about your elementary school days?  Was there a teacher that really impressed you--
Speaker 2: Ah, to this day--
Speaker 1: --to this day?
Speaker 2: --my heart belongs to Miss Byars. Miss Byars--
Speaker 1: Are you saying Buyers?
Speaker 2: Byars.
Speaker 1: B-U-Y-E-R-S?
Speaker 2: B-Y-A-R-S.
Speaker 1: B-Y-A-R-S (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Byars.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Loved me some Miss Byars.  And, and, and, and--
Speaker 1: And what grade was that?
Speaker 2: That was the fourth grade.  And I remember Miss Byars coming--and coming to class, "I'm going to read a poem for you."  And all the other kids weren't interested.  And she sat there and she told us about the wind.  And I will never forget it so long as I live.  She said, "The wind (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'd like to hear it.
Speaker 2: She said, "Why does the wind so want to be here in my little room with me, when he's all the world to blow about, but just because I keep him out? He cannot wait a moment still, but frets upon my window sill.  Sometimes brings a noisy rain, to help him batter at the pane.  Upon my door he comes and knocks, and he rattles and rattles at the locks.  He lifts the latch and stirs the key, then waits a moment breathlessly.  Tell me why does the wind so warm could be here in my little room with me," ['The Wind,' Elizabeth Rendall].  And I was like, "Wow, wow."  I want to be able to tell a story like that with such thought-provoking inspiration.  And it affected my writing from that day on.  Everything that I've written is in that vein that causes people to say, "What did he say?"  Songs like 'Love Said Not So,' you know.  But it was that moment that I realized I want to write.
Speaker 1: Could you share a little of the lyrics of 'Love Said Not So'?
Speaker 2: 'Love Said Not So': "Life was bitter to the core.  There was nothing to live for until love came.  Even second times around, happiness could not be found until love came.  I was left all alone, my heart was breaking.  Thought was my own, my soul was aching.  Tears covered me, weeping through the whole night.  Needed some relief.  Joy comes in the morning.  I've been searching for many years now keys to life's door--."  See there's that key? (Laughter) "Brought to my knees.  Savior can you help me.  Led to believe a failure I was to be, but then love showed me.  Love said, not so."
Speaker 1: Beautiful.  So you think maybe that was the seed (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, that was the seed--
Speaker 1: --that started you, your--
Speaker 2: --Miss Byars, was the seed.
Story_ID: 629164
Speaker 1: I gave CeCe [Priscilla Winans Love] a thirtieth birthday celebration.  We both, at the time, were living in another city.  But we came to Detroit [Michigan], and on her thirtieth birthday I gave her a big birthday bash.  And I went and I found Miss Byars, I found our principal, I found three more teachers from elementary school [MacDowell Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan], from junior high, and from high school.
Speaker 2: Now, can you give me some names?
Speaker 1: Miss Mackey [Vivian Mackey] was one of our favorite teachers in Munford--at Mumford High [Samuel C. Mumford High School, Detroit, Michigan].  A counselor of ours at Mumford High was Miss Guyden [ph.], and so they both came.  As I said, Miss Byars, Miss McKenzie [ph.] came from elementary school, and about two others.  And that itself meant so much to CeCe because, you know, it was wild.  You know, Miss--Miss Beverly [ph.], which was Miss Allen who was--the music teacher was Miss Allen [ph.], and Miss Beverly was there as well.  And these were the people who planted those seeds, who really in so many ways gave us that--the other foundation, I think it's a community that raises a family and we need one another.  And so, my mom [Delores Ransom Winans] and dad [David Winans, Sr.] did their part, the church [Mack Avenue Church of God in Christ; Zion Congregational Church of God in Christ, Detroit, Michigan] we went to did their part, and the school--the teachers--did their part, you know.  And so, it was a great celebration that I will never forget.  But those people, all of them came.  And some of those people are still in our lives.  Miss Guyden is still one of the persons I'll call, Miss Mackey is still one of those people I'll call (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Miss Guyden was the music teacher?
Speaker 1: No.  Miss Guyden was the counselor in high school--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --of Mumford High.
Speaker 2: What was some of the best advice she gave you?
Speaker 1: Miss Guyden, I think (laughter)--Miss Guyden, Miss Guyden was my girl.  And so, Miss Guyden told me then, she said--she said, "BeBe [HistoryMaker BeBe Winans], you have a charm that's going to get you through life.  Keep on.  Don't lose that charm." You know, and it was true.  I didn't know at that time until she pointed out those characteristics that was there inside of me because--and, and, and she said, "There's an honesty, too.  Don't lose that honesty."  Because I would go to Miss Guyden's office and I would tell her, "You know, Miss Guyden, I don't feel like going to class."  And she would say, "And why don't you feel like going to class?"  And I would be honest with her and I would say stuff like, "Well, because I really want to sit here with you, and you--you could teach me everything that teacher knows."  (Laughter) She would just smile and she would call me, "Benjamin.  Benjamin, Benjamin.  All right, you can sit here."  And so, I--I to this day she is, she is one of my favorite people.
Story_ID: 629165
Speaker 1: Between her and Mrs. C. Robinson.
Speaker 2: Okay. And this is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Very important.  She told us from day one, you know, because there was another teacher there that was Miss Robinson.  But, "I'm Miss C. Robinson."
Speaker 2: And the C stood for?
Speaker 1: I don't know what the C stood for.
Speaker 2: Didn't matter (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It didn't matter.  It was C. Robinson, and Miss C. Robinson, she didn't take anything.  She was almost like militant.  She was--when the bell rings, your foot has to be on the wood.  That was her message.  And so, I fell in love when she was the history--she was the history teacher.  I fell in love with Miss C. Robinson.  One of the things I will never forget--passing--you know everybody was afraid of her.   "Oh, there's no way you're going to get a passing grade with Miss C. Robinson," because she just didn't pass you to be passing you.  So I remember working hard, and I became one of her favorite people, and I got good grades in her class because I was just interested in everything that Miss C. Robinson had to say.  So one day I was walking by, but I'll never forget, I was walking in the room, and on that day they were showing in the auditorium 'The Wiz.'  And so, I remember walking past and there was nobody in her--
Speaker 2: Which 'Wiz' was this?
Speaker 1: 'The Wiz' was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) With Diana Ross?  Okay.
Speaker 1: --with Diana Ross and Michael Jackson.  And she--her classroom was empty, and I remember walking past and she was just sitting at the desk.  And so I backed up and I said, "Hi, Miss C. Robinson."  She said, "Hi, broth- ."  She used to call me, Brother Ben [HistoryMaker BeBe Winans].  (Laughter) She said, "Brother Ben, how you doing?"  I said, "Doing fine."  She said, "Come on in."  So I walked in and she said--and I asked her, I said, "Where is the class?"  And she said, "Oh, they're downstairs watching 'The Wiz.'"  She was a character, I'm telling you.  She said, "Oh, they're downstairs watching 'The Wiz.'"  I said--she said, "And we had a test too.  We had a test and they did not take the test."  She said, "But it's okay."  She said, "They'll come in tomorrow and they're going to ask, 'Can we take the test?'"  She said, "I'm just going to tell them, follow the yellow brick road."  (Laughter) These people have stayed with me in my journey in life.
Speaker 2: So did you take the test since you were there?
Speaker 1: Oh, I, I, I was not in that class when they were showing that film.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay (laughter).
Speaker 1: So I had already took the test (laughter).  I didn't have to, follow the yellow brick road.  (Laughter) But, you know, all these people played such a great part in who I am today, and so I still respect (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You mention the principal [of MacDowell Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan].  Who was the principal?
Speaker 1: Oh, what was his name?  You got to give me a minute for his name.
Story_ID: 629166
Speaker 1: I remember my principal's name, Mr. Petras [ph.].
Speaker 2: Mr. Petras.
Speaker 1: Mr. Petras.  That was my man.
Speaker 2: And what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A very, very, very, very loving man.  He loved his students.  And so, you could sense that.  You could talk to Mr. Petras about anything, and so, he almost like--he was a father figure, as well as our principal.  And the wonderful thing that it is that Mr. Petras was our principal at the elementary school, MacDowell [MacDowell Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan], and then he transferred from the elementary school to Mumford High [Samuel C. Mumford High School, Detroit, Michigan].  So he became our principal as well at our high school.
Story_ID: 629167
Speaker 1: Looking back at yourself as a elementary school student [at MacDowell Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan], how would you describe yourself?
Speaker 2: I think I was--I was-and, and I loved people so I loved my fellow students.  And I really had easy-goingness about me.  I was very outgoing, and I just got along--I think if you ask any of my peers, I get along with people and I think it's because of a genuine love for people.  So that would be my characteristics.
Speaker 1: And what about high school [Samuel C. Mumford High School, Detroit, Michigan]?
Speaker 2: The same.
Speaker 1: The same?
Speaker 2: The same, high school.
Speaker 1: Do you have friends that you had in high school and at elementary school that you are still connected with today?
Speaker 2: Yes. There's a couple of friends that still surround me.  My best friend since we were eight years old is Margaret Bell [Margaret Bell-Byars], and we have been friends, oh, thirty--over thirty-five years we've been friends.  And to this day we talk every day.
Speaker 1: Is that right?
Speaker 2: There's not a day that goes by that me and Margaret don't talk.  We graduated at the same time, and--and a couple of other friends, Tony Claxton [ph.], that is still in my life that I went to grade school with.  And to me those are the best, you know.  I've gained some wonderful friendships over the years but those are the friendships that you just, you really hold onto.
Story_ID: 629168
Speaker 1: When you were in, let's say high school--let's say grammar school [MacDowell Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan], did you know what you wanted to be?
Speaker 2: I--I knew when I was in grammar and junior high because we sang all the time.  We sang not only in church [Mack Avenue Church of God in Christ; Zion Congregational Church of God in Christ, Detroit, Michigan] but we sang in the choruses, in the choirs at school, and talent shows at school is where (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you ever win any talent shows?
Speaker 2: We won talent shows, and we won talent shows singing gospel.  And so, it was, you know, easy for us to continue to do what we do and believe we would be successful at it.
Speaker 1: What was one of the songs, if you remember, that you sang in a talent show that won?
Speaker 2: One of the songs that I will always remember--we were like the inspirational version of Gladys Knight and the Pips.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: So with CeCe [Priscilla Winans Love] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) CeCe was Gladys?
Speaker 2: CeCe was Gladys and then the Pips was me, Michael [Michael Winans], and Daniel [Daniel Winans].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We were the Pips.  And my brother Ronald [Ronald Winans] was the one who formed our group.  He made us become a group.
Speaker 1: So he was [HistoryMaker] John Levy, the manager (laughter)?
Speaker 2: So he (laughter)--that was (unclear).  And one of the songs I remember us singing we had routines to, which you just couldn't do, you know, sing the song and not have routines; it was Andrae Crouch and The Disciples, they had a song called (singing), "Tell them even if they don't believe you, just--," (singing) (laughter).  I feel so goofy, but it's (singing), "Tell them even if they don't receive you, please tell them for me, tell them for me that I love them, and I came to let them know," ['Tell Them'].  And we won the talent show (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And your choreographer was?
Speaker 2: Well, Ronald (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Ronald was everything in that day (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But so where was Marvin [Marvin Winans]?
Speaker 2: Marvin was around, but Ronald was the one that nurtured us.  He really did.  He was like--he's the second oldest so he was always like a father figure as well, you know.  But he was the one that formed the group, and he taught us exactly how to stand, and he--he was definitely our manager.  But we were--when we sang that song, we won the talent show in Mumford High School [Samuel C. Mumford High School, Detroit, Michigan], we were still in grammar school.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) We were still in grammar school and a couple of us was in junior high.
Story_ID: 629169
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Where did you go to junior high?
Speaker 2: Hamp- Beaubien [Beaubien Junior High School, Detroit, Michigan].  My brothers went to Hampton [Hampton Junior High School, Detroit, Michigan] and we went to Beaubien, was the junior high school we went to which was right--maybe four blocks away from the grammar school [MacDowell Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan].
Speaker 1: Being a writer and a person that loves describing things, if I asked you to describe in a color your elementary years, what color would it be?
Speaker 2: It would be blue (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  High school [Samuel C. Mumford High School, Detroit, Michigan]?
Speaker 2: High school would be green.
Speaker 1: Why green?
Speaker 2: Because I saw--you know money is the color of green--money is the color of green, pastures is the color of green, and in high school, I saw that what I did, I was capable of taking that and it becoming my lifestyle.  At the same time, you know, I saw where people was drawn to what I did, and so, therefore, the color of pastures, you know, of green, many people.  You know, I, I, I saw in high school that the gift that we had really had the ability to touch people and not just one person, but many people.  So that's why green comes to my mind (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now--
Story_ID: 629170
Speaker 1: I want to just backtrack just a little bit.  Your dad [David Winans, Sr.] was of the quartet type music genre, the Ray Charles--the Lou Rawls, Sam Cooke; those famous quartet singers that were in the '50s [1950s], where your mom [Delores Ransom Winans] kind of up picked up with the Hawkins, the Winans.  So who impressed you as a child?  Did you have the rich appreciation for the history of gospel, let's say, from Dorsey [Thomas A. Dorsey] and James Cleveland, and how did you do that, if so?
Speaker 2: I, I, I had a respect for the traditional gospel, for quartet gospel, you know, The Caravans, which was Shirley Caesar and Inez Andrews and Dorothy Norwood, Albertina Walker, James Cleveland.  I had appreciation for them, but my love and my (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But how was that introduced to you?
Speaker 2: The--
Speaker 1: Through your dad? Or--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The--what--the quartet was definitely introduced to us by my dad.  Shirley Caesar, little of my mother.  But definitely my mother's influence was the Andrae Crouches of the world.  And I think that was because she saw a need in her children to be surrounded with music that was being played on the radio stations.  You know, you can't help but know who Aretha Franklin is if you live in Detroit, Michigan, and you couldn't help to know that Gladys Knight was down the street.  By the way, she is my favorite of all times.
Speaker 1: Now, you were born in 1952 (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Did you hear what I said, though?
Speaker 1: Yes (laughter).
Speaker 2: Gladys Knight (laughter).  It don't come no better than Gladys Knight.  Okay, yeah.  But I was born in '62 [1962].
Speaker 1: You were born in '62 [1962], so you were a young boy when The Supremes and The Temptations and all of those groups--and they were all from Detroit (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. From Detroit.
Speaker 1: So you know any of them, and what did you think about their music?
Speaker 2: I--being--see, understand, my father had a rule that if you lived in his house, you only heard gospel in my household.  My father didn't play anything else; nothing else was allowed in the house but gospel music, but inspirational music.  And now, when you grow older, you become an adult and you have children of your own, it clicked.  It's like, I understand exactly what my father was doing.  He was surrounding us by positive music.  So positive influences because children don't understand.  You know, it's funny today because you hear, children listen to anything.  And if you hear constantly something negative, you know, "Bust that person upside the head," and you put it with rhythm, and you just, "Oh it's just--."  We were taught that words are spirits, and if you receive something over and over again, then you're going to bust somebody upside the head without the rhythm.  And my father understood, and my mother was very wise in selections of only gospel music.  So if you hear constantly, "Forgive your brother, forgive your brother, forgive your brother," in music form, well, you're going to forgive your brother, you know.  And so, that influenced--but my mother--with those kind of influences outside of the household--and even in those days they were singing great songs, especially when you compare them to the songs of these days.  And it was stories in those songs, yet and still, my mother saw, "If I'm going to keep my children's attention, then I need to surround them with contemporary music as well."  And so, that's where Andrae Crouch was introduced to us and he became our hero.  Our hero, hands down.
Story_ID: 629171
Speaker 1: Yet and still, I never will forget the day that me and my brother saw Gladys Knight at J.C. Penneys [J.C. Penney Company] in Northland mall [Northland Center, Southfield, Michigan] (gesture).  It was over.  It was done and over.  And I remember saying, "Ronald [Ronald Winans], there's Gladys."
Speaker 2: Because she was a big star then.
Speaker 1: Oh, big star then.  Big star then.  No security guards, just going on about her business.  And we stood behind clothes for I don't how long.  We followed her around the store (laughter). Oh, we--
Speaker 2: But how did you know about Gladys?
Speaker 1: Oh--
Speaker 2: I mean (unclear) when you got to school you heard the music?
Speaker 1: (Pause) You have to understand, being raised as we were raised, we didn't get a chance to hear on the radio or on the record player these wonderful people.  But my father [David Winans, Sr.] and my mother [Delores Ransom Winans] would allow us to watch the Grammy Awards, awards shows and variety (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But they were planting the seed--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --yes, so you'd listen to the good music.  What a wonderful thing.  So then they'd let you see (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) See--
Speaker 2: --this is what you can do.
Speaker 1: Exactly.  And so, in watching, you know, someone at the Grammy Awards, Gladys Knight being the winner there, and [HistoryMaker] Dionne Warwick and all these people, we could aspire definitely--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --to, to that place, you know, with hard work, with practice, and my father instilled that in us.  It's not going to come easy.  He used to tell me all the time, he said, "There's a thin line between being confident and conceited, and some people think when you're very confident that you are conceited.  But that's not what I want you to be."  He said, "I want all of my children to be confident.  So no matter what you do in life, be confident, and that's going to separate you from every other person and every other artist."  And so, so watching the Grammy Awards and watching variety shows that had music--now Flip Wilson, he was a Flip Wilson fan.  So you know, different guests that would be on those television shows, so we (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And, of course, by then Ray--Lou Rawls--
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: --had crossed over.
Speaker 1: Crossed over.  Sam Cooke (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sam Cooke, yes.  Okay.
Speaker 1: --had crossed over.  And so, we, we knew all about them.  And so, when we--I remember the first time.  I know I'm probably going up a little further.  The first time my brothers [as The Winans] recorded a national, international album, but a national album, and they were nominated and we went to the Grammy Awards.  We were like kids in a candy store, and I have the picture in my home, the day we were at the Grammy Awards and Gladys Knight was walking past, and I said, "Ronald, take a picture," and I just dashed.  And I show her today and she just laughs, me reaching out for her hand and she reaching to shake my hand, and you know, it was over with.
Speaker 2: No more standing behind the clothes (laughter)?
Speaker 1: No more standing behind the clothes.
Speaker 2: Those days were over.
Speaker 1: Oh, I will never forget that day, you know.  You meet people--you know, it went beyond our dreams.  We felt that we had something to say. We (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Did all of you want to sing?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Did all of you aspired to be (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That can be, you know, it's not just some kids that have a little talent, but it was kids that loved everything about it.
Speaker 2: So this was your burning white heat, so to speak (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 2: --from a child's --
Speaker 1: This was--this was it.  Not knowing that music would lead us to where it's brought us to.  But we did feel as if there's something there, my parents nurtured the gifts.
Story_ID: 629172
Speaker 1: When we couldn't afford a whole lot of things, my father [David Winans, Sr.] sacrificed and bought a piano and placed it in the, in the living room.  We taught ourselves how to play--
Speaker 2: I was going to ask you how did you learn the piano (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, we, we taught ourselves how to play because we couldn't afford--we didn't even know you could take lessons to tell you the truth.  So we taught ourselves.
Speaker 2: Because there was--there was no formal vocal training?
Speaker 1: At all.  No vocal formal training, no piano training.  Nothing.  We just had an ear. That, now, that itself has carried us even further (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And that came from--
Speaker 1: That came from--
Speaker 2: --from God.
Speaker 1: --from God, yeah.
Speaker 2: And that came from lining up every night (laughter).
Speaker 1: Exactly. That's what I'm telling you.  Harmonizing, being forced to sing quartet music, those hard harmonies into the wee hours of the night.  So at this point, I mean you stand there, and you appreciate everything my father did for us, you know, even though as a child we thought, oh this is torment.  But we know it was love, but it was something that my father saw, and knew.
Speaker 2: Now, does your father play piano?
Speaker 1: My mother [Delores Ransom Winans] plays piano.  We (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But she had that formal training (unclear)--
Speaker 1: --she had no formal, but my mother played at the church [Mack Avenue Church of God in Christ; Zion Congregational Church of God in Christ, Detroit, Michigan] and various things for the choir as well sometimes.  My father, if you ask what instrument he plays, he'll tell you he plays everything.  He used to drive us crazy with his saxophone.  My father, serious, would wake up just like he bought the Kawasaki [Kawasaki 500]--my father would wake up and say, "I'm going to play saxophone," and would go buy a saxophone and come and blow it.  (Laughter) And it was like, I got to get out this house.  It was just full of horrible notes being blown.  And then my father would wake up and say, "I want to play the guitar."  He would go buy a guitar.  And so, that was--
Speaker 2: It was in his blood.
Speaker 1: It was in his blood, you know.  But does he play anything, no. He can sing (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But you play piano?
Speaker 1: I play piano, my sister Angie [Angelique Winans Caldwell] plays piano, my brother Marvin [Marvin Winans] is the best player, and my--of piano, and my brother Ronald [Ronald Winans] played piano and my brother Daniel [Daniel Winans].
Speaker 2: But none of you have had any formal training?
Speaker 1: None of us, no.
Speaker 2: Not even since you've made it, so to speak?
Speaker 1: You know, the, the funny part is that I always tell myself I'm going to go and study and go get some voice training, but it just never works out.
Story_ID: 629173
Speaker 1: One of the things, you know, we talked about the Grammy Awards and all those things, and aspiring to, to do that.  One of the things my father [David Winans, Sr.] did, and you get asked by a lot of aspiring artists what to do.  One of the things that was so important that I look back on it and say, my father is, you know, is due a lot of respect for was, he would take his hard earned money, hard earned money and he would put on concerts.  He would put on local concerts, and we, we saw those local concerts build and build and build.  Mother's Day, people would expect the Winans family going to give a family concert, and on Christmas we would give concerts, and it became regional concerts.  And so, about time the national contracts came in to record we were ready.  We knew how to stand on stage, we knew how to position ourselves and how to display what we felt.  You know, I think it's so important that you feel what you sing.  And so, my father did that.  He sacrificed, like I said, they nurtured us.  But other than outside of just nurturing they supported our talent.  So--
Speaker 2: So your concerts were held every year at, was it seasonal (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Twice a year.
Speaker 2: --like Easter and Christmas, or?
Speaker 1: It was Mother's Day.  You know, Easter we would--we had some Easter concerts, but Easter was most of the time we would be at church [Mack Avenue Church of God in Christ; Zion Congregational Church of God in Christ, Detroit, Michigan] and had different programs there.  But we were known for Mother's Day concerts and Christmas concerts.
Speaker 2: And these were held where?
Speaker 1: These were held at Ford Auditorium [Henry and Edsel Ford Memorial Auditorium, Detroit, Michigan]. Sometimes--when we first started it was in high schools, and we just build, and build, and build.
Speaker 2: And you'd sell tickets?
Speaker 1: Sell tickets.  My mother [Delores Ransom Winans] was so funny, too.  My mother is the queen of worry, and what I mean by that is that we would have these concerts that at this point we would sell out all the time.  And my mother--I remember one particular time, she was nervous.  It was like the concert was sold out at one of the halls and she was like, "Well, Ma, it's sold out, you don't have to worry."  She said, "I know, but you know, I wonder if the weather--."  "Ma, it's going to be sunshine."  "I know, but I wonder if they gonna really come."  "Ma, when people buy tickets, they usually come," (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They're gonna come.
Speaker 1: But she was always worrying for us.
Speaker 2: Now, was it just the Winans family that appeared on the concerts or did you hire other artists (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Most of--most of the time it was the Winans family because, understand, it was like three entities with the Winans family.  There was my brothers, the older brothers, The Winans; and we were The Winans, Part Two, the younger siblings; and every now and then we would have various other gospel groups and singers from the Detroit [Michigan] area. Like, Vanessa Bell Armstrong and The Clark Sisters.
Speaker 2: So these concerts took place in what year?  What year did they start?
Speaker 1: These concerts started in the '70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I would say in 1975, '74 [1974] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So by then The Winans was a group already?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Story_ID: 629174
Speaker 1: And then Part Two [The Winans, Part Two], that's what I wanted to talk about.
Speaker 2: Winans Part Two (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Part Two was you and--
Speaker 2: Me, my sister CeCe [Priscilla Winans Love], and my brother Daniel [Daniel Winans], and my brother Michael [Michael Winans] was in The Winans, Part Two.  Now, when The Winans, my four older brothers formed, my brother Michael left our group because The Winans was, before they were Winans, The Testimonial Singers.  And then The Testimonial Singers was my two older brothers Marvin [Marvin Winans] and Ronald [Ronald Winans] and then two other singers, Howard Smith and a young man named Ed [ph.].  And they were The Testimonial Singers, and just evolved in to the point where my--Howard Smith left, I never will forget that, he left.  And it was my brothers Marvin, Carvin [Carvin Winans], Ronald, and Howard Smith.  Howard Smith left Detroit, Michigan; he moved to California and he joined with Andrae Crouch and The Disciples.  And so, I didn't know until later on my brother Marvin, which was pretty much the leader of the group, he wanted me to join.  And my father [David Winans, Sr.] said, "No, no, no.  Has to be the next in line," which was Michael.  And so, Michael joined my brothers and they became The Winans; just Michael, Ronald, Marvin and Carvin.
Speaker 1: How--so your father was pretty much--
Speaker 2: Oh, he was the manager.
Speaker 1: So how did you let somebody out of the family get in the group?  He must have been special then.
Speaker 2: He was (laughter). Yeah, Howard Smith was like a brother.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was very special.  And my father loved him like a son.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But when he left, my father said, "Okay, the next one in line is Michael, so we have to go to Michael."  And so, when Michael left my group, CeCe, me, my brother Daniel, we--there was a good friend of ours named Marvie Wright who joined us, and another young lady who would become our sister-in-law named Vickie [Vickie Bowman Winans].  And we became--you know The Winans, Part Two as well.  And we sang for years together until me and CeCe moved to Charlotte, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: And became BeBe and CeCe (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We became BeBe and CeCe prior to the PTL Singers [Praise the Lord Club].
Story_ID: 629175
Speaker 1: Okay, and that's what I want to talk about.  So you had your groups, The Winans, Part Two, and The Winans, Part Two was managed by Pop [David Winans, Sr.]; is that correct?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Daddy was our--well, most of the Winans, my brothers, The Winans.  Ronald [Ronald Winans] was our manager.  He told us exactly what to do, what we were doing in a loving way.  So we really didn't have a manager outside of Ronald just, you now, leading the way and showing us the ins and outs.  So, but when we moved, there was a friend of mine named Howard McCrary, friend of the family.  Howard McCrary lived in Los Angeles [California] and he was hired to become the musical director in Charlotte, North Carolina for Jim [Jim Bakker] and Tammy Bakker [Tammy Faye Bakker] of the PTL network [Praise the Lord Club].  And they were holding auditions, and Howard called my mother [Delores Ransom Winans] and father and asked if me and CeCe [Priscilla Winans Love] could come and audition.  And my father gave the green light--understand, I was only seventeen and CeCe was fifteen.  We had just graduated, CeCe came out two years ahead of herself.  And so (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So Cece graduated high school at fifteen?
Speaker 2: Cece graduated from high school at fifteen.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you graduated at seventeen?
Speaker 2: Seventeen.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And did you graduate together?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Same school?
Speaker 2: Same school, Mumford High [Samuel C. Mumford High School, Detroit, Michigan].  And my mother took us on a bus, a Greyhound bus to Charlotte, North Carolina, to audition.  It looked like that bus took forever to get to Charlotte, North Carolina, from Detroit, Michigan.  And we went and we auditioned.  We left, we came back home.  CeCe made the audition, I didn't.  And my father, I remember my father saying to me, "I'm not going to let her go unless you go."  I was like, "Well, Dad, I'll go, I mean it's a great opportunity for her.  I'll go get a job."  And I went and I was getting a job at Krogers [The Kroger Company], that's the grocery market in Charlotte, North Carolina.  My brothers, you have to understand, my father wouldn't let us spend the night over at anybody's house.  So at fifteen to allow CeCe to move with me to Charlotte, North Carolina, my older brothers were livid.  They were angry.
Story_ID: 629176
Speaker 1: I'm trying (laughter) to understand how that happened.  Were there any other family members in North Carolina?
Speaker 2: No.  No family members in North Carolina.  He didn't even know Howard McCrary, who asked us to come, that well, and he says (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So why do think he--
Speaker 2: It had to be a miracle of God.  Seriously, it had to be a miracle of God, because when I say my brothers challenged my father [David Winans, Sr.], they challenged him and was angry.  They were so angry because he was so strict, he loved his kids, he wanted to know where his kids was; and so at fifteen and seventeen, to say, "I'm going to allow them to go," it had to be God.  It really, really did.
Speaker 1: So where did you live?
Speaker 2: We at--when we first moved there--and my brothers didn't talk to us for years (laughter).  When we first moved there they had a place--a house where--apartment where we lived with Howard and his wife, Shay [Shay McCrary (ph.)], Darius McCrary--that's the funny part--Darius McCrary, who at that time was maybe two years old, their son who became a big actor in--on a sitcom ['Family Matters'].  We lived with them for a couple of months until we found an apartment.  And then me and CeCe [Priscilla Winans Love], we found a two bedroom apartment and (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) At fifteen and seventeen?
Speaker 2: --and a friend of ours (unclear), a friend had to cosign named Sherry [ph.] who worked at PTL [Praise the Lord Club], and it was the most scariest, exciting time of our lives because not only were we on our own, but we went from a predominantly black surrounding to now being the minority where it was four thousand employees and four was black Americans.
Speaker 1: And that was you, CeCe, Howard--
Speaker 2: And two other folks.
Speaker 1: Was Howard McCrary black?
Speaker 2: Howard was, yeah.  Howard McCrary and there was one other person that worked there, Derrick [ph.], who worked there.  And that was it.  So our whole world changed.
Speaker 1: So during that time, did Mom [Delores Ransom Winans] and Pop come down?  I mean, did they come to see the apartment?  Did they--
Speaker 2: To tell you the truth, you know, after we got there--because after we got there, Charlotte, North Carolina, I got a job at Kroger [The Kroger Company].  Howard was determined I was going to be a part of this group.  So there was one particular song that CeCe sang, and Howard said, "I want you to sing in the chorus, and in the chorus when she breaks down and do her verse, I just want you to ad-lib."  And when she got to the point where she sung (singing), "Angels of mercy sent from above, angels that whispered," and I said (singing), "Whispers," she said (singing), "of love." And I said (singing), "Of love."
Story_ID: 629177
Speaker 1: So, you know, we, I sung that song, and when I did that ad-lib (singing), "Whispers of love," Jim Bakker said, "Whoever that young man, that's doing them whispers, put him in the group."
Speaker 2: And this was during the performance?
Speaker 1: And this was during a church performance.  CeCe [Priscilla Winans Love] sang in the choir as well when she got hired as a PTL [Praise the Lord Club] singer.
Speaker 2: What kind of pay was she making?
Speaker 1: At that time, you know, and then I joined the singers and we were making, like, seventeen five [$17,500] a year.
Speaker 2: Good money.
Speaker 1: Good money for a fifteen year old and seventeen year old (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) For the fifteen year--seventeen five a piece?
Speaker 1: A piece. You know, it was--
Speaker 2: So your household income was thirty-five thousand dollars at seventeen?
Speaker 1: Yes. At seventeen years old, we were the Rockefellers, you know, coming from our humble beginnings.
Speaker 2: At least the Trumps (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) You know, at least the Trumps, exactly.  But, you know, young, our own apartment [in Charlotte, North Carolina].  And yet and still, really, really nervous, because all of a sudden, all we knew was family.  And me and CeCe was our only family, you know.  And family was a couple of hundred miles away. And so we had to grow up quickly (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Let's talk about money management.
Story_ID: 629178
Speaker 1: How did you learn how to handle your money (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, we made so many mistakes. We made so many mistakes.  But yet and still, you know, we had an example, we had Ma [Delores Ransom Winans].  Ma--she probably won't like this but Ma was the queen of writing checks.  She could write a check and have none of the funds, the amount of funds, in the bank; but before that check got to the bank, she would cash that check.  It never bounced.  She would always have the money there--she was the queen of the not-checking-bounce-writing woman.  And so, but we learned.  It's like, you know, we have to be responsible and make sure that everything was paid.  So I became very responsible at that point because CeCe [Priscilla Winans Love] couldn't have a checking account at fifteen years old.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And had no driver's license.
Speaker 1: So how did she get her check? Do they--
Speaker 2: So they would write her a check--they would give her a check, but she would deposit her check into my account.  And so, we just--we learned as we were going.  We really didn't know exactly what we were going to do, but we were learning as we were going.  And then Howard McCrary and Shay [Shay McCrary (ph.)], who was the music director, they were, like, an older brother and sister to us.  And so, they really did take us under their wings, and Shay to this day, they are very, very close friends of ours.  And so, she schooled us, you know, because she was a mother as well.  And so, she taught us what to do sometimes and what not to do.  And she would check in with my mother and let her know, "Oh, they're fine," and you know, so they really had that confidence in Howard and Shay to protect us.
Speaker 1: So did you have some kind of routine with the family, with Mom and Pop [David Winans, Sr.] that you had to call every Thursday or they would call you every Friday?
Speaker 2: No routines.  We, we, we didn't have any routines, but we were just close so we would talk almost every day.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: To this day we talk almost every day.  Not a day really goes by that I don't talk to any of my brothers and sisters or my mom and my dad.  So we would talk, definitely, all the time.
Story_ID: 629179
Speaker 1: My grandmother, my father's mother, was very close to us as well, Laura Howze [Laura Glenn Howze] was her name.  And she would call--as a matter of fact, she, I never will forget that day, she bought a K-car.  That's what it was.  It was a K-car.  They were made by Chrysler [Chrysler Corporation; FCA US LLC].  She bought a brand-new K-car.  They drove it down, her and my grandfather, and CeCe [Priscilla Winans Love], at that time, was sixteen.  She didn't have any license, she didn't even have lessons at that time.
Speaker 2: So she didn't know how to drive.
Speaker 1: She did not know how to drive.
Speaker 2: Now, did you know how to drive?
Speaker 1: Yes, I had my license, and I was angry as all get up at my grandmother.  And I told her, I mean, I didn't even want to talk to her.  I was hot.  "You bought CeCe a car?  She can't even drive.  I've got to drive it.  I've got to take her to places she wanna go.  Why wouldn't you buy me a car?"  And I was so angry at my grandmother.  And she called me one day and she said, "Boy," and I was like, "Yes, yes, ma'am?"  She said, "I could have bought you that car.  I didn't want to buy you no car because you're a man and you gonna buy your own car because you're a man."  She kept on telling me the things that I was going to do because I was a man.  "And you're gonna do this because you're a leader.  CeCe's following you." (Unclear) I didn't want to hear, but you know, I was very respectful.  She finished her speech, and I remember the day I bought my RX-7 [Mazda RX-7].  I saved my money just like she told me to, even though I didn't want to listen to her, and I went and I bought my car.  And the first person I called was my grandmother.  And I say, "Grandma?"  "Yeah, baby?"  "This is BeBe [HistoryMaker BeBe Winans].  I just want you know I just bought my car."  She said, "How you feel?"  I said, "I feel the same way you said I would feel."  (Laughter) "I feel like a man.  I feel like a leader."  You know, and that was--that was very--those were very important moments.
Story_ID: 629180
Speaker 1: And all those moments came, while me and CeCe [Priscilla Winans Love] was in Charlotte, North Carolina.  We grew up in Charlotte, North Carolina.  A lot of people, just people from television, but when I said Jim [Jim Bakker] and Tammy Bakker [Tammy Faye Bakker] were dear friends of me and my sister and of my family, but they loved BeBe [HistoryMaker BeBe Winans] and CeCe.  They would--I remember Jim and Tammy sang to us.  They brought us over for dinner one time, and Jim looked at me and CeCe and said, "You two are stars."  You know, we were just looking at him.  "You're stars and you're bigger than PTL [Praise the Lord Club]."  You know, because you don't know at that time that there's just, even though there's millions of people watching, it's just a handful that is watching that network, you know, when you compare it to the world.  He was always telling us, "You're bigger than PTL.  You are big."  And he kept on telling us this, you know.  And so, there was a particular song that Howard McCrary chose which was, 'Lord Lift Us Where We Belong,' which was taken from the 'Officer and a Gentleman' ['An Officer and a Gentleman'] soundtrack that was called 'Love Lift Us Up' [sic. 'Up Where We Belong'].  And we redid it, and me and CeCe sang it as a duet, where Jennifer Warnes and Joe Crockett [sic. Joe Cocker] sung it for 'Officer and a Gentleman.'  And that was the moment that defined me and CeCe's career, when we sang that song, not knowing that that song would just take us and shoot us.
Speaker 2: Now, when you first heard it, or when it was first presented to you, was it something that you wanted to do?
Speaker 1: It was--it was a song that we enjoyed.
Speaker 2: That you enjoyed?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: You didn't have any special feeling about it at that time?
Speaker 1: No.  At that time, you know, at that time, what we'd simply do was learn--we learned songs, you know.  Give me one moment.  (Pause) So we just learned the songs that the musical director brought us, and we would learn them.  And so this particular song he chose and he said, "I want BeBe and CeCe to lead this," and taught it to us, you know, and we learned it, liked it, but didn't know where we were going from there--from that moment, singing it every day, maybe three times a day.  And it became our signature tune for the network.
Story_ID: 629181
Speaker 1: I remember people started calling in to PTL [Praise the Lord Club] and asking me and CeCe [Priscilla Winans Love] to come out and sing at various churches and various events, conventions, and it was, like, "Oh, man."  So we accepted one and we, maybe three days before we left, we realized we didn't know any duet songs. None of the songs we had was duet other than the song, 'Love Lift Us Up' [sic. 'Up Where We Belong'] so we're like, "Oh, we gotta--we gotta create some duets."  So we created some duets of songs that normally I would sing by myself or she would sing by herself.  And we went to this one place in New Jersey.  And right before we went on to sing, I looked at her, we were behind a--in the office--I looked at her and I said, "Okay, so you do all the talking."  She looked at me saying, "No, I'm not talking, you do all the talking."  I say, "I'm not talking."
Speaker 2: So you hadn't even discussed the show?
Speaker 1: Had not discussed anything.  And we're going back and forth saying, "No, you, you, you."  And then they said, "BeBe [HistoryMaker BeBe Winans] and CeCe" (laughter).  And so we were going out there just saying, "Hi, I'm BeBe and this is CeCe, and we're going to sing some songs."  That was it.  It was, like, oh, this is scary.
Story_ID: 629182
Speaker 1: Just to go back to PTL [Praise the Lord Club], we used to sing, and after the performance they would take us in the back room and they would show our performance on videotape and film, and we learned so much from PTL.  They would zero in on, "Okay, you're not leading the song but the camera's on you and look at what you're doing, you're scratching your head.  You don't think the camera's on you, but the camera's on you even though you're not leading the song.  You can't slouch, look at that.  Look at your performance when you sing this word, you're frowning."  And so, it was really--
Speaker 2: Now was this Howard McCrary?
Speaker 1: This was Howard McCrary and the other people who were--
Speaker 2: And the other producers.
Speaker 1: --over us.  Yeah, the other producer who was over us.  And so PTL, if I had to sum it up, was our musical college.  It was our musical college.  We learned a lot about performance.  We learned a lot about looking into the camera and seeing millions of people--they'd tell us that all the time.  "These are millions of people looking at you right now, so how would you do," you know, "looking at millions of people?  Look at that camera and understand that that's people."  So we learned a lot about how to do and how to display.  And then we learned a lot about racism, the reality of the world that we lived in.  We learned about how to celebrate culture.  We learned, you know--PTL was my first time I went to a movie.  You know, it was a sin to go to a movie where I was raised.  It was, you know, it--so (laughter).
Speaker 2: Let me--let me go back just a little bit to the--to the theology of the Pentecostal church because at that time, and when--
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: --your dad [David Winans, Sr.] was coming up, you--everything was a sin.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Women couldn't wear their skirts--
Speaker 1: Pants, couldn't wear pants.
Speaker 2: --skirts had to be long --
Speaker 1: So that was confusing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) which, which is also--
Speaker 1: --yes.  So it was very confusing, you know, to go from where and how I was raised in such a strict environment, very strict environment, go to PTL where I saw totally the opposite of what I was taught.  You know--
Speaker 2: So up until the time that you went to PTL, you had never been to a movie?
Speaker 1: I had never been to a movie.
Speaker 2: You had seen television (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Other than watching television.
Speaker 2: --and that was the Grammys [Grammy Awards], the Grammys or the awards programs?
Speaker 1: That was the Grammys, cowboy movies, you know.  My father was a cowboy and Indian [Native American] fan; but just different programs that came on television.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You know, could not go.  So I remember--
Speaker 2: So you never had a girlfriend?
Speaker 1: Well, in church but--
Speaker 2: In church, a friend girl (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) it was a girlfriend, just, "Let me just touch your hand."
Speaker 2: --yeah.
Speaker 1: And that's it.
Speaker 2: What they used to call a friend girl.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.  Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: A friend girl and friend boy (laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, you know.  I mean--passion was not one of the things they taught (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Right. So, now you're in PTL, and prior to this, too, you had performed or sung for predominantly--
Speaker 1: A black audience (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) black audiences.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So now you at PTL, living on your own; you're seventeen, CeCe [Priscilla Love Winans] is fifteen, and you're--
Speaker 1: And you're experiencing life (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) the only two African Americans--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --in a choir of how many people?
Speaker 1: Four thousand.
Speaker 2: The choir?
Speaker 1: The choir was three hundred people.
Speaker 2: So three hundred people--
Speaker 1: Oh, the group (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) group of singers--
Speaker 1: --we had a group, PTL Singers was eight of us--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and then we sang in the choir at the PTL church (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So you were two of eight, and two of the thousand?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Or three [thousand].
Speaker 1: Four thousand.
Speaker 2: Four thousand.  So--
Speaker 1: What an amazing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and now you have freedom?
Speaker 1: Now we have freedom.  Yet and still, freedom of choice, I think--the lesson was to, even though there was freedom there, it was still bondage in my mind.  And when I say bondage, I say those things that I was taught was wrong.  Even though I was in a place where women were wearing pants and saying they were Christians--
Speaker 2: And lipstick.
Speaker 1: --and lipsticks, and earrings, and makeup.  It's like, "Wow."
Speaker 2: And they're praising the Lord (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is not supposed to be, yeah.  This is not supposed to be, but I'm just gonna go with it.
Speaker 2: Had you seen PTL before you went down there for the audition?
Speaker 1: No.  Didn't know anything about them (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So you didn't even know what you were getting in to?
Speaker 1: Exactly.  Did not know about it until Howard called and asked, and then we were down there, and--, "Okay, this is different," (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And it sounded okay because it's Praise the Lord--
Speaker 1: --sounded okay.  Exactly.
Speaker 2: --so you had no reason to think it was going to be--
Speaker 1: Had no idea of what we were getting--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --ready to be introduced to.
Story_ID: 629183
Speaker 1: But what changed it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So how do you think your dad [David Winans, Sr.] let you do that because it's so different from Pentecostal (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I really think--I, I honest, I honestly say, when I think about the PTL [Praise the Lord Club] days, a decision that my father made to allow us to go at the early age had to be the hand of God because my father was his own man.  He was his own boss.  He was--the only child, he was spoiled.  It was his way or the highway.  That was my father.  And so, at this point that's all I knew, and then all of a sudden you're allowing us to go--you wouldn't let us to go across the street.  You're allowing us to go out of the, the state, you know--
Speaker 2: And the brothers were appalled.
Speaker 1: The brothers were so angry.
Speaker 2: Because they still didn't have that kind of freedom (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They didn't call me, they didn't come to visit for maybe two years, my brothers didn't.  My mother [Delores Ransom Winans] would come every now and then when she could.  She was still working, so still had younger children to take care of, so she couldn't a lot.  My father was not the traveler, you know.  So it was me and CeCe [Priscilla Winans Love].  It was me and CeCe.  And to this day, my brother Marvin [Marvin Winans] and Ronald [Ronald Winans] used to tease her because they would say, "If BeBe [HistoryMaker BeBe Winans] say jump, you automatically just jump."  But to a certain degree that's true, but you have to understand, elementary school [MacDowell Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan], CeCe was right under me.  You know, so I was--I was a father figure to her for a while.  All her life to tell you the truth.  And so, even when it came to the point of me graduating from high school [Samuel C. Mumford High School, Detroit, Michigan], CeCe went to summer school and studied harder because she didn't want to be in school without me.  So she wanted to graduate with me.  She graduated with me.  So when we both moved to Charlotte [North Carolina], you know, "What you doing because whatever you doing, I'm doing" (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm doing.
Speaker 1: So we had fun together.  So it wasn't she was annoying to me and everything.  But it was really a close, a closeness I think that we have that none of our other siblings have, you know.  And so they used to tease her all the time, you know, "BeBe say this, you go with it, yeah, yeah, it's law, if BeBe says it."
Story_ID: 629184
Speaker 1: So PTL [Praise the Lord Club] was, was a lot of responsibility for me, you know.  I had to look out for my sister, at the same time I had to find my way.  How do you find your way when your enjoyment, recreation, at one point was bowling?  And now your recreation is hiking, mountain climbing, whitewater rafting?  I remember CeCe [Priscilla Winans Love]--my mother [Delores Ransom Winans] would call and find out, you know, where I was out, especially on weekends, and she would say, "Mountain climbing."  And she'd say, "Where's BeBe [HistoryMaker BeBe Winans]?"  "BeBe went whitewater rafting."  And the third time my mother said, "Tell that boy he black" (laughter). But that's all my white friends was doing.  If I wanted to hang out, I had to do these dangerous so-called sports.
Speaker 2: So how did you--how was--how easy was it for you to make friends?
Speaker 1: It was so very easy for me to make friends.  Very easy.  I think I was just--I was curious.  And so I made friends in a minute.  I can make--it's funny, my daughter [Miya Winans] is the same way, my son [Benjamin Winans, Jr.] is the same way.  I can make a friend in a minute.  And so it was no problem for me.  We were raised, you know, under unconditional love.  And so, I didn't have, you know, any white friends until I moved there [Charlotte, North Carolina].  But then after being there for a month, I remember having a lot of friends, associates (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What did you do about bible studies and the things were so accustomed to at home and in your church [Mack Avenue Church of God in Christ; Zion Congregational Church of God in Christ, Detroit, Michigan]?
Speaker 1: Right.  Well, it took some time.  PTL--you know, it would take days for us to talk all about PTL and what it means to me and everything that happened to me in North Carolina.  We speak of church.  We, we--me and CeCe were raised in a place where church didn't start really on time; it started around 10:30, 11:00, and we got out maybe at 4:00, whereas PTL, church started at 8:00, it was over at 10:00.  It's like, "God ain't even up.  What y'all doing.  Y'all letting out?"  (Laughter) It was confusing.  It was so confusing because I'm saying, "Wow, this is totally--this is totally different.  What are y'all doing here?"  You know, at the same time, it was the best thing for us because we learned that God was more than just this.  God was just more than just this, you know.  And there was a scripture that said, "Learn how to comprehend with all the saints" [Ephesians 3:18]. And so, what I knew in my mind, I started--I started to live in my life.  And so, PTL was some of the reasons why I became who I am and learned, seriously, how to sing, too.  I mean, it's very easy.  What I learned at PTL was, if you're singing to a Spanish speaking audience, you should learn how to speak Spanish and sing to them in Spanish.  If you're singing to a French speaking audience, you should learn how to speak French.  So, therefore, we learned we're not singing to an America--African American audience who loves to see you sweat (laughter), and turn flips.  I'm singing to someone who really don't show their appreciation until it's over, you know.  And so, we learned how to, to present our message to various kinds of people.
Story_ID: 629185
Speaker 1: So you and CeCe [Priscilla Winans Love] are now in PTL [Praise the Lord Club] and now you're getting engagements--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes sing and (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) being called to go on, do your own show, so to speak.  So now, what happens--take me from, from, after your first engagement.
Speaker 2: One, one of the things that happened to me and CeCe after our first engagement as BeBe [HistoryMaker BeBe Winans] and CeCe, we looked at each other and we both knew without saying words, how are we going to tell the rest of our group, family members, that there's no more The Winans, Part Two, because we were still Winans, Part Two.  You know, this was just a phase--me and CeCe, a period of time, we're going to go there and then come back to Detroit [Michigan] and join up with the group Winans, Part Two and then continue on.  And at this moment, we realized--
Speaker 1: It's over.
Speaker 2: --it's over.  How do we call and tell, tell them that it's just BeBe and CeCe?  It was one of the hardest things we ever did but we had to do it.  So on one of the breaks, we went home and we had a meeting with the rest of the members, and we told them that we believe that this was ordained.  This organically happened, you know, and we felt both strongly that we have to go with this.  You know, it was, really, really--and when you think about it, when I think about, I think about why was I nicknamed BeBe?  And it was before CeCe came along, and then she was nicknamed CeCe.  I mean, there's something to it.
Speaker 1: It worked.
Speaker 2: It worked, and you know, it didn't have to--
Speaker 1: It was synergy (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, and it wasn't that we said, "Okay.  We need a name for our group."  BeBe and CeCe.  We were always BeBe and CeCe, you know.  And so, it's really--I think it's a great thing to sit back sometimes and reminisce and go back and rethink and see how history has brought us to where we are.
Speaker 1: But it was after that first engagement that you knew, in your spirit (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, we knew.
Speaker 1: It's over.
Speaker 2: It's over for Winans, Part Two.  BeBe and CeCe has been born.
Story_ID: 629186
Speaker 1: It's still wild, after all these years (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) How did it feel, going back to PTL [Praise the Lord Club] or you're still with PTL, but now, you two are isolated.  Now you're getting your own publicity.
Speaker 1: We met up with jealousy.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Tell me about it.
Speaker 1: We met up with a lot--I'm telling you, PTL was college for me, was the college of life.  We met up with a lot of things.  After we come back, and not only just coming back from engagements, but at this point, you have to understand, Jim [Jim Bakker] and Tammy [Tammy Faye Bakker], that's all they said, was--, "BeBe [HistoryMaker BeBe Winans] and CeCe [Priscilla Winans Love]."  Instead of the PTL Singers, he would say, "Here comes BeBe and CeCe and the singers."  It's like, "Oh, Lord, here we go."
Speaker 2: So he's recognizing you--
Speaker 1: Oh, he's recognizing (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and he's appreciating you.  As they, maybe unintentionally--
Speaker 1: Unintentionally.
Speaker 2: --are separating you.
Speaker 1: And they're giving us raises.  And when I say us, I say BeBe and CeCe.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So how much you're making now?
Speaker 1: At this point, I'm making twenty-five thousand [dollars] a year. CeCe (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And it's only been a year?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And, you know--
Speaker 2: And you're at, now, you've made your eighteenth birthday?
Speaker 1: Yes.  Went and bought me a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Eighteen and making twenty-five thousand?
Speaker 1: --went and bought me a ring.  Had a little diamond in it, at least they said it was a diamond.
Speaker 2: A little (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I'm like, I don't know, now, I'm rich.  You know, I think because of our upbringing, it didn't cause us to treat anyone differently.
Story_ID: 629187
Speaker 1: So now you're performing, who's booking you and how much are you making per (unclear)--
Speaker 2: There is a young lady named Debbie Reynolds [ph.]--wow.  That's really her name.  She worked at PTL [Praise the Lord Club] and she worked in the music department, and Debbie and a lady named Penny Hollenbeck became our booking agency.  So on the side of--outside of their work at PTL, they started doing this other side, and (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And did PTL know about that?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And we started going out and we were making five hundred dollars, fifteen hundred dollars a show.  And things started--because, you know, you started getting wiser and, you know, start to have to add band members, and, okay, all this that goes along with it.  And we knew a little from my brothers, learned a little bit as far as how that goes, but now, we have--we having to do it ourselves and--
Speaker 1: And now you can't call them, because they're angry, they don't want to talk to you.
Speaker 2: Their anger didn't (unclear) (laughter).  They were still angry at us.  And so, it was, you know, bump your head as you learn.  And we weren't afraid to bump our heads because we had been bumping our heads--that's why I think it's so important of our foundation with our children here.  My father [David Winans, Sr.], you know, when we were doing the local concerts and the regional concerts, well, we learned.  You know, you have to market; marketing is very important, publicity is very important, you know.  So my father, we saw all of that when we were, you know, teenagers and in our--
Speaker 1: You saw promotions?
Speaker 2: We saw promotions.  We saw all of that.  So therefore (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And through your mother [Delores Ransom Winans]--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --you saw studying and discipline?
Speaker 2: Exactly.  So we knew some things, but now we're living it.  And, you know, it's nothing like living it, you know.  And also living what we were taught, you know, years ago in the church [Mack Avenue Church of God in Christ; Zion Congregational Church of God in Christ, Detroit, Michigan] (unclear).  So even though as time went on, we learned that you can wear earrings, you can wear makeup--
Speaker 1: And you were right, yeah.
Speaker 2: --you won't go to hell; that you can love God and look different and be different.  When I went to my first movie, 'E.T.,' ['E.T.: The Extra Terrestrial'] I was sitting up there saying, "Ah, God, now, you're not going to kill me because--
Speaker 1: 'E.T.' (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) "E.T., phone home."
Speaker 1: --is the first movie you saw?
Speaker 2: First movie.  I'm sitting here saying, "All he needs to do, Lord, is phone home."  (Laughter) "You're not going to kill me because E.T. phone home."  But I was a nervous wreck.  I was a nervous wreck.  Enjoyed it but a nervous wreck at the same time because of my upbringing.  But I was being freed from man made rules and laws.  And so, PTL introduced me to the reality of really who God is.  And so, I owe a lot, absolutely (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, 'cause that's--being from a Pentecostal background myself, that's a hard God to serve.  You know, you're so fearful of everything.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.  I mean, that was a lot of guilt.  There was a lot of guilt there.  And, and, and I think it was [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou who said to me, "Love liberates."  And I was like, "Ah."  Wow. That's powerful.  Simple, but it's powerful.  And so, a lot of my liberation came when me and CeCe [Priscilla Winans Love] moved to Charlotte, North Carolina.
Story_ID: 629188
Speaker 1: So you were with the PTL [Praise the Lord Club] how many years?
Speaker 2: We were with PTL about four, almost five years, and then I stayed in Charlotte [North Carolina] after we left PTL.  I stayed in Charlotte for a while.  CeCe [Priscilla Winans Love], when she left, she got married, she moved back to Detroit [Michigan] because she fell in love and she was getting married [to Alvin Love] so she moved back to Detroit.  But we were there for about four or five years.  Wow, a lot happened in four or five years.
Speaker 1: Like what?
Speaker 2: Well, learning that--that racial prejudice still lived and it lived within the church as well.  That was a hard--I had a situation happen.  For instance, there was this one man, I won't call his name, but he had a history--his wife had a history of miscarriages.  And so, he was a cameraman, and white, and so, we found out that she was pregnant again, and we all came back together and we prayed that God would just let this happen, and it happened, and we spoke to this person every day, every day.  So three years down the road he decides he's moving--they're moving and then going to get another job.  He comes to say good-bye to everybody.  He comes to me and he's bawling when he says good-bye.  It was like, you know, and he says, "I want to thank you."  I was like, "I didn't do anything outside of the norm."  And then he said, "I hated you.  I hated you and every time you would come by and speak, then you would touch my shoulder, I would cringe."  And at this point, he had my undivided attention.
Speaker 1: Totally undivided.
Speaker 2: Totally undivided attention.  And he says, "I was raised in a Christian home and my parents taught me to hate black people, and black people were evil and to hate you."  And this man, at this time, you have to understand, I'm nineteen and he's, like, thirty-nine, and I'm confused because he said a Christian home.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And I saying, "Okay."  And then he says, as he's crying he said, "And but because of you, because of the love you kept showing me, it broke the chains of hatred inside of me, and I have to tell you thank you."  So at that moment I learned such a great lesson, and the biggest lesson from that was love is more powerful than hatred.  It really, really is.  And I wouldn't have learned that, I don't think, if I would have stayed where I was.  So PTL, Charlotte was a defining moment for me in my life in so many ways.  So I, I, I, I learned not only do it exists, but is more powerful than hatred.  I learned that I was a leader.  You know, having six older brothers, well, I could relax and let them lead the way.  But when we moved there, I became a leader, you know, for my sister and for myself.  So I wouldn't--
Speaker 1: You became an adult. That's where you grew (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.  I wouldn't erase those years for anything, most precious years.  I learned professionalism.  I learned that God was bigger than the congregation I knew, you know.  And more importantly, that he was love.
Speaker 1: And you're, you're--now we're back to the color green--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --because now you can see--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the green--
Speaker 2: The green pastures (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and you can see the green pastures as you can see.
Speaker 2: --of multitudes of people.  The variety of people.  I learned at PTL, I learned at PTL to celebrate the variety of the world because not only was it, you know, it's 3,997 Caucasians, but it was Asians, there were Hispanics, in that as well (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And you had not had that exposure prior to that?
Speaker 2: And I did not have that exposure, exactly.  Did not have that exposure until then.  So it was the college of life, I keep on referring it to.
Story_ID: 629189
Speaker 1: And then you developed a stronger relationship with Jim [Jim Bakker] and Patti--
Speaker 2: Jim, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) I mean Tammy [Tammy Faye Bakker].
Speaker 2: Strong relationship with Jim and Tammy.  Seriously, it was.  When she passed, she passed this year, 2007, I think it was August or September she passed--August [sic. July 2007].  And I spoke to her maybe a month or so before because she was dear to me.  She was so dear to me, she was the most wonderful--I remember seeing Tammy Faye for the first time; she came to the taping early with no makeup on.  No makeup on.
Speaker 1: And you recognized her (laughter)?
Speaker 2: And she was beautiful.  It was--it was this--it was--and I had a private conversation with her.  I said, "Tammy--," and when I say beautiful, I mean beautiful, if you know, some people need makeup.  But she was beautiful, and I said, "Tammy, why don't you just go like this, I mean what--?"  And she said, "BeBe [HistoryMaker BeBe Winans], it's my insecurities."  She was insecure, and that was why--the reason why she wore the makeup she wore.  But such a beautiful heart.  Such a beautiful heart.  Very, very close to her.  And so, I know, for sure that she's in a better place.  She had a heart of gold.  She really loved people, and that's why I think that ministry exploded the way it exploded.  I mean, they had a theme park [Heritage USA, Fort Mill, South Carolina], it was condominiums.  It was a great place for people to come from all over the world to enjoy each other, to fellowship and to enjoy (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And to celebrate the Lord.
Speaker 2: To celebrate, yeah.  It was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) To celebrate the goodness of God. Because it was all--
Speaker 2: Exactly.  It was a great, great place, but it happened because Jim and Tammy really loved people.  And, you know, it's not a perfect world, there's not a perfect place.  A lot of things that happened in the negative were some of the people that attached themselves to them.  So I learned at PTL [Praise the Lord Club] it's very important the team that you have around you.  Very, very important, you know.  They can uplift you or they can bring you down.  So I learned that at PTL as well.  So a lot of respect.
Speaker 1: If I may ask, what happened?  What brought the fall of PTL?
Speaker 2: I think a lot of things.  I mean, when we add it up, we're not perfect.  So Jimmy and Tammy were not perfect.  At the same time, I--I really believe with all my might that they didn't know this was going to explode the way it exploded.  So they were still trying to catch up with how to run it.  They were still trying to catch up with how vision had just, just spiraled into something--gigantic, you know.  So when you're playing catch up--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --you make mistakes, you know.  And then you bring in people who say they love you; oh, we've all experienced that, and say I've got your back and they're there for the wrong reasons.  And Jim and Tammy, just like any other people, were really deceived in that.  And that itself, I think was the key reason why things started going down.  But loved them.
Story_ID: 629190
Speaker 1: PTL [Praise the Lord Club] became your identifying place (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Moment.
Speaker 1: --moment. And also your launching pad.  So within that five years, now you are well-known to the white audience, because it was a predominantly white audience that watched PTL.  And now you're getting booked in other venues that are--
Speaker 2: Both black and white.
Speaker 1: --both black and white.  So now you're building your audience, building a wider audience among the African American community. For five years you had an opportunity to do that.  Where are some of the places you played, and tell me just a few of experiences that may--maybe two or three that may have just really stood out in your mind.
Speaker 2: I'll tell you one experience, too, is--I learned a lot being at PTL.  I learned a lot about our people (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay. For example?
Speaker 2: I learned a lot about African Americans.  We have, I think, we have sometimes a big problem in celebrating each other, and when we became, when I say we, CeCe [Priscilla Winans Love] and I, when we became successful at PTL and when we became successful on--in that genre accepted, then our people really started applauding us.  We have, I think, the--we claim you (laughter) when you become successful--
Speaker 1: It-is.  We-claim-you-it-is (laughter).
Speaker 2: --yeah, we-claim-you-it-is (laughter).  We don't really like you, but we gonna like you because you they like you.  And it was just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, wait a minute.  Why do you say that?  Why do you say that?
Speaker 2: I just--I've just seen it happen.  I've seen it happen with so many people.
Speaker 1: Why do you say that they didn't like you?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't--because when I say they, especially the small community of the Pentecost- the Church of God in Christ (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: Really, and it started with my grandfather--my [paternal] great-grandfather [Isaiah W. Winans].  My great-grandfather meant business.  You know, I thought my father [David Winans, Sr.] was strict.  Listening to his stories with him, he didn't take no junk.  He was just not really liked.  And so, even when it goes all the way back to Dr. Mason [Charles Harrison Mason] that--and those pioneers of the Church of God in Christ, my great-grandfather decided, oh, no, you guys are not serious.  So even though we are Church of God in Christ, we're not fellowshipping with you all.  So they have a big convention every year in Memphis, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but Patterson [Gilbert E. Patterson]--Reverend (unclear) Patterson (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We did not go, even though we were part, we were separated.  We never went to Memphis, Tennessee, until I was like, eighteen, seventeen years old.  It's like I didn't even know this existed, even though we were in the same denomination.  My great-grandfather decided we're not being a part of that so, my family, especially in the gospel community, was not really well liked.  But they had to applaud us because of the success over here and over here.  Now, that's not saying everyone over here because I learned as you grow older, it's not everyone, you know.  And one bad apple don't spoil (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Don't spoil the batch.
Speaker 2: --the batch.  You know, at the same time, I learned and I saw, "You're only applauding me because Oprah Winfrey likes me."  (Laughter) You only like me because Denzel [Denzel Washington]; you only like me because a lot of our audiences-- me especially and CeCe, 75 percent of our listening audience and concert-going audience was from the R and B world, was R and B listeners because our music broke on various genres of music.
Speaker 1: So let's talk about that.  Because (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's going to take a long time (laughter).
Speaker 1: I know (laughter).
Story_ID: 629191
Speaker 1: --Have gospel at home, then you go to PTL [Praise the Lord Club]; now you cross over, so to speak--
Speaker 2: And there was a line.
Speaker 1: --and there was a line (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Not too many.  It was--Andrae Crouch was the last person who had acceptance both in the gospel market and the Christian market.  Break it down, black people, white people, saying they love God; at the same time, a division unheard of.  At the same time, Andrae Crouch was one who won both audiences.  So until him, there was nobody there until BeBe [HistoryMaker BeBe Winans] and CeCe [Priscilla Winans Love] came around (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But nobody won both audiences like BeBe and CeCe.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Andrae Crouch may have broken the barrier, but nobody did it like you.   That--
Speaker 2: Which was (unclear) (simultaneous--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Which was revolutionary.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean what you've done in gospel music is revolutionary.  So how do you feel, being Church of God in Christ, and then there's that line of people that are saying, "This is not right.  This music is--something is wrong with this.  They're not saying God enough, they're not saying Jesus enough; and now they're being played on secular stations?"  How does that feel?
Speaker 2: You know, it was--
Speaker 1: Or does it matter?
Speaker 2: --the fact is it did matter, and I think people are deceiving themselves when it says it doesn't matter.  It's not that you set off on a journey to be disliked.  I think everyone wants to be liked and everyone wants to be loved.  But the fact of reality is that everybody's not going to like you.  Everybody's not going to love you no matter what.  So therefore, therefore, I was kind of used to it.  Understand, being a Winans, being raised in your [paternal] great-grandfather's church [Mack Avenue Church of God in Christ; Zion Congregational Church of God in Christ, Detroit, Michigan].  So, you know, there were some people who loved the Winans, and there were some people in church that didn't like the Winans.  "Oh, you think you're something because you're a Winans."  "Oh, you think you can get on the program because you're a Winans."  Like where I am, you know, it's not that I think I am (laughter)--
Speaker 1: As a matter of fact--we produced--my Mama's producing the program.
Speaker 2: You know, and it wasn't that we wanted to as much as that we had to.  We had to.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but you know, I don't know if I would and, of course, you know better than I, you were there; but, I don't know if it's dislike as far as the music, as far as the music is concerned.  So there may be a line of jealousy as far as the Winans were concerned.  But when it comes to the music, it's happened so many times (inaudible) gospel music where, who was that--Rosetta Tharpe [Sister Rosetta Tharpe]--who--
Speaker 2: Oh, my gosh, Mahalia Jackson, because it was just like (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Mahalia Jackson, so it was like--you may--you run the risk of losing the gospel audience--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --when you--
Speaker 2: See, but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) accept, are accepted--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --or doing what is perceived to be commercial.
Speaker 2: Right, and see the thing is that's true, and so, it was always confusing for me and CeCe--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and the rest of my family when you picked up a magazine and this genre, they say, "You know, they're, they are the devil."  And you pick it up here and--, "They are angels."  It's like, golly.  You know, not that you just went with this because they say you're angels, but you realize these people are writing about me; they don't even know me.  I've never met John Smith who wrote this article.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Susan never sat with me one day.  How does she know me?  How can he write about who I am?  They don't know me.  So you learn early on, "Oh, I'm a conversation piece.  I am being discussed at coffee tables," you know.  And I have--I can't do anything about that.  Can't do anything about that, so you learn early on, early on, "I can't do anything about that.  Some people gonna like me, some people not gonna like me.  Some people gonna love me, some people will not."
Story_ID: 629192
Speaker 1: At the same time, I think my upbringing gave me the strength and the ammunition needed in order to withstand those storms, because there are storms.  Now, some storms are five category, some are one.  It's still a storm.  If you're not careful, you can die in a one as well as a five, you know.  So you learn what to do and how to do when a storm is raging, you know.  And that to me is the most important thing, to understand what a storm is.  And so, learning by way of childhood and PTL [Praise the Lord Club] these, these were two big steps in my life.  I learned, you know what, I'm free.  Being a writer, this is where my freedom came.  I was free to be transparent and relate on pen and paper what God meant to me through song, in every area of my life.  And because of that, not knowing--now, you know, I would be lying if I sat here and said, "I knew this was going to happen.  I knew the R and B stations was going to play us.  I knew some adult contemporary station--." I had no idea, none.  I mean, I had some of the record company people say, "You can't write a song about heaven and sing about heaven." And, why not?  I believe in heaven.  And then 'Heaven' came out.  And it was really successful, and them same people would applaud me saying, "Great job.  Can you write another song about heaven?"  (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Got anything about the pearly gate (laughter) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Know how to write a song about hell (laughter).  I'm telling you the truth.
Speaker 2: But--
Story_ID: 629193
Speaker 1: Now you're making your mark or your mark is being made.  What's happening in Detroit [Michigan] with The Winans?  Where are they at musically?  Now, the family--seems like now the family is getting ready to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  The thing--
Speaker 1: --take over the industry (laughter).
Speaker 2: --yeah, and not really had planned to, but the thing is about my family--I'll let you in my family--my family had award shows before we were nominated for any award. (Laughter) We--you didn't want to go to church [Mack Avenue Church of God in Christ; Zion Congregational Church of God in Christ, Detroit, Michigan] and sing a solo in the choir and bomb, because when you got home, that's when it begins.  It's like, "Oh, did you hear him?  Oh, man, don't you ever get up there unless you're going to change your last name and sound like that again.  Da-da-da."  We were each other's biggest fans, and we were each other's biggest worst critics.  I mean, we would tear you up if you sounded a mess.  But we would applaud you if you got the house.  Ah, we couldn't wait to get home on that, you know, and say (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)  Now for somebody that may be seeing this tape and may not understand what get the house means (laughter).
Speaker 2: Oh, that's when you're singing and doing a great job and the people are screaming, and people are running around with their hands up and just saying, "Oh," and smiling and then pray--
Speaker 1: That's getting the house (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) I mean that's getting the house.  That's getting the house.  You know, the people are going with you in that direction.  So, you know, and we couldn't wait to get home to tell you, "You did a great job.  Ah, the way you did that and when you did this."  So we were, and we still are, we still to this day, each other's greatest critic--greatest fans and the worst critics.  So, therefore--
Speaker 1: What's the most recent criticism you had from (inaudible)?
Speaker 2: Ah, the latest criticism--you know what, I've been doing pretty good.  I haven't had too much criticism at this point in my life.
Speaker 1: Ah.
Speaker 2: But one of the--
Speaker 1: Tell me one you remember.
Speaker 2: --greatest--I tell you one of the greatest compliments--well, not the greatest compliment--one of the compliments.  My brother Marvin [Marvin Winans] called and said, "You know what, I have to tell you, I think you're a star," and I started laughing (laughter).  "No, no, no, no, no.  I really mean it.  You really shine bright no matter where you go.  And I want you to know I recognize that.  And I love you for it," (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And this was when?
Speaker 2: This was about two months ago.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: You know, and so--
Speaker 1: Have you ever received a criticism that has helped you from one of the brothers--or one of--
Speaker 2: Yeah, all of them.
Speaker 1: That you've changed something recently, or I say recently within the last five years, (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I won't say.  I mean, I think it's a little bit more than that years passed by when my brother Ronald [Ronald Winans] (laughter), my brother Ronald used to tell me, "Okay, now look, you're confident or you're a little haughty."  I'm--, "What are you talking about?"  He said, "Just the way you walk."  I said, "Ronald, what are you talking about?"  He said, "Now, when you're not doing it, your head don't shake from side to side.  But when you do it, your head shakes from side to side."  And I do recognize that.  Well, that's like, oh, my head is going from side to side like he said.  We got to do away with that.  So, you know, those are things that, you know, stay with you over the years, especially when you recognize it.  And you can recognize it because it's coming from a safe place.  It's coming from a sincere place, you know.  People, you know, I throw back to--people'll always tell me, especially these days, "Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] love you.  Oprah love you."  It was like, "You know what, she does.  But she also understands that I love her."  And I think with my family there's a mirror right between us, and we know I love you and you love me.  So, therefore, I can take the criticism.  I can take the applause as well because it's coming from a safe place.  And once you find those safe havens, you go there all the time, especially in the environment we live in.
Speaker 1: It's important to have people that--
Speaker 2: It is so important.
Speaker 1: --it's, it's, it's as important as having those old friends.  That's another safe place.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Those old childhood friends (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Because you know you can't choose your family, as you know, but you can choose your friends.  And there's been some choices that I've made that's been some bad choices, but I've made some, some great choices along the way, you know.  So once you find that safety, you stay with it.
Story_ID: 629194
Speaker 1: You ever written a song about that kind of safety from that spirit (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, man, yes.  I've written several songs.  I, I mean, there's a--I can--I can take you through moments of when I wrote certain songs, almost all the songs.  'Searching for Love.'
Speaker 1: Take me through that moment.
Speaker 2: "Searching for love, has anyone found it.  Everyone knows love is a feeling.  But I know it's real.  So let my record show 'til everyone here knows that it's real."  I was at PTL [Praise the Lord Club] at the time.  I was going through an identity crisis, and I was trying to find my way because, you told me God looks like this, and I'm finding out that, that's really not true.  So I was searching--now, I believed because it says, "Love is more than a feeling, but the reality of this whole world, a love that was formed and a babe that was born to reveal."  It's like, okay, this is real, but now I have to find my way, you know.  I found out that I was using--church was a crutch for a long time until I got to PTL.  Then it was taken from up under me, and it's like, you have to grow now.  You have to find your way, you know.  So, you know, it's okay. (Singing) "I need to know, yes, it's okay."  That was at the moment when my ex-wife [Debra Winans] thought she had cancer, and it was, what, she's going to die from the same thing that her mother died from?  And then there was a song say, it's okay.  It's going to be okay. Can I handle this storm?  Yes, you can.  Only together.  You know, I've written about my life and I've been transparent.  And it takes courage to be transparent.  You know, just--you just don't wake up and say, "Ah, I'm going to tell you about my life."   It takes a process to be--there's a book inside of me and I'm allowing it to be written, and when times come, I'll put it to paper.  But--and it ain't all pretty.
Speaker 1: And give me a temp- just give me a working title for the name of that book.
Speaker 2: 'The Art of Being Open.'
