Story_ID: 99798
Speaker 1: Okay.  My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Ma'am--
Speaker 1: We also do this.  This is a--
Speaker 2: I'm a mademoiselle.
Speaker 1: It's part of our HistoryMakers home training.
Speaker 2: I understand.  My name is Dyana, rhymes kind of like with banana, Dyana, D-Y-A-N-A, Williams.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, is that your--
Speaker 2: W-I-L-L-I-A-M-S.
Speaker 1: Now, is that your full name?
Speaker 2: My full name, for your purposes, yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  And--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --I did notice.  I saw your name, Dyana, spelled a different way on something else.
Speaker 2: It's D-Y-A-N-A.  I was named after a movie star named Deanna Durbin who spelled her name differently.  She was a cinematic performer--I believe in the '40s [1940s], '50s [1950s].  But my mother decided to spell her name different.  You know, it's interesting--I met Kathleen Battle recently and I was introduced to her by a mutual friend.  And the friend said, Dyana, this is Kathleen.  Kathleen said, Dyana.  And I said-
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION).
Speaker 2: Her middle name is Dyana, so we started hugging.  Her mother, I mean she said my mother named me after a movie star.  I said, Deanna Durbin.  So the great Kathleen Battle and I were hugging, holding hands, sharing, you know, rejoicing in the fact that we're both Dyanas.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I felt a special bond with her.
Speaker 1: Now, do you have any--oh, what was your maiden name?'
Speaker 2: My maiden name is Williams.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Gamble is--I've always been Dyana Williams.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  I see, all right, okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: All right.  And do you have a nickname or anything?
Speaker 2: I have many nicknames.  One is Dee Dee, my childhood name if you go around my family.  They call me Dee Dee, but my ex's first wife's name was Dee Dee Sharp.  So, when he and I got together, all of a sudden, you know, I cracked the whip on my relatives.  I was like, no more Dee Dee--that was the first wife.  It's Dyana now (laughter).  And, oh, like we, you're Dee Dee, you're always be Dee Dee to us.  Cookie, my father [George Williams] calls me Cookie, and my daughter calls me Cookie.  My father went to the Korean War and I was born while he was away.  When he came home, he said I looked like a little chocolate chip cookie, a little light-skinned chocolate chip cookie, and that was my daddy's name for me.  My radio handle is Moonbeams, Ebony Moonbeams, so I have about maybe six friends, including [Kenny] Gamble [HM], who call me Moonbeams.  That's their affectionate name.  Actually, my preferred name is Moonbeams 'cause it reminds me of an era and a time in my life that was full of joy, great satisfaction, personally and professionally.  So Moonbeams and, you know, I respond to Honey, Baby.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm messing with you now, Larry (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry.  Those are the nicknames.
Speaker 1: What is your, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My date of birth, I have two birthdays.  I'm a Scorpio.  I was born November 8th.  However, they registered my birthdate incorrectly on the certificate.  My mother [Nancy Neuman], who was young and busy being a new momma, didn't ever--she never corrected it.  So, my legal birthdate is November 9th, 1953.  And my real birthday is November 8th, hence the celebration of two days always.  Is the party over here?
Speaker 1: All right.  And where were you born?
Speaker 2: I was born in Queens, New York at the St. Alban's Naval Hospital.  Since my father was in the Navy, I had the honor of being born in a military facility.  But they took me out of the Bronx, the Queens, really quick into the Bronx [New York] where I lived as a small child with my family, and then moved to Puerto Rico when I was about 10 for a few years 'cause my mother is Puerto Rican.  And she was offered a teaching position.  She was a professor and she taught nursing, so we moved to Puerto Rico for a couple of years.  And then, I moved back to, after my parents' divorce, to Harlem [New York].  So I really claim, 'cause my formative years that I really remember, and had the best time was in New York and Harlem and Manhattan.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you, you moved there as a teenager?
Speaker 2: I moved there--actually, I was about 12 going--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --into 13.  So what a heady place to, time and place, because it was post-civil rights, early '70s [1970s], "Say It Loud--I'm Black and I'm Proud".  And it was Harlem.  It was a place of the Harlem Renaissance and I was fond of Langston Hughes and the great writers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I spent my time in the Schomburg [Center for Research on Black Culture], the old Schomburg, not the new one as we know it, but you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  We're going to get into all that--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --but just trying to--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --slate--
Speaker 2: Get the facts.
Speaker 1: --the interview right now before we really get started.
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.
Story_ID: 99799
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a producer.  I am president of the International Association of African American Music.  Additionally, I am a media coach, and I specialize in artist development.  Also, I work with athletes.  I've worked with Roy Jones, Jr., the former heavyweight boxing champion of the world, as well as soccer players from South Africa.  So I do many things.  I'm almost a journalist.  I'm a contributing editor for a music industry trade publication called "Urban Network".  So, every day is different and that's how I like it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you've been a radio producer--
Speaker 2: I started in radio as a radio personality.
Speaker 1: --a television personality and--
Speaker 2: I did television.  I worked with BET as an on camera entertainment reporter.  I also was a consultant for VH1 for a show called "The Soul of VH1".  Vanessa Williams, former Miss America, was the host.  I did all the artist interviews.  So I--and I still do voice overwork, a myriad of things, but I pride myself most in being a music activist, a cultural ambassador for African American music and culture.  It's the role that I enjoy most, and I do it all over the world.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, this thing is anticlimactic after that, but what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is February 8th, 2005.  It is a Tuesday.
Speaker 1: That's right.  The sun is shining--well, it was.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's a beautiful day--good time to be alive.
Speaker 1: And, sorry, and where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are in Penn Valley, Pennsylvania, which is approximately nine miles from downtown Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], the City of Brotherly Love, and sho nuff, Sisterly Affection, going west of the city towards Valley Forge [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay, now where--we were coming through here.  Is this what people call Mainline?
Speaker 2: Yes, we're in Mainline, Pennsylvania.  It is an area that is considered the suburbs.
Speaker 1: The affluent, so--
Speaker 2: Affluent community where I live, which is where we are now in my home, where I've been living for the past, going on 17 years--very few African Americans, certainly very few Puerto Ricans.  And Teddy Pendergrass is my neighbor, and that's how I discovered this community.  I used to come visit Mr. Pendergrass, who is a good family friend for close to 30 years, and I fell in love.  Having grown up in the city, I wanted, you know, I always had an urban experience.  I lived in high rises and buildings up in the air.  I wanted to have trees and grass and deer, you know, grazing on my property, and plant flowers, and all that good stuff, and have a place for my children to play basketball and enjoy.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, it's a beautiful view here, too.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Story_ID: 99800
Speaker 1: What--now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions we always ask.
Speaker 2: Certainly.
Speaker 1: And they only require a brief answer.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food would be plantains--platanos in Spanish.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My mother tells me when I was very young, I used to demand--command my grandmother to make big bowls of plantains.  They're green bananas.  They're yellow that are ripe, and then the green which are the ones I prefer.  You slice them, you fry them, you smash them, put some salt on them, [Spanish] platanos.  That's a complete satisfying delicious meal, but I could eat plantains all day, all night.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is turquoise.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: I love--it reminds me of the ocean, the blue--it's soothing.  I like color, period, pinks, yellows.  I'm very attracted to color.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: "Spring Can Really Hang You Up the Most".  I love spring.  It's--things have been dormant and they start coming to life again and it's not too hot.  It's no longer cold--flowers, colors.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: People's energy shifts.  People become more revitalized, so and the words of the great song, "Spring Can Really Hang You Up the Most."  I prefer that season.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: One of the most beautiful places that I've ever been to in the world, and I haven't seen the entire planet, but I've done an extensive amount of traveling is Bahia, Brazil.  I recall sitting on a beach on a rock on a beach in Bahia reading Ishmael Reed's "Reckless Eyeballing".  Looking out at the ocean, there was no one in sight.  And I felt like I had carved out "My Little Slice of Heaven".  First of all, they brought more African slaves to that region of Brazil than anywhere else in the world.  And so, the African retention is extremely strong, but you have these people speaking Portuguese.  But, God, you feel like you're in Angola or some part of the continent.  And I had not been to Africa before I went to Brazil.  And I started crying because I felt like I was home.  So, I would have to say Brazil and follow that by Ghana.  I love Accra--intend to live there at some point in my life, so Africa, Brazil--same place.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And the last questions is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: My favorite expression was taught to me by my parents.  They instilled this in me, and it's what I've imparted to my children and anyone I meet--"Anything that the mind can conceive and believe, if you truly believe it, you can achieve it".
Story_ID: 99801
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I'm going to ask you about your family history.
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.
Speaker 1: I'll ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side.  We'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Nancy Rafaella (ph.), and do you need me to spell Rafaella?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: We might have to get mommy on the phone for that.  Her--
Speaker 1: I think I can, but go ahead.
Speaker 2: Rafaella--well, let's see because she's got, she's Puerto Rican so, you know, Puerto Ricans use their mother and their father's name, Delgado Vives, V-I-V-E-S, which is my family name on my mother's side, Williams, Neuman, N-E-U-M-A-N, my mother's deceased husband, Neuman.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She has a very long name but she goes by Nancy Neuman now, N-E-U-M-A-N.  And she's Dr. Neuman because she is a professor emeritus--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --from Jersey City State University [Jersey City, New Jersey].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My mother was born in San Juan, Puerto Rico, October 20-, I want to say 20, like daddy, when was mommy born?
Speaker 1: GEORGE WILLIAMS:  Twenty-fourth.
Speaker 2: Twenty-fourth?
Speaker 1: GEORGE WILLIAMS:  Yeah.
Speaker 2: October 24th, 1930-
Speaker 1: GEORGE WILLIAMS:  Thirty-three.
Speaker 2: Thirty-three.  Good ex-husband, right?
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: October 24th, 1933--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in San Juan, Puerto Rico.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, how far back can you trace your mother's family?  How far back can you trace your ancestors on that side?
Speaker 2: I can trace my mother's family as far back to my great-grandfather and great-grandmother.  In fact, I have a photograph of them in my home.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what do you know about them?  Do you know what they did for a living or how they lived and or--
Speaker 2: Actually, I don't recall.  I just know that my mother tells me it was a very loving family, a big family, very--my great-grandfather, my father's, my grandfather's father, as well as my mother's father, were both very, very strong men, very in charge, domineering, very Latin, Latin men.  And that's about all I know.  I have images of them, but I don't know much about them.  That's kind of sad--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --that you ask that question.  I mean, I can't really tell you what they did for a living.
Speaker 1: So you don't know?  Okay.
Speaker 2: How about they lived life?  How's that?
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm sure they lived life--
Speaker 1: All right, now--
Speaker 2: --and made babies.
Speaker 1: Are there any stories from that side of the family about those ancestors on that side or about--
Speaker 2: My mother's got them.  I don't have them down like I should, but I need to sit her down and record them--ask 'cause her recollection is pretty strong.  She's seventy-two, but she's very young and spry, so none that I can share with you at this moment.
Story_ID: 99802
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did your mother [Nancy Neuman] talk about growing up at all?  And do you know how she grew up and how, you know?
Speaker 2: She did.  My grandfather was a teacher and a businessman, and she was the only girl.  She had four brothers.  A couple of siblings died.  But my grandfather was a hustler.  And my family--my mother's family was middle class.  And she, being the only girl, was very preferred--treated like a queen, a princess.
Speaker 1: So, did she grow up in San Juan [Puerto Rico]?
Speaker 2: She grew up in San Juan.  My grandfather is from, was from--my grand-, my grandparents are deceased.  My grandfather, his name was Juan Vives, Juan Delgado Vives, and he was from--oh, daddy help me.  Papa was from Ponce, P-O-N-C-E, Ponce in Puerto Rico.  And my grandmother, Bienvenida Vives, was born in Myos (ph.)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but they raised their family in San Juan.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did your--are there any stories that your mother told you about growing up, or anything that you can relate?
Speaker 2: Not really.  I just--my mother tells me they just had a very loving--I mean, you know, no details.  Interestingly enough, no details, but just I've seen pictures.  My mother went to--she was like a debutante.  I have pictures of her balls and my grandmother and her cotillion, so they were very much into those traditions that exist in Puerto Rico.  She tells me stories now about the "Three Kings", the celebrations post-Christmas.  She tells me that she really didn't want to go to church.  And she wasn't very--she was spiritual, but not very religious.  But my grandmother--my family was Catholic and she talks about, you know, the, the imposition of Catholicism on she and her brothers, and how she was determined to not impose that on me, even though I did go to Catholic school when I lived in Puerto Rico and Bayamon.  And I learned about Catholicism.  I was baptized Catholic, but my mother did--she wasn't heavy-handled about it and, and nor was my father [George Williams].
Speaker 1: Did she ever discuss why she wasn't that excited about Catholicism?
Speaker 2: In conversations that we've had since I've become an adult, I think I've gotten that my mother just had a lot of questions about what was taught--the belief system, the catechism, the, the Holy Ghost, the whole thing.  My mother is not, although I see her--she's gotten older.  She's become a more God-fearing woman.  You know, she talks more about God than she did when I was little.  My mother just was not that--and I'm glad she wasn't.  She's very liberal, and I think that having had a situation where religion was imposed on her, she was determined--and she's a free spirit.  So, most free-spirited people do not submit to organized religion.  And I believe that's what happened with my mother that when she was old enough to make her own decisions and have her own child, she decided to let me be that way and make my own choices.  I'm very, very spiritual.  I mean, God means more to me than anything.  I've been pregnant, so I know what it's like to go from not having a life in you to having it in you, and then feeling it, and then seeing your body go through these immense changes.  And then, this person comes out of you, and you see them grow and acquire their tastes and a definite personality.  I mean, and to me, it's--I've had an up-close personal experience with God having been a mother.  And is that to say that people who don't have children can't?  No, because you can just look at a tree.  I can't make a tree.  I couldn't even think to make a tree or grass or an ocean or an elephant.  To me, these are all manifestations of the Creator.  I couldn't think to make another human being in all of our infinite abilities.  I couldn't, I couldn't make a brain or create the emotion of love.  I believe that is all divine and I submit to that and celebrate it morning, noon, and night, all day long.  I'm prayerful when I'm in crisis and trouble.  I call on God.  So, while my parents did not impose heavy duty religion on me, they really helped me become a spiritual person.  And I'm grateful that they encouraged me to explore.  I mean, I learned about Islam and, and Buddhists, and Jehovah's Witnesses.  I was exposed.  I was very fortunate.  So, anyway, I know I've kind of sidetracked.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  But so, when did your mother come to the United States or--
Speaker 2: She came young--probably in her early teens is what I understand.  Right, daddy?
Speaker 1: GEORGE WILLIAMS:  1941.
Speaker 2: Okay.  He, he knows.  You might want to interview him.  It was his wife though--1941.
Speaker 1: So she wasn't, she was maybe eight or nine years old, I guess.  Was she?
Speaker 2: Maybe younger, huh?  Yeah, daddy, she was about eight or nine?
Speaker 1: GEORGE WILLIAMS:  Yep.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Story_ID: 99803
Speaker 1: So, well, did she [her mother, Nancy Neuman] go to school?  Well, she had to have gone to school in New York and--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum, yes.  My mother is very, very smart.  Academically, she excelled.
Speaker 1: Do you know what high school she went to in New York?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.  I know she went to--she went to Brooklyn College [Brooklyn, New York] for undergrad, and also NYU [New York University, New York City, New York] for her post-, for her grad.  That's all I know about her education.
Speaker 1: And she's a Ph.D. now--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in what?
Speaker 2: Nursing, public health nursing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.  She recently--they made her professor emeritus at Jersey City State.  And I sat in the audience with tears rolling down my face to see my mother in a cap and gown, and to be acknowledged the way she was.  She's super smart.  My mother is the kind of woman--she's an intellectual, but she's a, yeah, everyday woman.  I mean, she'll kick it with you about everything--hip hop, you know.  Like I said, she likes to party.  She likes to have a good time, but she's enormously bright, very, very smart.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I admire her, her level of intelligence.  Whenever I have a question or problem--in fact, when I went through school, Temple University [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], I was on the phone with her most of my time there getting help.  She was my tutor.  She helped me with all my subjects, papers.  You know, she's the kind of person who knows all the rules--being a professor, being in school having to grade papers and stuff.  So, it was a tremendous advantage for me to have her 'cause she was my, my rock steady.
Story_ID: 99804
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, tell us, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father's name is George Gabriel Williams.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: January 29th, 1933, and he was born in Culpeper, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side?
Speaker 2: I know that they were a hodge-podge of people.  We have Irish; we have Cherokee Indian; oh, of course, African American.  I think that my father's family represents what a lot of black families are--a mix of white, black, and Indian.  We, we were definitely that.  My father's people were very light-skinned black people.  I have an aunt who's blonde hair, blue-eye, but her daddy was a black man.  Her mother was very light, Irish, you know, but they lived in the South.  And they lived in the black community, but they were very light-skinned black people.  I think that, I think my father, I think my father-
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION).
Speaker 2: Well, I just--
Speaker 1: So, I say that I think my father was a product of the times.  He was born in 1933, raised as a mulat- (ph.), still strong in the South, mixed marriages, frowned upon--a very difficult time, but the reality is that for black people, they've always been mixing with white people.  But, you know, we tend to discriminate against the light, the dark, you know.  If you're light, you--I mean, I grew up hearing all the time that I had good hair.  You know, I was Puerto Rican and black and Irish and Indian.  And, but I always heard that, you know, I was pretty, and that I had good features and all those kinds of things that I think are a lot of self-hatred on the part of black people.  In fact, the first time that I learned--well, I'll tell you about that later.  What I was going to say--that I experienced racism was in Puerto Rico from my own people then.  That's another story.  But, anyway, my daddy grew up in the South.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, are there any stories from that side of the family?  It seems like with the different peoples coming together there, there should be some good stories (laughter).
Speaker 1: Again, I don't have detailed stories.  I mean, my father tells me about walking to school, you know, long distances.  You know, they didn't have developed transportation systems.  My, my grandfather was away at work a lot.  My daddy tells me stories about, you know, the uncles and the aunts.  I've heard little things here and there.  I would--my father would take me home when I was little, but I was very, very small.  I remember going down there, and they were serving chitterlings--my first time, and I got sick.  I ran out in the back 'cause I was a city girl down South eating chitterlings.  I was like ugg, how nasty.  You know, but my father describes it as a, as a good childhood--I mean, he talks about his daddy whipping his ass, you know.
Story_ID: 99805
Speaker 1: Now, so there're no stories from your father's [George Wiliams] side to pass down that you remember?  Any stories from his childhood that he shared with you that--
Speaker 2: Well, like I said, daddy talks about having to walk to school, you know, working hard.  He talks about--I remember him telling about going to the corner store, or I don't want to say the corner store, but this, the country store, I guess--things like that.  You know, he doesn't--daddy doesn't talk too much about the, the old days.  Daddy kind of lives in the present.  He's not one to--he talks about more about his Navy experiences.  I probably know more about, you know, his travels.  In fact, when I go places now, I'll call him and say, daddy, have you been here?  Did you go there?  And then, he'll tell me stories about his, you know, military days in the Navy.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, he was in the [U.S.] Navy, I guess, during the Korean War?
Speaker 2: Yes, my daddy was in the Korean War.
Speaker 1: All right, and, okay, so--
Speaker 2: He tells me how he met my mother [Nancy Neuman], things like that.  My--
Speaker 1: Well, that's a story we need to know.
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: How did they meet?
Speaker 2: Well, my father became very good friends with Juan Vives who was my uncle--became my uncle, and Juan had pictures of my mother.  And my father saw my mother's picture and told Juan--he said, I'm going to marry her.  And of course, pushed to meet--have the opportunity to meet my mother.  And when they came home--I guess on one of their breaks, he met my mother.  My mother met him.  My mother told me--she said, you know, she was smitten immediately.  My father is a real good-looking guy.  He's very handsome.  He has a nice, nice, like pretty hair, nice thick eyebrows.  I mean, I favor my daddy.  It's interesting 'cause I think I'm a real mix.  Some days, I think just like my mother, and I act like her.  And other days, I feel like I have my father's temperament.  My daddy is very gregarious, very--he's smart as well.  My father is not as educated as my mother but reads.  My father reads--he's the kind of person that reads multiple newspapers a day, magazines.  I learned to love reading from my father because I remember when I was little--books everywhere, books all the time, periodicals, newspapers.  And he instilled that passion of reading in me in a strong way.  So my parents met then through my uncle, and they married young.  They were 18--they were teenagers.  And I talk to my mother now--I say, what did you know about love, and what did you know about marriage 'cause I reflect back to my youth--golly, 18, you don't know much about--that's, you don't, you hardly know yourself.
Speaker 1: But so, they were both 18?
Speaker 2: They were young.  Yeah, my daddy is six--daddy is about seven months older than mommy.  Well, let's--no, he's older than that.  He was born in January.  She's born in October so--
Speaker 1: That's not much difference.
Speaker 2: --not much difference.  They were very young.
Speaker 1: So they were very young, okay.  And was he stationed in New York [City, New York] sort of when he--
Speaker 2: Daddy was stationed in Philly for a while.  My other tells me that I was conceived in Philadelphia.  So when I moved here, my mother thought it was just--she says you're going back where you were conceived.  And I was like really?  So, my daddy was stationed--where were you stationed, daddy?
Speaker 1: GEORGE WILLIAMS:  I was on a ship.
Speaker 2: But you weren't stationed anywhere?
Speaker 1: GEORGE WILLIAMS:  I was stationed in Norfolk, Virginia.
Speaker 2: Okay.  But why did you come to Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 1: GEORGE WILLIAMS:  Dry dock
Speaker 2: The ship was in dry dock, okay.  It's interesting 'cause he's downstairs and we can't see him--whatever he's saying.
Speaker 1: I know, but thank God, he's there 'cause he's filling in the blanks.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: His memory, look daddy's 72, but he's on it, okay.  He knows.  He, he has better recollection and memories than I do.  I guess I need to sit my daddy down.
Speaker 2: Well, tell me--
Story_ID: 99806
Speaker 1: Do you have any brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: I am an only child.  I'm the apple of my daddy's [George Williams]eye, and the joy of my mother's [Nancy Neuman] life.  I wanted a brother and sister.  I always longed for a sibling when I was little.  But my parents only had me, and I believe it's part of the reason why I became such a people person--first, because my father is outgoing and loves people, and my mother is that way as well. They're both, you know, go-getters and folks.  They're real people-people.  But when I was little, I so wanted--I used to bring--my parents tell me now.  And I remember all the kids in the neighborhood--my house was the central location for the organization of stickball, all the street games, the sleepovers.  All that took place at 1461 Stickney Place in the Bronx [New York] where we lived when I was very little before we moved to Puerto Rico.
Story_ID: 99807
Speaker 1: Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: I remember growing up on a block--1461 Stickney Place was where I lived as a small child.  And I have lots of memories from there.  My earliest memories are playing.  I was the leader.  I always organized the boys and the girls, so I remember just being the point person.  And it's interesting because that's who I would become later in life--the leader, the natural leader.  So, I remember another recollection of biting a dog at my grandmother's house because he was sticking his tongue out at me.  I was very, very young.
Speaker 1: This seems to be one of the ordinary attitudes of dogs--to have their tongue as lolling out.  I mean, and you bit him for it?  It's--
Speaker 2: He was sticking his tongue out at me and that was just not right, and so I bit him.  And my parents rushed me off to the hospital.  I had to get a tetanus shot.  And I think the dog died shortly thereafter.  And I felt guilt for a long time because I felt like I was the cause of his death.  I don't even remember exactly.  Daddy, how old was I when I bit the dog?
Speaker 1: GEORGE WILLIAMS:  Uh--
Speaker 2: But you remember me biting the dog?
Speaker 1: GEORGE WILLIAMS:  --about four or three.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was young, very so that, that's one of my earliest memories and feeling sorrowful because the dog did die.  I don't know why the dog died.  Do you know why the dog died?
Speaker 1: GEORGE WILLIAMS:  No.
Speaker 2: Probably because I bit him.
Speaker 1: That's quite a story.  Now, did this inspire (unclear)?
Speaker 2: We were under the table, we were under the table.  And I, I just--he was sticking his tongue out at me.  I bit him.
Speaker 1: What a story.
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: --I bit a dog.
Speaker 1: Uh-hum, okay.
Story_ID: 99808
Speaker 1: Now, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: What a great question--the sights of my grandmother in the kitchen cooking.  My parents worked [George Williams and Nancy Neuman].  My mother was in school, and my grandmother [Bienvenida Vivas] was my caretaker in their absence.  And she didn't speak any English, so I learned Spanish really well first.  It was my first language, so when I get angry or emotional--when I had my children, it was in Spanish.  When I make love, it's in Spanish.  So, I remember my grandmother in the kitchen preparing food for me--hot chocolate and toast and rice and beans, and always sugar on the table.  And my family would put sugar on steak, everything, rice and beans.  It's a family tradition to this second.  My children do it as well.  And I just remember love.
Speaker 1: Yeah, a lot of Caribbean put, you know--
Speaker 2: Sugar on their food?
Speaker 1: --in beer, too, I heard--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and other things, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, well, we did, we did it.  But I remember, when you're talking about the sounds, I remember, you know, of course, Latin music.  I remember my father used to listen to WABC, "Cousin Brucie", the DJs that were dominant, AM DJs in New York at that time.  My father always had music and the radio playing in our home.  I remember that.  And I'm sure that was a factor in influencing me later to go into radio.
Speaker 1: Now, what kind of music did "Cousin Brucie" play?
Speaker 2: Played everything, they played the hits, Motown.  They played a mix.  At that time, radio was, it was homogenized.  It was white and black.  It wasn't just black music.  Later on, I would listen to WWRL, which was the AM black station, but growing up as a small child in the Bronx, my daddy played WABC.
Speaker 1: It's like a Top 40?
Speaker 2: It was a Top 40 station, exactly.  And that's what I listened to.  So, the sights were of affection.  My family is demonstrative.  We're touchy-feely, huggy, love-you, kind of family.  We had big meals, parties.  My father's best friend was named Macie (ph.), and he lived behind us.  And my father and mother and I would always go--I remember seeing parties, people getting dressed, drinking, lots of booze on the table, folks stumbling and fumbling, and drunk--just a good time.  I, I don't have sad memories of my life at all.  I remember love.  I mean, it was the prevailing sight, sound, feeling, the dominant energy in my childhood.
Story_ID: 99809
Speaker 1: Now, as an only child, did you, did you ever feel alone or lonely or?
Speaker 2: Yes.  But it was a wonderful thing because I learned to manage being alone very effectively.  It helped me develop my imagination.  I used to play with bobby pins and make bobby-pin people.  I used to take--for the girls, they would have a little piece of toilet paper in the top.  That would be this and two legs, and the girls would have toilet paper for hair, and the guys wouldn't.  That's how I distinguished the males and the females.  And I would play for hours in the bathroom or my bedroom with my bobby-pin people.  Made up stories--people, characters, and so I learned how to be alone and play.  To this day, I enjoy the solitude and my company.  I think it's important to be able to be with yourself and know what you like.  So, I hear some people say, oh, I could never go to a movie alone, but I go all the time.  I enjoy going with other people, but it's no big thing for me to grab the keys, run in the car, and go to a movie.  And, too, if I'm lucky, that's like to me a great Saturday to see two good movies.  And I like to see the movies when they come out.  So, when I was a little girl, no problem being alone.  I amused myself very well.  I had cousins though, so my cousins would come over and play.  But being alone was joyful, lots of fun.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 99810
Speaker 1: Now, did--you said you did, did you go to church at all here coming up?  Did you have like a--
Speaker 2: Occasionally.  It was not mandatory.  My daddy [George Wiliams] didn't go.  My mother [Nancy Neuman] didn't go.  Any religious activity transpired, it took place with my grandmother who was very religious.  She had a picture of the Virgin Mary in her bedroom.  She had rosaries, so there were images of Jesus all over the place.  So, I saw that at my grandmother's house but not at my house.  It was none of that there.  My house was full of books especially--my parents used to read novels and paperback books.  I remember my parents had a bed with a bookstand thing behind them--lots of books.  That's what I remember most about my parents' bedroom were all the books everywhere.  So, but, no, going to church was not a big thing.  When I went to Puerto Rico and lived in PR, I was in a Catholic school, Santa Rita, and Bayamon, and it was mandatory that we went to church every day.  We had to go to confession, you know.  Sometimes I would be, like phew--I would make up stuff 'cause, you know, how bad are you when you're 10, 11 years old?  So, you have a church then.  And I always got in trouble with the nuns because I'm the one that was questioning and saying--well, if there's such a thing as God, why is God allowing poverty and suffering?  Why are--why is there racism?  I mean, even at that age, my parents--my mother, mostly, was called in to speak to the Mother Superior about the fact that I was questioning so much.  That wasn't--they didn't want that, but that's who I am and that's--now, you know, even to this second, I have questions about that.  But I've, I've learned to deal with those questions a little differently.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, so you lived in the Bronx [New York] first, right?
Speaker 2: I lived in the Bronx, yes.
Speaker 1: And how many years did you live in the Bronx?
Speaker 2: Until I was about ten years old.
Story_ID: 99811
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I know you learned how to play the flute.  I mean, you're, you're a flutist.  And now, did you, did you start playing when you were in grade school?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, I didn't start playing the flute until I was about 15 years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what did you like to do in grade school?  What was your--in fact, what, what was the name of your school, your first school?
Speaker 2: I went to P.S. 78 in the Bronx [New York].  And I have photographs, lots of pictures.  I'm grateful to my parents because as you get older, your--my, in my case, memory dissipates, but my parents [George Williams and Nancy Neuman] did a great job of documenting my history.  My mother has report cards.  My mother has my class pictures, which I have, and I've shown to my children--I mean, so I can see those people.  I can see the people that I spent time with--have the names of my principals.  And they documented my life pretty well.  And then my dad--later in my career, my father is like the historian of my career and my family.  He's kept, he could--my daddy could have a clipping service.  I tell him all the time because if my name is in the newspaper or magazine, my daddy is clipping it.  When I was in Jet, first time, daddy, you know, Ebony, whatever, my daddy's--he's on it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, P.S. 78.  And then I went to Puerto Rico to Santa Rita and Bayamon.  That was the Catholic school experience.
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: Santa is S-A-N-T-A, Rita is R-I-T-A.
Speaker 1: Okay, as in Puerto Rico.
Speaker 2: And Bayamon and that's B-A-Y-A-M-O-N.  Bayamon is about 20 minutes outside of San Juan, and it's where my father, mother, and I lived--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --on Calle Cadiz.  Calle is C-A-L-L-E, Cadiz is C-A-D-I-Z.  And that's where we lived.  My mother still owns the house that we lived in.
Speaker 1: So you were in the Bronx until 10.  Then you went to Puerto Rico, and how long did you stay in Puerto Rico?
Speaker 2: Two years, daddy?
Speaker 1: GEORGE WILLIAMS:  Yeah, two years.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We lived in Puerto Rico for two years.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, from 10 till about 12.
Speaker 2: And that's when you came back to the U.S. to Harlem [New York City, New York], right?
Speaker 1: I grew up--well, yes, came back to Manhattan [New York City, New York], and we resided at 725 Riverside Drive.  It's funny 'cause I just met a woman recently in New Orleans [Louisiana] who lives in the building.  Huh, and I was like, get out of here.  She's--I live in Harlem.  I said, oh, really, where--I grew up in Harlem.  She said, 725 Riverside Drive.  I was like, get out of here.  I said, that's where I grew up.  So, 725 and we lived on Riverside Drive so I used to go to Riverside Park.  I mean, that whole--that was my playground, that whole area, from Riverside straight on over to Edgecombe, that whole vicinity.  And then, I went to Junior High School, 143 Eleanor Roosevelt on 181st Street and Amsterdam Avenue.
Story_ID: 99812
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, you were talking earlier before we started that you--we'd frequent some of the cultural institutions of Harlem and made an impression on you.  You talked about the Schomburg Center [for Research in Black Culture].  All right.  Can you tell us about that--your experiences there?
Speaker 2: Young girl, inquisitive, I loved the environment that I lived in.  It was alive.  There was so much going on in terms of black people, and that community being always a cultural mecca for African Americans.  I so appreciate that opportunity to be there to see those things and to, to be nourished there.  I mean, I had the best of all of it.  I had the Bronx [New York].  I had Puerto Rico.  I had a foreign language that I--I'm not, I mean, I'm fluent.  I'm not great.  I forget how to conjugate my verbs sometimes, but I understand everything and I can write.  But then, I came back to New York.  It was a sad time for my family because my parents divorced in Puerto Rico.  And my father [George Williams] was very unhappy--he loved my mother [Nancy Neuman]  immensely.  And my mother wanted to make some changes in her life and, of course, as divorce does, it impacts on the children and everybody--the friends, everybody.  So, it became a period of rebellion for me, a combination of exploring this new environment.  My mother was very involved in her work.  She started teaching at Hunter College [New York City, New York].  And, you know, I was rebellious.  It was that age, teenage--I was moving into my adolescence, so I felt angry with my mother.
Speaker 1: Did you live with your mother or father or, you know?
Speaker 2: I lived with my mother--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but my mother allowed liberal visitation with my daddy.  And my father and I were very, very close.  And I would go visit my father and see him, and I always, I, I felt sad for my daddy because I knew that he loved my mother.  And she had split up the family.  That's how I viewed the divorce.  I didn't understand the nuances.  That later, became familiar with as an adult, but it was, it was probably--living in Puerto Rico was really sad because that's where my parents were really--it was all coming to a head.  And, and, but then we moved to New York, to Manhattan [New York City].  It was tough 'cause I'd only known my father and mother.  I'd known that family and it changed--the whole dynamic of our interaction changed.
Story_ID: 99813
Speaker 1: Now, as you grew up, did you have to--now, you might, did you think of yourself as primarily a Puerto Rican or an African American or which?  Did it make any difference to you?
Speaker 2: Great question, Larry.  I was raised culturally African American, and I thought of myself always as African American, even though I knew my mother [Nancy Neuman] was straight-up Puerto Rican.  Both her parents were Puerto Rican.  I knew that my father [George Williams] was mixed because I saw my family and I talked to my family and I knew.  But I consider myself, I considered myself at the time African American with a Puerto Rican mother.  And because I experienced racism for the first time from my own people in Puerto Rico--when I was in Puerto Rico, I was teased about my Spanish 'cause I grew up in the Bronx [New York City].  So, my Spanish was not impeccable like the girls that grew up in Puerto Rico.  My Spanish was not impeccable like the girls that I grew up with in Puerto Rico.
Story_ID: 99814
Speaker 1: Well, when I was in Puerto Rico, I was taunted about everything from my hair to my color.  I was called a negra, negrita, but not affectionate, 'cause in Spanish, negra can be an affectionate term of endearment, but I was called negra, like a nigger.  I was a nigger, so I got into fights, arguments.  And I was coming from the Bronx [New York], and even though it was a middle-class neighborhood that I grew up in, I still had street smarts.  And, in fact, I used to beat the boys up on my block if they got out of line.  So I was a tough girl so I got into fights.  I defended myself, and I felt really bad because these were my own people.  All the girls--these girls were blond, blue-eyed.  I have cousins who look like that by the way, but I was a nigger 'cause I was dark.  And I resented--
Speaker 2: That is interesting, 'cause I know where the--there's a Puerto Rican community I'm familiar with is the one in Chicago.
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: They seem to really identify with the black community so they know they're different, you know, but they--
Speaker 1: Yeah, but these are Puerto Ricans in Puerto Rico--
Speaker 2: In Puerto Rico, okay.
Speaker 1: --so it was different.  And even, I remember having long--
Speaker 2: Was it different in New York--
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's different in New York--
Speaker 2: --in terms of how the Puerto Ricans related to you?
Speaker 1: --because the Puerto Ricans and blacks interact a lot.  They marry, they date, they live in their communities are side by side or they, their--they border each other.  So the relationship between Latinos and African Americans in the United States versus Puerto Rico is different.  And remember now, contexts of the times, this was the late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s].  Civil Rights Movement was happening, but it hadn't quite happened in Puerto Rico yet.  And so, I was different.  I was not (in Spanish).  I was mixed, I was mixed--I wasn't a straight-up and down.  My father wasn't Puerto Rican and they knew that,  And they knew I was coming from New York.  So, in the Bronx--so pfew, those girls worked me over, but I worked them right back.
Speaker 2: Did they tend to look down on--
Speaker 1: They looked down on me.
Speaker 2: --other Puerto Ricans from New York?  I mean, when they come back to Puerto Rico?
Speaker 1: Yes, it's changed.  But also, the color thing that prevails around the world of light versus dark, it's everywhere.  I mean, when I went to Brazil, the people running Brazil are light-skinned people.  They're not the dark-skinned Brazilians.
Speaker 2: Who are actually--most of the Brazilians.
Speaker 1: Who is the majority of the population, exactly.  And it's like that pretty much around the world with the exception of African countries, African nations.  But even there, I mean, even there, I noticed when I went to Senegal and to, to Ghana--those are the two I went to, also to Egypt.  Egypt is a little different because it's Arab, but the--guess what?  In Egypt, the people of color, the original people are like on plantations like our Indians, like our Native American Indians.  I visited them--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --dark, dark, dark people.
Speaker 2: Nubians now--
Speaker 1: They're Nubians.
Speaker 2: --in Southern Egypt.
Speaker 1: Exactly, exactly.  So this color thing is just, you know, I remember interviewing Dr. Frances Cress Welsing some years ago, and this whole issue of melanin, and it's deep, but it's real.  I think there's a lot to be said for it.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And until--I think that's the, that's one issue with human beings that we need to conquer is this whole question of color.
Story_ID: 99815
Speaker 1: There's an interesting dynamic between black people and Puerto Ricans in New York City [New York].  Two of the leading black historians in New York City are actually Puerto Ricans--
Speaker 2: [Arthur] Schomburg was Puerto Rican.
Speaker 1: Schomburg, yes (laughter), black Puerto Rican with a German name.
Speaker 2: Schomburg was a (unclear), exactly, exactly.
Speaker 1: His mother was from Jamaica, his father from Puerto Rico.  I think his father was part-Indian and part-white, you know.
Speaker 2: He was a hodgepodge like me, and like many of us.
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Arthur Schomburg who collected more--
Speaker 2: Books.
Speaker 1: --books and information about African Americans than any other person.
Speaker 2: Anyone else, exactly.
Speaker 1: I think, maybe recently, Charles Blockson [HM], here at Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], has--
Speaker 2: Equals have more, maybe--
Speaker 1: Yeah, has, yeah, has--
Speaker 2: --close.
Speaker 1: --right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Charlie's a dear friend of mine.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, God.  I have to tell you my Charlie Blockson's stories.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 99816
Speaker 1: But, yeah, I considered myself African American.  And when I came back again, it was the '70s, [1970s], the early '70s [1970s].  It was, it was '7, [1970], maybe '69 [1969], '70 [1970] when I moved back to Harlem [New York City, New York].  So, you know, what was going on in this country at that time--we had already had Selma and Montgomery.  We had had the March on Washington.  All that had taken place.  Of course, I was very young. Did your family keep up with the Civil Rights Movement, you know, or did you talk about it in the family a lot?
Speaker 2: As I said, my parents were very smart, very well-read, learned, so they did.  But there wasn't a lot of discussion with me--I was still very young.  So, no, but I became keenly aware of the Movement when I moved back to Harlem.  I started reading Frantz Fanon--
Speaker 1: Now, were--
Speaker 2: --"The Wretched of the Earth".
Speaker 1: --were you in Puerto Rico when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed?
Speaker 2: '68 [1968], no, I was in the states.  I was back in the states because I went on my class trip.  And we were in D.C., April 4th--I think it was April 4th, 1968.
Speaker 1: 1968, right.
Speaker 2: And I was on a class trip for my junior high school.  And the riots broke out, and I was on a bus.  I remember we were near the Washington Monument, and they started throwing rocks at the bus.  So, no, I was back in the states by that time that happened.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, yeah, I became aware of the Civil Rights Movement and what was going on because I was living through it.  And then, of course, moving back to Manhattan and being in Harlem, whew.
Speaker 1: Now, I interrupted you.  You said you were reading Fanon when you--
Speaker 2: Well, that was maybe 13, 14--Frantz Fanon.
Speaker 1: That's still deep reading for a 13- or 14-year-old, yeah.
Speaker 2: Again, daddy [George Williams] and mommy [Nancy Neuman], they--I was mature.  I've always been mature beyond my years.  And I attribute to my parents making me independent and growing up in New York.  I had to take the subway.  I had to take the bus to go to school.  My parents didn't take me to school.  I took myself to school, so you become street savvy and independent, and that's what I was.  That's who I am.
Story_ID: 99817
Speaker 1: Now were you involved in school activities and that sort of thing?  Did you do a lot of activities in school?
Speaker 2: I was the vice-president of my class, yes.  I became very, very active in the school government.  I was always talking to the teachers--wanting to know about things, and very friendly.  I knew about their children and the husbands and their dogs and their cats--always, always, that person investigating, interested, curious.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you like school?
Speaker 2: I loved school.  I loved learning, I loved learning.  What a thrill to get new information, and then to be able to apply it some kind of way.  My, my mother [Nancy Neuman] and father [George Williams], they liked to learn.  And we talked a lot.  There was a lot of discussion, a lot of talking in my house, talk, talk, talk, talk, talk, talk, all the time, you know, and that was good, that was good.  My mother was going to school.  She was getting her--when, you know, I was younger, she went to Brooklyn College [Brooklyn, New York] and she went to NYU [New York University, New York City, New York].  Information, knowledge is power.  When I hear that expression, I relate 'cause it's true.  The more knowledge you have, the more powerful you become.  And while my daddy didn't go to college and doesn't have advanced degrees--as I said, he loved reading and watching television and the news.  So, there was always a flow of information in my home.  And they stressed the importance of me getting information as well, which I think enabled me to become a good journalist later, or allowed me to have--develop an aptitude in that area.
Story_ID: 99818
Speaker 1: Now, when you were a teenager--I mean Harlem [New York City, New York] had--as I said, there's a lot of intellect activity in Harlem around black history and culture and the Schomburg Center [for Research in Black Culture].  And you got, you had people like John Henrik Clarke and Dr. Ben [Yosef Ben-Jochannan HM] and, you know.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: William Greaves [HM], the filmmaker was around and other people.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So did you remember any of these people or some of the--
Speaker 2: I remember Dr. Ben.  I remember the Muslim Movement, the Mosque, hearing about Malcolm X.  I remember all of that.  I read The Autobiography of Malcolm X around that same time that I was reading the (unclear).  I don't know how I became so politicized at that point in my life--very young, but I was also reading Herman Melville, "Moby-Dick".  I was reading [Charles] Dickens "A Tale of Two Cities".  My favorite poet was Robert Frost at the time that I discovered Langston Hughes.  I enjoyed reading.  "Wuthering Heights" was my favorite book.  I loved the [Charlotte and Emily] Bronte sisters.  So go figure--I mean, I was taken to the library.  I was exposed and I was hungry.  I was--I had an insatiable interest and desire to learn about all kind of things--history.  I used to read Will and Ariel Durant.  My mother [Nancy Neuman] enrolled me in a class.  I wanted to be an archaeologist.  This is a little later in my teen years, and she found the class on archaeology, and I went to the Museum of Natural History and studied archaeology.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you seemed to have a real rich life in New York in terms of anything you want to do.
Speaker 2: Oh, that's why I say it was the best upbringing.  I mean, and then because I was precocious and very mature, by the time I was 15, I was studying flute with Jimmy Heath, the great jazz musician from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] of the Heath family.
Speaker 1: Of the Heath Brothers, yeah, the whole family is, yeah.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  James Mtume is a dear friend, who's his son, who was a percussionist with Miles Davis, who introduced me to Miles.  And I became very dear friends with Miles when I was about 19.  So, I, I used to go to the jazz clubs.  Jazzmobile was the program where I studied with Jimmy Heath when I was 15.  And do you know to this--
Speaker 1: Jazzmobile, now what is that a program--did they actually come around and they would play jazz?
Speaker 2: Exactly.  They used to take jazz musicians into the community, but there was a school called IS201.  And they taught--leading jazz musicians taught jazz classes to students for free.  And that's where I met Jimmy Heath and started studying the flute.
Story_ID: 99819
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were, you went to IS201?
Speaker 2: I went to IS201 for the jazzmobile jazz classes--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and that's where I met and studied with Jimmy Heath.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But that wasn't the high school you attended?
Speaker 2: No.  I went to Washington Irving High School off of Union Square in Manhattan, lower Manhattan [New York City, New York].
Speaker 1: Washington Irving High School.
Speaker 2: It was an all girls' high school.  And I used to have to take the train.  At that point, my mother [Nancy Neuman] and I had moved to 240 West 98th Street.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I used to take the train down to Union Square to go to Washington Irving.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Very, very active there and, again, school politics.  I was in all the school plays.  In fact, I became so--well, I didn't even put any information in my yearbook.  Somebody said, oh, you know, Dyana is going to be an actress because I was in the National, the Negro Ensemble Company Junior Workshop.  I, I was accepted into that audition and--
Speaker 1: Who was conducting that at that time?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't remember who was conducting the, the workshop.
Speaker 1: Negro Ensemble Company, is it Woodie King [Jr. HM] and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, the NEC.  Yeah, Woodie King [Jr.] that crew, but they--not when my, with my particular group.  I was very young.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But, so that's the kind of stuff--
Speaker 1: You came around just after all those stars left really.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: They had just left in the mid-'60's [1960s]--James Earl Jones and--
Speaker 2: Yes--
Speaker 1: --Cicely Tyson and--
Speaker 2: --but I knew that they had been there.  So, growing up in Manhattan afforded me the opportunity to see a diverse amount of culture and activities and engage in them.  And because I had mommy [Nancy Neuman] and daddy [George Williams] pushing me to--my, you know, what, one, one of the things I loved about my father then, and even still, my father used to tell me, you can do anything you want to do.  If you're a trash person, be the best trash person.  He encouraged me to just do whatever I wanted to do.  He was never critical of my choices.  He was just nourishing and, and made me--he empowered me to feel that I could do whatever I wanted to do.  And, of course, my mother was there to co-sign.  She was more of the disciplinarian when I was younger, but when I was a teenager after--post the divorce, my mother was very liberal and open.  And I mean, when I was 15, my mother moved to Madrid [Spain] and left me in the apartment for the summer.  I paid all the bills.
Speaker 1: You were there by yourself?
Speaker 2: Uh-hum, yeah, I was there by myself, but I had a job.  I worked as a crew chief for the neighborhood Youth Corps and I worked.  I'd go to see my daddy.  I hung out with my friends.  I was very responsible, very.
Story_ID: 99820
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what, I have a note here about Vy Higginsen [HM].  Now, tell me about--
Speaker 2: Vy Higginsen was a prominent radio personality on WBLS-FM in New York, a station where Frankie Crocker, who was this charismatic radio star program director and on-air talent, was in charge.  And Vy Higginsen was the first black woman that I heard on the radio in New York.  And I was mesmerized, enchanted, totally engaged hearing her.  She had a very sweet, honey, honeyed voice, and just such a sexy, warm style in her presentation.  And I heard her and I was like, that's what I want to do.  I kind of started tinkering with the idea.  First, I wanted to be a musician.  I wanted to be a jazz musician.  I wanted to be the first accomplished female on jazz, jazz flute, jazz flautist, but, boy, I lacked talent.  I just wasn't good.
Story_ID: 98567
Speaker 1: We're talking about Vy Higginsen [HM] and WBLS in New York [City, New York], Frankie Crocker and--
Speaker 2: The Chief Rocker.
Speaker 1: --we're talking about--you said that you played the flute, but you realized you really weren't as good as you thought you should be.
Speaker 2: Whew, well, I was awful.  I picked up the flute recently.  My flute lives--I have a home in New Orleans [Louisiana], and the flute lives there.  So, one day, recently, I was sick, I had a cold.  I picked up my flute and started playing it--phew, bad (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, this--whoever is watching this might find this interesting.  At the time, you were trying to learn how to play the flute.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: Yeah, with the Heath Brothers.
Speaker 2: Jimmy Heath.
Speaker 1: You were actually with Jimmy Health?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: He--your boyfriend when you were 17 was Hubert Laws.
Speaker 2: Yes, my boyfriend was Hubert Laws.  I might--
Speaker 1: Hubert Laws is one of the greatest jazz flute players of--
Speaker 2: Of all time.
Speaker 1: --yeah, of all time.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  And--
Speaker 1: So did that, did going with him make you feel like even worse about playing the flute?
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly.
Speaker 1: See, anybody would feel worse probably with him around.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Well, it's interesting 'cause I ran into Jimmy Heath.  This is many years ago in St. Louis [Missouri].  I was going to a wedding, and he was with his brothers, and he saw me crossing the lobby.  And he said, Dyana, Dyana, and I looked up, and I recognized that it was Jimmy.  And I went over to hug him, and he told his brothers, he said, Dyana was my most promising student.  I wanted to cry.  He said, she was one of my most promising students.  I was like, are you on drugs?  Are you okay?  I know you're getting old.  But I sought out Hubert Laws because I felt like I needed private instruction.  The instruction that I had with Jimmy Heath was in a group, a small group, but I wanted one-on-one, 'cause I wanted to get better.  And I realized that I was weak.  I couldn't--my improvisational skills were not strong.  My music fear--all of that stuff was all weak.  So, somebody gave me his number and said, you know, he does private teaching, and we met.  I don't think I ever got a lesson from him.  I don't think--as far as the flute was concerned (laughter).  He, he taught me a lot, but it had nothing to do with the flute other than I can play.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: But what a great experience dating him.  At 17, he was older than me, of course, but--
Speaker 1: How much older was he?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  He's pretty old now, so let's see.  He was--oh, I want to say he was in his late--early 30's maybe, late 20, maybe 29, 30.  He'd been married, divorced, married to the same woman a second time and divorced.
Speaker 1: Maybe 10 years, 10, 12 years maybe?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, he was definitely older than me, but I was, I was 17 getting ready to get out of high school, so let's make that clear.  I was closer to 18, so it wasn't like I just turned 17.  I was 17 coming out of high school when we started dating, and he became the first love of my life.  And as a result of our relationship, he was recording with Creed Taylor, CTI Records.  That's when I met Grover Washington, Jr., Hank Crawford, Esther Phillips.  I had an opportunity to meet Creed Taylor, of course, Rudy Van Gelder where the albums were recorded and--
Speaker 1: Flying Dutchman, yeah.
Speaker 2: I used to go, I used to go to most of those sessions and boy--I mean, I was his girlfriend.  So, I was on the set all the time, you know, hanging out with everybody.  So, and, you know, he would do--Hubert was also a very popular studio session musician, so he did all the--
Speaker 1: Right, he played behind everybody.
Speaker 2: He did "Day Dreaming", Aretha Franklin, so I would go with him to a lot of the sessions, and I met Donny Hathaway, Quincy Jones [HM].  In fact, I remember being in the studio with Quincy Jones and Donny Hathaway when they were doing the soundtrack to "Come Back, Charleston Blue".  And I was in the control room with them, and they were talking to Aretha Franklin.  And I was a young girl, the boy, phew, lucky, blessed to, to have been so exposed to--met so many great at a young age.  Needless to say, I developed a tremendous affinity for jazz and a knowledge, first hand, because I was having dinner with these people.  I was socializing with them.  They were a part of my social set.  And they knew I was young, but I was--again, I was a very mature young woman.  A lot of them--I don't think they knew that I was that young, but they accepted me because I was Hubert's official girlfriend.
Story_ID: 98568
Speaker 1: Now, did you, do you think when you look back at your playing, your flute playing, do you really think it was--I mean, he said you were one of his most promising students.
Speaker 2: Jimmy Heath.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Jimmy heath just said that--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --and did you ever think that maybe you kind of gave up on it too soon or you should have--
Speaker 2: Perhaps the, the association with Hubert [Laws], 'cause he was so great.  He not only is a renowned jazz musician, but he played classical music.  He studied, you know, he played with Jean [Pierre] Rampal and all the greats, and he also played with the Symphony Orchestra.  He was a classical musician as well, so I would go to Lincoln Center with him when he did those performances.  And I would sit there in awe and look at him, and his mastery of the instrument was such you practice all the time.  To be a musician, I mean, I know Wynton Marsalis.  I know some of the great musicians of our time.  These guys practice all the time.  I don't want people to think they just pick up the horn or the bass or play the drums and--they practice.  Even at the level of excellence where they are, and Hubert was such a person.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think there's a--
Speaker 2: The flute was always in his hand all the time.
Speaker 1: That raises something that I think you hear a lot.  I mean, people used to hear Jimi Hendrix even or--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --or I think it may have had something to do with Charlie Parker, or some of the other bebop musicians, but there's an impression that these musicians just get high and play.
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: And that's really, from what I know, is erroneous.
Speaker 2: That's erroneous, yeah, that's an erroneous assumption or belief.  That's not the case.  Many of the greats practice.  They woodshed.  The term is woodshedding in jazz.  And they did.  And so, I felt, Larry, that I just simply didn't have that ability.  I didn't want to practice all day long.  I just wanted to pick up the flute and play pretty with no flat notes, and I didn't want to have to stand there and do scales all day long.  I didn't like the mechanics.  And so, my feeling was, and as I said, I was not very good in terms of improvisation, which is the foundation of jazz music, as being able to do improvisation as well.  I couldn't do that, I just couldn't do it.
Speaker 1: So the passion for that kind of dedication for it just wasn't--
Speaker 2: I just wasn't qualified.  I didn't have the, the natural ability.
Story_ID: 98569
Speaker 1: But what happened was when I went to college--I went to college in Harlem [New York City, New York] at City College [of New York] on 138th and Convent Avenue.  I went initially as a music major, but very quickly discovered that I just couldn't keep up.  I couldn't keep up, but one day someone invited me to the radio station.  I didn't even know that we had a station.  It was a Carrier Current station, WCCR, and it was heard on campus and in the Harlem vicinity.  Needless to say, we were in the heart of Harlem.  The moment I walked into the radio station--when you hear that expression, love at first sight, I felt so deeply, totally, completely in love with the turntables and the microphone.  The entire environment just connected with my spirit.  And I enrolled in the class to learn some of the basics and that was it.  That's what I did well.  I knew music.  I knew the musicians.  I had a fairly decent voice.  I liked to talk.  We established that earlier.  And so, with great facility, I was on the air in no time.  Not only was I on the air, but I became the music director, and I started running the radio station. I also started producing concerts.  I knew--I had a show with Gary Bartz.  Of course, I had Hubert there.
Speaker 2: I think Gary Bartz was finessing with great music in the early '70's [1970s], right?
Speaker 1: Uh-hum, uh-hum, exactly.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And so, these were all my buddies.  And then, we had access to money like most students, student--we were housing the student center, so I accessed money for concerts and things of that nature.  So, I became a producer then.  I even had articles.  I found it recently that I produced this concert at CCNY.  So, that was the beginning and that was it, that was it.
Speaker 2: And a year after that, I dropped out of school, I dropped out.  I moved to California with Hubert [Laws] and tried to get a job there.  I was determined to get a job.
Speaker 1: Now, what year is this, what year is this?
Speaker 2: Had to be '72 [1972].
Speaker 1: Now, you graduated from high school in what year?
Speaker 2: Seventy-three [1973], '71 [1971].
Speaker 1: Seventy-one [1971]?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: And you were at City College [of New York] in '72 [1972], I guess or '71 [1971], '72 [1972]?
Speaker 2: Uh-hum, '70 [1970]--I think, it was '71 [1971], '72 [1972].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, because by the time 1973 rolled around, I was on the radio in Washington, D.C. at WHUR-FM.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you moved to California with Hubert?
Speaker 2: Moved to California for a brief period of time with Hubert.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And things didn't work out.  That was the demise of our relationship.  I came back to New York to my mother's apartment at 240 West 98th Street--no money, no job.  I dropped out of school, much to my mother's dissatisfaction, unhappiness.
Story_ID: 98570
Speaker 1: Now, how did WHUR come about?  How did you wind up at WHUR?
Speaker 2: Prior to moving to California, I had decided once I was at WCCR on air, I started hosting.  I, I received a phone call one day from a gentleman and he said, is this Dyana Williams?  I said, yes, this was at the radio station.  He said, we listen to you on the radio, and we'd like to invite you to do what you do on the radio on camera for Teleprompter.  Teleprompter was a cable outlet in Manhattan [New York City, New York].  It was the very beginning of cable, and they had a public access channel on 125th Street and Harlem.  And so, they were able to hear my radio show and they liked what they heard.  I had all my friends on, all of my--Hubert and my friends would come on.  So, it was, for a college show, it was pretty hot.  So, I said great.  And I had to come up with a name for the show.  And that show--the name for the show, I'm sorry, was "Ebony Moonbeams".  And so, "Ebony Moonbeams" was a show that featured dancers, photographers, choreographers, the sidemen, the leaders, jazz mostly.  And I produced, wrote, and hosted the show.  So I was 18 at the time.
Speaker 1: And so, this was all on cable--
Speaker 2: Cable.
Speaker 1: --cable access and--
Speaker 2: And I found a tape recently that I'm trying--it's, it's so old.  I'm trying to get it transferred to DVD so I can look at it, but I have one show remaining in my possession.  So, I did that for a period of time so I was on the radio.  I was hosting the TV show and I wanted to be a jazz DJ.  There was a jazz station.  At the time, that was very successful, WRVR-FM.  And I would listen at night because, of course, I was in school during the day and doing all this other stuff, plus I had a job.  I sold jewelry in the [Greewich] Village.  I had a jewelry store, Dar El Sudan.  I sold jewelry there.  And also, I was in the NEC [Negro Ensemble Company] acting workshop, so I had a lot going on.  I was busy.  But I decided that I wanted to do that professionally, so I called this gentleman up who's a DJ at WRVR.  He did overnights, midnight to about 5:30.  His name was Van Jay, smooth, deep voice, real, you know, like jazz DJ sounds, so sexy.  And I called him and I said, hi, this is Dyana Williams.  I'm on the air, WCCR, and he's like where?  I was like, WCCR, City College Radio station, and I host a TV show on Teleprompter and I gave him all this.  And I said, you're my favorite DJ.  I'd like to meet you.  And he said, fine, come, come to the station.  I said, but let me tell you before I come--I don't go get coffee.  I'm not a go-get coffee girl.  So, I just want to watch and see what you do, and learn.  And he said, come down here, young girl.  And I went down there.  And I would go there every night and watch.  I was thrilled to be in a professional radio station because, of course, the Carrier Current was the student-run station on the college campus.  But this was a real radio station with lots of records and where DJs--I mean, interacted with the jazz musicians, like I was doing at the college radio station.  So, Van took a liking to me.  I adored him 'cause he really took an interest in me.  He did my first audition tape.  So, before moving out to L.A. to Harbor City with Hubert, I did an audition tape.  And I got a list of the top black radio stations around the country.  And I took tapes with me as well for California because I wanted to try to get a job at the jazz station in L.A.  But before I moved to L.A., I sent the tape out with my limited resume, but what did the resume have on it--WCCR music director, producer of concerts, host of a TV show, references available.  It was a pretty impressive resume for an 18-year-old.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were doing this while you were at, you were on the City College radio station yet?  Okay.
Speaker 2: I sure was.
Speaker 1: All right.  That's before you went to California?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then I went to California--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --and played house (laughter) with my boyfriend.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you--now, a lot of the musicians--
Speaker 2: For my Jehovah Witness boyfriend, I might add.
Speaker 1: He's a Jehovah Witness?
Speaker 2: He was disfellowshipped at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is he back with it now--is he?
Speaker 2: Good question.  I'm not sure where he is.  In the cycle, he's been disfellowshipped a few times.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think he's--he goes to the hall still but I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Story_ID: 98571
Speaker 1: Now, in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] at that time, I know you introduced some artists at WHUR on the radio--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --that were actually getting their start-out at L.A. when you were there, I believe.  And I'm trying to seek--I've heard stories from other people--Earth, Wind and Fire, Doug [Carn] and Jean Carne [HM] are out there.  There are other people, other musicians--I mean, were they, did you know them in California before they--
Speaker 2: No, I did not know them in California.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But what happened was when I went out to California, I didn't know how to drive.  I was housebound.  I was like a housewife, and things didn't work out between Hubert and I.  And I returned to New York--broke, a college dropout, jobless.  But a week after being in New York, my phone rang, and I heard a man's voice--Dyana Williams.  I said, yes.  He said, this is Bob "Nighthawk" Terry from WHUR-FM in Washington, D.C.  I received your resume and your audition tape, and I'd like to invite you to D.C. for an interview.  We have a position available.  (Laughter).  I was asleep when he called.  I woke up fast.  And I proceeded to borrow Greyhound fare from my mother [Nancy Neuman].  And I said, mommy, this is maybe what I--this is it.  So, it was November 7th.  It was on November 7th--
Speaker 1: 1970?
Speaker 2: --that I went down there in '73 [1973], just before my birthday.  And I went down, met Bob Terry, met John Paul Simpkins.  They interviewed me.  They said, they loved my tape, and they offered me a position making $6,000 a year.  I didn't have my broadcast endorsement at the time.  DJs had to have a license with a broadcast endorsement.  And I'd taken the test and because it involved math, and that's my weakest subject, I failed the broadcast endorsement, so the deal was $6,000.  My chief engineer, Jim Simpkins, who is--I'm sorry, Jim Watkins, who is still there, would cover for me 'cause you had to calibrate and take readings.  It was very different for DJs now, as it was for me back 30 something years.  And that was the deal--that I had to get my broadcast endorsement within six months of my employment.  So, on the eve of my 19th birthday, I was hired at WHUR.  And so, I caught the Greyhound back.  In fact, I met a woman there who would become very important in my life.  Her name is Sheila Eldridge.  She was a student at WHUR, communications major.  Tony Brown, who hosts "Tony Brown's Journal", was the dean of the school of communications.  And that's where I met him and forged my relationship with him then.  And another woman who would become my best friend to the second, Cathy Hughes [HM], was the sales manager at WHUR.  She is the woman who would later go on to create the "Quiet Storm" format, the first African American woman to take her company public, and the founder of "Radio One" and "TV One", and probably one of the most successful women, aside from Oprah Winfrey, in the communications field worldwide.  She is my best friend--has helped me raise my children, has held my hand through my trials and tribulations, is my critic, my champion, my beloved sister.  Talk to her on the regular, and I am that for her as well.  So, WHUR was very significant in my development as a young woman and later in life.
Story_ID: 98572
Speaker 1: And in terms of the content of WHUR--I mean, I had a chance to, even though I'm from Dayton [Ohio].
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: The theater group I was with, actually at the time in Dayton, moved to [Washington] D.C.  It was the shows in Robert Hooks'[HM] theater.
Speaker 2: I--Robert, yeah.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: The D.C. Rep?
Speaker 1: --yeah, Theatre West was the name of the group.  But while we were there, I went down there for a while, and I came back to Dayton.  I wanted to try to finish school, but the--we listened to WHUR all the time.  I mean, I listened to it all the time.  And we stayed near the Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] campus and the WHUR was phenomenal.  I mean, the--
Speaker 2: It's been nothing like it since--
Speaker 1: --the mix of music and--
Speaker 2: --360 degrees of the total experience in black music is what we used to say.
Speaker 1: Right.  You'd hear a little Malcolm X.  You'd hear some, you know, the poetry.  You'd hear--
Speaker 2: The "Last Poets", I was just with Abiodun [Oyewole HM]. I met Abiodun in the "Last Poets" around that time, and I ran into him in Chicago [Illinois] last week.  Yeah, we did it.  We played "Clinton".  We played Go-go 'cause D.C. is the Go-go capital of the world, probably the only place that really kicks it like they do.  But we played it all.  And everybody came through that radio station.  It was the--truly, the central nervous system for D.C., and other places as well.  It's the Nation's Capital--Chocolate City.
Speaker 1: Well, it seemed to me that--I don't know, maybe all the different forms of black music as--were put together with a message, you know.  There are a lot of messages in the music.  I mean, what, and it's, you know, all the form.  You had like a, you had almost every kind of black music.
Speaker 2: We had raggae, jazz.  We had African--
Speaker 1: Right, everything.
Speaker 2: --the Diaspora, we covered the Diaspora, whatever it was.
Speaker 1: And it was popular in D.C., but I was wondering why--I mean, we seemed to have our urban stations, you know, play the same kind of thing a lot.
Speaker 2: That's another story.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: And not, but we, you know, but it seemed like HUR really worked in D.C. and every--
Speaker 2: And still does.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It's still very popular.  It's a heritage station is how we describe it.  But, yeah, got hired.  And how about in the very beginning, I wasn't on the air.  Bob Terry had a military background--I think he was in the Army.  And he never called me Dyana.  He called me Williams, and he barked at me as though he was my sergeant.  And, remember now, I was this little heady girl from Harlem and the Bronx, a little Puerto Rican spitfire.  I was like, oh, hell, no--I took it for a minute.  He had me numbering boxes.  I corrected logs.  I pulled wire copy.  I did everything in that radio station, including cleanup and got an attitude.  As time progressed, I got an attitude.  I was like, you hired me to be a DJ.  I was chomping at the bit to get on the radio.  And then he put me on late nights.  And that's where I used Ebony Moonbeams--again, my TV show.  I used it in D.C.  I was on overnight--fire, like wildfire in D.C.  I read poetry.  I took calls.  We talked about relationships and love.  We talked about politics.  It all happened in those four hours.  And--
Speaker 1: And you were 19?
Speaker 2: I was 19 (laughter), I was 19.  And just recently, I found tapes.  I'm having them dubbed now.  I cannot wait for my children to hear them.  And the gentleman, the engineer, who is dubbing them, called me.  I was in Jacksonville [Florida].  He said, Dyana, it's a joy, a pleasure listening to these tapes, this music as you cited, the diversity, the combination, the mix, the blend of everything that we played.  No one told me what to play.  We got to pick our own music.  We programmed our own show--whoa, programmed my own show for four hours, did whatever I wanted to do.  Radio is not like that these days, but I came up at a time.
Story_ID: 98573
Speaker 1: And, remember also, I mentioned Vy Higginsen [HM] at WBLS as a woman who inspired me.  And, actually, we never really--I met her once.  We were never friends, or she wasn't my mentor.  But I distinctly remember the impression that she left upon me.  But there were several other women, Mary Mason, Louise Williams Bishop, Martha Jean "The Queen", and I heard of them--didn't get a chance to really hear them, but this was--and they were gospel at AM stations for the most part.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Martha Jean from Detroit, yeah.
Speaker 1: Exactly.  But here I was--FM and it was 1973 in D.C.  FM radio was new, FM radio was still new.  Black folks had listened to AM radio.  Most cities had a prominent, dominant powerhouse AM station.  For me in New York, it was WWRL.  Gary Byrd and all these great guys that I later became friends with, and it was such a pleasure for me because I grew up listening to them.  And then, they became my colleagues and my peers, but D.C. 1973, hmm, remarkable place to be.  Bobby Hooks [HM], the D.C. rep--I mean we had--there were so many people, Gil Scott-Heron.  They were all in D.C., in Virginia, and Maryland, and we all hung out together.  We were family.  We'd go to each other's homes.  We struggled together.  We were all--nobody was rich.  Everybody was just trying to make it.  I mentioned I was making $6,000 a year, but all the record companies--I never had to--I was taken out to eat.  I didn't own a car, didn't know how to drive, but somehow or another, I managed to get everywhere I had to go.  And my show became very popular, and I was eventually moved to daytime.  And I did a show called "Revelations" mid-days, 10 a.m. to 2 p.m.  Everybody and their mother came through that show, like you had to do the show.  Marion Barry [HM] was a city councilman.  That's when I first met him.  He later became mayor two times, two times, of D.C.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he's in city council again, you know.
Speaker 1: He's on city council again, right.  So, wow, I was young--20, 21.  And then, I got a call from Frankie Crocker.  And while I was in D.C., I emceed all the concerts--Minnie Riperton, Earth, Wind and Fire; Cameo.  I went to junior high school with Larry Blackman, the leader of Cameo.  Everybody who came through town--I worked for a gentleman by the name of Bill Washington.  Dimensions Unlimited was the name of his company.  And I emceed all the major shows--Richard Pryor, everybody, so I got to meet them.  And then, they would come on my show.  I'd interview them, of course, 'cause we were promoting the concert, so fun.
Speaker 2: But you were so young.  You were still only about 20 years old, or not or--
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, I was 20.  My mother [Nancy Neuman] was proud.  She was very trepidatous at first because, to my mother, a college education was everything.  Again, daddy [George Williams] was very happy.  My daddy was excited that I was on the radio.  And, but then, I started making more money.  I failed the test for my broadcast endorsement three times.  On the third time, they were like, Dyana, you have got to pass this test.  You, you've got to pass the test.  We're going to have to fire you.  I said, you're not firing me--I'm your number one DJ.  There was another woman on the air.  Her name is Dianne Quander.  She did late, late night.  She took my late night spot.  She and I were roommates.  She lived downstairs.  I lived upstairs, and we had the city on lock--two black women who were good friends who--people didn't know, not everyone knew, but we lived together.  And then, we were on the radio station all day, every day.
Story_ID: 98574
Speaker 1: So, I met Miles Davis during that period of time and James Mtume who was Mtume--Mtume is Jimmy Heath's son
Speaker 2: Jimmy Heath, yeah.
Speaker 1: He was a percussionist with Miles Davis and because I knew Jimmy Heath, I knew Mtume, and he introduced me to Miles.  And Miles and I became fast friends.  In fact, the very first time, I met Miles, I had on a white gele, you know, women used to wrap their head a lot.  And I had on a long white dress and some white shoes.  And so, the very first time I met Miles Davis is very vivid in my mind.  He said, marry me, and I said no.  And he's like, well, why not?  I said, I don't know you.  And we took our friendship from there.  We were never lovers--always friends, and good friends.
Speaker 2: What was he like?  I mean, what--
Speaker 1: To me, he was always very generous and nice.  I was sick one time--he called me.  I had laryngitis and I answered the phone.  I was like, uhh.  He said, what, what's wrong with you?  I said, I have laryngitis.  And he had his doctor, Dr. William McTory (ph.) call me, and called in a prescription.  He sent me roses.  He was nice to me, but I saw him be tough and hard on his children, on his musicians, on others, women, other women.  I think because of how I met him, I wasn't afraid of him.  And I stood up to him and I said, no, from the very beginning.  And it remained to know because I mean he did approach me about being more than a friend.  I was like, no, you're my friend, and I'm not interested in--he was drugged out and he was throwed off.  And I knew he was brilliant, but phew, you can't be my boyfriend.  You can be my friend, but you can't be my boyfriend.
Story_ID: 98575
Speaker 1: I was still in love with Hubert [Laws] and even though I dated, you know, Hubert came to visit me in [Washington] D.C. when I was on the air, and I knew it was over.  And it was helpful because then I, I was able to move on and that's good because shortly thereafter, I met the man who would become a significant person in my experience for, for the duration of my life, and that's Kenny Gamble [HM].  I met him while I was emceeing a concert for Bill Washington, and it happened to be an O'Jays Concert.  I was asked to present gold records to the O'Jays and Gamble and Huff.  And that's where I laid eyes on a guy that made my heart flutter, made my, my blood move faster through my veins, you know, made the synapses of my brain fire at a faster pace.  It was immediate and consistent, and remains love after many years of us being apart, but three children, my family, you know.  He wrote some pretty songs for me that I enjoy listening to on the radio to this day.  And he remains my most admired person after my mother [Nancy Neuman] and father [George Williams].  It's Kenny Gamble.
Story_ID: 98576
Speaker 1: You are invited to go back to New York [City, New York].  That's where we are now.
Speaker 2: I was invited to go back to New York by the Chief Rocker, Frankie Crocker, who was on the air on WBLS from 4 to 8 p.m.  But he was the program director and probably the most powerful and influential program director at that time in radio.
Speaker 1: And also, before we--on the last roll, we talked about your meeting Kenny Gamble [HM], too.  So this happened about the same time with--
Speaker 2: Before--well, around the same time I got the call from Frankie Crocker, I had emceed this concert in [Washington] D.C. at the Carter Barron Amphitheater with the O'Jays, and I met Kenny Gamble.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so--
Speaker 2: I have a picture of the very--we hadn't even met in the photograph that I have.  We had not even met.  I now have his photograph that I've shown to our children 'cause how many people can document when they first meet someone?  You can't always do that, but I've got a picture of it.  We hadn't even spoken when the picture was taken.  We spoke shortly thereafter.  And I had just come back from Puerto Rico, so I had a tan.  I was looking kind of cute.  I was a size 6.  I was a cute girl, a Puerto Rican girl (laughter).  And, you know, we started talking 'cause he asked me about my tan.  And I said, ahh, I just came from visiting my family in Puerto Rico.  He was like, oh, you're Puerto Rican.  I was like, uh-hum, I'm Puerto Rican and black.  And that was the beginning.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, did you keep in contact when you moved to New York with--
Speaker 2: Well, it--WBLS was the number one radio station.  And at the time, his record company was quite successful.  The O'Jays; Billy Paul; Me and Mrs. Jones had come out already; Harold Melvin and the Blue Notes featuring Teddy Pendergrass, so it was the happening music.
Speaker 1: Was it the Spinners and the--
Speaker 2: The Spinners--well, Thom Bell did the Spinners.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was a partner of Gamble and Huff [Kenny Gamble and Leon Huff HM].  So much he had done--well, Thom Bell had done the Del Fonics.  Gamble and Huff did the Intruders.  That was earlier in the '60s [1960s], but they had already done stuff for Aretha Franklin.
Speaker 1: The Philadelphia International.
Speaker 2: Philadelphia International Records, "The Sound of Philadelphia".  And so, he was quite successful as an entrepreneur, record company owner, songwriter/producer at that time when we first met.
Speaker 1: This really--Philadelphia International is really the--I guess, then get--they don't talk about that much, but it's the "Motown" of the '80s [1980s], I guess.
Speaker 2: Seventies [1970s] and '80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: It was the '70s [1970s], the '70s [1970s], and '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: Seventy [1970] and '80s [1980s], you're right, and Gamble and Huff were greatly influenced.
Speaker 1: 'Cause the hits kept coming and people were really--
Speaker 2: Gamble and Huff have a hundred, over 175 gold and platinum records to their credit.
Story_ID: 98577
Speaker 1: In fact, I'm working on a documentary on the "Sound of Philadelphia" right now.
Speaker 2: Right, that's something that needs to be done.  There's a documentary out now on--of course, there are a couple on "Motown" and there's--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --there's even one on the "Chicago Chess Records" and all that group--
Speaker 1: Really?  I haven't seen that one.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It's one produced locally, I think, in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: But it's been on, you know, I think it's been on National Public Television stations, but now something on Philadelphia International, right, which needs to be done, right.
Speaker 1: Working on it--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --got about 30 interviews.
Speaker 2: That music is like a music that's filled with messages, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, "Message and the Music."
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: That's the name of my documentary.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: The "Sound of Philadelphia Message and the Music" 'cause that's what thy used to put on their records.  We have a message in our music.  The O'Jays even did a song--"We Have a Message in Our Music".  I can't sing though.  Patti LaBelle told me to stick to talking on the radio, so Patti LaBelle tells you that, you just do it.
Story_ID: 98578
Speaker 1: Anyway, yes, I met [Kenny] Gamble [HM] at that time and we connected and maintained our relationship.  And then, of course, he became aware that I was going to WBLS because it was the number one black radio station and that was an important station to his company and his music.  It was New York.  New York is the number one radio market in the United States.  I venture to say very important radio market in the world.  And I was there, I was there with Frankie Crocker.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well, you were back home.  You knew the territory and--
Speaker 1: Whoo, back home, praise the Lord.  How exciting was that?  Finally, my mommy [Nancy Neuman] who was critical initially of me dropping out of college -- understandably so, given that she was a college professor.  My daddy was able to listen to me every day and he did.  Daddy [George Williams] was my biggest fan and then, of course, my relatives.  I have family--my aunts live in Edison [New Jersey] and Metuchen, New Jersey.  Everybody was able to listen to me, including the people I grew up with, people I went to college with, where I dropped out.  And many of them were just graduating 'cause I would have been graduating from college had I stayed in around that time.  I was turning 21.  And they were like, you have a job that I want.  How did you get this job?  You're on the radio.  And I was making more money than I ever could imagine.  I was making money.  Wow, what, what a blessing.  What a good life.  I mean, I've said many times and I'll say it forever.  I was thrilled because I'm a goal setter as well.  When I was 18, I had established a five-year plan.  The plan consisted of the following:  I wanted to, one, get a job in radio.  Of course, that had happened on the eve of the 19th birthday with WHUR.  Two, I wanted to meet a man, have babies.  I accomplished that a little later on.  Three, I wanted to work in television--did that, too.  And after that, I didn't really, I didn't, and that was it.  Those are the main things.  I wanted to get a professional job, meet a man, have balance, have family, but also wanted to work in television.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, WBLS, you arrived there in 1970 what?
Speaker 1: Five--
Speaker 2: Seventy-five [1975].
Speaker 1: --'75 [1975].
Speaker 2: Okay, all right. And--
Story_ID: 98579
Speaker 1: And how long did you--
Speaker 2: About a year.  I stayed there about a year.
Speaker 1: Okay, only a year?
Speaker 2: Only a year.
Speaker 1: What happened, what happened
Speaker 2: (Laughter),  It's such a long story, it's such a long story, Larry.  You don't have that much tape or time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But can you synopsize it for us?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I will do my very best.  It was--WBLS was not WHUR.  I did not have the freedom to program my show.  Frankie Crocker's position was, if you can't say it in 15 seconds, don't say it.  And, basically, what you can say in 15 seconds is 107.5 WBLS new music from Barry White.  Here's the latest from Al Green on WBLS.  You barely say your name.  But it was New York radio.  I was making money.  I was home, so that was lovely.  But at the same time, it coincided with me falling deeply in love with Kenny [Gamble HM] and our desire to start a family.  And so, by February of 1976, I was pregnant with our first child, Caliph Gamble.  He was born in October, October 14th, 1976, so I went on maternity leave.  I worked almost up to the very end.  I was big.  And after I left BLS, I didn't go back.  I didn't have to.  I was a mommy, I was a mommy.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I breastfed, and made my baby food from scratch, and I read all the books, and took my baby to the park.  And I really relished and enjoyed the opportunity to not to have to work and to be a homemaker, take care of my man, and take care of my child.  So, I went on maternity leave so and I never went back.  And then, there were some other issues with Frankie Crocker, and even Gamble at that time because Gamble had been indicted by the New York grand jury, and Frankie Crocker was involved in that indictment.  There was some undercurrents of things, and I didn't even really know all the details.  Gamble sheltered me from all of that, I later learned.  So, there was a dynamic going on with Frankie Crocker and, you know, my man at the time.  And I didn't quite know about, so I think I was kind of caught a little bit in the middle.  But I did my job and I was good at my job.  And until it was time for me to have my baby, have my baby boy.  I was on the radio.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it, it was difficult to be on the radio five and a half hours.  And then Ken Webb, who was my relief, was always late.  I'm talking about 45 minutes, an hour, so here I am pregnant with Ken Webb being late.  I was writing him up to Frankie Crocker all the time.  So, and then I wanted to leave New York because the smells--I was sensitive to odors when a woman is pregnant, you know.  First trimester was tough, and the dirt and the grime and the hustle.  I wanted a peaceful, more laid-back kind of way of life.  And that, for me, became Washington, D.C. again.  I decided to go back to D.C. instead of Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] for a variety of reasons but I won't--I moved to D.C.
Story_ID: 98580
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you became a program director of WMMJ in [Washington] D.C.?
Speaker 2: That was later.
Speaker 1: That was later, okay.
Speaker 2: That was in the '80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: So did you go back to HUR?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't go back to WHUR.  I took off from WBLS and devoted my time and attention to my son and my family.  And I left D.C. after a few years.  We had our second child, Salahdeen, two years later, 1978.  And [Kenny] Gamble [HM] was commuting.  We felt it was best at that point that I move to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] 'cause the commute was getting to be a little grueling, and I moved to Philly.  I came up to Philadelphia.
Speaker 1: So this is in '78 [1978]?
Speaker 2: Seventy-nine [1979] actually.
Speaker 1: Seventy-nine [1979], okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.  Salahdeen was born November 5th, 1978, so it was like mid-'79 [1979], but I came up to Philadelphia.
Speaker 1: So you don't really have to work during this period time just raising your children basically?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I'm, I'm not working at this point, but I'm missing working because I was a natural radio personality.  I really missed my gig and I missed the interaction with the community, the whole thing.  And so, it became a point of contention in my marriage, but I went on and got a part-time job at WDAS-FM, which is very similar to WHUR, in terms of programming, community approach and outreach.  And it was perfect for me because it reminded me so much of where I started professionally in D.C.
Story_ID: 98581
Speaker 1: In Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], much like [Washington] D.C., a very strong black community, a tremendous history.  I mean, this was-[W.E.B.] Dubois was here, you know, he did the "Philadelphia Negro".  Paul Robeson spent the last few years of his life at his sister's house and died here.  I mean, this was where all the jazz cats came.  And [John] Coltrane, while he was born in North Carolina, lived in Philly as well--had family 'cause of Mary, and spent a lot of time here.
Speaker 2: Yeah, his sideman, McCoy Tyler--
Speaker 1: McCoy Tyner [HM] is from Philadelphia.  The Heath Brothers [James, Percy, Albert Heath], I mean, phew, there was so much going on in Philadelphia.  This is another city--
Speaker 2: There's so many, Art Tatum--
Speaker 1: Art Tatum.
Speaker 2: --and you go on and on (unclear).
Speaker 1: Lee Morgan, you know, lots of folks.  Rufus Harley, Jamaaladeen Tacuma.  I was just talking to someone about this recently.  We have a wealth of talent.
Speaker 2: Rufus Harley, we hardly ever hear him--
Speaker 1: Bagpipe.
Speaker 2: --and a bagpipe musician, right, a jazz musician.
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, Philadelphia.
Speaker 2: Well, Philadelphia is really--that's got them.  You know, they're here (laughter).
Speaker 1: So I felt very comfortable in that respect that I was moving to another place that had tremendous traditions as it pertained to the African American community.  And, more importantly, I had a man [Kenny Gamble HM] who was such a servant of the community and his--he defined his life by giving back to black people.  It was important.  I remember when we first started talking when we were friends, before we became lovers and moved on in our relationship, he would talk about what he wanted to do to improve the condition of black people.  And it reflected in his music.  He wrote songs like "Let's Clean Up the Ghetto" and "Wake Up"--well, he didn't write "Wake Up Everybody" but it was a song that Teddy Pendergrass and Harold Melvin did.  Those kinds of song, and those kinds of songs--and that's what the company became known for.  And then he wrote these incredible liner notes talking about the need for black men and women to get together and for us to challenge the system.  And he wrote "For the Love of Money"--aww, mean, just the body of work was immense.  And the message he was--"I'll Always Love My Momma" songs celebrating, you know, a child-parent-mother relationship, family reunion, recognizing the importance of getting together, and staying together in prayer.  But then, he came back and wrote these fierce love songs, you know, "Let Me Make Love to You" and "Come On Over to My Place", "Turn Off the Lights and Light A Candle", "Darlin' Darlin' Baby", you know, so many great songs that just inspired a wealth of emotions in people.  So he covered the spectrum from romance to dance to finance to empowerment and in between, and that made me fall very deeply in love with him.  I admired his conviction.
Story_ID: 98582
Speaker 1: And this is in 1982 that you went to WDAS, right?  Is that correct?
Speaker 2: A little earlier--
Speaker 1: A little earlier?
Speaker 2: I was there--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I think it was, it was really '80 [1980] going into '81 [1981].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was about a year or so after I moved from Washington, D.C. to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.  And I was hired by Joe Butterball Tamburro who is a powerhouse and legendary radio personality.  He's now the general manager of WDAS.  And also a gentleman named Cody Anderson--Cody Anderson really initiated the relationship.  And I worked part-time there because my family was first and most important.  So, it was perfect because I had a chance to be on the air on the weekends, be very active in voter registration campaigns, going to churches, senior citizen homes.  Whatever it was that had to do with the life in Philadelphia for black folks, I was there and took great pride in being on the front line of, you know, working with the Georgia Woods and the people who were revolutionizing the politics and the way of life in the city.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, how long were you at WDAS?
Speaker 2: I left WDAS in--close to '89 [1989].  It was in 1989.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that's a long, pretty--that's the longest stretch--
Speaker 2: I was there through the '80s [1980s], yeah.
Speaker 1: --that's the longest stretch.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes, it was.  I had a very stable situation with my family and I did a show.  My show was called "Love's on the Menu". It was a Jerry Butler [HM] song.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, again, the same mix of what happened in D.C. of interviews, news that you could use, inspiring people, and playing new music.  I was also known--I was allowed the freedom because I was on the weekends and wasn't tied into the rigidness of the week formats, that I was allowed to--
Speaker 1: The all funk format during the week (unclear).
Speaker 2: Well, not just all funk but, you know, just more formatted.  I had a little more freedom to play--introduce new artists and new music.  I could, I would oftentimes have people like Phyllis Hyman or Patti LaBelle, Womack and Womack, Ronnie Isley, and Angela Winbush come sit in the studio and co-host with me.  Teddy Pendergrass, and so folks looked forward to that because they would hear the artists playing their music and talking about the creation of the music.  So "Love's on the Menu" became a pretty popular weekend destination.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Auditory destination.
Story_ID: 98583
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you got involved in television in the--was it in the late '80s [1980s], early '90s [1990s]?
Speaker 2: In the '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: Seventies [1970s], okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was hired.  I did a rock show.  I was the first African American woman to do rock radio in [Washington] D.C. at WRQX.  The station was WMAL and the caller is changed to WRQX-FM.  And when I say rock, I mean Led Zeppelin.  I'm talking about hardcore rock.
Speaker 1: Now what year is this?  Is this while you were still--
Speaker 2: This was after the birth of my second son, Salahdeen Gamble, '78 [1978].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, this was before you moved to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Before I moved to Philadelphia, I took a part-time job doing rock radio in D.C.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And during that time, I heard that the local CBS affiliate was looking for talent for a new show called "PM Magazine".  And they held open auditions and I went in, and 200 people auditioned for the slot that I ultimately was offered.  I did entertainment reporting.  In the tri-state area, I covered concerts, clubs, art museums, galleries, fun activities for families in the Virginia, Maryland, and Washington, D.C. metro area.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughing).  I was on the radio and doing the TV thing.  I was breastfeeding.  I'd go out with my crew, and sometimes if we went overtime, I'd have spillage.  They'd have to shoot me from here up.  And I'd go, okay, guys, we got to rush this.  I got to get home and feed my baby.  So, yes, I did "PM Magazine".
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, let's see, so this was before you moved back to Philly and then--
Speaker 2: Before I moved to Philly.
Speaker 1: And--
Story_ID: 98584
Speaker 1: Now, now, in terms of VH1 and the Soul of VH1, did that come later?
Speaker 2: Yes, it did come later.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So when is, when did that, yeah?
Speaker 2: When was the Soul of VH1?  It had to be--I want to say the '90s [1990s].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, I don't want to rush this past anything, but I'm just trying to get--make sure we get everything in.  But--
Speaker 2: Actually, I think I left DAS in '88 [1988].  It might have been '88 [1988] because I left to go to be program director of Cathy's [Hughes HM] first FM station, WMMJ.  When I left WDAS, that was my next gig--was PD of WOL-AM and Magic 102.3 WMMJ.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, that's in--back in D.C. so?
Speaker 2: That was back in Washington.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Cathy calls me at 1 a.m. in the morning and says, I need you.  I need someone I can trust and someone who'll have my back, and that's you.  She had gone on at this point to--she had WOL.  It had become a very successful station in the Nation's Capital and then she purchased Magic 102.3 so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 98585
Speaker 1: I met with [Kenny] Gamble [HM].  The children were about to start school.  It was an August conversation we had.  School was about to start.  He was immensely supportive and said, go, I'll keep the children.  You go, take the job.  It's a good opportunity for you.  We remain friends.  We remained very close.  And for the first time, I was separated from--at that point, we'd had our third child and had separated--and that's our daughter, Princess Idia Abdul Haqq Gamble.  Gamble had converted to Islam--I didn't.  And so--
Speaker 2: Was that part of the split?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Philosophical differences.  We just had a different--we loved God.  We loved our children and our family.  We just had different ways.  And I believe that when it comes to religion, you should be very sincere.  You know, some people convert to a religion to accommodate a marriage.  I don't believe in that.  I don't care how much you love the person.  I, I'll just--you don't sacrifice your belief systems because when it's all said and done, if you break up with that person, are you still going to be a Muslim?  Are you still going to be a Jehovah's Witness and follow that religion?  Or is it convenient for the duration of the relationship?  I don't believe in that.  And so, while it was sad that we couldn't follow through on what we believed to be a lifelong relationship, it continues to be that in a different way.  We're there for each other.  He supports me, encourages me, pushes me, criticizes me sometimes, and I do the same for him.  But we've raised our children.  They, they know love.  As I told you, the, the feeling and the atmosphere that permeated my home.  Even after my parents divorced, my mother was very open to my father and gave him liberal visitation, and said it's like an open door policy.  In fact, I never locked my door, my front door.  I left it open so and told Gamble any time he needed to see the children, they were here for him.  Any differences that he had were between he and I.  They had nothing to do with our babies.  We loved our children.  And I never left Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] because I wanted to give him the same opportunity that I wanted to have as a parent to see them--their basketball games and their first date and the prom, and he saw all of that, even though we lived in two separate homes.  We actually lived maybe no less than five minutes apart until he moved back to Philadelphia.  But even still, he would come see his children, or they would go to him in the summer, vacations.  But when I went to WMMJ with his blessings, the children stayed behind and lived with him in Gladwyne, Pennsylvania, and attended school in the area.  But I was depressed.  It was the first time in my life I'd experienced such depression because I'd never been away from my kids.  And so, while I have this great gig and everybody was like, aww, you have this great job.  And I was making money (laughter).  It didn't matter.  Money doesn't mean anything.  Happiness and health are the most important things in life to me and love.  And the people that I loved were in Philly and I was in D.C., including their daddy.  Even though we weren't together, I still loved him, so it was hard, but I left.  It, it was a very short stint--one of the shortest gigs I'd ever had.
Speaker 2: So you were only there--
Speaker 1: A few months--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --maybe four months, maybe three and a half, and I left.
Story_ID: 98586
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what did you do when you left basically?
Speaker 2: I became a manager.  I managed several artists--a guy by the name of Gary Taylor.  He wrote "Just Gets Better With Time" for the Whispers.  He was a songwriter/producer and then decided he wanted to sing.  And he got a deal with Virgin Records.  And my partner, a woman that I mentioned earlier, Sheila Eldridge, I met her at WHUR.  She actually gave me a ride to the Greyhound when I was hired at WHUR.  She was the first woman I met in D.C.  We became friends and later, became business partners.  She's been my partner for close to 20 years.  So, we started managing Gary Taylor, and then I went on the road with him and I despised management.  To me, it was like a glorified babysitting job.  I didn't like it.  And Gary and I had a lot of conflict.  In fact, we stopped speaking after his first promo tour.  He told the record company and my partner that I reminded him of his ex-wife.  I was like, what's that got to do with--I'm doing my gig because I said, be here and do this at a certain time.  I have to be the ex-wife?  I thought that was horrible.  And then, my partner plays a song for me.  She said, Gary has written you a song.  I said, he has written me a song?  The man's not even speaking to me now.  How could he write a song for me?  But it was Anita Baker and the song came from a conversation I had with him--I think it was in Chattanooga, Tennessee in the back of his limousine when I said, Gary, you need love.  You need, you don't know what good love feels like, and you need good love in your life.  And the song wound up being "Good Love" that he did for Anita Baker.  And the song says, "I want to know what good love feels like".  And that was my makeup song.  So, shortly thereafter, I get a phone call from Gary, still my client, and he says, you like your song?  I was like, yes, Gary, what is it not to like--Anita Baker?  Of course, I love the song--still didn't like his ways.  And we parted ways shortly thereafter so.  The management game, even though we stayed in it a little longer, I wasn't suited for that.
Story_ID: 98587
Speaker 1: And so, what did you end up doing now?  You've--all this knowledge of the music business and all these contacts and connections, and I mean it's hard to duplicate all that, you know.  I mean, for somebody that--so you've got all this rich store of knowledge and connections, what did you do with it after--
Speaker 2: You start a music organization, which is what Sheila [Eldride] and I decided to do after going to so many music conventions, particularly Jack the Rapper, which was the premiere music conference of the time where all the DJs and the program directors and the executives and the artists and the journalists would gather.  It wound up being a big party, and we got sick of the big party--naked women, Luke Skywalker, all kind of crazy stuff would go on--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: --and we were just disgusted.  We were mothers.  We had a certain level of consciousness and we said, we can do this better.  And so, we had both been involved--Sheila and I, in the Black Music Association which Gamble, Kenny Gamble, had started with Ed Wright, Jules Malamud, LaBaron Taylor, and a host of people in the industry.  And from the BMA came IAAAM.  The acronym stands for the International Association of African American Music.  And IAAAM, we decided after consulting with Gamble and Jules Malamud and LaBaron Taylor to make it a non-membership organization, but a trade association dedicated to the preservation and promotion of black music worldwide.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, this is in 1990, right?
Speaker 2: This is in 1990.
Story_ID: 98588
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And, now there's a connection with IAAAM and Black Music Month, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, there is.
Speaker 1: So, what's that?
Speaker 2: Well, the establishment of Black Music Month took place during the BMA's existence.  Gamble actually conceived of a month, much like Black History Month, which is February, where we would recognize and celebrate the outstanding contributions and achievements of people in the music industry.  And President Jimmy Carter hosted an event on the lawn at the White House, and declared that June was Black Music Month.  We were--Gamble and I were still together and guests of Rosalynn, Mrs. Carter, and her husband, President Carter.  And it was really a momentous occasion in the history of black music, to have a president recognize this cultural art form that's also a viable economic entity worldwide and say, June is like Music Month.  So, after the demise of the Black Music Association--
Speaker 1: Now, what caused the demise of the Black Music Association?
Speaker 2: What caused--
Speaker 1: How was it structured and how--what made it collapse?
Speaker 2: I believe what caused the demise of the Black Music Association is when you have too many cooks in the kitchen, it can spoil the soup.  And that's what happened.  The structure of it is that they had a board of directors.  They had membership in the retail, radio, artist divisions.  It was very heady for a while.  They established black music as green campaign, like Music Month, a lot of great things.  These are the Black Entertainment Sports and Lawyers Association--came from BMA.  It was a networking organization that implemented programs that prevail today.  And, but the politics, the in-fighting which is not uncommon with groups--some people wanted the organization to move from Philadelphia to L.A.  Some didn't want the founder, Kenny Gamble, to be involved because they felt that he was autocratic.  There were a lot of fights.  A lot of in-fighting started and it was just--a myriad of things caused its demise.  I think, if you look at the history of any government or organization, you get to a certain point and then things just start to unravel.
Speaker 1: Now, how, what kind of life did Black Music Association have?  How long did it exist?  When did it start?  When did it end, do you think?
Speaker 2: I'm not certain of the precise years, and I don't want to be incorrect, but it existed--I want to say, maybe 10 years.  And I'm not sure.  I don't recall at this point.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I just know that by the time 1990 rolled around, BMA did not exist.  And Sheila and I decided to continue--
Speaker 1: With the--
Speaker 2: --with some of the energy and the efforts that had been established--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --by the founders and members.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Story_ID: 98589
Speaker 1: Yeah, we're talking--
Speaker 2: As I mentioned, IAAAM [International Association of African American Music] was a advocacy organization for black music.  Sheila Eldridge and myself and our board of directors, which includes Cathy Hughes [HM] and some other prominent people, who are concerned and committed to black music and culture, we discovered, after writing President [Bill] Clinton that June was, in fact, not Black Music Month recognized by the White House.  And we were like, no, no, wait, we presented all these papers from the BMA.  President [Jimmy] Carter hosted this event.  He said June is Black Music Month.  And the folks at the White House said, we see all that, but he never signed a Presidential Proclamation, and there's nothing in the annals of the government of the United States recognizing it as such.  So they suggested, they said, you know, you need to try to do something about that--get in touch with your congressman, your senator, and try to get some legislature enacted.  Well, it sounded pretty simple, but I'd never done anything like that.  So, here became where this was the beginning of my education about how legislature is enacted.  And I contacted Congressman Chaka Fattah [HM] in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and explained the situation.  I said, can you work with our organization?  And then I reached out to Senator Arlen Specter, who is a Republican a little later, much later.  But it was literally Congressman Fattah who championed our cause to establish legislature recognizing June as Black Music Month.  Well, first, we call it the African American Music Bill that recognized the contributions of the African American Music industry as a multibillion dollar business, and one of America's exports around the world, and indigenous American music.  What are the blues, jazz, hip hop, gospel?  It started here.  It came from the suffering and the joys and the tremendous experiences of people of color in the United States, and loved by many.  You don't have to be black to love the blues.  In fact, more white people seem to like the blues than black folks.  If you go to concerts, you see more white people at jazz shows as well.  So, we wanted to celebrate the music.  I wrote the draft that became the actual language.  They put the "Whereas" in Congressman Fattah's office, but I wrote the actual language celebrating--saying, why it was important to celebrate and recognize black music.  Some years earlier, Congressman John Conyers [HM]from Michigan had written similar language regarding jazz, recognizing jazz as a national treasure.  And that's been his--one of his causes that he has promoted during his tenure in Congress and the House.  But I wrote the African American Music Bill.  And when it first went up--oh, and it was a lobbying process.  I had to go actually lobbying and get signatures, and encourage other congressman and women.  I went to the Black Caucus and Latino Caucus.  I went across the board--white congressman.  I was on the Hill, on Capitol Hill.  In fact, during that time, I met a women who would later become the head.  She was like a page.  Her name is Hilary Rosen.  She was the head of the Record Industry Association of America.  I would later work with her and do some projects.
Speaker 1: Now, I have a question in regard to that.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: It's probably--was there any resistance to this bill?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Folks were literally like, why do you need it?  What's, why, why do you have to say black music is great?  You know, it's great.  What, what, what?  And I was like, well, we want it recognized by the American government.  We want the President to recognize it.  It deserves to be recognized by corporations.  I felt that it would make it easier for us as an entity to raise money, to have across the board, recognition and respect.  Why not?  That was also part of my argument--why not?  Why are you opposed to this?  There are so many other pieces of legislature--quite frankly, many that are BS.  Why can't we have one that says, this is indigenous American music.  It should be recognized, celebrated--it should be studied.  And that's what the bill says.  But the first time out, they would not incorporate language--I said, "June is Black Music Month".  So we had to go back to it later, and the bill number changed.  Don't ask me what it is now.  I've forgotten.  But 509 was enacted and then later, Chaka added language that said, "June is Black Music Month".
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, it was important.  And now, guess what?  June Black Music Month is celebrated by the President, President Clinton.  President Bush has an annual event every year in the White House where they bring artists together of different genres and say, "June is Black Music Month".  We need to study and celebrate.  And it's probably what I'm most proud of.  I think my parents are more proud of that than just about anything else that I've done because here I am, a little girl from the Bronx [New York City, New York] and Harlem, writing legislature that's been enacted in, in our government.  I never thought I would do something like that, but it happened.  And I was very proud to be a part of a movement.  It was a movement.  It was an effort.  It took us a minute--take, make it happen.  When I say a minute, I'm like black person's minute.  It took us, you know, a couple of years.  I wrote an editorial in "Billboard" magazine.  I mean, I was champing and lobbying this cause hard.  And the satisfaction of bringing it to fruition was tremendous, and a great education for myself and those of us in the IAAAM organization.
Story_ID: 98590
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think someone called you the ambassador for black music basically.
Speaker 2: It was around this time, yes, it was around this time that American Express "Departures" magazine did a story on me and gave me the title of Ambassador of African American Music.  I was also traveling around the world.  IAAAM was doing events in Bermuda.  We did a USO tour in Japan.  We went to five military installations and took Philip Bailey, one of the lead singers for Earth, Wind and Fire, along with 50 musicians to entertain the troops.  We went to Bosnia.  We went all over.  And so, this position of leadership as president of IAAAM inspired the writer to identify me as the Ambassador of African American Music.  And I said, hey, that fits--if the shoe fits, wear it.  And I proudly assumed that role because I started traveling to Africa, all through the Caribbean, South America, as I mentioned earlier, and in an official capacity representing our country and our music.  And I was comfortable with that.  That was fine with me.
Story_ID: 98591
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, and you continue to write.  You wrote for other--not just "Billboard", but for "Philadelphia Tribune", uh, "Philadelphia New Observer".
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: You do a lot.  Do you still write, do you still--have you?
Speaker 2: I do write.  I don't write as much as I used to.  I am a contributing attitude--sorry, let me start that again.  I do write still.  I'm a contributing editor to the "Urban Network", which is a music industry trade publication, and I do pieces for them periodically.  In fact, the last piece I did, I was talking about why we needed to celebrate Black Music Month.  And it was the anniversary, an anniversary of Black Music Month so, yes, and I'm asked to write things.  I did liner notes for Harold Melvin and the Bluenotes, a reissue of their first CD.  Sony approached me about doing that.  And that was a lot of fun 'cause I'd never done liner notes like that.  And then when I went in the store, it said, "Liner notes by Philadelphia DJ", and that made me very proud as well to have that association, even though I haven't been on the air in many years in Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  So, yeah, I still write.  I don't consider myself a strong writer but I can write.  I can put a sentence or two together, but with my momma's intervention, 'cause she's the grammatician in this situation.  I'm not that girl--thank goodness, for spell check.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 98592
Speaker 1: So, television, too now--come to television, you were--now, you said this occurred in the '90s [1990s], the Soul of VH1?  You were like a reporter?
Speaker 2: That happened because Gerald Levert, who is a good friend, was being interviewed by the Soul of VH1, and he asked me to meet him at the studio.  And I went.  And one of those fortuitous situations, the producer and I started talking, and one thing led to another.  And she learned of my background in radio and television.  And she said, we are looking for someone to do these interviews.  I can't do them.  I've got to concentrate on producing the show.  And you seem to have a connection with artists and a command of the music.  Would you be interested in doing this job?  And I said, yes, so I traveled.  I commuted from New York [New York City, New York] to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] once a week to do the show.  I was the behind-the-scene person, and Vanessa Williams was the public face of the show.  And, in fact, I never got to meet Vanessa during the period of time.  I met her another occasion but every week--
Speaker 1: So how would you do it now?  She--you were--she was--
Speaker 2: We'd do our segments differently.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They would tape my segments, the interview segments, and then Vanessa would come in and do her standups and introduce the videos and the interviews.  And I got to do Bobby McFerrin, Roberta Flack, Jimmy Jam, Terry Lewis.  Anyone who was hot and happening at the time would sit with our cameras and allow me the tremendous pleasure.  I would sit in there and say, I'm getting paid to do this--what a nice gig.  And then, they paid for me to go up to New York, and I'd get to see my people in New York, and then come back to Philly.  And I was a mom, too--don't forget I was a mommy, so I still had my babies.  But my daddy [George Williams] had retired early and came to live with us in Philadelphia and Penn Valley, so I had a trustworthy, reliable person that raised me, helping me with my children 'cause I was a single parent, but single parent with a daddy who was very involved.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, so Soul of VH1.
Story_ID: 98593
Speaker 1: All right.  What other--now I heard you produced a PBS special, the "Philadelphia Music Makers"?
Speaker 2: That came out of--I produced a documentary called the "Philadelphia Music Makers" with noted writer and music historian, cultural critic, Nelson George.  And that was done for the Black Music Association [BMA].  I've got a small budget.  It was LaBaron Taylor and his then-wife--both are deceased--Yvonne Taylor.  I went to them and pitched this idea.  I said, look, let's do a piece on "Philadelphia Music Makers", 'cause the BMA--one of the last functions the BMA did was to honor and celebrate Philadelphia artists.
Speaker 1: So this was prior to 1990--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --prior to the establishment of IM?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And then it aired on WHYY which was the PBS station in Philadelphia, public broadcasting station affiliate.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Channel 12.
Speaker 1: Okay.  WHYY, that's both for the radio and TV.  They have the same--
Speaker 2: Right, WHYY-TV and radio--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --same call letters.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Story_ID: 98594
Speaker 1: Now, I don't want to skip over anything, but in 1997, you went back to school.  You went to Temple [University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], right?
Speaker 2: Actually, I went back in 1984--I think it was 1983 or '4 [1984] after the birth of my daughter, Princess Idia.
Speaker 1: And was that at Temple as well?  Okay.  You said--
Speaker 2: I went to Temple University and that came out of--my son's best friend was Jaleel White who played [Steve] Urkel in "Family Matters".  And he used to come visit us during the summer.  And one day, I took him to WHYY where Bill Cosby was taping a TV show.  He met Cosby.  Cosby took a great interest in Jaleel--invited him to his home in Elkins Park.  I, of course, had to drive him, and they had breakfast, and I was sitting, during their breakfast.  And Bill was encouraging Jaleel and saying to him, look, you're a big TV star.  You're rich already at this young age.  But school and education, there's nothing more important than that.  And his message resonated with me.  I had dropped out of college after only a year with a mother with, you know, all these credentials, and a respected educator.  And I had promised my mother when I dropped out many years ago, many years earlier, that I would return to school at some point, and complete my undergraduate studies.  So, inspired by this conversation between Bill Cosby and Jaleel White, I, after the birth of my daughter, applied for Temple University, and was accepted.  So, three children, single parent, on the radio, doing 50 things as I normally do, I went back to school full time.  And then after a year, it became very difficult.  It was hard.  And it was also a hard period of time because I had broken up with [Kenny] Gamble [HM], and it was just hard.  And I believe in doing well.  I like to do well.  I don't like to do things half-ass--never have.  So, after a year, I decided to take leave, and that leave turned into 10 years.  So I went back in the '90s [1990s]. I went back in '94 [1994].
Story_ID: 98595
Speaker 1: And I decided to take it slow so, 'cause I was producing IAAAM [International Association of African American Music] and big events.  We would do something called the "Diamond Awards".  We honored everybody--a big sit down black tie dinner.  IAAAM would do, during June, in its connection with the celebration of Black Music Month, a four-day conference--panels, workshops, networking receptions.  And it culminated with a black-tie dinner, usually a sit-down for a thousand people where we honored everyone from Stevie Wonder to the great jazz pianist, Dorothy Donegan.  Oh, little Jimmy Scott, and they would be there.  And I produced all of those elements--booking the artists, you know, bringing them in, doing the hotel, raising the money.  Sheila and I, Sheila Eldridge and I, together, and we would raise six figures to do this beautiful event.  And we would have other artists, young artists, pay tribute, musical tribute to the "Diamond Award" recipient.  For instance, the year we did Freddie Hubbard, Nicholas Payton, the Grammy Award-winning trumpet player from New Orleans, did Freddie's music better than Freddie (laughter).  I was sitting with Freddie, and Freddie was like, get that boy off the stage.  I hate him (laughter).  And he even got on the podium when he accepted his microphone and said, uhh, get rid of him, you know!  And McCoy Tyner [HM] was our chair that year.  He helped present the award.  So, it's a beautiful, lovely event that I take great pride in producing.  And we've been doing it now for the better part of fifteen years--so, the Diamond Awards.
Story_ID: 98596
Speaker 1: But I went back to school in '94 [1994] and started with one class, and then stepped up to two classes, more and more and more.  And then by 1996, I was awarded two academic scholarships, the Marilyn Fife Academic Scholarship, and the Jessica Savitch Award for Journalism.  And it paid for everything--my books, my parking, everything, but the chair of my department said, Dyana, how many credits do you need to finish?  I said, I don't know.  I think I need about 46, 47 credits.  She said, make a run for it.  I said, what?  That's Lily (ph.) LeBron (ph.) is her name--Dr. LeBron said, make a run for it, and I didn't understand what she was talking about.  She said, we're paying for everything.  You have to use these scholarships this academic school year.  They will not carry over, so finish up.  So, I did 21 credits my fall semester, and the following one, I did 23 credits.  I needed 44 to finish.  Three kids, working, traveling, I still traveled a lot, and I graduated Cum Laude from Temple University.  And Bill Cosby was there when I graduated, and I had a chance to shake his hand to thank him.  Kenny Gamble [HM] was there.  My children were there.  Some of my closest and dearest friends came, Cathy Hughes [HM]--from all parts of the United States; Jean Carn who is godmother to my older son; Debra Grable who is a noted broadcaster in Chicago [Illinois]--
Speaker 2: Chicago, right.
Speaker 1: --is my youngest son's godmother.  She was there.  All the godmothers and the godfathers were there.  And everybody was proud 'cause it was tough.  But I graduated with a degree in radio, television, and film in 1997, May, from Temple University.  And I'm very proud of my school in North Philadelphia in the City of Brotherly Love and Sisterly Affection.  So, I tried to show my children that "Anything a mind can conceive and believe, you can achieve it".  It just requires hard work.  I averaged maybe two and half, three hours of sleep a night.
Story_ID: 98597
Speaker 1: I became friends with Charles Blockson [HM] one of the great collectors of books in the world, second to Arthur Schomburg.  In fact, his library became my library.  And I donated most of my papers, my research papers, to Blockson and the Blockson Collection.  And they remain there 'cause I wanted other students to have access to the research that I did during my tenure at Temple [University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] .  So, but Charlie Blockson became one of my mentors and also Dr. Molefi Asante, who was the chair of the African American Studies Department.  Dr. Molefi Asante was the chair of the African American Studies Department, and I minored in African American studies, so he pushed me hard.  He was one of my professors.  And his thing, to this day, is you got to go get your PhD,  I was like Molefi--I'll be in school forever.  That's just so hard.  And also, I studied with Dr. Sonia Sanchez [HM], before she retired from Temple, and she is my sister friend.  She was my friend then.  We were girlfriends when I took her class and it was like an 8 a.m. class.  It killed me, killed me to go to her class, but she was getting ready to retire, and I wanted to study with Sonia, you know.  It wasn't enough just to be her friend.  And it was a black woman's lit class, so we had like 50 books to read.  So, you know, Sonia was like--when we would be socializing, going to the movies and hanging out, she's like, Dyana, be on time now, okay?  Don't be late for my class.  I'll have to mark you late (laughter).  But Temple, great institution, and so proud to have had an opportunity to study there.  I was--when I went back in the '80s [1980s], I was a grown adult student.  I was on the radio.  So, a lot of my professors--I didn't tell anybody what I did.  I didn't want anyone to know, but they found out and it was kind of hard because I had one professor, in particular, who would say, Miss Williams, why don't you come up here and teach the class?  You know, and I even applied for something called CRLE, credit for relevant life experience, and this was an opportunity--if you worked, to translate that into credit if you could equate it to a class, and get documentation from your employer, you could get credit for it.  I was awarded by the Dean of the School of Communications the most credits they'd ever given to anyone at that time.  I got 15 credits.  So that helped advance my studies.  And I only paid $150 'cause they only charged $10 a credit.  I couldn't believe it.  I mean, I kept going to the bursar's office and calling them--saying, are you sure, are you sure?  But it was true.  That's what happened, and that's what helped me tremendously.  I mean, economically, it was a great boost for me, 'cause I was paying for my own education.  My mother pitched in a little later.  She said, I would have paid for this anyhow had you gone to school and, and she wanted to do that.  She wanted to say she helped put me through college.  So, but the CREL was great because, at that point, I had already been a TV reporter.  I'd worked for the CBS affiliate.  I had worked for Cathy Hughes [HM].  Cathy wrote me a killer letter I still have--it was like this thick.  And the dean said, we really should be just--you should just be graduating at this point, but you've got to take classes as well.  So, that was nice.  So I love learning.  I mean, recently, I flirted with the idea of going to the University of Penn, and studying with my buddy, my, my dear Michael Eric Dyson who's teaching there now.  But then when I looked at my schedule and what I have, I declined.  I decided--or not declined, but decided to, to delay my graduate studies.  But ultimately, my intention is to get my graduate degree and then my Ph.D.
Story_ID: 98598
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what, now, you are--yeah, speaking of Maxine Powell [HM], you are involved in--you do consultations with artists around building their images, right, and--
Speaker 2: Ten years ago, I was approached by a woman by the name of Sharon Haywood.  She was then the president of Virgin Black Music.  And Sharon said, Dyana, she took me to lunch at a hotel in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], and she said, you should become a coach.  I was like, coach?  I was sort of a coach in terms of football, baseball, basketball, and I know very little about sports.  And she said, no, you've got great relationships with artists.  You've been on the radio.  You've been a music director, a program director.  You've done entertainment reporting.  You worked for BET, for VH1.  You've got a wealth of experiences that would be of great benefit to an artist.  You should consider artist development and media coaching.  And, shortly thereafter, Sheila Eldridge gave me my first job.  She was senior vice president of Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis's record company, Perspective Records.  And they had a group called Solo, so I went to the library, did some research.  I used some of my experiences having interviewed so many artists.  And I put together something I called the "Influence System", influence meaning the ability to prevail upon the thoughts and feelings of others.  And that's basically what an artist does when they release their music, or an athlete or anyone.  They're, they're coming to you saying, believe in what I do, encourage and support my project, my book, my film, my, my album. my theater, play, whatever it is.  And so, that was the beginning.  And here it is, a decade later, and I've worked with a plethora of supernova talents ranging from DeAngelo to Faith Evans, 112.  I've worked with a lot of Puffy's artists.  I've worked with Puffy over the years.  Jermaine Dupri's performers, Escape, who were together, broke up, and are getting back together now.  I've worked with Charlie Wilson from the Gap Band.  It was fun working with him because he was a well-established artist.  Usher--had the opportunity to collaborate with him.  Brandy, and with some of my clients, it's every album, every project they release, involved in formulating what is the platform?  What is the story?  What's the approach?  What are we going to share with public about, you know, what are you thinking?  So, it's  a little bit of a combination of an analyst, a critic, and a champion, and the coach.  I got a whistle.  I got a hat and I got a shirt that says "coach."  I'm just joking (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 98599
Speaker 1: No, but it's basically--
Speaker 2: So, it's more, it's different from what Maxine Powell did on some levels.  It's a--
Speaker 1: Exactly.  Maxine Powell, I consider her the mother of artist development.  And Mrs. Powell spent more time dealing with etiquette, human etiquette, how to sit, how to meet people.  I do some of that as well, but not as detailed as Mrs. Powell.  I deal more with communications and career building in a different way 'cause the times are different.  She dealt with artists that were coming out of the projects.  I do, too--a lot of artists that are coming from the hood and don't know anything about how to say hello to someone or shake a hand properly or make good eye contact.  But Mrs. Powell, she's the mother of artist development.  And I had an opportunity to meet her recently.  I reached out.  I called her actually.  I called information and asked for all the Maxine Powells in the Detroit [Michigan] area until I got her.  And I introduced myself and said, Mrs. Powell, my name is Dyana Williams.  I live in the Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] area, and I do something similar to what you do.  And she was like, oh, that's very nice, young lady.  Mrs. Powell is very prim.  She's very proper.  And she was like, okay, well, don't forget, I'm the one, I'm the queen, I'm the mistress of this.  And I was like, hey, all praise to the queen.  I was clear on who I was calling.  And so, some time went by, and it would be a couple of years later that I had the occasion, through a friend, Professor Michael Denwitte from NYU and a playwright, to be introduced to Mrs. Powell.  And I consider her now a friend.  I got a great Christmas card from her recently.  And I was like, I'm corresponding with Mrs. Powell, you know, I'm pinching myself.  And I've met a lot of famous people.  I've been in the Oval Office of President Clinton.  But I was hyped about meeting Mrs. Powell because working with artists as I do and how challenging it could be, and I know how richly rewarding it is when you see an artist do an interview or being in a setting, and they do well and they're warm and engaging.  It's one thing to sing and dance and entertain, or even write a song and produce it.  It's another thing to connect with human beings on a DNA level, on a core level.  And that's what I do as a coach.  I help people do that because I believe that's my God-given.  Everybody has different skills and abilities.  I believe that's part of what God gave me.  And all of those experiences, the radio, the TV, the print journalism, the--all of it would go into what I do now, and I do it with great passion, much pleasure.
Story_ID: 98600
Speaker 1: Now, the kind of advice you--you advise them about a lot of different things, business things, as well as how to--
Speaker 2: I do.
Speaker 1: --what to wear to, you know, certain meetings and--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --'cause it's a music world.  There's a--
Speaker 2: Image (unclear).
Speaker 1: It's a milieu that you know.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum, oh, yes.
Speaker 1: You know very well so--
Speaker 2: --yes, that's true.  I do.  I work closely with managers, publicists, the stylists, the bio writers, almost every different level.  Sometimes I'm --have to interact with their lawyers.  I have some clients that have legal situations, and I need to consult with their attorneys to know how to advise my client best.  So, yeah, it's--no day is the same, and that's how I like my life.  No day is the same.  It's all different.  I travel a lot.  I enjoy traveling.  I love seeing God's planet, meeting new people.  I have friends all over the United States and the world.  I have friends in Europe, the Caribbean, Africa, Asia.  I like hooking up with my friends.  And this allows me an opportunity to do it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now, is this Creative Consultants for Soul Solidarity. Is this a different--is it?
Speaker 2: What is it?
Speaker 1: Creative Consultants, is that the name of what, of--
Speaker 2: No, the Influence Entertainment.
Speaker 1: Influence Entertainment, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Influence Entertainment is what I do in my company.
Speaker 1: And how long have you been doing that as a consultant?
Speaker 2: Ten years.
Speaker 1: Ten years, okay.
Speaker 2: It's a little over 10 years now, yes.  And I--even athletes, Roy Jones, Jr., when he was a heavyweight champion, I worked with him because he has a record label.  Cathy Hughes [HM], the owner of TV One, I advised her--get a credit on the show now because I'm her coach, so it's wonderful work.
Story_ID: 98601
Speaker 1: Now, you were also just to co-- complete this entertainment industry discussion.  You work with AFTRA [American Federation of Television and Radio Artists].  You're on the board of the National Endowment for the Arts, are you?  I mean, on board?
Speaker 2: That's not correct.
Speaker 1: That's not correct?
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, I served on a review panel--
Speaker 1: Panel, okay.
Speaker 2: --for the National Endowment on the Arts in D.C. where decisions were made about who would receive money.  That was an interesting process.
Speaker 1: Was it the music panel?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was on the music panel.
Speaker 1: A.B. Spellman and--
Speaker 2: Well, A.B. Spellman wasn't involved but yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They have different people representing each year in the process.  I've also done it for Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] for the city--I've done it.  I have also served on the Philadelphia Cultural Fund in this city making decisions and determinations about who gets money.  And it was good for me-
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION).
Speaker 2: It was good for me running an arts organization to see the process.  We've never applied for grants or funds.  All of our funding has been private.  No government funding, none, none of that, but a good opportunity to see the process of how it happens.
Story_ID: 98602
Speaker 1: And so, I've been on the board of PHILADANCO, the Philadelphia Dance Company [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] with Joan Myers Brown.  I've worked with a myriad of organizations from literacy to media and music.  I've cut that back because it really--I think when you become a board member, you should be very sincere in your commitment, and it requires a lot of time.  And there's also liability involved in being on a board.  But more importantly, the commitment--you should really be about raising the money, and I like to be that kind of board member--really roll up my sleeves.  I'm, right now, only on one board.  I'm on the Paul Jones Collection Board at the University of Delaware [Newark, Delaware].  Paul Jones is one of the foremost collectors of African American art in the world.  His collection is breathtaking, breathtaking, and when I got the letter--well, got the call first from Paul.  And he said, Dyana, I'd like you to be on my board.  How could I say no to him?  We're talking about 18th century art straight through modern art.  And he knows--Paul has tremendous taste and insight and knows how to see who's got, got the goods.  And he's been collecting for over 50 years.  One of my passions and interest is African American art.  I have art in every room of my house.  I have works of art stacked on top of each other on the floor.  I have so much art out of my garage.  My children's bedrooms, I give art as gifts to friends.  I love it from, from photographer to mixed media--everything.  I have Elizabeth Catlett who's one of my all-time favorites.  Bearden's, Jacob Lawrence, but I have the Philadelphia--what I consider the Philadelphia Masters, Barbara Bullock, Tom McKinney.  I have Verna Hart.  I have great artists in my collection, and I derive so much pleasure from looking at this work.  And I've also used it to teach my children to develop an eye and appreciation.  I think my daughter has it more than my sons 'cause she paints.  And I have some of her paintings--Princess Idia Gamble's art in my collection.  I also have a home in New Orleans [Louisiana], so that house, same thing, art everywhere.  And Paul and I became friends, and so when he asked me to be--he knows that I also have the same kind of intensity about art that he has.  So when he asked me to be on the board, it was a quick yes.  And we just had our first board meeting recently.  So I'm only on one board now and that, you know, the president of the university, the provost, everybody's on that board.  It's, it's a hot board, and we're encouraging people to come, to go to online to see the Paul Jones' collection and is--well, to visit it in person at Mechanical Hall on the campus of the University of Delaware.  They've inherited a tremendous collection of very viable.  And Paul, what I love about Paul is that he has also insisted that they teach it as a part of American art.  You know, we know it's African American art, but these are great American artists, and that's how I feel about black music.  It's--we know it's black music.  These are black artists, but it's American music.  John Lee Hooker, Ray Charles, these are great American artists that are revered around the globe and should be in their own communities, as well here in the United States.  So I'm telling you, I--if it's art, music, books, dance, theater, it just excites me.  It really does.
Story_ID: 98603
Speaker 1: Now, you recently received a--I got local Philadelphia Liberty Bell Award by the mayor, you know, right--the Mayor, Mayor John Street.
Speaker 2: I have three Liberty Bells.
Speaker 1: You have three?
Speaker 2: Are you supposed to have that many?  Every time they give me one, I'm like, wait, you gave me already.  Am I supposed to have another one?  I have three Liberty Bells.  It--to, to be recognized, anyone--I think we all, to love and be loved in return.  Nat King Cole said it best in "Nature Boy", and to be recognized for whatever you do, small or large.  It's--I consider it a blessing from God.  I'm thrilled.  It gives me more excitement for my parents, you know, I give my momma [Nancy Neuman] the award.  She keeps them for a little bit of time, and then she gives them back to me.  My daddy [George Williams], he likes to look at them.  I, I feel like it's paying homage to their parenthood, to their dedication to the investment that they made.  I feel like they're getting a return on their investment.  And, for me, to be friends with my parents as I am, for them to be young parents--they're in their 70s, but they're young parents.  You know, for my children to see it, for my family and my friends to enjoy and celebrate it with me is what matters most.  And to know that it's service to the community--the information that we disseminate in IAAAM [International Association of African American Art] or even when I'm working with an artist, one-on-one, with my company with Influence Entertainment.  I feel like I'm doing something of value and merit, something that will live beyond me.
Story_ID: 98604
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this question.  We ask this question of everybody.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: My hopes and aspirations for the African American community is that we put aside our differences and celebrate our similarities and recognize the need for the preservation of our traditions, our legacies, our history, and create a future, have a situation where our children will have something tangible to live within safe communities, jobs, insurance.  I got a letter recently from Social Security saying, look, don't count on this.  Have some other something for retirement.  I want my children to be able to count on having health insurance.  I had an opportunity to travel to Cuba a few years ago, and same thing with Canada.  You get, you need triple bypass?  Don't worry about it.  You'll get it.  That should be the case in the United States for all people, not just African American people.  As I've gotten older, I'm very much a nationalist.  I love my people.  And I'm a very proud Afro weakened woman.  I've embraced as I've gotten older more of my Puerto Ricanness as well.  (In Spanish), you know, my, my (in Spanish) is in me.  My cellular (in Spanish), my (in Spanish), as well as my James Brown and my Terry Collier (ph.).  I mix it up and I like that combination.  But I'm a human being as well and I recognize that we're on planet earth together, so I celebrate my brothers and sisters in Australia and England and everywhere, Asia.  And I want human beings to recognize that if we keep mucking this up, there's not going to be anything for our children.  We need to be concerned about a myriad of issues.  There's so many things.  The war in Iraq distresses me.  We're spending so much money there and, meanwhile, children here in this community, they don't have decent books.  Teachers are the most underpaid people in our society.  There are so many travesties, so many miscarriages of justice happening.  And I believe that we need to--I tell people, everybody has different capacities.  Some people, it's easier for them to write a check.  Some people, it's easier for them to go to the homeless shelter and pass out food.  Everybody has a different capacity.  Identify what you do best and do it.  But do something up and beyond yourself.  Don't just be about your own protection and that of your family.  Be about the community because we all are connected.  I can't make it without you.  You need me.  That's what I believe.  There's a synergy amongst human beings that we have to protect and preserve.  And I don't mean to sound hokey 'cause I really mean this.  We need to love each other.  There's not enough love and respect in the African American community.  We have it, but due to racism, due to all the "isms", the sexism, due to poverty, it's disabled our ability to be as we once were.  We're a great people.  We come from,--we're descendants from kings and queens.  I have been to Africa, and I haven't traveled all through the continent, but I've seen enough of it to know.  There were regal people.  We had great libraries in Alexandria, books.  You know, we had, we had the architects and the mathematicians and the scientists and the crafts people.  We made beautiful jewelry and clothes, wonderful songs and dance.  I lectured in Egypt about the contributions or the inheritance of, of black people from Egypt or America and Egypt.  It's all connected.  And we have inherited a great history.  We need to celebrate it, protect it, and make sure that it's preserved for future generations to know that we do more than just rap and shoot hoops.  We create light switches and shoes and operations to keep us whole and healthy.  Charles Drew--I mean, we're, we're great people, we're Charles Blockson [HM].  We're Sonia Sanchez [HM].  We're Kenny Gamble [HM].  We're history makers for real.
Speaker 1: Noel Mayo was the man with the light switches.  I just remembered his name.
Speaker 2: What's his name--Noel Mayo [HM]?
Speaker 1: Noel Mayo, yeah, right--
Speaker 2: Ohh.
Speaker 1: --Noel Mayo.
Speaker 2: We're Noel Mayo.  We're Barry Mayo [HM].
Story_ID: 98605
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let me ask you this, okay.  When you look back over the things you've done so far and you're very young for the HistoryMakers, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, but we interview our people that are really are retired and, you know,
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: And, but when you look back at what you've done so far, you still have a lot to do, what would you consider, would you--is there any major thing that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: I don't live my life in regret.  Everything that I've done, I've done the way I did for a reason.  I just try to learn from mistakes so that I don't necessarily repeat them.  But I feel that I have so much more to do and I am relatively young in the scheme of things.  One of my, my closest, highly regarded people in my life is ninety-two.  And I talk with him and spend as much time with him as I possibly can.  He is to me an example of a full life and at ninety-two, he's still writing books and poetry and engaged in a host of things.  And he was the only human being that I was ever interested in meeting from the time that I was a young girl and I had a chance to, to do that, to meet him, and become a friend where, when I call him, he's happy to hear from me and we kick it.  We talk about our kids and love and life and work, and he was a director, a photographer, a poet, an author, a novelist, an activist.  He cared--was on the front line of issues for black people.  He exposed poverty in Brazil.  Here in the United States, I'm talking about Gordon Parks [HM].  He's my heart and he's ninety-two.  And so, I look at Gordon's life 'cause he teases me all the time and he says, you're a baby, Dyana.  And I was like, okay, I'll be your baby.  But I look at his life and say, hey, if I'm blessed and given the opportunity to live as long as he's lived, I want to do so much more to help some many other people.  I want people to really recognize and celebrate black music.  I want them to give artists the respect that they richly deserve.  I want artists to be equally paid.  Those that were robbed, I want them to be compensated for their work, whether they write or whatever.  I want, you know, want to improve the quality of life for my peoples, and all people.
Story_ID: 98606
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, likewise, when you look back at what you've done so far--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --what would you consider at this point to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: My legacy is the enactment of the African American Music Bill in Congress.  I'll start again.  My legacy was the enactment of the African American Music Bill in Congress, my work on Capitol Hill ensuring that black music is celebrated and recognized for as long as there's a United States government, and also the work I do in schools.  Jimmie Jam, Terrie Lewis, Grammy Award-winning songwriters and producers who've done Janet Jackson "Boys to Men", a host of folks.  Sheila Eldridge, the co-founder of IAAAM and myself established the program under the auspices of the IAAAM Foundation some years ago called the Literacy Lyric Project.  We take music industry professionals into schools to advocate excellence in education.  And we say to kids, hey, I've got to read and write all day long in order to be successful in the music industry.  It's not just get up there on the mic and sing.  I got to be able to read the lyrics to the songs, or I got to be able to write the raps.  I have to be able to read the video treatments.  I have to be able to read my itineraries and my contracts, my fan mail--reading, writing all day long.  And so, we've been doing this for probably about 10 years and we have criss-crossed the United States from the elementary school level to high school.  And that's something I'm extremely proud of and satisfied when I see young kids say, ohh, wow, I can do that, too.  I don't have to be a singer and talented in that.  I can be an entertainment lawyer or I can be a stylist or perhaps I can be a journalist.  And we take those people in and frequently they're from that community.  They attend that school, like I took Sean "Puffy", also known as P. Diddy Combs, to his high school in New York, Mount Vernon.  The kids had a chance to see him.  He's a fashion designer.  He has his own clothing line, one of the most successful in the world, record company, producer.  He himself is an artist.  He dances.  He choreographs.  I mean, he's a political activist.  He did the vote or die campaign.  He's an actor in films and on Broadway.  Phew, he's a sky's-the-limit type person and he went to that high school.  So, for the kids to see one of their own come back and say, hey, I read.  I'm proud to say I write and I learned how to do a lot of that here--you, do the same.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm very proud of the work with literacy linking music, art, and using it to empower and inspire children to do better.
Story_ID: 98607
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything we haven't asked you that you want to address before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: Ohh, Larry, where can I get some pants like this?  (Laughter).  Ohh, no, you've covered quite a--I mean, the documentary I told you about that.  I plan to write books about black music and also artist development.  I keep getting pressure from a lot of friends and folks.  And a lot of my clients say, can I read more?  Where can I study more?  So, I intend to do that.  I plan to live in Europe, Paris [France], perhaps, or maybe England and London, Accra, Ghana.  I see myself living in Accra, just like [W.E.B.] DuBois went, when he died there.  I fell in love with that country and its people, and I think that it really enhances and expands your horizons as a human being when you have experiences beyond where you just grew up.  You know, I'm moving back to New York [City, New York].  I have an apartment in New York.  Then I'm going to be spending some time, and I will still be in Pennsylvania and New Orleans [Louisiana].  I like--every city has a different flavor.  I mean, New Orleans, my heart is in New Orleans.  I have a beautiful place in Treme which is the oldest African American community in New Orleans.  I think it might be in one of them in the United States.  And, ohh, God--the history, you walk the streets and you can feel the history.  It's where women who were the women of--the mistresses of the French and the Spanish.  They had whole families in Treme, and these women were wealthy landowners.  They had children.  Their children were educated in Europe.  I mean, it's, it's a vital community that has had, you know, its down times, but it's on the up again.  In fact, people can't buy real estate in the French Quarter 'cause it's so expensive.  They're coming two blocks over into Treme where I live, to buy property, but I love the culture and the history and the music and the food and the people and the flavor and the vibe and the sexiness and the sensuality and the spirituality.  I love the tombstones above ground, the vaults, you know, has so much flavor.  So I want to continue to live, expose the culture of different regions to other people, make artists mindful of their commitment and connection to have a message in their music, some kind of message that elevates the spirits of the people that they are making it for.  That's my life's mission, you know.  I--my intention is I always wanted to be a documentary producer so I'm going to continue.  I'll finish the "Sound of Philadelphia", the "Sound of Philadelphia" documentary, and then do others on different individuals or situations in our country that I believe more people need to know about.  And that will be my life's work.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So we have to come back in about forty years and finish this interview (laughter).
Speaker 2: Come back, come back.  I'd love to, you know, I, I want to study photography with Gordon Parks [HM].  I'm kind of across the board, you know.
Story_ID: 98608
Speaker 1: Okay, but our last question--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: -- is similar to legacy, but a little bit different.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as a person who cared, who was committed, who had great vitality and energy for her people, who was uplifted and inspired by music, and who used her wherewithal and skills to improve the quality of people's lives in a way that is magical and memorable.  I want to be remembered as a mother who, despite perhaps inadequacies, some shortcomings that human beings have, really put her children above all else.  I want to be remembered as a person with a good heart and who had weaknesses, but was fun to be with, and silly and serious and alive, a person who lived life to its fullest.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, thank you very much for sharing with us.
Story_ID: 98609
Speaker 1: Dyana Williams at WHUR-FM in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  And how about when was it?
Speaker 1: Circa 1974.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  I was down there for African Liberation Day before.
Speaker 1: Oh, you're funny.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: This is at the Carter Barron Amphitheater, Dyana Williams hosting an O'Jays Concert.  I was asked to present the O'Jays with gold plaques for--I believe it was the "Survival" album at that time.  There were albums--no CDs.  And this is Kenny Gamble [HM] and Leon Huff [HM] and members, executives of their record label.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  (Simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: That's Kenny Gamble right there, uh-hum--me, uh-hum, and Leon Huff is towards the end next to Harry Coomes.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Harry Coomes right here?
Speaker 1: That's Harry Coomes, and Leon Huff is next to him, yes.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: This is Dyana Williams after I emceed a concert with Richard Pryor and Philip Bailey from Earth, Wind and Fire, the show.  The bill was Richard Pryor opening for Earth, Wind and Fire.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Pryor and Fire--
Speaker 1: Pryor and Fire.  And the young lady is Dianne Quander, who was my roommate, and the young lady I mentioned earlier who was on the air with me as well.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  At WHUR?
Speaker 1: At WHUR in Washington, D.C.  And she later went on to write, "Caught Up in the Rapture" for Anita Baker and numerous other songs for Earth, Wind and Fire, Maurice White, Miles Jay, a bunch of people.  And that picture was taken 1974.  This is Deborah Grable.  She is a noted Chicago-based journalist, PR marketing expert, godmother to my youngest son, Salahdeen Gamble, dear friend.  People used to mix--confuse us 'cause we worked at some of the same places and they thought we had the same kind of energy.  Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  And got to re-pick (unclear) a copy of.  All right.
Speaker 1: This is right to left--Jeff Sharp, who is a well-known concert promoter, just did the big Jay-Z  He's a supporter and friend of International Association of African American Music.  Actually, the Diamond Awards event that I mentioned to you, we have done as a concert for the public several times.  And he's been the promoter, so he is a colleague.  The young lady is Sheila Eldridge, the co-founder of the International Association of African American Music, as well as the CEO of Miles Ahead Entertainment, which is a PR marketing firm based in New Jersey.  And she's the first young lady that I met when I moved to Washington, D.C.  She was a student at Howard University, later went on to be a DJ, and an executive.  She also is the person who gave me my first coaching job when she was senior vice-president of Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis's label, Perspective Records.  The gentleman that we're hugged up on in the Oval Office of the White House in Washington, D.C., the Nation's Capital, is President Bill Clinton.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  That's like early in his tenure, right?
Speaker 1: This was during the Monica Lewinsky phase.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Is it?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  I thought his hair was a lot (unclear).
Speaker 1: This is flautist Hubert Laws who we talked about earlier, and this is a photograph taken by Will Downing.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: I should get a picture of-
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is a photograph of some of my closest female friends--not all of them, but it's music friends of 30 years.  We're all friends of 30-plus years.  Left to right, Dyana; Sheila Eldridge; in the rear, Claudia Samson; Cathy Hughes, my best friend; Ruth Carson, Dianne Quander; and in the back, rear, Jean Carne, the great singer.
Speaker 2: Are we in (unclear)?
Speaker 1: We're a booty picture, and an endorsement from McDonald's.  I used to eat McDonald's, yes.  And that's how I looked and this was WBLS in 1976.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Make them slow.
Speaker 1: This is Dyana Williams with Kenny Gamble [HM] .  And we were in New York at Radio City Music Hall Tribute to Count Basie.  This is Dyana, left to right, Caliph Gamble, my eldest, who is currently 28, born October 14, 1976; in the middle, Salahdeen Isa, I-S-A, Salahdeen, S-A-L-A-H-D-E-E-N.  He is 26.  And Caliph spells his name, C-A-L-I-P-H, Gamble.  And Princess Idia, P-R-I-N-C-E-S-S, I-D-I-A, Abdul, A-B-D-U-L, Haqq, H-A-Q-Q, Gamble.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: She's 22.  She goes to Clark Atlanta University.  And she calls me Cookie and that's--I call her First Daughter-
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Are your children--
Speaker 1: --and Baby.  This is Gordon Parks [HM].  This picture was taken a few years ago and he's just as fine as he wants to be.  And he is my--he's the epitome, New York at the UN Plaza.
Speaker 2: A more recent picture of the Gamble children.  They're all musical.  My youngest boy, Salahdeen, who's on the left is a B producer.  Princess Idia is a photographer and an artist, painter, writes lyrics, quite creative.  And Caliph is a recording engineer and assistant engineer at Philly International.  He does sessions.  He's worked with Jennifer Lopez, Justin Timberlake, the Roots, and many others.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: These are my parents on their wedding day.  And my mother had the low-down wedding dress.  And they looked very much like they did when they got married still.  That was George and Nancy Williams.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  This was about 19- what?
Speaker 2: I think they got married in '52 [1952].  I was born in '53 [1953].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: It's like they got married, you know, hit it, and boom.  This picture was taken in the '80s [1980s].  I can't tell you the exact date, but it was in Atlantic City.  Gamble and I went to see Diana Ross perform, and she loves herself some Kenny Gamble [HM].  I had to say, excuse me, Ms. Ross, the boss, it's my man--back up.  And she was very nice, but that was in Atlantic City in her dressing room.
Speaker 1: This is George Gabriel Williams, my dad, in the Navy, during his two-time tour of Korea.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: This is Gabriel Williams, my father's father.
Speaker 2: This photograph was taken at WDAS-FM in Philadelphia in the studio.  Right to left, Coloma (ph.) Rios (ph.), my mother's best friend, Dyana.  Seated in the yellow is Bene (ph.) Venita (ph.) Vives, my grandmother, my mother's mother.  My mother is standing behind her, Nancy Vives Neuman.  Beside her, my father standing.  Seated with the glasses on is my grandfather, Juan Vives; my daughter, Princess Idia when she was little; and my sons, Salahdeen directly behind Juan Vives; and in the yellow Lakers cap, Caliph Gamble.
Speaker 1: Photograph of my parents on their wedding day with my grandparents.  Starting with the right, Bene Venita Vives, my mother's mother; the flower girl, Pam; my cousin standing beside my grandmother; my step-grandfather; my mother; my father; my father's mother, Mary Scott; my uncle, the little boy, Neil Vives; and my grandfather, Juan Vives, grandfather, my step-grandfather beside my grandmother.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: This is Nancy Crock (ph.) Vives, my mother as a child at one of her cotillions in Culpepper, Virginia.  This is my grandfather later in life, Gabriel Williams.  April, can you grab my-
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: This is right to left, Jimmy Jam, Grammy Award-winning producer.  April, what was his name?  Right, standing next to Jimmy--can't remember his name all of a sudden, a famous promotion guy.
