Story_ID: 650011
Speaker 1: I'd like to have you start out--we're gonna slate the interview.  So my name is Julieanna Richardson.  I'm the interviewer.  Matthew Hickey is the videographer.  And I'd like to have you start out by stating and spelling your name, including your middle name, and give your date of birth.
Speaker 2:  	Charles Morris Warfield, Jr. [HistoryMaker Charles Warfield, Jr.]; that's Morris, M-O-R-R-I-S, Warfield, W-A-R-F-I-E-L-D, Jr.  I was born in 19--September 10, 1949.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your place of birth?
Speaker 2:  	Place of birth was Washington, D.C., Freedmen's Hospital [Howard University Hospital, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: And our location today?
Speaker 2:  	Our location today is Skadden, Arps [Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher and Flom LLP] at the, 4 Times Square on the thirty-seventh floor, conference room 37C.
Speaker 1: And, and your occupation--sorry?
Speaker 2:  	My occupation--I am a senior advisor today to YMF Media, LLC, until very recently, formerly the president and COO of YMF Media, LLC here in New York City [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Would you call yourself a radio executive or a broadcasting executive?
Speaker 2:  	I would call myself a broadcast executive rather than a radio executive (audio disturbance).
Story_ID: 650012
Speaker 1: We ask five People magazine-ish questions of everyone, short answers, your favorite food?
Speaker 2:  	My favorite food, I'm not allowed to have it as often as I like, but it's fried chicken.
Speaker 1: A favorite time of year?
Speaker 2:  	Favorite time of year is the spring, and I like that everything's blooming and the colors.
Speaker 1: A favorite plate--no, favorite color?
Speaker 2:  	Favorite color would be, to wear would be black.  But I'm also sort of partial to the color in red.
Speaker 1: A favorite place to vacation?
Speaker 2:  	That's a very easy one.  It's Saint Martin.  My wife [Mary Warfield]--our family has been vacationing there for the past twenty-seven years.
Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2:  	Straight talk makes for straight understanding, is a phrase that I borrowed from a former pastor of mine here in New York City [New York, New York], Reverend Johnny Ray Youngblood.
Story_ID: 650013
Speaker 1: You know, I was just--when you were--oh god, I forget what you said, but that brought back something to me.  Okay, I wanna start out and if you could talk about your family, I'd like to get your family background.  So if you would talk about--let's start with your father [Charles Warfield, Sr.].  And if you could talk about him and what you--you know, his birth--date of birth, year, and what you know about his growing up.
Speaker 2:  	Well, my father was born in--out, outside of Baltimore, Maryland, in Ellicott City [Maryland] area in September 23rd of 1917, I believe.  He was an only child, raised by his mother [Lillian Morris Warfield] who was a single parent; did not know my, my grandfather [Caleb Warfield]; never met unfortunately my, my grandmother.  She was a homemaker, a domestic, for a family in Ellicott City in, in the area which is now known as Potomac, Maryland.  My father went to--as far as schooling, he went to a private boys school in Virginia.  He used to give us--he used to challenge us with stories about that upbringing as to where he went to school and that if we would ever get out of line that's where he would wind up sending us.  And the one thing I remembered about the school is that it was in an open field.  There was nothing around it until you got maybe a quarter of a mile out.  There were trees and all.  And I kept thinking it looks sort of like a prison.  You put me there and there's nowhere I can go, and I'm a city kid.  So it helped to keep five boys in, in line as we were growing up.  But my father was a very hard worker.  He always had two jobs when we were growing up.  He drove a cab at night most of my young life.  And he also had different jobs that he maintained during the day.  The other thing also we learned from my, my father, and all of the boys learned--there are five boys--was how to cook, because my father did the cooking for the family Sunday through Friday.  My mother [Ruby Carroll Warfield] got to cook on Saturday.  My mom may not, you know, appreciate this, but we ate together as a family Sunday through Friday.  Saturday was optional.  We ate when we felt like it, depending upon what my mother cooked and whether or not we had an appetite for it.  But he was always, always working, always involved with people, very much an outgoing individual.  As a matter of fact, it was his commitment to his job and his willingness to help people--he de- he declined to take care of his own health and passed sooner than any of us would have expected to have happened, but very boy oriented--male oriented.  I remember growing up one of the things we always did, we would watch fights together on Friday nights.  My father was a big Notre Dame [University of Notre Dame, South Bend, Indiana] fan.  We were--I was a ba- raised Catholic in Washington, D.C. when I was growing up--didn't have an option but to root for Notre Dame, and I was a Notre Dame football fan--professional football fan.  But the things that would happen in a male dominated household, as our household was.
Story_ID: 650014
Speaker 1: So your father [Charles Warfield, Sr.]--how old were you when your father passed away?
Speaker 2:  	I was in my early thirties.  He passed away in 1985 from prostate cancer.  He suffered with the disease for ten years.  The only thing I remembered about when that occurred--not when he passed, but when he had his original operation, the doctor came out of the operating room and we were all there, my mother [Ruby Carroll Warfield] and, and, and sons--four of the five boys were there.  And the doctor told us that my father could have--it could be three months, six months; it could be a year.  My father struggled with the disease for ten years, and in my mind my father just had some things that he wanted to do.  He was not ready to give up.  He was not ready to quit.  And I was working and living here in the New York City [New York, New York] area, and I remembered every three, four months making that trip to D.C. [Washington, D.C.] because my father for, for various reasons was hospitalized.  We never knew when he went in whether he would come out, we had ten years.  He got to see his--my two children born.  And when he was finally ready to succumb, the one thing I remember is my father.  He was laying on the sofa at home looking at us and saying you know, "I'm tired, I'm tired."  And, and we knew that it--it was close to, to that time at that point.
Story_ID: 650015
Speaker 1: How far back did he know or do you know the family history on his side?
Speaker 2:  	I don't know much of my father's family history.  There were some distant cousins that were down in the Rappahannock area in Virginia [Rappahannock County, Virginia].  We would go down occasionally when I was very young; I was four, five, six years old.  The thing I remembered about family at that point is that I had an uncle--well, he had an uncle who was a pastor, relatively strict as far as I knew.  And it was sort of put into my mind that picture of the high school.  They had a home overlooking a, a major road, and I just felt sort of isolated when I was there.  I remember my little red pedal car that was there.  And my parents [Ruby Carroll Warfield and Charles Warfield, Sr.] would drop us off--my brother [Carroll Warfield] be right behind me and I for the summer.  But my aunt, my uncle, I would spend some time with them.  But really as I got older, did not stay in touch with them; and don't have much memory of my father's upbringing.
Story_ID: 650016
Speaker 1: And your mother, what a--can you give her name and her year of birth (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) My mother, Ruby, Carroll was her maiden name [Ruby Carroll Warfield].  She was from Nanjemoy, Maryland, which is in the Indian Head Highway [Maryland Route 210] area of, of Maryland outside of D.C. [Washington, D.C.]. One of nine children.  We were raised--our family was raised pretty much as part of an extended family with my mother's siblings' children, a lot of cousins, a lot of aunts and uncles that I remembered in growing up in that area.  As a matter of fact, we used to spend pretty much one day of every weekend visiting my mother's family in the Indian Head Highway, whether it was my grandfather [Carlton Carroll], who was alive until I was about eighteen, or aunts and uncles, who we remained in contact with throughout our entire lives and their entire lives.  But I remembered many occasions spending time with family, cousins, nephews, aunts, uncles.  I have one uncle in particular that owned a convenience store on Bryans Road, the Walton's Store [ph.].  As a matter of fact, the Waltons [ph.] still own a store on Bryans in Indian Head, Maryland, and we would spend many weekends--as a matter of fact, until I was old enough to say to my mother, you know, "I'd like to stay home now, Ma," and I was old enough to stay at home on my own--but we had an uncle who would always come by on either a Saturday or a Sunday--late morning, early afternoon--and pile the five boys into a car with my mother, and drive us all down for a, a day with the family, and we would be there all day.  And that occurred--that occurred our entire lives quite honestly.
Story_ID: 650017
Speaker 1: So how would you describe your mother [Ruby Carroll Warfield]?
Speaker 2:  	I would describe my mother as a hard worker; she was--she worked; she raised--she had five children, one of whom had the--Down syndrome; my mother worked for the agriculture department [U.S. Department of Agriculture]. Disciplinarian.  My mother was one of those that either we--we laugh and joke about this sometime when you, you hear comedians talk about the, "Wait until your father gets home."  Well, that was sort of my mother.  She didn't have to wait for my father [Charles Warfield, Sr.] to get home.  She, you know, had her own justice.  She made sure her boys knew right from wrong, and we did right, and there was a consequence for wrong--worked very hard, got up, left the house about 7:15 every morning going to work.  She'd walk back in about 5:00, 5:30 every evening.  Of course my bro- father would come home from work, and about 4:00 he'd be in the kitchen cooking dinner.  My mother was the one, you know, helping us with the homework and making sure that five boys were ready for the night and ready for the next day.  My mother was kind of--kind of quiet in, in that--I that sense, not a very particularly warm, outgoing person.  She was very outgoing within her family, but as far as the kids were concerned, not--neither more or father showed a lot of love per se, not hugging and kissing kind of upbringing, but responsibility, respect.  Schooling was, was important to, to the family and not just to my, my parents but my extended family also.  And she--one of the things we never wanted to have is to have the police bring any of, of their kids home for any particular reason.  We had an interesting background in terms of where we lived in Washington [D.C.].  We lived on what is known as Chicago Street. And during my upbringing at--it was a dead end street, and at the top of the street was a police precinct, the 11th Precinct.  So on our block we had a little insulated neighborhood and community that extended two blocks long and two blocks on either side, if you can envision a cross. And the police officers parked in our neighborhoods, so we always had--we were sort of insulated from some of the surrounding areas, which was a very difficult area at times, in the Anacostia area of Washington, D.C.  But we had a little enclave that we were protected from outside influences coming into our community.
Story_ID: 650018
Speaker 1: Are you the oldest of, of the--of the five?
Speaker 2:  	I am the oldest of five boys.
Speaker 1: Of five boys.
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: So can you give your siblings' name and birth order?
Speaker 2:  	Behind me is Carroll M. Warfield [Carroll Warfield], he's also Morris Warfield, who is three years younger than me, so that would make him today sixty-one.  I had a brother who passed this past May with Down syndrome.  He would have fifty- he was fifty-nine years old.  Something happened in hit--with the birth certificate, but it was Michael Darnell Warfield.  It should have been Darnell Michael Warfield [Darnell Warfield], because all of us would have had M as a middle initial.  And the youngest brothers are eight years younger than me.  They are twins, twin boys, identical twins, Gerald [Gerald Warfield] and Gerard [Gerard Warfield], born in 1957; so they're eight years younger than me at the moment.
Story_ID: 650019
Speaker 1: So what is your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2:  	My earliest memories are really about the neighborhood [Anacostia, Washington, D.C.]--the family and the neighborhood.  I had a neighborhood--again, when we talk about a neighborhood that was pretty insulated, two blocks long, two blocks on either side.  All of the neighbors knew one another.  We used to play in the street a lot.  We were allowed--we were required to be out of the house.  It wasn't any reason to be in the house during the course of the day.  And our parents worked.  We always had a babysitter or someone, whether it was a neighbor that was caring for us or an extended family member that would care for us.  While my mother [Ruby Carroll Warfield] and father [Charles Warfield, Sr.] were at work, the neighbors took care of the kids on, on the block.  I have memories of Mrs. Conyers [ph.] on the block, who would--she had her own children. She had a child younger than me.  She had two sons and a daughter older than me, but she was sort of the, the, the mother of the block, so to speak.  She was the one that if anyone needed to contact the police department--if there was anything that needed to be done in the neighborhood relative to political leaders, Mrs. Conyers was the one to do that.  We also had a large family, the Stewart [ph.] family that lived up the street.  There were thirteen Stewart children. And the Stewarts--Mr. Stewart would work during the day.  And one thing we could always count on Mr. Stewart to do when he came home from work was sitting on his--sitting on his porch with his pipe, keep a watch on the neighborhood to make sure that we were not busting up car windows 'cause we were throwing the football around, but that there were also no outside influences or no one was doing things that they shouldn't have been able to do.  But in, in growing up it was just a very close neighborhood that raised the kids, not only in the neighborhood and being on the street.  Much of the neighborhood were, were Catholics.  We attended the same Catholic church, which also sort of, you know, formed some opinions in my mind about religion, but we all--many of us went to the same church.  I didn't not go to parochial school, which is a story in itself.  My younger brothers did go to parochial school.  The Stewart family went to parochial school.  I did not.  But when you didn't go to parochial school, you had to go to catechism classes on Saturday mornings, so I was accustomed to going to school six days a week, catechism classes during the school year from nine a.m. until twelve noon.  And then sort of the day sort of extended if your parents sort of pushed you, because then you had choir or you had altar boy rehearsal in the afternoon.  So if you really got that involved in the church you could be their all, all day on a Saturday.  But it was a real close knit neighborhood, and probably 25 percent of the neighbors are still in that neighborhood today.
Speaker 1: So what was the address of the--of your house on Chica- it was Chicago--(unclear)--
Speaker 2:  	Chicago Street.  It was 1110 Chicago Street Southeast.  My youngest twin brother still lives in that home.  We own the home.  We turned it over to him because he was caring, not only for my mother as her health failed--and she's still living; she's in assisted living--but also my brother with Down syndrome [Darnell Warfield] until he was no abe- no longer able to stay at home.  He cared for them while also maintaining a full time job.  One of the things we did in, in appreciation for that is turning the family home over to him, so that family home is still in the family.
Story_ID: 650020
Speaker 1: You know, you did such a beautiful job of, of describing, you know, the, the neighborhood [Anacostia, Washington, D.C.].  I, I will wanna explore why you didn't go to Catholic school, but before that I'd like to have you just talk about what sat- sights, smells and sounds remind you of growing up.
Speaker 2:  	I--food being cooked in the kitchen was always a smell that I enjoyed to this day and enjoyed growing up because we never knew what it might be.  One thing about my father [Charles Warfield, Sr.], he would try anything.  It would--you know, we would have soft shell crabs; we'd have some type of a, a shrimp casserole; there would certainly be the traditional roast beef and chicken being cooked.  But my father was a very adventurous cook so there was always the smells of the kitchen that were there.  The end of our street was a dead end, and we lived at the base of that dead end street.  It was--there were--there were railroad tracks, and there was a train going up and down the tracks.  And it was also at that point an extension of the Southeast Naval Yard [Washington Navy Yard, Washington, D.C.] extended literally within--rocks throw from our house.  So there was the smell at that point of the vehicles on the base and the--and during the spring and the summer the trees and I call--we called them bushes as we were growing up and those smells.  The reason I remember that is that I was allergic to everything that was growing there, but it was also a play area for all of us.  So, those are the things that I remember on, on the block itself to this day.
Speaker 1: And what about--I, I heard smells.  I don't know if I heard sounds.
Speaker 2:  	Sounds was, was--it was music for me growing up.  My father, he drove a cab at night.  My father had habits, some people call a bad tendency to come in the house two in the morning--1:30, 2:00.  Instead of crawling in the bed, my father would just sort of sit on the sofa and, either late at night when he came in or early in the morning as he was getting ready before he went to work, we would hear music being played--jazz music being played.  It, it might be a gospel song being played from the stereo that was in the hallway below my bedroom.  There was always music in the house.  My father also sang in the solos and sang in the choir at church.  And my father was someone who loved to practice what he sang, and he had a wonderful voice.  It would always be the voice of my father singing.  You know, there was also some, some things that don't leave such a, a positive memory for me, and I have to tell that as the truth of part of growing up.  It was disagreements and arguments between my mother [Ruby Carroll Warfield] and my father.  As my mother worked, my father worked.  Their struggling with raising five boys, one of whom had a, a handicap [Darnell Warfield].  And things weren't always perfect.  They stayed together for the boys.  A lot of times I believe they did stay together because of the family.  But there were those, those sounds.   So there's the positive sounds of the music.  There was also the disagreements between my mother and my father that I could never get out of my mind from growing up.
Story_ID: 650021
Speaker 1: So, (clears throat) you're the oldest so how is that--how is that role--how does that play out within the family, you know, you being the oldest boy and your responsibilities with that.  And then I wanna ask about when your, your third brother--you know, the one with Down syndrome [Darnell Warfield]--how that sort of changes the dynamic.
Speaker 2:  	Well, there was always the responsibility being the oldest brother.  I don't remember that being a particular challenge as I was younger.  One thing I do remember, though, throughout, until I went away to college [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] is that the brother right behind me, Carroll [Carroll Warfield], who's three years younger than me--but when I went out during the spring, during the summer, when we're playing--we're playing football--I had to take my brother with me.  I was not allowed to go out and leave my brother at home.  My brother never went out by himself.  He always had to be with me, and I resented that at, at times.  I mean, you're--a lot of my friends happened to be one or two years older than me, and now I've got my younger brother who's always around no matter what.  It played out in both of our lives.  Here is a very aggressive young man who's always been that way, never willing to accept second best, never wanting to lose at anything, always being aggressive, standing up to anyone.  I had to be the responsible older brother.  It, it sort of played out until I went to college.  My brother and I used to always get into little squabbles.  I would always pick on my brother.  I did until I was a freshman in college and came home, and my younger brother was, all of a sudden was bigger than me.  And it's amazing how those disagreements just came to a screeching halt.  But it in, in growing up, very recently, over Thanksgiving, which we do as a family--my family--for most of my life, my brother was telling his youngest son, who's eleven, about how he threw a fork that stuck in my throat when I was younger.  And, and that was because the night before--we had bunk beds--and I--my brother irritated me some kind of way, and I took a hairbrush and threw it down and hit him in the head.  So we had that back and forth growing up always, but I will say today that as brothers we've always stayed close.  We are close today.  We spend most of the major holidays together.  We still--we're very close.  We got through all of that.  It sort of formulates who you are.  It made my brother very much who he is.  For me I sort of resented it in a great degree, but I sort of became--sort of compensated in some other ways in terms of being kind of quiet, reading a lot when I did get some quiet time by myself without my younger brother.  But it made him a lot more aggressive in, in a lot of ways in growing up.
Story_ID: 650022
Speaker 1: So he was the lit- he was always trying to prove maybe he was you, you know, or something.  You know, it's hard to be sa- they say the second and third child sometime--'cause they have to find their way.
Speaker 2:  	Carroll [Carroll Warfield] had to find his way.  It was interesting.  If we would have talked to some of my friends in growing up, one thing they would--what they would comment on is that I didn't have a lot of fights when I was growing up.  I was not in a lot of fights.  People in the neighborhood sort of shied away from me because they were more afraid of my brother.  So my brother would always come to the defense if there was something involving his older brother.  I didn't have that concern so much with him because I'm the older brother, and he wasn't getting into those, those issues unless it was directed at me first, and he always stood up for his older, older brother.  So I don't remember a lot of fights in growing up, couple at school--in elementary school [James G. Birney Elementary School; Thurgood Marshall Academy, Washington, D.C.], but I was had my younger brother who was there as a defender for me.
Speaker 1: Now what--how did things change when your--wait, the, the, the--your bro--Michael--is it Michael?
Speaker 2:  	Michael.  We call him Darnell [Darnell Warfield].
Speaker 1: Dar--
Speaker 2:  	Darnell Michael.
Speaker 1: Darnell--
Speaker 2:  	Darnell.
Speaker 1: Okay, so when Darnell--how did things change then?  'Cause this--we're talking about a different time.  People are just now coming around to physically challenged--and we haven't even dealt with the mentally challenged yet.
Speaker 2:  	Right.
Speaker 1: So--but that was--so how did that change things?
Speaker 2:  	I--someone has asked me that recently, and, and I guess there are certain things in your life you just sort of put out of your mind.  But my parents did not allow us to treat Darnell differently.  Darnell was a younger brother; he was five years younger than me.  He obviously was not allowed to go out and do all the things that Carroll and I could do but, you know, he was allowed to go out on the block.  He had his friends on the block.  The neighborhood kept an eye on Darnell, and they kept an eye on Darnell until he was no longer able to stay on that block, and he was in his mid-fifties by that--by that point, but he was a brother.  He had responsibilities in the house just like we had in the house.  When I had to give--when I had to give chores to my brother, because my mother [Ruby Carroll Warfield] when she went away--went to work--would wake me up first, give me the chores that we had to do during the spring and the summer.  And my attitude is, if I'm up, my brothers are gonna be up.  But, you know, he all--he had chores to be done like everyone else.  As a family we went to, to Indian Head, Maryland, and visit with my mother's family.  Darnell went everywhere that we went.  There were some restrictions on what he could do, but my family always had Darnell engaged.  He was always engaged in programs; he had summer camps that he went to; he bowled; he was in Special Olympics.  He had a, a full life, as, as we said in his going, going home ceremony.  So when he was born and my mother brought Darnell home, Darnell was another one of the boys that my mother and my father [Charles Warfield, Sr.] had.  We didn't treat him any differently.
Speaker 1: So there--that's pretty innovative in some respects, 'cause a lot of people they would do different things, you know, some--
Speaker 2:  	We found out when we--when my brother passed this past May that my parents were told when Darnell was born that it was not likely that he would survive.  And, and in evidence of that my parents, who had two boys at that point and then Darnell was born January of '54 [1954], made arrangements for him to possibly not live long.  They'd bought burial plots for five family members, my mother and father and three sons.  I jokingly said to my twin brothers [Gerald Warfield and Gerard Warfield] that when they passed they were on their own 'cause there are still only five lots and you know, if we go first they were on their own.  They've gotta find that--they didn't find that too funny at that point, but in, in--you know, my parents were prepared for Darnell to not survive.  And Darnell survived 'til fifty-nine and had a very full life.  So my parents had a responsibility to five boys, and they raised five boys to the best of their ability (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 650023
Speaker 1: And then the twins [Gerald Warfield and Gerard Warfield] are--they're, they're how much younger than you?
Speaker 2:  	They are eight years younger than me--
Speaker 1: So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	--(simultaneous) the twins.
Speaker 1: So they're, they're like little babies.
Speaker 2:  	They were little babies to me.  I got to really get to know my twin brothers more as I got older.  When I went away to college [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], my twin brothers were eight years old at that point.  They weren't doing the things that I was doing--high--junior high school [Kramer Junior High School; Kramer Middle School, Washington, D.C.], high school [Anacostia High School, Washington, D.C.].  They weren't--you know, I--at the point that they were going--they were still going to the country on the weekends.  I was old enough to stay at home and not go myself.  So my memories of my twin brothers, besides the fact that they broke one of my teeth--and I don't know how they survived that, but--and I remind them of that from time to time--horsing around with them and one 'em sat on my head and my tooth remained on the floor.  And I think I would have had one less brother if my parents [Ruby Carroll Warfield and Charles Warfield, Sr.] weren't home at that point.  But, you know, I--we've all become closer.  The twin brothers became much closer to my father in a way as they grew older.  My father I mentioned drove a cab, and driving a cab, as an individual in a house, you cannot drive a taxicab for personal use.  So I would--did not have access to a family car at that point.  As my brothers were growing up, my father became a union representative in Washington, D.C. and had a company supplied car.  And they had some benefits of my father being around and being home that I did not have--never resentful of it.  It was just a transition of his life and what was--and how it was a little bit different from my brothers and for me.
Story_ID: 650024
Speaker 1: I had responsibilities.  We all--we all cook.  We all wash and dry clothes.  One of my responsibilities was to go around the corner to the laundromat, which was a great time for me.  One of the things that I did growing up is I read a lot--comic books, books just in general.  And quiet time for me was to go to the laundry room, be in the laundry room, washing clothes, sitting in the window reading.  I had the light of the window, facing out to the street, and reading, and I would be there for a couple of hours once a week when I--when I did that.  That's how a lot of my friends and neighbors remember me growing up.  I always had a book in my hand.
Speaker 2: So, Charles [HistoryMaker Charles Warfield, Jr.], you were--you were an inward kind of--because you talk of also about being quiet.
Speaker 1:  	Yes.
Speaker 2: You know, so can you describe yourself as a young person?
Speaker 1:  	I can do that.  I mentioned that many of my neighbors went to parochial school.  I did not.  I went to the, the local public school, Birney Elementary School [James G. Birney Elementary School; Thurgood Marshall Academy], which was a few blocks from my home in Barry Farms [Barry Farm, Washington, D.C.] in D.C.  I had a few--very few of my neighbors who went to school with me.  I don't really remember neighbors on the block that were in my classes.  And I was in Birney Elementary School through the fourth grade.  And in the fourth grade, they transferred me from what was Birney to what they called Old Birney.  It was a block away.  It was a much older building, smaller classrooms, but what I always remember about those times is kids were not all taught the same subjects at the same time.  So my teacher in the fifth grade, sixth grade, would divide us into different groups, depending upon our proficiency in math, our proficiency in, in English, in reading.  And I--and I remember this, with, with reading and math in particular, I was the one guy that when the teacher called my group up, I'm the only guy going up to the front, so you get accused of being the teacher's pet.  And, and what you do when you're faced with something, but then you wanna be one of the guys, you wanna be sort of one of the group, and I always remember, you know, dragging my chair up to the front, and banging into other chairs and the desks.  'Cause if--you know, you didn't wanna go up there.  I mean, your parents are proud of you, but you, you sort of--you don't wanna be that guy.  And I remember that in math, I had--I was the only kid in, in--at certain times I was the only kid in that group.  In English there were a couple of, of girls that were in that group along with me, but none of the guys in--and that was through the, the sixth grade.  I'm gonna go back to elementary school, why I didn't go to parochial school--the oldest of five boys.  Many, many of the parents sent their kids to parochial school on my--in my neighborhood.  My father [Charles Warfield, Sr.] was Catholic.  My mother [Ruby Carroll Warfield] was Baptist.  My father agreed to raise his, his sons as--under the Catholic religion.  We went to church [Our Lady of Perpetual Help Catholic Church, Washington, D.C.] on Sunday--went to church every Sunday until I became old enough to tell my father as--going into my sophomore year in college [sic. high school] I'm not going to church this morning.  But when my parents went to enroll me in the second grade in the local parochial school, Our Lady of Perpetual Help [Our Lady of Perpetual Help School], the re- the request was made for my mother to convert to Catholicism, and she refused to do that.  And they refused to allow me to go into the second grade in parochial school, so I remained in the local--in the public school.  Now in hindsight, I look back on that.  It was one of the best things that could have happened to me, because of my experience once I got out of elementary school going into an integrated junior high school and an integrating Washington, D.C., public school.  So my experience became broader than it would have been had I gone to Our Lady of Perpetual Help.  But I was not allowed to enroll in the second grade in parochial school.  Now my younger brothers, Carroll [Carroll Warfield], behind me, and the twins [Gerald Warfield and Gerard Warfield], were allowed to go into parochial school.  They sort of lifted that requirement from my mother, from the family.  They did go to parochial school all the way through high school.  They went to parochial school, but I did not.  I went to the public elementary, junior [Kramer Junior High School; Kramer Middle School] and high school [Anacostia High School] in Washington, D.C.; and to look back on it, glad that that happened to me.
Story_ID: 650025
Speaker 1: Now was there any--you say your parents had arguments.  Was that any--was that a source of any of the arguments, about the parochial versus--
Speaker 2:  	No, I never re- my--we were raised as Catholic.  I don't ever remember, with the exception of an occasional funeral, ever going to church with my mother [Ruby Carroll Warfield].  We always went to church.  We didn't necessarily go to church with my father [Charles Warfield, Sr.].  My father made sure we went to church.  We may get a ride to church with the Jacksons [ph.] up the street.  We may get a ride to church with the Stewarts [ph.].  Mr. Stewart had a station wagon.  When you have thirteen kids, it's--you need some transportation that can handle a large family.  The, the Catholic--the Catholic service was forty-five minutes more or less, so you have an eight o'clock, nine o'clock, ten o'clock, eleven o'clock service.  So if there was room in the--in the Stewarts' car, you know, myself and Carroll [Carroll Warfield] may hop in the car and get a ride up to church.  And we always would walk, walk down from church.  But the church also played another role in, in my upgra--bringing because in my neighborhood in Anacostia [Washington, D.C.] where I lived was all black.  We would see, you know, white police officers, but the neighborhood was an African American neighborhood.  But very close by--matter of a blocks--it was predominantly white, and there were two Catholic churches.  As I grew up I've, I've looked at 'em as the black Catholic church and the white Catholic church.  The white Catholic church from my home was three blocks.  The black Catholic church was at the top of the hill, Morris Road in Washington, D.C., about a mile from the house.  But that's where we went to church.  We were not allowed.  We were not welcome, not allowed to go to Saint Teresa's [Saint Teresa of Avila Catholic Church, Washington, D.C.] around the corner.  We had to go to, to Our Lady [Our Lady of Perpetual Help Catholic Church, Washington, D.C.].  Something that always stuck with me--there's something wrong here with the church, not black, white as much as, how can the church allow something like that to happen?  But we were not allowed to go to Saint Teresa when I was growing up until the neighborhood began to change.  So there was the experience of the black, white Catholic church.  There was also the experience that the Catholic church would not allow me to enroll because my mother would not agree to become Catholic.
Story_ID: 650026
Speaker 1: But your father [Charles Warfield, Sr.] seems like he ru- he really controls a lot of what goes in the house--you know, goes on in the house in a lot of respects, you know, 'cause he's--so what are you learning from your father?  What is he teaching you?
Speaker 2:  	He's teaching us how to provide for the family.  As I said, he always had--he always had two jobs. He was always there when we woke up in the morning preparing breakfast.  He was all there--always there in the evening when, when we came home from school or when it was time for dinner, and he would call us to the table, and we were there together for dinner.  But he was always providing for, for the family.  My father was also someone that you did not talk back to.  Not that he, you know, it--you know, dished out corporal punishment because that was not the issue.  You could have a conversation with my father contrary to how he felt or what he was expressing until he took a step in our direction, in which case the conversation was over.  But education was important to my father.  My father was also a very outgoing individual whether it was involved with political leadership in, in Washington, D.C.  He got along very well with anyone--very verbal, very outgoing in that regard.  He was very comfortable around anyone, black, white, or, or any other kinds of people.  He got along with the ladies very well.  So there's good and bad that you learned, you know, in, in watching your parent.  But he was always working and he was always taking care of, of his family, and that work ethic is something that to this day we--we've all learned from, we've all emulated.  You know, our wives, you know, present and past, might say that we're cursed by.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) That's cute.  Okay.  I'm sorry.  I was reading between the lines (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter).
Story_ID: 650027
Speaker 1: The thing that I wanted to ask: are there other memories you have of growing up in your household?  You know, 'cause--and I'm thinking first round, you know, whether it's--were you the type of family to take vacations?  You know, what were holidays like?  You know, I know that weekends that you were spending, you know, with your mother's side of the family, but I'm just trying to--summers--
Speaker 2:  	Vacations for us, five boys, working parents--my mother [Ruby Carroll Warfield] had a large extended family.  We would always spend a week or two with other cousins at, at my grandfather's [Carlton Carroll], at one of my aunts.  It was always down in Nanjemoy [Maryland], Pomonkey [Maryland], Indian Head [Maryland], 'cause that's where my mother's family was from.  She came to the city.  Some of her siblings also came to Washington [D.C.], all of about a half hour today.  But we would always spend a week or two there when we were--when I was very young.  My father's uncle, we would go to his home for a week, Uncle Morris [ph.].  We would go to his home for a--for a week or two.  I remember that as my, my uncle was someone that was very strict and stern as I remembered.  He was a pastor.  I remembered something happened one day in, in the house during a storm, and, and he got an electrical shock.  And I don't; for whatever, reason, I just sort of giggled about that, thought it was funny.  He did not think that was funny, and I paid the consequence for that, but I sort of remember that.  But we would--that was vacation for us.  We didn't take family vacations.  That was a vacation for my parents.  It was also a vacation for us as boys to, to go away to the country.  We, we--to this day we call it to the country.  It was a lot of farm land; it was a lot of woods.  I'm a city boy.  When I got old enough as I said to say I don't--really don't wanna do that, I did not.  But the holidays were different, particularly Thanksgiving and, and Christmas.  As a family growing up, it--we continue this tradition today.  My fa- my mother had--it was nine siblings with my mother, and there were husbands and, and family, extended family.  My father [Charles Warfield, Sr.] cooked Thanksgiving dinner until he passed.  Thanksgiving dinner was at our--my parents' table.  I believe I was fifty years old before I had Thanksgiving dinner anywhere except the table that I was raised at in Washington, D.C.  My father enjoyed cooking; he loved cooking.  Other family members would always bring a dish, but my father pretty much did the cooking for Thanksgiving.  And the cooking began on Sunday and continued right up to the--to Thursday and everyone was welcome, uncles, aunts, cousins--not necessarily there for the whole day, but during the course of the day, we would be there as a family having Thanksgiving dinner.  And as, as boys, what we promised ourselves and promised my father before he passed is that we would maintain that tradition, and we still get together as a family.  You know, of course, over time families expand and have their own traditions, but we still have a family gathering for Thanksgiving now.  It's at my brother's home in Mitchellville, Maryland, because my mother can no longer travel, but I was just there for Thanksgiving a couple of weeks ago.  And I always remember those Thanksgiving get togethers, and it was also how family always came together. Christmas--my memories of Christmas were we could never find the Christmas gifts until Christmas morning.  The way our house was configured, there was a dining room table in the basement, and there were five boys.  And on Christmas morning you'd come downstairs, and your name would be at the table, and your gifts were there at that table on Christmas morning.  And Christmas morning was as any kid, you play with your toys.  They had to break you away to have some kind of breakfast.  Well, I really don't want breakfast, until it was time to get dressed because we were as a family going to the country, because on Christmas, the family came together on Christmas.  We went to the wal- generally to the Walton's [ph.].  They had a larger home.  They had the store.  And the cousins, the nephews, we were all there for Christmas day.  That was what we did.  Other holidays, 4th of July, we were down at the country.  Memorial Day, we were at the country.  So some people would look at that as a vacation, a break, but that's how we celebrated the major holidays; and we were always together as a family.
Story_ID: 650028
Speaker 1: I know you described yourself as shy, and you've described yourself several times as a city boy.  How else would you des- and you, you also were naturally a good student.  I understand that.  And I think you also indicated that math, math--you were--you were good with math.  Can you describe yourself also--I mean, anything I've missed?
Speaker 2:  	I, I read a lot when I was growing up.  I loved comic books.  We had a gro- a corner store up the street that a Jewish family owned.  They were there all the time, so we got to know their, their kids; we sort of grew up with their kids.  But they would have the--a box in the store of comic books, where you could buy three comic books for twenty-five cent.  The, the titles were, were cut off at the top so they may not have been the brand new edition of it, but I'd would be there.  I'd be there as often as I had some money to go buy a comic book, and I always had comic books.  I, I got after my mother [Ruby Carroll Warfield] once.  I said, "Did you take--where are my comic books?"  Just like with the Lionel train.  "Where's my Lionel train," now that it's a collector's item.  "Well, I, I gave that away," or, "I got rid of that."  As the family gets out of the house and moves away, she reclaimed some space.  But I always had a book in my hand, whether it was at the--at the laundry room around the corner where I would take the cart of clothes and wash and dry clothes.  I'm sitting there and I had a book.  I'd sit on my front porch and always had a book.  I read a, a lot.  I mentioned that my friends--my--when I was young, the friends you had--I had were really family.  'Cause every Saturday or Sunday we were at the country.  We played football and ran up and down the street and played tag and played horse with the neighbors in the--in the neighborhood--the Stewarts [ph.].  The Stewarts--there was--Donna [ph.] was the, the closest one to me.  There was also Kenny Stewart [ph.], who was a year older than me.  But I never went to school with Donna, and Kenny was a year older than me.  And particularly when I got to junior high [Kramer Junior High School; Kramer Middle School, Washington, D.C.] and high school [Anacostia High School, Washington, D.C.], I didn't go to school with any of the--any of my neighbors.  But I was sort of accustomed to--I'm the kid in the fourth grade dragging his chair alone up to the front of the room to have my math class or to do my reading lesson, as, as, as the teacher, Mrs. Jenkins [ph.], had divided us up into, into groups.  And I was in that quote (air quotes) advanced group at that point.  Something I always remember about Mrs. Jenkins, she taught me a lot that I didn't know I was being taught at that point, but I always hated the parents-teachers meetings because I knew what Mrs. Jenkins was gonna say to my parents, "He could always do better; he's doing okay, but he could always do better."  I didn't really wanna do the best that I possibly could, but at the same time I also knew that my parents were holding me responsible for doing my work and being a decent student.  But I was--I didn't--I mentioned--you mentioned sights, and sounds.  And music was always the sound when I was growing up, my father's [Charles Warfield, Sr.] music, my father's singing in, in growing up, my father's voice in church when he sang in the choir, either as a choir member or, or solos.  There was a--there were always albums in the house.  That became a, a lifelong passion of mine, collecting albums and listening to music.  But the tradeoff for that is that I was one of the guys on the neighborhood that I didn't do a lot of dancing, so dancing is not a--is not something that I'm proud of.  Today I'll get out there.  You get passed your prime.  But we had some dancers in my neighborhood.  I was the kid that always had all the music.  I always had all the music until--probably until about ten years ago when I gave about five thousand albums away to my oldest son [Edward Lawson], because I'd refused to move them from New York [New York]--matter of fact, now this is fifteen years--refuse to move 'em from New York to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] for the last time.  But I was always the music collector, so music became something that was--I would go into.  I would not be at the party doing the dancing, but I'd be at home listening to the music, and learning all of the songs, and learning all of the artists, and really getting in, into the music.  But that's something you can do singularly by yourself, listening to music, collecting music, what you like and why you like it.  In growing up, junior high and high school, I had one girlfriend on my block, Peaches Cook [ph.].  If my parent--if I wasn't home, my parents knew where I was.  I was at the Cook's house across the street.  The Cooks were another one of the families that was one Chicago Street and that we remained--she was my girlfriend until just before I went away to, to college [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], when I'd made the decision I need to leave Washington, D.C.  I need to get out of here.  But I was--I was kind of quiet.  I could always call myself quiet, shy.  People who know me today don't go for that, but I always remembered myself as being that type of kid growing up: always with a book in my hand, always reading.
Story_ID: 650029
Speaker 1: So what were you thinking inside then?  So you were really more internal.  What, what thoughts are going through your head?
Speaker 2:  	It was natural for me.  I was always around family.  I, I didn't--when we went around--down to the country, we all ripped and ran, and played, and played ball, and engaged with, with cousins--some older, some younger.  So I never considered myself to be--to be different.  But that education part, when I talk about the fifth grade, the sixth grade, going up to the front of the class and being in this group by myself, and not--none of my friends were either in the classroom and they were not in my--in my group.  And that continued when I went away--went to a junior high school, because I--then--the elementary school experience was a black school in a black neighborhood.  And I went to elementary school--I mean to junior high, Kramer Junior High [Kramer Junior High School; Kramer Middle School], in, in Anacostia [Washington, D.C.], totally different experience because that school was probably 80 percent white, 20 percent black.  And my, my most vivid memory of going to the seventh grade--I always considered my parents [Ruby Carroll Warfield and Charles Warfield, Sr.] to be smart.  My father was always very good with numbers, just a natural inclination and, and understanding of, of numbers.  He could just add things up--multiply things so quickly.  He was always very good with numbers, and I always remember my parents being able to help me with schoolwork when I--when I needed that help.  I remember being in the seventh grade in this (air quotes) new math class, and I remember it was called a new math class; I remember the text book.  It was a paperback textbook.  I'd never had a paperback textbook.  The textbook were always handed down through the class.  This was a brand new math class--new math.  And I remembered coming home from junior high school to do my homework and my parents, my father in particular, looked at me and said I can't help you with this.  And I had no neighbors.  There were none of my neighbors in any of my classes.  And I remember crying when I started the seventh grade.  Because you have to de- you have to depend upon yourself, and I guess I learned how to do that, to depend upon yourself.  You can't quit but you gotta find a way to figure this out, and, and I had to find a way to figure it out, and that was pretty much the case in junior high and high school [Anacostia High School, Washington, D.C.].  I didn't take classes with any of my neighbors.  I didn't have a neighbor that I could go over their home and study with or to do homework with.  As I got into high school, I had friends on the telephone who lived in other areas in Southeast that I could call on occasion for that, or you do some work together in a--in a library,  but as a student I had to depend on me.
Speaker 1: So, elementary again was--the name of the elementary was--
Speaker 2:  	And it was--it was Birney [James G. Birney Elementary School; Thurgood Marshall Academy, Washington, D.C.] that became--and then I went to--
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2:  	--Old Birney.
Speaker 1: So what's the difference between--that's what I was wandering.  What was the difference between Birney and Old Birney?
Speaker 2:  	I don't know why I was transferred from Old Birney to Birney.  I think part of it was how I was progressing--
Speaker 1: I thought you were in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	--(simultaneous) in elementary school.
Speaker 1: I thought you went from Birney to Old Birney.
Speaker 2:  	I went to--I went from Birney to Old Birney.
Speaker 1: Birney, right.
Speaker 2:  	That's correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	And, and I went from--I went to Old Birney in the fifth and sixth grade.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2:  	And that's when this division--separation of, of different categories of learning--first time I had experienced that being brought up as in a separate class and English class with, with my instructor, and I was sort of there by myself.
Speaker 1: So you were being tracked.  It was (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) I was being tracked.
Speaker 1: --being tracked, okay.
Speaker 2:  	And that's what we had at that point.  It was a track--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2:  	--in junior high school and a track in high school.
Speaker 1: So then junior high was?
Speaker 2:  	Kramer Junior High (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Kramer Junior High, and did that go from the sixth to the ninth or--
Speaker 2:  	It went from seventh through the ninth.
Speaker 1: Seventh--
Speaker 2:  	Seventh, eighth and ninth.
Speaker 1: --I'm sorry seventh through the ninth.
Speaker 2:  	Seventh through the ninth.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 650030
Speaker 1: And then, in high school was?
Speaker 2:  	Anacostia High School [Washington, D.C.], which at that point was just integrated in the early '60s [1960s].  I went there in '64 [1964].  There were still sporadic fights between black and white students.  The Stewarts [ph.]--there was some of the Stewart kids who went to Anacostia for high school and they--I remember the fights that they said they would have, because you had to go through a predominantly white neighborhood to get to the high school, and they didn't want us in that high school.  I fortunately did not have that same experience when I went to Kramer [Kramer Junior High School; Kramer Middle School, Washington, D.C.].  It seemed at Kramer it had calmed down.  I think one of the factors that helped that for me is I was involved with baseball; I was involved with football; I was involved a little bit with basketball.  There was a Police Athletic League in the school that began at 3:30 after school.  In order to go into the Police Athletic League and use the facilities and to play on any of the teams you had to go to school.  And the thing I always remembered--we had a football team and a baseball team at that particular police boys club.  And we--when we would go away to play, be it baseball or football, we had the only integrated team-- we ever played.  We either played all black teams or we played all white teams.  We'd go out in Maryland and Virginia and all the teams would be all white.  We'd go to certain areas in Washington, D.C., the teams were all black.  And you learn as a teammate, your teammate's not black or white; your teammate's a teammate.  You know, I played center in, in football, and the offensive's line responsibility--if you don't block according to how the play is called, the play breaks down.  It doesn't matter who that guy is next to you or what color they are.  As a team, in order to win, you had to work together as teammates.  And we defended one another.  When we would play the black school--the teams and they wanted to pile on some of our white teammate, that, that didn't work; that's our teammate.  And the same thing applied when we'd go to the white neighborhoods, and, and there would be issues with the parents or issues with the team--with the players playing a team that had black kids on it; we were a team.  And, and I learned that in junior high and high school.  And I go back to say what I've learned, why I was happy, and I didn't go to parochial school.  That experience may have been different for me had I not--had I'd gone into parochial school at that point my experience may have been totally different.
Story_ID: 650031
Speaker 1: So you--do you gra- are you gravitating--besides sports, are you gravitating to subjects that are more math and science than literature or--
Speaker 2:  	I--I'm gravitating to being a competitive student in an environment with students that seemed to be better prepared than me in junior high [Kramer Junior High School; Kramer Middle School, Washington, D.C.] and, and high school [Anacostia High School, Washington, D.C.].  And you're in a track.  You're either in an academic track, you're in a commercial track, you're in a shop track.  You're with students who--and I fortunately was in an academic track.  The expectation that was spoken and unspoken in my family is that I was gonna go to college.  My father [Charles Warfield, Sr.] didn't go to college.  My mother [Ruby Carroll Warfield] chose not to go to college.  She had siblings who were teachers and had gone to college.  My mother wanted to get into the work field, and left home, and moved to Washington [D.C.], and started a family, worked at the agricultural department [U.S. Department of Agriculture] until she retired to take care of my father when he's--when his hit- health began to fail.  So it was--it was understood that you're gonna go to college.  And these are the kids that I'm competing with, and you, you wanna keep up.  And again, I'm sort of that, that solitary kid that when I go home to do my homework, my parents could help me with some things and some things they couldn't.  And my neighbors weren't there to help me, because I wasn't taking any classes with them.  So you learn to sort of figure out a way to get--to get through it all.  I thought I was a better student than, than it turned out that I was.  My daughter [Jada Warfield] brought that to my attention, because as I was raising my own kids, always pushing, always pushing.  And at one point, my daughter found one of my high school yearbooks, and in the high school yearbook was my tenth and eleventh grade report card.  And I've--I'll never forget her reaction when I had a D in this; I had a--I got an F in deportment in one grading period.  My father--my daughter was like, how do you get an F in deportment?  What--well, I was sort of talkative.  'Cause again, I was that standalone kid in the fourth, fifth, sixth grade.  You're trying to fit in in junior high and high school.  I got kicked out of gym--out of physical ed [physical education] and gym once because the teacher said, "The next person that says anything is--," you know, "I'm gonna put 'em out of here."  And I was the next voice to be heard, and he put me out, and I got an F in that particular grading period.  But my daughter's always reminded me of "All this pushing you've done for us, for me and for my brother, and I look at your report card here.  How dare you?"  I was the father.  I will admit to who I was.  I was a father that when my daughter and my son [Jason Warfield] had four A's and a B plus I focused on the B plus--that you can always do better--or I focused on the B.  And I was guilty of that.  I was very much guilty of that, much more so than, than my first wife.  And my daughters never let me forget that, particularly after she found that report card.
Speaker 1: See memory and actuality, right?  Now--
Speaker 2:  	(Nods head) I thought I was a much better student 'til she reminded me that I'm not all that I thought I was.
Story_ID: 650032
Speaker 1: When you are getting ready to go to college, what is the talk of--I mean, how you end up going, you know, to Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia].  But how, how do you decide on that?
Speaker 2:  	It was God's will for me to get out of Washington, D.C., to have the opportunity to go to school.  My parents [Ruby Carroll Warfield and Charles Warfield, Sr.]--we had all the things that we needed.  My parents--I guess people would say we were poor.  I never--we never thought about ourselves as being poor.  I worked from the age of fourteen.  I looked at something not long ago, my first paycheck for--was for $5.69 from Police Athletic League, and I got that for doing a--one of the summer jobs we had was cleaning the prison cells or the jail cells in the--in the police station up the street, and I remembered how we used to have to clean those up.  But I had a $5.69 check stub that my parents kept and still have to this--to this day.  But always--always worked but, you know, couldn't expect to get a lot of money from, from my parents.  We had what I needed to, to go to school.  I had money for school lunch and things of that nature.  But I'll always remember my mother saying to me--the big sneaker at that point was Chuck Taylor's Converses.  And I would go shopping with my mother for clothes, and it was the, the Keds and the other sneakers that were on the table--make sure that the sizes match--and then there were Converses.  And my mother said to me that, "The first pair of Converses you buy, you will pay for."  With five boys Converses were not in the budget.  But when it came time to go to college, I had one teacher in particular, Mr. Kinsman [ph.], when I was a senior [at Anacostia High School, Washington, D.C.] who encouraged me to think beyond where I was.  "Where should you go to school?  Don't just think about Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  You know, think about the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland]," which was resisting integration at that point.  He told me at that point--I'll never forget--that, "You should apply to go to Penn State [Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania]."  There was no way in the world I--my parents could afford to send me to Penn State, or what did I know about Penn State?  My parents didn't go to college.  College was something we were expected to do.  Fortunately, I wasn't--I was accepted to Howard.  I was also accepted to Hampton.  There was a partial scholarship to Hampton, which made up the difference for me to stay at home and go to Howard or to have the opportunity to get away from home and go to Hampton.  And I was so blessed to be able to get away from home and to go to Hampton.  I say this today--people might take this the wrong way, but I mentioned none of my friends were in any of my classes.  I had friends when I was growing up.  None of them went to college.  We were friends through high school.  We did things together, but I, I jokingly say that had I stayed home with my core friends, I'd probably be a second semester junior today.  It was necessary for me to get away from home.  I took me a year to figure out--you know, being away from home, you've got your own responsibilities.  I never drank when I was in high school.  I tried to figure it out as a freshman in college.  I needed to maintain a 3.0 average in order to maintain my scholarship.  I think when the year was over I pledged a military fraternity, Pershing Rifle [National Society of Pershing Rifles].  I also played baseball, trying to be--trying to balance the social aspect of being away from home.  I wound up with a 2.8 grade point average.  And I came home for the summer, and the first thing my mother did was took me to the bank to take out a student loan to make up the difference that I lost because I didn't maintain that 3.0 average.  But family always--was always there to help the extended family.  I had an aunt and an uncle that--who did not have kids.  They adopted a, a son late in their lives when he was twelve, thirteen.  But they--family always pitched in to help my parents to make sure we had what we needed.  Sometimes we knew where that help was coming from.  Other times we did not, but we knew that we had family that were there.  They were always keeping an eye on us and how well are you doing.  I figured out the academic part before I got out of Hampton, but it took me a year and a half to figure some things out.
Story_ID: 650033
Speaker 1: What does the Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] experience represent for you because you ended up majoring--well, that's what I don't understa- it's says you majored in horns.
Speaker 2:  	I majored in accounting.
Speaker 1: In accounting.  What is this?  This is bad information.  Okay.
Speaker 2:  	I majored in accounting.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and so how was Hampton's program at that point?
Speaker 2:  	It's kind of interesting why I--before I--when I, I went--I looked at my yearbook picture and they ask you, you know, what your--what you anticipate yo--doing when you grow up, and I said accountant.  I think one of the reasons I said accountant is I was studying for where did I--where might I wanna go to school.  One thing I remembered about accounting majors, they did not have to take a foreign language.  And I was always pretty good at math; at least I thought I was pretty good at math.  I was always pretty good in math then it just seemed to, to make a lot of sense--accounting, me.  My mother [Ruby Carroll Warfield] was involved with computers.  So I said accounting as a senior in high school [Anacostia High School, Washington, D.C.], and that's what I chose to do when I went to Hampton--did not require a foreign language.  And I got into the--into the course, and I sort of enjoyed accounting.  It wasn't as much writing.  I did well in writing through, through high school, but dealing with the numbers and putting the little small numbers in the boxes and understanding the principles of accounting worked for me and stuck with me.  It was also something that I was able to do while I was doing these other social activities in school also; so I stuck with it.
Story_ID: 650034
Speaker 1:  	In the country, Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] was a--is a private university.  We had a new president that year who (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Who was the president that year?
Speaker 1:  	Holland [Jerome H. Holland] was the president.  I don't remember the president's name--
Speaker 2: Na--
Speaker 1:  	--because he was only there for two years.
Speaker 2: Cheek [HistoryMaker James Cheek]--not--no, no.
Speaker 1:  	Cheek was at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: Howard, that's right; that's right.
Speaker 1:  	But he replaced Hudson [Roy D. Hudson].
Speaker 2: Hudson.
Speaker 1:  	Hudson.
Speaker 2: Paul [ph.]?
Speaker 1:  	President Hudson.  And a couple of things happened as--my class--I was a senior--we opened up the coed dorm, which on a historical black college [HBCU], a private school, traditional black families, how dare you open up?  How dare you put my daughter or my son in a coed dorm?  We opened up the first coed dorm on campus.  And, and, and Hudson sort of was taking the side of the alumni and the parents who were not supportive of, of the--of the idea of a coed dorm.  I'm living in the dorm.  We're not hearing any issues.  There's no disrespect between the men being on the first three floors and the women on the top four floors.  We were behaving ourselves, but the other part of it, the student--I mean the university handpicked who they were gonna have to be in the, in the dorm.  So the troublemakers weren't in the dorm.  If they had any reservations about men or women being in the dorm, we weren't allowed to be in the dorm.  They handpicked those of us who would be in the coed dorm.  I remembered about a month in that he had a dorm meeting and said that they were considering eliminating the coed dorm and making it all male or all female because of the external pressure from the alumni.  And I'm sitting here as a student, and a lot of classmates (unclear) student said you, you should be on our side on this.  You know, we're here as responsible students that you handpicked to be in this dorm and this experience, but now you wanna capitulate to the--to the parents and to the alumni, which as a student.  You can't explain that to us.  But there was a lot of unrest on campus.  It was a lot of unrest in the country.  There was a fire bombing of a building on campus my senior year.  The, the--one of the dormitories that the visiting athletes stayed in called the Wigwam was partially burned own.  They--my understanding is they found it an incendiary device in one of the classroom buildings.  The class had taken over--taken the board of directors hostage on campus at, at one point that they had to--the only way they could get off campus was to go out the back of the building that they were in on boats to get away from our Home by the Sea, Hampton.  They also took over the Administration Building.  The student body took over the Administration Building at that point.  But what they--what wound up happening--about a month before finals, two a.m. in the morning, notices were posted on campus.  Notices were passed around on the--to the dorm rooms (unclear) under the door that officially at seven p.m. that day school was officially closed, and all students had to leave campus in less than twenty-four hours.  This was the time before mobile phones and you know, the students would line up on Sunday to try to make that phone call home.  And now you've got an entire campus that has to vacate by seven p.m. that evening.  And what they did with the senior class--private university, no court of appeals, so to speak--they put the seniors in one of three categories.  You had sufficient grades to graduate you were in good standing with the university.  They mailed you your diploma.  You were in good standing with the university.  You were not--you did not have sufficient grades to graduate or does--did not have sufficient credits to graduate, you would be allowed to come back for the summer or the following fall to finish your studies at Hampton.  Third category was if you were part of the unrest on campus, they did not care if you were going to med school [medical school], if you were going to law school.  You were not gonna get a Hampton degree, and you were not gonna be allowed to come back to complete your degree at the--at Hampton.  That's how I left Hampton.  There were a lot of students whose--
Speaker 2: Which of those categories did you--
Speaker 1:  	Oh, oh, I guess I should fill that in.  I did get my diploma.  They mailed my diploma.
Speaker 2: Oh, so you were in the first group?
Speaker 1:  	I was in the first group.  I had sufficient grades to graduate, once I found my English lit [English literature] teacher, who I had put that class off until my final semester there, and I owed him a paper.  But I spent the better part of that day trying to find him to make sure he was giving me a passing grade so I could graduate.  And I did graduate with honors from Hampton with an accounting degree.
Story_ID: 650035
Speaker 1: But I've, I've, I've never gotten over that, that feeling.  It's sort of a love, hate relationship that not only myself but a lot of classmates have--it bonded us together.  We're referred to at Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] as (air quotes) that class.  You know, we would become part of the freshman orientation of what to do, what not to do for years to come.  The class of '81 [1981] invited the class of '71 [1971] down to march with them.  At that point it--at that point I'm in the workforce for ten years.  I was there for the reunions, which I do every five years, but did not have a desire to, to march with the class.  But there were a lot of students whose parents lived for that moment.  Their par- their kids to walk across that stage.  I did not have that in my--in my upbringing.  It did--it sort of--I had a job offer.  I had, had accepted a job.  I knew I was gonna be going to New York City [New York, New York] to accept a job in public accounting.  I was prepared to go before all of that happened.  So for me this was an extended break.  No, my parents [Ruby Carroll Warfield and Charles Warfield, Sr.] did not get an opportunity to see me walk across that stage, but, Ma, I got my degree.  You know, I got out--I just didn't have that same connection to my parents watching me walk across that, that stage.  So I was okay at that point, but as you think through it, as I got older and I thought through it, it was disrespectful to our class at that point.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and then you--it sort of robs you of the opportunity for year- you know for--
Speaker 1:  	For a lifetime.
Speaker 2: For a lifetime.
Speaker 1:  	You never go back--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --to redo that.
Story_ID: 650036
Speaker 1: How did the Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] experience change you or add to you; and, so how, how did it change you?  And did you have any mentors or teachers on campus?
Speaker 2:  	My mentors, as I think back on it, I did have some mentors in the accounting department.  As a senior, in particular, I had one of my instructors, Mr. Fox [Bob D. Fox], who asked me to do him a favor.  I had accepted a job at the General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company] in Upstate New York.  I had accepted that job and I'm through with the interviewing process and marching towards end of school year and going away to college.  He asked me if I would do him a favor.  There was a CPA [certified public accountant] firm coming to campus.  Only one or two students had, had signed up for interviews, but they wanted to encourage this company--continue to come back.  Would I do him a favor and sign up?  He knew that I had accepted a job. "Would you please sign up and at least go do an interview for the school and for the department?"  And I agreed to do that.  I was the last interview that this individual, Bill Brown [ph.], had for that day.  He was an African American manager at the CPA firm [S.D. Leidesdorf and Company; Ernst and Young LLP].  We hit it off and wound up spending the better part of the day talking about the opportunities in public accounting and why I should think about coming to New York [New York], should consider a career in public accounting.  I wound up agreeing to come to New York and do an interview with the firm, and ultimately I wound up accepting that, that job.  But I had teachers like Mr. Fox who quite honestly saw more in me than I really understood myself.  It never dawned upon me, for example, to apply and go to graduate school.  I think, again, the oldest of five boys; parents [Ruby Carroll Warfield and Charles Warfield, Sr.] still have four boys to take care.  At this point my younger--the brother right behind me--Carroll [Carroll Warfield] was a freshman at Hampton.  He, he turned down a scholarship to go to Brown [Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island] to follow his brother to Hampton on a football and an academic scholarship.  I, I can't explain it any other way than that's why he chose to go that path.  But he wound up as a freshman there when I was a senior.  It taught me camaraderie in a difference sense.  I grew--my, my friends group expanded throughout that, that period of time.  I played baseball for four year at Hampton.  I pledged the military fraternity [National Society of Pershing Rifles], not Greek.  But after my freshman year, I told myself I can do the pledging.  Greek growing up in Washington [D.C.] didn't mean anything to me and my--I didn't know any Greeks in my family.  You know, Greeks and fraternities didn't mean much to me--of anything to me at all, and I didn't feel I had to prove that to anyone.  So after pledging a military fraternity as a freshman, playing baseball as a freshman, I didn't have anything to prove, so I wanna be a student; that's what I wanna do.  And I also wasn't very good at being told what to do.  I always had an eight o'clock class in Hampton.  I had an eight o'clock class every semester I was there; and not a lot of money so I always went to breakfast before I went to my eight o'clock class.  So to say to this day I'm a morning person, I'm a morning person.  But I would go to--I would get up early, I'd go to breakfast, walk to the other end of campus, and go to class.  I was great in the morning.  After lunch I wasn't so good in the afternoon--always morning classes; always an eight o'clock class--tried to encourage my kids to do that.  It didn't, didn't connect the same way with them, but it was a sense of structure that I gave myself.  It was also one of the other things that I did from that.  I taught myself--I've never drank coffee.  When I got out of college I said two things I won't do: I won't drink coffee, and I won't smoke cigarettes.  To this day I don't smoke cigarettes, but coffee is one that I, I still do to this day.  But I was never one to force myself to stay up and cram for exams at night.  My eyes told me when to go to bed.  At a certain point you start to read; you start to study.  You can go over it over and over again, but when your body and your mind shuts down, go to bed.  And I, I believed in that.  I always followed that.  I did my--try to tell my kids [Jada Warfield and Jason Warfield]; go to class, take good notes, stay on top of your homework and participate in class.  You'll be o- you'll do okay, and that's what I followed through college, staying on top of my, my studies.  I was never one to be up studying up with the high intensity light at midnight or trying to get the NoDoz to stay awake for my tec- my exam the next morning.  My body told me when to go to sleep and I did.  I woke up many mornings with my roommate, who ultimately became a dentist, with his high intensity light burning on his forehead or it shining down on his forehead with his textbook open, and he's knocked out.  That was never me.
Story_ID: 650037
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you were very disciplined.  I mean, all this--you know, I think of your fath- I mean, you had been raised in a disciplined household, and then you were very disciplined in your approach.  So during summers were you--what--how did you get your job?  You went to work.  Did you work immediately at Ernst and Young [S.D. Leidesdorf and Company; Ernst and Young LLP] or was it the other (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Well, it was--I worked at--went immediately to work.  The school ended a month before, before graduation.  I went to work in New York City [New York, New York] in mid-June of 1971.  I think I was about to say earlier I did not think to apply and, and possibly go on to graduate school.  It was just I wasn't pushed to do that.  I was looking forward to getting out on my own and, and getting some financial relief to my parents [Ruby Carroll Warfield and Charles Warfield, Sr.], having some money in my pocket for myself for the first time.  I was ready to go into the workforce and, and go to work.  So I went right to work.  And what came to--went to New York City and went to work.  One thing I, I comment on when I look back at growing up.  I haven't lived in Washington, D.C., since the summer after my freshman year.  My parents still had four sons at home that they were responsible for.  I went home after my freshman year.  I had a summer job that my mother helped me to get through the agricultural department [U.S. Department of Agriculture].  And this is something that also in, in--made me realize that I had to leave Washington, D.C., also.  My mother worked in the Rural Electrification Administration of the agricultural department, very well respected there, worked with the computers--some of the first computers--that, that I ever knew about involved with business.  And I--do--during that year, after one year of college, I was helping my mother's boss with some of his worksheets and accounting work.  And I sort of remembered late in the afternoon that he'd be in his office, and he'd be on the phone taking.  And I'm actually doing some of his work.  And, and I'm thinking that I don't think I want a job in D.C. in the government marching towards retirement in thirty-five years.  I'm sitting here doing some of my mother's boss's work after having one year of college.  Not that I was smarter than him or smarter than anyone else, but there just didn't seem to be a challenge that was there, and I had sort of made up my mind at that point.  I didn't wanna work in Washington, D.C., I didn't wanna work in the government; and at that point there wasn't a reason to come home and I never did.  I never lived at home (audio disturbance) after that summer of my freshman year (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 650038
Speaker 1: You get hired--do you get hired, or that's?
Speaker 2:  	I get hired.  I get hired by--what the name of the firm at that point was S.D. Leidesdorf [S.D. Leidesdorf and Company].  It's now part of Ernst and Young [Ernst and Young LLP].
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: But it was S.D. Leidesdorf.  I was one of four African Americans on a professional staff of six hundred--very proud of my time there.  I mean, I did learn.  I didn't want to be a public accountant all of my life, but they invited me.  Shortly after I got there, maybe six months, I was doing the work that you have to do that every staff person has to do, but when you don't have many African Americans students--and this was a time in our country that companies were looking for qualified African Americans for management training positions to, to diversify their workforce.  There was an effort by the firm to recruit more minority students, and they would ask me to do a lot of that recruiting both on campus and when candidates came to, to the firm.  And I did that for three of the--three and a half years that I was there with the firm.
Speaker 1: 'Cause you--so you were a young auditor, but they had so few of you that you were also helping.
Speaker 2:  	I was also helping with the recruitment to, to the firm.  And, and I enjoyed, enjoyed--you know, you have the responsibility; you're traveling on the company expense accounts to Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], to Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], to Florida A and M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida], recruiting on campus, talking to students at lunch when they came in trying to get them to work for this particular firm.  That sense of responsibility--because I'm representing the firm, but I'm also representing so few like me that had the opportunity that I had.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, Charles [HistoryMaker Charles Warfield, Jr.], you stay there three years you say?
Speaker 2:  	Three and a half years.
Speaker 1: Three and a half years.  So why do you leave if you're, you're on a good track, you know.  I know the road up is high, and even now the numbers are not good in, in accounting firms.
Speaker 2:  	Right.
Speaker 1: But why do you leave?
Speaker 2:  	I didn't--I, I did well in, in public accounting.  I didn't love it.
Speaker 1: So you were on audit teams?
Speaker 2:  	I was on audit teams.  I had a lot of different clients in retail.  And it was always interesting.  And with the firm that was predominantly Jewish we did a lot of retail type audits.  I was always the African American that was on the engagements, and I, I was very comfortable in that environment.  I conducted myself well.  It wasn't a particular challenge.  I accepted the responsibility of who I'm representing, not just my- myself but others like me, others who weren't given the opportunity that I was given and I have to live up to.  But I didn't necessarily wanna be in public accounting for a career.  The firm tried to get me to stay when I had indicated I was going to leave, but they wanted et- they wanted to ask me if I wanted to move into human resources, HR, because I was so good at the recruitment and getting along with the staffs and all.  And I didn't wanna--I had no interest in, in doing that, and I let them know that's not something that I wanna do.  To this day and back then in particular, we could always get a job in HR, because we always had to learn how to be--how to function well in their environment.  So you had to fit in in their environment; and you had to be comfortable in their environment; and I had learned how to do that, but that wasn't what I wanted to do for a career.  I wanted to get out of public accounting.  And you get out of public accounting, you wanna get into a company that hopefully is broad enough that it will--the audit work will expose you to other divisions within the company that you can move into a staff position.  That was the expectation.
Story_ID: 650039
Speaker 1: So I went to work for RCA Corp. [RCA Corporation] in New York City [New York, New York], 30 Rock [30 Rockefeller Plaza].  RCA Corp. had RC- had NBC TV; they had--they had radio stations; they had--
Speaker 2: How did you get that job, though?  'Cause (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1:  	(Simultaneous) I interviewed--I interviewed for that job.  There weren't--it wasn't a client of ours.
Speaker 2: So you just--you found, found a listing or--
Speaker 1:  	I found the--I don't even recall whether I found the listing.  I think someone may have referred me.  Someone was looking for qualified people for the audit department, if it's something that I might be interested in.  And I went for an interview and ultimately got that job.  But it was always with the intent that I can be in audit for a period of time, but the expectation was to get out of audit and to move into a different management position within a company that size, RCA.  They had Cushman and Wakefield, the real estate company--real estate management company was owned by RCA.  It was RCA Labs [RCA Laboratories; Sarnoff Corporation] when they were--RCA Labs was developing the predecessor to the laserdisc before the laserdisc and the DVD.  They had a company that manufactured wallpaper--custom wallpaper.  They own Hertz [The Hertz Corporation], the car rental company.  It was all under the, the RCA umbrella.  Here's an opportunity to move into a responsible position outside of audit, if you stayed there long enough.  What I learned from a corporate audit perspective is that you're also sort of perceived that as a corporate spy, so they're not so quick to hire you off of corporate audit to bring you into their division because of a concern of where are the loyalties.  Are they with corporate?  Are they gonna be with me and my division?  So I didn't see a lot of movement off of corporate audit into, into the management positions within the organization, which is why I left there.
Speaker 2: And you were there how--you were there--
Speaker 1:  	I was there roughly three years.
Speaker 2: Three years.  And this is where I need to find your timeline.  So--wait, you graduate in nineteen seventy--
Speaker 1:  	I graduated in '71 [1971] [from Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia]--
Speaker 2: One [1971]--
Speaker 1:  	--and went to S.D. Leidesdorf [S.D. Leidesdorf and Company; Ernst and Young LLP] in '71 [1971], and three and a half years later, in '74 [1974], I left there to go work for RCA Corp.
Speaker 2: And, and RCA you, you work for then for (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1:  	(Simultaneous) I stayed at RCA Corp until August of, of '76 [1976].
Speaker 2: (Cough) Okay.
Story_ID: 650040
Speaker 1:  	I was there at RCA Corp. [RCA Corporation] and--when I realized that there was not gonna be a lot of movement off of the audit staff into a management position.  One of the clients that I represented when I was in public audit was Medgar Evers College [Brooklyn, New York], which was part of the city university system of New York.  And the business manager, John Antanasio [ph.] contacted me because they were looking for an assistant business manager.  I had worked for him when I was in public accounting and was ready to leave RCA Corp. at that point.  My wife, at that point, thought I was absolutely out of my mind.  You're going to leave RCA Corporate Corp. to go work for the (air quotes) black university [HBCU] under the CUNY umbrella [City University of New York] with the financial challenges that CUNY had.  I knew the school.  I had worked--done audits there for a couple of years.  It was one of my clients.  And they were also gonna allow me to be an adjunct professor of accounting.  That was a way of making all of the money work.  The job had a particular pay scale, and I also received additional compensation as an adjunct professor of accounting, which I could do within my normal workday.  And it all appealed to me.  And the interesting story is I left RCA Corp.  My last day was on a Friday.  I believe it was in August of, of '76 [1976].  On Saturday morning Ed Koch closed the city university system because of financial challenges within the system, and I didn't have a job.  My job was frozen; they had no funding; they could not hire me.  I was supposed to start on Monday, so I'm getting the proverbial, (points finger) "I told you so. Why did you leave?" "What are you gonna do?"  It all worked out in that I was--I was unem- technically unemployed for about three weeks.  The money was made up.  The position was--I was still hired ultimately when the city university came back live, but for the first time in its history with tuition.  'Cause city university had no tuition up to that point in '76 [1976], and when they reopened there was a tuition requirement placed on students, with no, no systems in place whatsoever as to how are you gonna navigate this new environment.  Students have financial aid.  Students now--some students are gonna have to pay for credits.  They have no money--city university--I mean CUNY--I mean, Medgar Evers was in Brooklyn--Crown Heights, Brooklyn [New York], a working class community, working class students, older student body.  You would call--you would call the CUNY corporate office trying to get some answers to: how do we do this? How do we do that?  What's the story with, with aid?  And there were no answers forthcoming because they didn't have any.  I'd--one thing I did enjoy about that year, I absolutely loved being an adjunct professor of accounting.  It was something that of all the things that I've done in my career, I thoroughly enjoyed the connection with the students.  It's the one thing that I never went back to but thoroughly enjoyed at that point.  But I was there for a year before I realized working with--how do I say this correct?  Working with (air quotes) public employees, I didn't have an appetite for that because I couldn't accept the fact that people weren't gonna give there all.  I wanna go back momentarily to my father [Charles Warfield, Sr.].  My father I mentioned was a union representative.  I always had a management mentality, and if people are doing the management mentality--if you're doing your job and you're doing your job to the best of your ability, then you shouldn't need to have a union that's gonna protect your job, or you can't lose your job because you're protected by a union.  My father and I used to have these union management discussions when I was in college [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia].  And we were on different sides of that.  And he was a union representative to the heart, and I was a management guy to the heart.  And there was something about you're looking to get an answer to a question at five o'clock, and you call the office to get an answer and five o'clock the phones are dead; people have gone home.  That was what the environment was.  I learned a, a lesson; it's a lesson that I teach to high school students at that point in my career.  I had been out of public accounting now for close to four years; it's 1977, February.  One of the managing--one of the partners from the CPA firm [S.D. Leidesdorf and Company; Ernst and Young LLP], his name was Michael Goldstein.  I had worked for Michael on a number of engagements.  He was the partner on some assignments that I was on.  Always--I always felt that I did good work.  I was always dependable.  The hours in public accounting were insane.  You would have during audit season--there were many times you worked Monday through Thursday from 8:30 until 9:30, ten o'clock at night.  You go home early on Friday.  You go home at about six.  You'd work from ten to--nine to five on Saturday, and maybe from eight to four--eight to three on Sunday.  You start all over again on Monday; and that was your schedule, and that's what you did.
Story_ID: 650041
Speaker 1: I hadn't seen Michael [Michael Goldstein], hadn't heard from him in three years.  He called me out of the blue.  He said one of their clients [at S.D. Leidesdorf and Company; Ernst and Young LLP] at that point was a--was an up and coming broadcast company that they had made a recommendation to the broadcast company, which was continuing to grow--growing pretty rapidly--that they hire a controller.  And they felt that they needed a controller at that--would I be interested in possibly interviewing for that position?  And that was Inner City Broadcasting [Inner City Broadcasting Corporation]--hadn't seen Mike in three, four years.  And he just--he remembered me from my experience with working with him and the team at that point.  And he called me to put me in the search for that particular position.  This was February.  Ultimately, I was selected for that job in August.  But out of that--I, I, I say this to young people, in particular, high school students and college students, that you never know who you're gonna meet; you never know who's watching what you do, so you should always do your best; you should always be respectful to the people that you work with; you should always bring a positive attitude to work 'cause you never know who that individual is that you're working with and how they may be able to help you somewhere down the road.  You may have a bad day.  As an African American I would preach you're not entitled to a bad day.  It doesn't matter what business I had been in.  There have been very few of me, people who look like me.  It didn't get better as I got older.  It--I can look in certain environments today that I'm still involved with.  It still (unclear) not much different.  You have to give your best every day, because that great impression you made yesterday--if you come to work tomorrow with a bad attitude, that great impression from yesterday doesn't carry over to today.  It doesn't necessarily work for them; that works for us, and it's not fair.  No one said it's fair, but it's truthful and you need to conduct yourself in that manner.  Put forth your best every day.
Story_ID: 650042
Speaker 1: Did he know that you have loved music; and Michael--is it Michael?
Speaker 2:  	Mike Goldstein [Michael Goldstein].
Speaker 1: Right, Mike Goldstein, did he know you have a love for music?
Speaker 2:  	It wa- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, ca--
Speaker 2:  	It was absolutely irrelevant.  I don't recall we ever had any--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	--any conversations about music.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	My love for music was my love for music as a child and growing up, collecting.  But I never had any thought that I would be involved in the commun- in the communications business.  I didn't take communications courses.  Radio--television was not something I gave any thought to.  They [Inner City Broadcasting Corporation] needed a controller that could blend in with the management style of the company, who could help bring them forward as a business.  And I was someone that he knew, and this was a minority company that he was making a recommendation for.  I interviewed for the position in February.  I was ultimately selected for the job in August of '77 [1977].  But I've always learned that lesson that something that --whether I was thinking about it up to that point, it always comes to mind that you have to put forth that effort every day because you don't know who you met along the way and what they may mean for your career or your future, good or bad.
Story_ID: 650043
Speaker 1: So can you tell me about your interview that you had?
Speaker 2:  	I had an interview--I re- I remembered an interview with two people at that point.  One was [HistoryMaker] Pierre Sutton, who was the president of Inner City Broadcasting [Inner City Broadcasting Corporation] at that point, Percy Sutton's son.  And I also had an interview, fortunately, with a woman by the name of Dorothy Brunson, who was the general manager of the--of the business.  I clearly felt I was not the preference of Pierre Sutton, Pepe Sutton.  I, I felt that he was sort of distracted in our--in our interview, and I also came to understand that he had--he was leaning towards another candidate for that--for that job.  And I didn't hear anything for quite some time.  I had a very good interview with Dorothy Brunson that really dealt with my knowledge of finance, my knowledge of accounting, my knowledge of systems, what their business was about, you know, why--the fact that she had functioned as controller--as--at a--also as general manager and that they wanted to bring someone in that they could teach the radio business to, but can also run their accounting operation.  Whatever the internal discussions were, it was August that I was offered the job.  I think Mike Goldstein [Michael Goldstein], I believe, I had some input in that discussion with Dorothy Brunson and also with, with Pierre Sutton, because it was his recommendation that they hire a controller.  But in, in my--as I recount my career, I've always given credit for my hiring to Dorothy Brunson and not to Pierre--to Pierre Sutton.  Because I believe it was her decision that made the difference with me getting that job within Inner City.
Story_ID: 650044
Speaker 1: Can you describe the organization you're coming into; and who, who some of the key players are, and, and what--because at this point--let's see--Inner City [Inner City Broadcasting Corporation] began--I thought it began in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Began in '72 [1972] with--
Speaker 1: It's--
Speaker 2:  	--the AM--'74 [1974] with the FM [WBLS Radio, New York, New York], and by '75 [1975], '76 [1976], going into '77 [1977], FM had overtaken AM as the primary band for entertainment on the radio.  And I was a bit star struck when I--when I first went into the company.  I had--you're listening to the radio in New York City [New York, New York], and I listened to a lot of radio.  And I'm, I'm here with the home of Frankie Crocker and Ken Webb and [HistoryMaker] Vy Higginsen on the air.  It's--this is Percy Sutton's company.  This is a high profile job opportunity in New York City.  So you're, you're struck with that.  You have the artists that come through the radio station that you would see from time to time coming to pay homage quite honestly to the man, Frankie Crocker.  There was also [HistoryMaker] Hal Jackson, who was there as a vice chairman of the country--company.  And Pepe--Pierre--Percy Sutton, who was running for mayor of New York City against Ed Koch, was in and out.  And Charles Rangel [HistoryMaker Charles B. Rangel] was in and out; and [HistoryMaker] Basil Paterson was in and out.  And, and these kinds of people were in the environment all the time.  David Lampel, who was the news director--people that you would hear on the radio, and now I'm here in this company, and it--yeah, it made--it made me feel very good.  It was an important job, but then the reality of the work that you're facing, you know, sort of hits you in the face and says you got a real job here.  All this was before computers.  Records were maintained on handwritten cards, receivable cards.  Human error was involved.  They had a manual system for putting commercials on the air.  And once the commercial ran--getting the commercial on an invoice and being billed, and how they handled the collection of money and offsets against accounts receivable, and, and the, the manual--our means of processing checks.  There was a real need for the job at that point, and I embraced that, and I--and I worked hard as I was taught to always do--gained the confidence of, of people.  One thing I learned at this point--and I, I guess I was learning it along the way is that I'm very good at the numbers; I understand the numbers; I can explain the numbers, but I wanted more in my life.  I also had an interest in engaging with people.  I wanted to learn the business, but I wanted to do more than be in the--the bean counter that's upstairs or downstairs or around the corner in accounting.  And prep--Percy Sutton, when he lost the race for mayor and came into the company as chairman of the company, began to give me more and more responsibility and respect and, and counted on me.  In the first year I was there I spent working with a consultant to the company, had engaged to raise money to buy radio stations in other cities, which was a very difficult thing to do in 1977 because African Americans--one you're in radio; you--it's a business you don't know because the entrepreneurs in radio at that point were successful business people in either arenas who are now investing in radio were not seasoned broadcasters, and they were surrounded by seasoned broadcasters.  So we didn't have a lot of confidence in financial institutions to lend us money.  But the first year I was there working with a consultant we were able to convince Citibank [Citibank, N.A.] to lend the company $15 million, which in 1978 allowed the company to buy an FM station in Detroit [Michigan], an AM/FM station in San Francisco [California], and an AM/FM station in Los Angeles [California] and get change back.  Now today, you can't buy WLIB [WLIB Radio] in New York today for anything approaching--uh, maybe $15 million today you possibly could, but there's a valuation today that's totally different from what it was in, in those days.  But I gained the confidence of, of Dorothy Brunson and, and Percy Sutton at that point, and he allowed me to learn more about the business and become more involved in, in other aspects and ultimately appointed me as the vice president and general manager of Inner City Broadcasting [Inner City Broadcasting Corporation] in 1981, replacing his son [HistoryMaker Pierre Sutton], who was de facto in that position and had been in that position when Dorothy Brunson left to run her own company.  I will always be thankful to Inner City Broadcasting, to Percy Sutton.  I don't believe that had I been a controller working for CBS or NBC or, or the other broadcast companies I would have ever been given an opportunity.  And I've never taken that for granted, giving me the opportunity to learn the business.  As I say, I learned the business from the bottom up.  I learned the business from a P and L [profit and loss] perspective: here's how much money we're gonna make but understanding well, how do we get there?  And it's because of the trust that he in- that he showed in me during my tenure there with Inner City Broadcasting.
Story_ID: 650045
Speaker 1: So (clears throat) can you describe (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Coughs).
Speaker 1: --Mr. Sutton [Percy Sutton]?  I want you to describe him; then I want you to describe the company [Inner City Broadcasting Corporation] that you're coming into and who are some of the other key players.  But can you describe him?  We never were able to interview him unfortunately (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Percy was a gentleman, a consummate politician, and, and I say that in the most positive of ways.  He never met sa- politicians are always running for office, and Percy, whenever he met someone you felt like he was always running for office.  He'd look you in your eye; he'd shake your hand; he always had a kind word to shay--say to you.  He would always take time to write small little notes of appreciation or recognition, things that, that he did naturally.  When he walked into a room, he always took time to speak with people that--the everyday people that were in the room.  But some of his friends were also some of the most influential African Americans in, in the country.  I, I, I observed a lot from that.  One thing he also taught us, taught me, taught the company when he came there, just a simple practice he put in place, which I thought was: why are we doing this?  To show that respect for people that Percy had, he required all of us to refer to one another as Mr. and Ms., so I became Mr. Warfield [HistoryMaker Charles Warfield, Jr.].  And he didn't refer to his son as Pepe [HistoryMaker Pierre Sutton].  He was Mr. Sutton; and his daughter, Cheryl [Cheryl Sutton], was Ms. Sutton; and David Lampel was Mr. Lampel; and Frankie Crocker--but, but the, the receptionist was Mr. or Ms.  And that was his way of showing all people respect for who they were, and it was a value that he required all of the employees to have.  People--I've been in broadcast business now for thirty-six years, and people who have known me over that period of time--I've never been able to get away from being Mr. Warfield, and that's who Percy Sutton made us.  He made me Mr. Warfield whether I wanted to be or not.  And that respect for people--it's a very simple thing to do, but when you're required to refer to per- people as Mr. and Ms., you realize they're no different than you.  Respect people for who they are, not what they do.  And it sort of carried through the company.  And we had some very big personalities in, in the radio station [WBLS Radio, New York, New York] at that point.  It was no one bigger in radio.  Urban radio certainly (unclear) radio in general then Frankie Crocker.  And Frankie was the program director.  Frankie was also on--the on air personality, second to none in, in, in the country.  And I'm coming to work with this guy every day, and I'm watching how revered he was, feared he was, how important he was, and how seriously he took the position of radio being in the entertainment business.  Something that Frankie would say--kind of cruel, but we're in the entertainment business--that some air personalities should be heard and not seen.  Because you're on the air creating an environment that people wanna be a part of, whether it was the party at Studio 54 [New York, New York] that you attended last night, whether it's attending a music industry function in Khan [ph.], whether it was a Michael Jackson concert or Michael Jackson interview in the studio, you're bigger than life.  You're, you're in the entertainment business.  Air personalities on radio were bigger than--as big as movie stars in California 'cause there were more of us, and they were part of our world, talking to us about what's going on in our community.  And we had the Frankie Crockers.  Frankie brought Vaughn Harper to the radio station.  We had Lamar Renee; we had Al Roberts; we had [HistoryMaker] Vy Higginsen, who was--who was on the radio; Kenny Webb, who was on the radio, and he wanted them all to be bigger than life.  None of them could be as big as Frankie Crocker, but he wanted them all to be bigger than what they believed they could be.  And the company carried themselves that way.  It was a growing company.  It certainly made--had its challenges and issues when it was--when it was developing.  We're very proud of what the radio station did--became one of the most--became the number one radio station in New York [New York] in, in the '80s [1980s].  There was no one bigger than Frankie--also created what is now known as this urban contemporary--urban radio format that's survives successfully today.
Story_ID: 650046
Speaker 1: Now at that time to impro- at that time especially, I wouldn't say not now, but really radio deejays are--you know, they made the, the--I mean, they made they the stars.  I mean--you know, you--if you didn't get--like I know [HistoryMaker] Dionne Warwick was talking about Frankie Crocker didn't think her music--you know, and she wanted to be played.
Speaker 2:  	Right.
Speaker 1: You know, and so--you know, he didn't think it was, you know, right for the listening audience.  So there was a lot of power in there.
Speaker 2:  	Very, much power.
Speaker 1: Now, how did he come?  Was he already part of the station when the Suttons bought the station or did he--'cause I--you know, I always hear of him being there.  I don't know how he came.
Speaker 2:  	Frankie, Frankie came along with the station.  Percy Sutton and a group of (air quotes) sixty-three investors bought WLIB [WLIB Radio, New York, New York], which was at--on 125th Street on Lenox Avenue [Malcolm X Boulevard]--310 Lennox Avenue--at that point, with an option to buy the FM in '74 [1974].  They paid more for the AM in '72 [1972] than they paid for the FM in '74 [1974].  When they bought the FM in '74 [1974] Frankie came along as--was part of that--part of that transaction, to my--to my--to my memory.  And he became bigger than life.  He was the personality that the radio station was built around.  But it wasn't just Frankie.  It was Frankie and also someone that in our industry over the--over the breadth of their career was even bigger, and that was [HistoryMaker] Hal Jackson, who one of the original investors in Inner City Broadcasting [Inner City Broadcasting Corporation] and was there until his passing just a few years ago.  So you had Hal Jackson; you had Frankie Crocker; and then this, this image of what became the world's best looking sound that was created under this umbrella of WBLS and Inner City Broadcasting.  There was--there was no one bigger in entertainment in New York City [New York, New York] than Frankie and the, the staff and, and the call letters, WBLS.  And they also made the recording artists of that period of time.  They were also made by people like--but--like Frankie Crocker and Hal Jackson.
Story_ID: 650047
Speaker 1: So do you have a, a favorite Frankie Crocker story from that period?
Speaker 2:  	A favorite Frankie Crocker, besides the statement that I made that--
Speaker 1: And what did he mean by that statement?  So he, he was referencing some pe- someone (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) It's--
Speaker 1: --some--
Speaker 2:  	If, if you think about the statement itself that some air personalities should be heard and not seen.  In his mind not everyone should go off the radio air and go out into the public because they're not gonna be able to live up to the image that they've created on the--on the--on the radio.  It's sort of like the telephone operator, which guys would joke about--beautiful person; I wonder what she looks like, and you meet the telephone operator, and she's not who you thought she was; you're disappointed from that point forward.  Frankie was a--his nickname was Hollywood, Hank Frankie "Hollywood" Crocker.  He dressed the part; the hair was the part; he had his legs straightened to be the part; his nose was done; he, he reflected who he wanted the radio station to represent.  Radio station--the radio station, WBLS [WBLS Radio, New York, New York], was bigger than black radio in New York [New York].  It was radio in New York, and Frankie was the star of that, and he wanted others like himself.  Vaughn Harper was an All-American basketball player at Syracuse University [Syracuse, New York], who was drafted into the NBA [National Basketball Assocation] with the Detroit Pistons, injured his leg and didn't play professional basketball.  But everyone in New York, if you were a sports fan, knew who Vaughn Harper was coming out of Boys and Girls High [Boys High School; Boys and Girls High School, Brooklyn, New York].  Frankie heard him with a microphone with that deep voice that Vaughn has and made him an air personality.  And Ken Webb, who had just a way of connecting through his family and through his down-home humor to be a morning man on the radio station.  I remembered a Kenny story with Frankie.  Kenny was notorious for doing a number of things.  Kenny was notorious for--he'll--he would always give you the, the color of the day, but his days would be off.  He might give you the wrong day.  Kenny was also great for giving you the wrong time in the morning.  When a morning man, one of the primary responsibilities is give them the time, give them the temperature, give 'em the traffic, and give them the news.  Kenny also lived in Wheatley Heights, New York, so he had a hour commute into the station in the morning.  Kenny is all personalities, had a--had--they wa- had activities at night.  They'd go out at night.  Kenny would go home and then he had to be on the air at six o'clock in the morning.  So there was one morning Kenny was very tired; Kenny was--couldn't stay awake.  And Frankie had a way of just showing up when no one expected Frankie.  So Kenny was playing a record in the studio--we had turntables at that point--and then put his head down.  And Frankie came into the studio, and Frankie said, "If you lift your head you're fired."  And Kenny--Kenny will tell you to this day, he, he started playing that next song, which was already up on the key--on the turntable, but he--you know, he was gonna do--, "I'm not gonna lift my head; I'm awake chief."  But--you know, it was--it--a, a Frankie Crocker--only Frankie could something like that.  But Kenny took it to heart, and Kenny didn't lift his head before he hit that--hit that mic to get that next song up there on the air.  But he, he was a very unique talent.  Been in this business thirty-six years.  I don't think there was a better air personality ever in my career that I have been around or seen than, than Frankie Crocker.
Story_ID: 650048
Speaker 1: So you had mentioned some of the people I had.  You mention David Lampel.  So he was--was he here part of the beginning part?
Speaker 2:  	David was the news director at WBLS [WBLS Radio, New York, New York] and WLIB [WLIB Radio, New York, New York] when I started with the company in '77 [1977].
Speaker 1: I see.  Okay, and then someone had given--what about--let's see, Janie Washington or as do I have it--Janice Campbell, Jamie--I mean, they are--
Speaker 2:  	Those were people that worked for [HistoryMaker] Pierre Sutton.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2:  	Janice Campbell was his administrative assistant.  Janie was sort of the traffic director when I got there.  As a matter of fact, Janie is there now still working with Pierre in certain capacities.  They were support staff at the radio station.
Speaker 1: I see, I see, okay.
Speaker 2:  	Right.
Speaker 1: So you, you get in and you're enjoying--you're starting to really enjoy the business.  So, now what was your role for the purchase of the stations?  You know, what, what role do you play, and is it after the purchase of the stations or as part of this purchase of the stations that you get--you know, you have the conversation with, with Mr. Sutton [Percy Sutton] and you, you move up to--you know, you're promoted.  So--
Speaker 2:  	Right.
Speaker 1: --you had mentioned the stations by then.  You know, I didn't know--
Speaker 2:  	We raised--we raised $15 million the end of my first.  We bought (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The end of your first year for thi--
Speaker 2:  	End of my first year.  In 1978 we were able to raise--myself and a guy by the name of Lee Hague, who's no longer with us, were able to convince Citibank [Citibank, N.A.] to lend the company [Inner City Broadcasting Corporation] $15 million.  And we bought the FM in Detroit [Michigan].  We, in December--February of '79 [1979], we bought an AM/FM in San Francisco [California].  And in April of that year we bought an AM/FM in Los Angeles, California.  My rule--my, my responsibility in each one of those was certainly helping to set up the books.  Pierre Sutton was involved in hiring a general manager for de--for each one of those markets.  And my responsibility was to keep an eye on the financials and make sure the financial reporting was done correctly.  I was offered the opportunity by Pierre to go to San Francisco to run the San Francisco operation when we bought that in April of '98 [1998].  My father [Charles Warfield, Sr.] was ill at that point with prostate cancer and it wasn't something I really wanted to do.  I had two young kids at that point.  I had a--I had--it's some challenges in my marriage and to move three thousand miles away to take on that responsibility, I rejected that opportunity and remained in New York City [New York, New York].  I felt there was still more to be done in New York as we absorb these additional stations within the operation.  I was still the controller at point.  I had responsibility of reporting to the financial institution, the budgetary process, and, and growing the accounting operations so that we could properly manage these, these individual stations.
Speaker 1: Now was that--when you were hired, was it already assumed that--I mean, were--was it in the business plan that these acquisitions would occur if they could?  And was Mike Longston [ph.]--was he advising them in the--in, in light of that they wanted to grow in this way?
Speaker 2:  	Mike Goldstein [Michael Goldstein] is the audit partner, really wasn't involved in the operations station outside of the audit engagement in itself.  His involvement was getting me there.  I certainly had a responsibility each succeeding year to make sure that the audits were done and properly reflect--reflected the financial operations of the--of the company.  But the--it was Percy's vision--Percy Sutton's vision to grow the company as a broadcast company at that point.  It was his influence that did that.  And it was a great frustration that there had been efforts before '77 [1977] to borrow money, to, to grow and expand.  It had always been rejected by the financial institutions.  Fortunately, we were able to convince Citibank to lend the company the money at that point in, in '78 [1978].
Story_ID: 650049
Speaker 1: This is sort of huge; and I just would like you to put things in context because--you know, just as you were talking about your hire into, into Ernst and Young [S.D. Leidesdorf and Company; Ernst and Young LLP], you know, this is a time that blacks were going into Corporate America.  Your hire was part of that, you know, the Urban League [National Urban League] and entities like that playing a role.  And in this particular case--I mean, this is--this is like signing times.  You have--I don't know if you had any time on the--spending time on the Hill [Capitol Hill, Washington, D.C.] or things like that because, you know, Pluria Marshall [HistoryMaker Pluria Marshall, Jr.] is advocating.  There's Syncom [Syncom Venture Partners] that's--you know.  So I'm just wondering, are you seeing any parts of that?  Are seeing just the deal structures?
Speaker 2:  	In it--I saw primarily the deal structure.  The interesting thing about Inner City Broadcasting [Inner City Broadcasting Corporation]: I would always call myself apolitical.  In coming into a company of, of--the chairman of the board is Percy Sutton.  Some of his closest friends and advisors are politicians-- [HistoryMaker] Basil Paterson, Dave Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins], Charles Rangel [HistoryMaker Charles B. Rangel].  Al Sharpton [HistoryMaker Reverend Al Sharpton] was a regular visitor to the radio station early on in, in, in his career.  Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] would be at the radio station when he was in town.  There were politicians in Inner City Broadcasting that I didn't have to be the politician, and I tried to stay out of the politics of, of Inner City.  The fights on the Hill, per se, that was Percy's area of expertise and where he was integrally engaged.  I was focused on running the business.  One thing that, that I didn't say--and I've been blessed--and this goes back to--it's really a blessing that I've had in my career.  I have always had a desire to give back to my community.  It's one of the reasons I went to work at Medgar Evers [Medgar Evers College, Brooklyn, New York], the black university at the city university of, of New York [City University of New York, New York, New York].  I went to work for Inner City Broadcasting, a minority company.  I have been involved with ma- with urban radio ever since that day and throughout my career.  It's always been a focus on the community that I came from and wanting to give something back to that community.  And fortunately I was given that opportunity with various positions that I have had but never forgetting where I came from and who I had a responsibility for.  Tho--these radio stations, BLS [WBLS Radio, New York, New York], WLIB [WLIB Radio, New York, New York], WDAS [WDAS Radio] AM and FM in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] serve the African American community unlike any other stations in those markets.  And I was blessed to have the opportunity to work in these places to continue that connection with that--with our, with our community.
Story_ID: 650050
Speaker 1: So what are you learning about the radio business though, and the broadcasting business?  What are you learning with these acquisitions?
Speaker 2:  	I'm learning--I'm learning how important people are to the successful operation of, of a radio station.  A bad hire can cripple a radio operation.  A good hire can grow a radio operation.  We had some good hires; we had some not so good hires.  I also learned how important it is to build a team within an operation and to focus on business.  I bought a business mentality to the day-to-day operation.  I wasn't trying to be a politician.  I was not trying to compete with someone bigger than life, a Frankie Crocker, a Vaughn Harper.  You know, I would always say when I walk in a room, although through my career Frankie Crocker worked for me; Kenny Webb worked for me; Vaughn Harper worked for me, but for me to walk into a room and lead with, "Oh, yeah, well, yeah, Frankie works for me," that room doesn't care.  They don't care who I am.  They're there to meet Frankie; they're there to meet Kenny; they're there to meet Vaughn.  I wasn't competing for them in that environment.  We worked together as, as a team, and I became very comfortable.  I worked for Percy Sutton.  When I walk in a room and Percy (unclear) who am I?  And it was not to be self deprecating, but to understand what our roles were within the, the business that we were--we were building.  The radio stations were bigger than life to the communities that we served.  They were there for those individuals.  I'm there to help those individuals be the best that they can be so that we can all be the best that we can be.
Speaker 1: So when you became vice president, when you were promoted to that position, you (unclear)--year was that again?
Speaker 2:  	Eight-one [1981].
Speaker 1: Eighty-one [1981].
Speaker 2:  	Nineteen eighty-one [1981].
Speaker 1: So literally you're here for four years and you're promoted to that position.  Had that position existed up to that point?
Speaker 2:  	That position--Dorothy Brunson was the general manager who had hired me.  I, I took over the controller role that she had.  She was the general manager.  When she left, Percy put his son Pierre [HistoryMaker Pierre Sutton] in as general manager.  Honestly, he did not have the desire really to do the work that was necessary to be successful in that job.  Ultimately, Percy promoted me into that position, and, and Pepe became president of the company, and I became general manager with day to day act- responsibility for the operation, the management of, of all the people.  And I've always looked at the (air quotes) general manager's role--people say what does a general manager do?  I don't sell; I'm not a sales manager; I'm not a program director; I don't pick music for the radio station; I'm, I'm not an engineer; I don't--I don't do plug and spite--splices and things of that nature.  My job has always been to get the people to operate together as a team to be the best business that we could possibly be, a general manager.  And I have worked very hard to be that person throughout my career, and that's what I set out and learned how to do with guidance from Percy Sutton in particular during my tenure--my first tenure at Inner City Broadcasting [Inner City Broadcasting Corporation].
Story_ID: 650051
Speaker 1: So what are the things that you have to put in place?  'Cause you are--you are working for a family owned company [Inner City Broadcasting Corporation].
Speaker 2:  	Right.
Speaker 1: And sometimes that can--you know, that can be dicey as an outsider.
Speaker 2:  	It certainly can be.
Speaker 1: You know, and people who are sort of larger than life and you know.  So, what things do you put in place to try--'cause you--I dit- I was struck--you know, you were saying while things were--there is no computer system or computer--you know, things were manual, you know, they--there were some errors.  So, what are the things that you say, "Okay, now I'm in charge.  I'm gonna put these systems in place."  So what do you do?
Speaker 2:  	Well, there are human resources systems that have to be in place.  How do you treat people?  Businesses--family owned businesses don't always do things by the book.  You know, some people can be hired and fired because people like or don't like.  I've never been one to subscribe to that.  You don't have to like me.  But what I need you to do is to do your job to your best of your ability.  Something I also learned from Pat- Percy [Percy Sutton] is professional respect and courtesy is due everyone and then they spoke to that.  And you have--people earn that, and I have to give that to people.  And the fact that I have a title is irrelevant.  The fact that a department head has a title is irrelevant.  You're only as good as the people that are with you.  So I sort of became focused on how people were treated, how people were managed, how people were recruited, why people were in their jobs.  I can be a friend of yours, but maybe we can't work together.  I said this in my thro- throughout my career.  I've hired and fired a lot of people, and I can honestly say none of them were ever because I didn't like someone.  I have a gentleman that worked for me in my last position who did not like me.  And I actually had to say to him one day that it's okay that you don't like me.  What we will always do, I'll always respect you, and I expect that same respect in return.  Certain things that I never tolerated in a workforce is, is cursing.  I don't--I think that if, if I'm going to call you out of your name or I'm going to speak to you less than respectfully and then expect you to give me 150 percent of your effort every day, human nature does not allow that to happen.  I can communicate just as well without cursing at you.  And it was something--it's not always easy, but it's something I don't allow in, in, in the workplace.  My attitude is when you hear me curse somebody out then you can do it.  Now, you can come in my office and we can disagree, and you may get heated about the conversation and you may curse at me.  We can ha- I can handle that.  We can do that behind closed doors.  But once that door opens and we walk out, I'm not gonna disrespect you and I'm not gonna be disrespected by you.  And you sort of inject that within the workplace.  I have never worked in a job--maybe when I was much younger--I have never worked in a job without adults.  I've always worked with adults.  Adults want to--want to be heard.  They wanna have an opportunity to express their opinion.  They wanna understand clearly what the goals and expectations are, what's expected of them, what's in it for them.  They wanna understand that.  They wanna be respected as adults.  I don't have any children who work in any of these businesses.  And as such you have to treat them with respect.  The fact that you are afraid of me so therefore you won't say to me things that you're feeling, I'd rather understand it, 'cause the fact that you don't say it doesn't mean you don't feel it, and the fact that you may feel it could be impacting your ability to work with me and to work with other, other people.  So I like to have an open dialogue.  I'm not one to sit in my office and have people come to me.  I like to walk around a radio station.  I like to walk around a business.  I like to get to know people as individuals.  And I've always had that, that respect for people regardless of what their title.  It's sort of an extension of Percy referring to people as Mr. and Ms.  It's not enough just to give lip service to it.  It's how do you conduct yourself day in and day out?
Speaker 1: So what--so you were able to put that in place (simultaneous).
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: Now many employees are there at that point?
Speaker 2:  	At that point, there were probably fifty employees between the AM [WLIB Radio, New York, New York] and the FM [WBLS Radio, New York, New York] at that point.
Story_ID: 650052
Speaker 1: But then as you start acquiring, what are the challenges of those acquisitions; and do they all happen at the same time, or is it each deal a separate deal?
Speaker 2:  	Each deal was--it had its own timeframe--San Fran- Detroit [Michigan] was in December.  We [Inner City Broadcasting Corporation] absorbed that, put a manager in place.  So Detroit was first--put a general manager in place.  The general manager's responsibility is to fill out the staff.  My responsibility is to put systems in place.  There's a traffic system; there's an accounts payable system; there's a check system; there's a traffic system that needs to be put in place; personnel records have to be maintained; policies and procedures need to be put in place in Detroit.  Then in February we took over an AM and an FM in San Francisco [California].  We needed--we had to evaluate the people that are there.  You've got to determine whether you've got the right people in place.  If not, you've gotta recruit the right people.  At that point, I--you know, you, you, you hit or miss or some of these decisions that you make.  And then in April, we're--we've got a--beginning to put a staff in place in San Francisco.  We sent some people from New York [New York] to Detroit, people that were trusted in, in New York [New York] to go to Detroit and be involved with the operations.  And people in, in New York were sent to San Francisco.  They understand the culture of the company.  They understand some of the systems and procedures.  Sometimes that works; sometimes it doesn't work.  And then we also had to find--we do that in San Francisco in February and then you're doing the same thing in an operation in L.A. [Los Angeles, California]  You know, one of the biggest challenges in something like that is there are egos that are always involved because radio is bigger than life.  Radio--you're dealing with the entertainment world.  You're dealing with the parties that are going on in the--in the envir- in the community that you're involved with.  You're a community figure in a sense.  You have to find a way to remain committed to your people, committed to your business, but yet committed to the property and not get too bigheaded about it.  And it's very easy to do in our business.
Story_ID: 650053
Speaker 1: So as things are growing, how does that impact the New York [New York] operation?  'Cause you were one and then--well, you were two--I mean, on LIB [WLIB Radio, New York, New York]--
Speaker 2:  	Right.
Speaker 1: --and you know, right.  But then you became--
Speaker 2: (Coughs) Excuse me.
Speaker 1: --what, six--well, four--five--six--
Speaker 2:  	We were--we became seven.
Speaker 1: Seven.
Speaker 2:  	There were five at--additions to New York.
Speaker 1: So how--that--it's different when you're managing everything local that you can (unclear)--
Speaker 2:  	Right.
Speaker 1: It's a totally different thing when you're not seeing and touching--
Speaker 2:  	There are unique challenges with that, each market in its own.  Na- San Francisco [California] had some success early; Los Angeles [California] had some success early; Detroit [Michigan] had some early success, but it didn't--it didn't translate long term.  You're trying to put in place what works in New York maybe doesn't work the same way in San Fran--in, in Detroit.  Music is a perfect example.  The music that might be hot and happening in New York may not be the same music that the San Francisco audience wants to hear.  So you're evaluating the format options that you have.  Then San Francisco ultimately became the Quiet Storm, which was more slow jams, some jazz infusion within that format.  We didn't play as much of that in, in New York City.  We played it some of (unclear)--play a lot more of that in, in, San Francisco.  Los Angeles--Frankie [Frankie Crocker] tried to take who he was in New York and be that person in San Francisco--I mean in Los Angeles [California] for example.  He was Frankie "Hollywood" Crocker in New York City.  But who the hell is Frankie "Hollywood" Crocker in, in Los Angeles when you had movie stars walking down the street.  You know, there's a different Hollywood that was there, so what you did here doesn't necessarily translate there.  You're not on a big screen.  So it is an adjustment that people need to make that's relative to where they are, and it takes time.  It, it--Frankie was not the big success in L.A. that he was in New York, but he can come right back to New York and he's still Frankie "Hollywood" Crocker.  But he struggled with that when he was in the Los Angeles market for a while, and he lived there.  But the success didn't translate the same way in L.A. as it was in New York.  So--but that's, that's part of a learning process.  There's no exact science in our--in our business.  Or if that were the case, every radio station will be a success like WBLS [WBLS Radio, New York, New York] was.  We were a young company [Inner City Broadcasting Corporation] growing, trying to identify people like ourselves to bring into the business.  Just like they gave a, a, a, an inexperienced African American like me the opportunity, we were also giving other African Americans an opportunity to come into the business and learn the business.  Not to the exclusion of anyone else, but we made that special effort to bring people in to give them an opportunity that they not get in other companies.  Doesn't always work out, but station wa- I mean, the company was successful and had been successful for many years.
Story_ID: 650054
Speaker 1: So the revenue when you join is what; and what does it increase to at that point? Let's--?
Speaker 2:  	The--that's a good question.  I've never really gone back to look at the revenue growth of Inner City [Inner City Broadcasting Corporation] from that period of time.  I'll put it in a different perspective in that when LIB [WLIB Radio, New York, New York] and BLS [WBLS Radio, New York, New York] were bought, they were bought for a combined $3.2 million.  An AM and an FM signal today--if you were to try to buy BLS in New York City [New York, New York] today it would cost you in excess of $100 million.  There was at one point that WBLS by itself as probably worth close to $300 million.  In a different environment in the broad--in the radio industry some years ago, it had a value that was--that was that great.
Speaker 1: So you came into something that really grew and grew and grew--
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: --you know, and so money was the--lack of money was not the issue after you did your first acquis--
Speaker 2:  	Lack of money was always an issue.  Our, our country had a way of every ten years running into some financial challenges.  Eighty-one [1981] was one of those years the economy went south.  Ninety-one [1991] was one of those years.  Two thousand one [2001] was one of those years.  It just seem that every ten years we'd hit this economic meltdown within the business.  Black radio in particular for the longest period of time, and I would even argue today it's still struggling with a--never received it's fair value for the audience that we deliver.  Our audience was perceived as not being as valuable as WABC's [WABC Radio, New York, New York] white audience down the dial.  But that's one of the great things about being in this business that we have a responsibility that you have to embrace to attack and to try to knock down those misperceptions about our audience.  But it's a struggle throughout my thirty-six career in this busine- ye- years in this business that we still deal with today.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so what you're talking about is the ratings and just the perception of the black audience--
Speaker 2:  	The value (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and the consumer--
Speaker 2:  	--of that black audience.
Speaker 1: --(unclear) the value.
Speaker 2:  	That's correct.
Speaker 1: Okay, the value (unclear).  But--so in '81 [1981]--'2 [1982], the--it's the Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] years and interest rates were high and all of that--
Speaker 2:  	Right.
Speaker 1: --so the servicing of the debt.
Speaker 2:  	Which became very difficult.  We borrowed money in '78 [1978]--'79 [1979].  You're paying that money back, interest rates are rising, and you can't outpace the increase and the interest rates at that point.  You were trying to refinance your debt as you go through those periods of time.  There are periods of time we're calling our, our vendors and saying, you know, we need--we need you to give us some time.  Percy Sutton himself made those calls.  I made some of those calls.  You're trying to hold onto your employees, and you're trying to invest in your, your business while you're trying to also service your debt.  It becomes very, very difficult but not new in business.  Those are those economic challenges that many businesses have gone through.  Radio was, was no different with that.
Story_ID: 650055
Speaker 1: And so were any of the--you met--I want to clear something up.  I'm sorry.  Because I've heard so many stories about the Quiet Storm--you know, [HistoryMaker] Cathy Hughes mentions the Quiet Storm (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --(unclear) in D.C.  You know, you mentioned San Francisco [California].  I'm like, I didn't think si- you know.
Speaker 2:  	Right.
Speaker 1: San Francisco seems like a sleeper market.  Can you tell me where the--I mean, we know the 'Quiet Storm' is [HistoryMaker] Smokey Robinson's song.
Speaker 2:  	Right.
Speaker 1: But where did it really--
Speaker 2:  	I will always give the, the start of the Quiet Storm--I won't necessarily give it to a person, but I'll give it to WHUR [WHUR Radio, Washington, D.C.] and Melvin Lindsey, who was on the air in Washington, D.C., doing the Quiet Storm.  I don't know and I'm not taking exception to what Cathy says.  Cathy says she was there at the radio station, at that point.  That may be true.  I've never gone back to verify that.  But it was Howard University [Washington, D.C.], WHUR, Melvin Lindsey in Washington, D.C., who was, as far as I'm concerned, the creator of the Quiet Storm as a format--the music.  We picked it up here in New York [New York] with the Quiet Storm on WBLS [WBLS Radio, New York, New York] here in New York beginning with Vaughn Harper in '83 [1983], '84 [1984], and we put a format like that on the air.  We called it the Quiet Storm.  And [HistoryMaker] Pierre Sutton did that in San Francisco.  But it was a different Quiet Storm there because it was infused with more jazz there than it was the nighttime love music that Vaughn and Melvin would play in Washington, D.C.  And Butterball [Joe "Butterball" Tamburro] would play in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and we would play here in New York.  It was a format that went across the entire day, part in San Francisco because New York with a 15 percent African American composition had a large enough African American audience to support black music.  Washington, D.C., Chocolate City, could certain do that; Philadelphia could do that.  San Francisco was never more than 8, 9 percent African American.  And just to be urban was not enough for us to be successful.  We had to be broader in the format, and that's why we--some changes were made to the delivery of the format and the kind of music that was played in that market.
Speaker 1: And then what about L.A.?
Speaker 2:  	Los Angeles [California]--Los Angeles also is not necessarily a black city.  We had--acute in that--in that market.  We never really became--the AM was urban; the FM was more mainstream with a, a leaning urban.  It played a lot of dance music and some urban music, but it wasn't as black as WBLS; it wasn't as black as WHUR, 'cause your audience--the makeup of the market itself wasn't large enough to support a (air quotes) true black format in L.A.
Story_ID: 650056
Speaker 1: You're here from '81 [1981] to '89 [1989]?
Speaker 2:  	Eighty-nine [1989].
Speaker 1: Eighty-nine [1989].  So tell us what's significant about those years, from '81 [1981] to '89 [1989], because that's before the next economic crisis.  And you've acquired these so things--you've made some--you've made changes; you've put systems in place.  What are--what, what else happens in those eight years?
Speaker 2:  	During that period of time, Percy Sutton is the chairman of the--of the company.  Percy is looking to broaden the financial base of the company, investing in other businesses.  Some were successful; some were not.  At, at that time, you're taking--from, from an operational prospective--we're taking money some cases to invest in new businesses that I thought could be better used to defend our position here in this marketplace.  In '70 [1970]--in seven- '81 [1981], '82 [1982], '83 [1983], it was WBLS [WBLS Radio, New York, New York], the world's best looking sound.  We were the urban sound in, in, in New York, but then competition started coming along.  There was KISS FM [WRKS Radio; WEPN Radio, New York, New York]; there was WKTU [WKTU Radio; WBMP Radio, New York, New York]; 92 K2U, which played a lot of dance music and dance oriented music in the late '70s [1970s] or early '80s [1980s].  And all of a sudden we're not the only game in town.  We're competing.  We're competing for talent.  We have air--radio stations that are picking off our talent and putting 'em on, on their air.  We have people that wanted to hire Frankie Crocker.  We had people who wanted to hire Vaughn Harper, and people who wanted to hire Kenny Webb.  So you're, you're fighting for that.  You're trying to give people the resources that they need to be with you, but you also need to support that; you need to advertise; you need to market.  You're going through financial ups and downs that always--you can't always do that.  And then we have a chairman of the board who's looking to grow his business, grow his company, whether it was to buy a transponder, to distribute satellite programming around the world, or to revitalize 125th Street and the Apollo Theater [New York, New York], it required resources, and you can only spend a dollar one time.  So there were challenges of a growing company.  The company is still relatively young.  We're talking '72 [1972].  Now we're talking the mid-'80s [1980s], and Percy Sutton is looking to put a different kind of an image on Inner City Broadcasting [Inner City Broadcasting Corporation].  He branched out and sold the AM--the AM and the FM's in ki- in Los--Los Angeles [California] at one point in order to invest in radio property in his home of San Antonio [Texas], but also to have money for other ventures.  He can look back on it and say that maybe that wasn't the right thing to do at that point, but as a man with a vision for a larger company, that was what Percy Sutton wanted to do at that point.
Speaker 1: He wanted to be in entertainment, a truly entertainment company.
Speaker 2:  	A media lar- much larger media company (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 2:  	--is what his desire and his wish was at that point.  And that was his vision.  You know, I'm, I'm learning the business during this period of time.  I didn't come into this business as a general manager.  I'm still learning the finer points of it and becoming more involved in the industry overall, not just urban radio but radio industry overall.  And I'm trying to learn as much as I can.
Story_ID: 650057
Speaker 1: I got to a point quite honestly in the--in the mid-'80s [1980s] that I'm starting to get a little itchy about--I need to learn more about this business, but right now I don't know that there's someone here to teach more about radio.  Percy Sutton was a broadcaster, but he was a politician first, and he was a businessman.  I'm working around some very good broadcast people but not that can help me get to that next level.  I'm expected to get them to that next level.  And I had a sen- feeling that there's more to this business than what I'm taught.  But if I--if you don't continue to grow and to learn, you can find yourself getting into situations that you shouldn't be in, not being as diligent and dedicated to the business.  Frustrations were there, and resources are being spent in other places, so it was a--it was a period of change and transition inside the company and outside--
Speaker 2: So, so--
Speaker 1:  	--of the company.
Speaker 2: --what were some--what were--what were the things that were siphoning off money?  What were some of the things?  Cable television was one--
Speaker 1:  	Cable television was an investment that Percy wanted to put money into.  He wanted to buy a transponder--satellite transponder to begin to distribute some programming, and you know there are consultants that are involved with that; there are legal fees that are involved with that.  My sole focus was on the radio operation and being able to satisfy the expectations and requirements of our lending institutions.  But sometimes you're taking money that should be used to repay debt to invest in other businesses.  It, it doesn't make it, for fun days all the time.  And I'm not taking exception to any of the decisions that Percy wanted to make, because as chairman of the board those were his and the board of directors to make.  It didn't always pan out for the--for the company, though, unfortunately, the Apollo Theater [New York, New York] being a primary example of that.  It was--it required greater resources than the company could bring to bear on the development of the Apollo Theater and the revitalization of 125th Street.  But once you make the commitment, then you're gonna have to live up to the promises that you made.  And that was at the expense, I think, of the overall health of Inner City Broadcasting [Inner City Broadcasting Corporation], the (air quotes) radio company.
Speaker 2: So you--do you decide then to look around?
Speaker 1:  	I decided to look around along with some--a lot of prodding from my, my wife [Mary Warfield].  I've remarried at that point.  And I really wasn't looking.  I had--I had a commitment to Percy Sutton; I had a commitment to the employees at Inner City Broadcasting.  This is a small industry.  I didn't want my name floating around looking for another job because that's gonna come back into the building at some point.  I thought I was being paid fairly.  I thought I was underpaid, but I'm--you know, I, I can make a pretty decent living here.  But there were people outside of our building who looked at me and thought that I could do more.  I'm minding my own business in my office, and I got a phone call from someone who is a friend of mine still to this day, asking me if I would do him a favor, that there was a company coming in--RKO [RKO General, Inc.] owned, owned KISS FM [WRKS-Radio] here in New York [New York], which was a primary competitor for WBLS [WBLS Radio, New York, New York]--would I be interested in considering leaving Inner City to go work for them when this new company buys it and comes into the market.  That's heresy.  I'm gonna leave WBLS to go work for the primary competitor who it's my sworn responsibility to beat in ratings and revenue?  But I did a favor for someone, and it happened very quickly.  I had an interview on a Thursday, as a (air quote) favor to someone.  The interview went fairly well with the individual that I was--that I was interviewing with.  He asked me if he--if I was interested.  They'd like to continue the process, which involved a psychological profile and meeting with an industrial psychologist and a couple of other steps.  But going through all of that, I was made an offer by Tuesday--Thursday interviewed--Tuesday a job offer.  I had--did not accept the job at that point.  I said before I accept the job I have a responsibility and a loyalty to Percy Sutton.  I would have to think this through with my wife, and I also would like to talk to Percy.  I don't wanna just leave, and I did.  And as--at the end of that conversation, I tendered my resignation.  So, Thursday of one week, and I tendered my resignation on Friday of the following week.  I had not been really looking for a job, but that's how quickly the process came together for me to do the unthinkable--to leave Inner City, to go run its primary competitor, KISS FM, across the street.
Story_ID: 650058
Speaker 1: So what was that conversation like?  'Cause this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) It depends on what side of the table you were sitting at.
Speaker 1: I'm talking about your side of the table.
Speaker 2:  	From my side of the table I thought the--I thought the conversation with Percy [Percy Sutton] was somewhat condescending and disrespectful.  He had indicated to me that--not that there was a counter coming, not that he respected the job that I had done for him and the family and the company [Inner City Broadcasting Corporation] up to that point, but that, you know, he and the company were accustomed to bringing African Americans into the company and training them and having them go off to work for other people.  And that certainly wasn't the way I looked at it.  I also hadn't seen a lot of that kind of movement outside of the company during my tenure there for eleven years.  And I took offense to it quite honestly.  I had not accepted the job, to the consternation of my wife [Mary Warfield], but before that conversation was over, I tendered my resignation.
Speaker 1: So then--so you go to KISS [WRKS Radio; WEPN Radio, New York, New York] and KISS is--talk about who's at KISS at this point.
Speaker 2:  	KISS-FM is being bought by a company out of Atlanta [Georgia], Summit Broadcasting Corporation.  The gentleman that hired me, his name was Owen Weber.  Summit had an urban radio station in Baltimore [Maryland].  They had what is still one of the--they don't own it anymore--but one of the, the best urban stations in Atlanta, WVEE [WVEE Radio, Atlanta, Georgia].  And they ultimately put an urban station on in, in Baltimore.  They did not have any African American management within the company itself.  I was the first African American hired as a general manager.  They showed, I believe, respect for me and what I had done and my abilities here in this market.  They were in a tight battle with WBLS [WBLS Radio].  WBLS was New York City's [New York, New York] urban radio station, and, and KISS-FM had had some success against it but had not been able to separate itself from WBLS.  They were both competing in a relatively short space.  KISS-FM was perceived as being more the mainstream younger and urban, and WBLS was more of the adult urban.  And here's a new company coming in wanting to invest money in New York, wanting to become a dominant urban broadcaster in this market; and they wanted me to help them do that.
Story_ID: 650059
Speaker 1: And so what is the structure?  What is different about KISS [WRKS Radio; WEPN Radio, New York, New York] than what you had experienced here at--you know, in Inner City [Inner City Broadcasting Corporation]?
Speaker 2:  	One of the differences were the resources that they had.  Owen [Owen Weber] had been a successful general manager in the Baltimore [Maryland] market.  He's now running this larger company, Summit [Summit Broadcasting Corporation].  They did considerable amount of research in the Atlanta [Georgia] market, in the Baltimore market.  They were successful in Baltimore with an urban format, very successful in Atlanta.  They celebrated their employees.  They were in a growth mode.  It was a family run business, but the family members were not involved in the day to day operation of the business.  And they were gonna bring resources to bear in this market to determine how can we be a better broadcaster in this market.  Again, as I said with Inner City, there were times we did some research; there were times we did some marketing, but as the company is expanding, attempting to grow in other areas, resources that may have been used for those purposes are now being siphoned off to do other things.  I didn't--I, I wasn't as conversant as to all of the research that could be done.  I wanted to learn more about the research.  They're working with one of the premier research companies in radio called the Research Group at that point.  They had a clear vision that they could have a stronger radio operation in this market how might we do that.  And I'm coming from the competition.  Who better to talk to about how to beat the competition than the former manager there?  At least they valued my input to that degree.  And it was--it was an interesting transition working with a young lady by the name of Mary Catherine Sneed and Owen Weber and the research director to determine what is the opportunity for KISS-FM in this market that we can become a, a larger, more listened to radio station in New York City [New York, New York].  That was Summit's mission in coming to New York and hiring me.  This was in June of '89 [1989].  By the spring of 1990, KISS-FM had become the number two radio station in New York City, and it separated itself from WBLS [WBLS Radio, New York, New York] significantly.  And the radio station, we remained as the number one radio station in New York City for three and a half years, and the most listened to radio during part of that time in the country--good people, great staff, corporate resources and support, research, and staying focused on the mission and the, the direction that we felt we, we needed to follow to be successful, unlike our primary competitor, my former employee, WBLS.  Unfortunately, they focused on Charles Warfield [HistoryMaker Charles Warfield, Jr.].  How dare I leave?  So I was the (air quotes) mortal enemy and the, the mission was to defeat me.  My mission was not to defeat WBLS.  My mission was to be better than the other radio stations in the market who we competed against.  'Cause we're competing against all the radio stations in the marketplace in my mind.  They're one, and we do want their audience to listen to us, but I'm not attacking them.  We're doing what we felt we needed to do in order to be a stronger and a better radio station in this market.  They were going to suffer as a result of that, but our focus was not on them.  It was on the marketplace itself.
Story_ID: 650060
Speaker 1:  	--decided to keep Steve Harvey rather than Tom [Tom Joyner].  We thought Steve was a more broad based successful show ['The Steve Harvey Morning Show'] than Tom ['The Tom Joyner Morning Show'].
Speaker 2: I see, okay (clears throat), okay.  So Barry was--so you're saying Barry was here.  He was--so Barry [HistoryMaker Barry A. Mayo] was at KISS [WRKS Radio; WEPN Radio, New York, New York]?
Speaker 1:  	Barry was at KISS in the mid-'80s [1980s].  Barry and I--I was running BLS [WBLS Radio, New York, New York] when Barry was running KISS.  In the mid--in--at that period time in the mid-'80s [1980s] there was a lot of--'86 [1986], '87 [1987]--there was a--drugs were rampant in the--in the streets; there were issues in the African American community; fights and things of that nature.  Barry and I got together 'cause we're friends to this day.  As a matter of fact, tonight I have dinner with Barry.
Speaker 2: (Whispers) Tell him I said hello.
Speaker 1:  	I will certainly do that.  I have dinner with Barry tonight.  But we decided--KISS had a basketball team that played teams in the--in the metropolitan area to raise money for not for profits.  BLS had a team that went back to the--to the mid--late '70s [1970s], when I first got there--also had the BLS Sureshots [WBLS Sureshots] that did the same thing.  We played basketball games for not-for-profit organizations in the metropolitan area.  We said that if the two primary competing urban radio stations can do something together to better the community, then the community should want to do something better for itself.  We wound up having the Kisscards.  The KISS basketball team played the WBLS Sure Shots in a basketball game to raise money for charity.  It went to the Black United Front [National Black United Front].  We did this game in Madison Square Garden [New York, New York].  It sold out 19,000 seats, with two radio station basketball teams playing against one another and raised over $100,000 for the fund.  We did it two years.  And we promoted it on both radio stations at the same time, their personalities on our station, but we did it for the community, which Barry and I could do because that's where we came from; that's where our commitment was to; and it was--the opportunity was bigger than me competing against his radio station, or him competing against Frankie Crocker.
Story_ID: 650061
Speaker 1: And so he does--he's there.  How--wait, so by the time you--he's left then.
Speaker 2:  	He's gone.
Speaker 1: He's gone--
Speaker 2:  	He's in Chicago [Illinois] at that point (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) and he's in Chicago.
Speaker 2:  	Right.
Speaker 1: Then you come over.
Speaker 2:  	I come over.
Speaker 1: And you really essentially replaced him.
Speaker 2:  	There was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) There was a--
Speaker 2:  	There was a manager--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	--(simultaneous) in between--
Speaker 1: There's an in between.
Speaker 2:  	--that I replaced.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	Barry [HistoryMaker Barry A. Mayo] is gone and started his company--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	--at that point.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so--because he becomes a big hit--
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: --in Chicago.
Speaker 2:  	In Chicago.
Speaker 1: And he was--
Speaker 2:  	Rightfully so with--
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2:  	--his little self.
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2:  	With his little self.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Right, so, so you come in and you are able--so what things do you put in place?  That's what I--I mean, I heard that there was a study and there are the three of you.  But what things do you put in place that allows you to grow to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) There are a number of things that, that we did differently.  It started with the music that was on the air.  As I mentioned that WBLS [WBLS Radio, New York, New York] was more of the adult urban, and KISS [WRKS Radio; WEPN Radio, New York, New York] was more the young and urban.  When I came in I--what I asked--let's see if we can stretch the rubber band.  We don't wanna lose our younger end audience that we have, but can we stretch the rubber band so that we can attract a little bit older audience between twenty-eight and thirty-four.  Let's test that in our research and see if we can do that.  We needed to improve our morning show.  We had a morning show with a young lady and a guy that--the young lady didn't really wanna be on mornings.  She was a good air personality that didn't wanna be on mornings, didn't really like the energy.  And one of the things a radio has to do--when you wake up in the morning and you turn the radio on, it's gotta give you a sense of getting you ready for the day, put a smile on your face, giving you the news--the primary news stories for the day, the water cooler talk.  We needed to replace the morning show.  We, we brought in--we put together Jeff Fox, who was at the station, and Ken Webb, who had been at BLS.  To, to make the KISS morning show we put them on the air together.  At one point, we wound up putting Wendy Williams on the air.  Wendy did a feature in the morning show called 'Dishing the Dirt.'  Our program director, Vinny Brown, in trying to attract more women and looking for a more creative air personality, wound up putting Wendy on full time in the morning.  And we focused on music that had an appeal to eighteen to thirty-four, regardless of what BLS--we weren't concerned about BLS.  This is an audience that we're going after, and if we can give them a better environment for that music and anyone else in the marketplace, we can win.  And we stayed focus on that mission.  We also--BLS was also--because of its founders: the Percy Suttons, the [HistoryMaker] Basil Patersons, the Dave Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins], the Charles Rangels [HistoryMaker Charles B. Rangel] was perceived as the voice of the African American community in this market, the involvement with, with Al Sharpton [HistoryMaker Reverend Al Sharpton] for example.  We needed to get more involved in the community; KISS did.  We put the 'Open Line' on the air with Bob Slade and Milton McLean Dennis [ph.] back in 1989.  We put that program on the air because we needed to talk directly to our community and let them know that we will be here for them.  And then you have to go out and you have to live that commitment to that community.  So our focus was on the African American community and what we need to do to better serve that community, both news and public affairs, entertainment, and the personalities that we put on the air at the radio station at that point.  And we stayed focused on that--not on them, on what we can do to make this the best radio station that we can in New York City [New York, New York]; and it worked.
Story_ID: 650062
Speaker 1: And so that (clears throat) took how long to, to make happen?
Speaker 2:  	That happened within six months.  The radio station was number five, number six in the market when I went there.  In '89 [1989] I had to hire a new program director; I had to hire a sales manager.  The sales manager was in the building.  We promoted her.  The program director was in the building.  We promoted him.  Bob Slade was the news director.  We gave him a broader involvement with the community with the 'Open Line' program.  We didn't make a lot of staff changes.  It was: how do you get everyone on the same page.  My biggest challenge was with the research company who believed that KISS FM [WRKS Radio; WEPN Radio, New York, New York] has to stay rooted firmly where it was with that younger audience.  Didn't--I didn't believe that we could grow if we didn't stretch that rubber band.  With a company that is committed to research, you gotta prove it in the research.  Let's test the music that's being played.  Let's test the features that are on the air.  Will the audience stay anchored on the younger end if we broaden the appeal on the upper end as long as we didn't get too old?  And we were fortunate that it, it worked.
Speaker 1: So who did you have to prove to do that or were you left to do that on your own?  I mean, 'cause if your research company is saying one thing, your--that's what you're paying them to, to give you that advice.  So what--
Speaker 2:  	Well, I--the research company was a party in the room, Owen Weber, who is--my boss was in the room.  Mary Catherine Sneed, who I always refer to as Summit's [Summit Broadcasting Corporation] secret weapon, she had a, a, a programming background--was, was in the room.  My voice was certainly heard in the room.  I've been in urban radio in this market for eleven years.  Our program director that we hired, Vinny Brown, had an ability to execute.  He also had an ability to attract good talent.  Kenny Webb [Ken Webb] and Jeff Fox weren't gonna come and just work for me if they didn't have Vinny Brown who was gonna show them how to grow their show.  Vinny had a relationship with, with Wendy Williams that he felt he could help develop Wendy into being a, a major market talent in New York [New York] and not just the (air quotes) lady that dished the dirt in the morning show.  We wound up--it was unintentional.  We wound up having three female voices on the air back to back, which was something that people (unclear) you can't do that.  The audience won't listen to three women back to back.  But we had three women that we thought were the best options that we had to put on the air: Carol Ford, Wendy Williams, and Yvonne Mobley who was doing the night show--the best talent that we had.  Vinny felt confident and comfortable in doing that.  Our parent company entrusted us to make those changes.  Research measures--continues to measure how well are you doing.  The results were, were reflected in the ratings in New York City within six months.
Story_ID: 650063
Speaker 1: This is eighty- wait, it's seven--
Speaker 2:  	Eight- '89 [1989] to '90 [1990].
Speaker 1: Eight-nine [1989] to '90 [1990].
Speaker 2:  	Middle of--by the spring of '90 [1990], we were one of the top two radio stations in New York City [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay, and then what other--you were there [WRKS Radio; WEPN Radio, New York, New York] until when you say?
Speaker 2:  	I was there until the end of the '94 [1994].
Speaker 1: Ninety-four [1994].  So you were there a total of really eight, eight, eight--
Speaker 2:  	Almost five years.
Speaker 1: Five--oh, five (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) No more than five years--'89 [1989] to '94 [1994].
Speaker 1: Now--nah--okay, '89 [1989] to '94 [1994], okay.  Then what, what is the average stay, though, of, of general managers at radio stations in the first place?
Speaker 2:  	It varies from company to company.  They--for example, in the San Francisco [California] market, there were general managers in that market that had been there for twenty-five years or more.  I'd say in a market like New York City it's probably more like four or five years.  In other markets it could be a little bit longer.  It--there, there's no set term.  It depends on your success and the expectations.  It also depends on--there was a time in our business before consolidation, which began in the mid-'90s [1990s], that you could leave a company and go and work for another company.  You may be a general manager from one station and you went to be a general manager in another.  You're compensation could be doubled because you're bringing your success from one to the other.  But with consolidations, as more companies bought up more radio stations under their umbrella, those opportunities became less and less available.  You really had to apply for an intercompany transfer, you know, which sort of limited your compensation capabilities at that point.  And also it sort of eliminated the opportunity to leave from one company to go to another to, to better your financial standing in your position.
Story_ID: 650064
Speaker 1: Now, but (clears throat) the thing is the '90s [1990s] the--there was the Telecom Act [Telecommunications Act of 1996]--
Speaker 2:  	Ninety-six [1996].
Speaker 1: --of '96 [1996].  But you're talking you--what is happening at the time that you decide to leave KISS [WRKS Radio; WEPN Radio, New York, New York]?  What, what happens there 'cause I didn't have a good--
Speaker 2:  	When I left KISS the Summit [Summit Broadcasting Company] had decided at the end of '93 [1993]--the family had decided that they wanted to get out of radio.  They had some newspaper interest investments.  They also had radio.  They felt that they had maximized the return in radio, and this was the time to exit the business, and that included Baltimore [Maryland], Los--New York [New York], Atlanta [Georgia], and Dallas, Texas.  Here in New York there as a great interest in KISS FM shown by Emmis [Emmis Communications Corporation], owned Hot 97 [WQHT Radio] here in New York.  There was WBLS [WBLS Radio, New York, New York].  BLS was adult urban.  Hot 97 was hip hop more or less.  KISS was mainstream urban, but we were in both of their lanes.  We were playing young end hip hop to a certain degree.  We were also playing adult.  And the owner--the owner of Emmis had an interest in buying the FM to pair with the hip hop to have the hip hop and the adult urban.  He had the foresight to do that; he had the financial resources to do that; and it wound up being the first what we called FM-FM duopoly.  No one in this market owned two FMs in New York City before Emmis bought KISS from Summit.  That became the verse--first FM-FM duopoly, one company owning two FM signals--not only two FM signals, two competing FM signals under one roof.  There were--there were savings in the operation as a result of that; gives you the opportunity to control the demographic, in terms of offering it to your advertisers that you--buying your company.  They can buy young and they can buy adult; you can squeeze out your competitor at that point; and they get to control the direction of both of those radio stations.  So they strongly went after KISS FM when Summit decided they were gonna sell it.  And they were the willy- the witting--the winning bidder.  It's difficult to manage an environment like that where it becomes known on the street that your primary competitor, who quite honestly had never beaten KISS in rev--revenue, had never beaten KISS in ratings is now about to be your owner at that point.  And that was an environment I wasn't interested in being a part of.  And it was also difficult being the first FM-FM duopoly, and you're being bought by your primary competitor, and it'd never happened in this market before.  I really couldn't wait to get out of the business quick enough.  I, I just felt badly for our staff.  When the acquired--when you are the acquired, the employees of the acquirer certainly have an advantage over you, and there's gonna be significant downsizing.  I didn't want to be a party to that.  And fortunately I had an opportunity to leave the company at '89 [1989] and I did.  I mean, I'm sorry in '94 [1994] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Eight--
Speaker 2:  	In '94 [1994].
Speaker 1: In '94 [1994].
Speaker 2:  	Ninety-four [1994] and I did.
Story_ID: 650065
Speaker 1: And you went where?
Speaker 2:  	I took a year off.  This is '95 [1995].  I'm looking at this point to the opportunity of raising capital to buy my own radio stations.  But this is also the time where in Washington [D.C.] they're talking about a ca- Communications Act rewrite [Telecommunications Act of 1996].  So there are a lot deep pocketed companies out here who all of a sudden are seeing an opportunity in the business to grow and in many cases to become public.  So the value of these properties escalated.  I understood from what had happened here in New York [New York].  You don't go into a market just to say you're a broadcaster to buy a standalone FM.  That's a, a recipe for disaster because you can't defend yourself from a competitor.  So the communications rewrite materialize in '96 [1996].  I'm out here looking to buy properties in '95 [1995] at a time the values are increasing.  There are larger broadcasters out here that are looking at ways that they can grow their platform, and I'm gonna be the new entrant in here, and I couldn't--I couldn't get a transaction done.  But I took a year off to try to do that.  I had the financial wherewithal to do that; had the family support to do that; and it was an opportunity.  It just never came to fruition.
Speaker 1: Who were you looking at to help with the financing or did you get to that point?
Speaker 2:  	There were a number of financial institutions that were interested, based on my success here in New York and involvement.  The difficulty is the ask--bid, ask issue.  Can you get the property?  And then when it becomes known that there are other bidders who are willing to pay more, who have underlying asset values that can support a bet- a greater selling price or purchase price, I became the low guy on the totem pole--'cause we were all out here trying to talk to the same banks, and financial institutions, and lenders--and just could not get a transaction done.  And I--and I was--I was fine with that.  I wasn't ready to go back into the radio industry at that point, though.  I didn't know.  And I had been in New York at this point.  I'd been very blessed.  Here it is 1995, almost 1996, and my entire career has been in New York.  In the radio industry, often times you have to move from market to market in order to get that opportunity.  I had God's blessings.  It allowed me to remain here in New York City to raise my family, to be successful all in New York City.  There's a good and bad with that.  Part of it was the perception that I would never leave New York.  So there may have been some opportunities out there that were not presented to me because I'm a New Yorker, and where do you go from New York?  Do you go to Boston [Massachusetts]?  Do you go to Baltimore [Maryland]?  You go to Washington?  And I really didn't have a--an appetite at that point to get into this industry that's now being consolidated.  I had been through that with Emmis [Emmis Communications Corporation] buying KISS [WRKS Radio; WEPN Radio, New York, New York].
Story_ID: 650066
Speaker 1: So I had an opportunity.  I got a phone call from someone that, wanna know if I might be interested in running a record label with an artist.  And I went to work for Uptown Records with Heavy D for a little over, almost a year and a half.  One thing I learned at that point, again, not to be disrespectful to anyone who may hear this and how I say it, but I learned during that period of time a couple of things: one, I'm better working with adults.  Remember I said earlier that I--people I've worked with have always been adults, and I like to treat them as adults.  The record industry is about young people.  One of the other things didn't sit well with me in the record industry is that it's not in the record industry's (air quote) best interest to teach the young artist the (air quotes) business they are about to become involved in.  And I was not really comfortable in that kind of an environment, where you're putting these artists in debt to the point that they can never pay you back, and they don't control their future in the industry.  And it was very clear that the radio--the record industry had no interest in educating these young artists.  What happens when they lend you a half a million dollar or give you a half a million advance?  What does that mean to an eighteen year old kid out of the neighborhood?  What does that mean to an eighteen year old kid that may have had a year of college, who has no professional management behind them, that out of that half a million dollars you have to pay taxes; you have to pay your manager; you gotta pay your accountant; you have to live off of that money; and you also have to go into the studi--live off of that money until you produce a product for, for the label.  And you also owe the label the next six projects that you produce, but they're not obligated to fund those for you, but you still are beholding [beholden] to them.  (Air quotes) All of this money are called advances, and (air quotes) all of that man- that money is recoupable.  They don't explain that.  There is no interest to explain that.  So I did that for about a year and a half and decided I really prefer to go work for adults.
Story_ID: 650067
Speaker 1: So let me ask you--that was, that was Heavy--what--at what point was Heavy D--I mean, Uptown Records, it was a new record label, right?
Speaker 2:  	No, Uptown Records had been in existence for a number of years.  It had a lot of success.  Heavy D was on the label.  Andre Harrell had been the president of the label for a period of time.  Heavy D was a recording artist on the label, and the label--Andre is going into other ventures.  Universal Records [Universal Music Group] is coming into being a new ownership--Doug Morris.  They had made a commitment to Heavy D that they wanted to make him the president, but they wanted someone that had the respect of the artists, had a--had a business background and understanding, understood radio as, as a general manager of the label.  Ididn't know the inner workings of the label, but it was a--it was an appealing opportunity for me at that point.  It paid very well.  I did know Heavy.  I knew Heavy as an artist.  I knew some of the people working for Heavy.  But it's, it's a different business than the radio business.
Speaker 1: And who ended up replacing you at that point?  Or was there--'cause there's been a lot of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Ultimately, they folded Uptown Records into--
Speaker 1: Universal.
Speaker 2:  	Universal.  So they ultimately--because the label wasn't, wasn't making money for a lot of different reasons.  The industry was changing, and they started them--to fold some of those in under--Sylvia Rhone at, at--(unclear) mother became president over, over Uptown and some of the other labels at some future point.
Story_ID: 650068
Speaker 1: So what do you do at that point then?
Speaker 2:  	At that point, I had an op- I had an opportunity presented to me at that point and this is 19--ooh, '97 [1997].  I had been--I had participated in industry--radio record industry events and conferences.  I met a gentleman by the name of Jimmy deCastro, who was running a company called Chancellor Media [Chancellor Media Corporation].  And Chancellor was in the process of buying radio stations.  Two of the radio stations they had an interest in were WDAS [WDAS Radio] AM and FM in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.  And Jimmy spoke very clearly to me.  He said, you know, we would have approached you before about this opportunity, but the perception was you would never leave New York [New York].  You had always been here.  My wife [Mary Warfield] was ready to leave New York.  Our youngest, my daughter [Jada Warfield], was now a freshman at Temple University [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  As a matter of fact, she's always said that we followed her to Philadelphia.  But when the opportunity was presented to leave New York and to go run, not only WDAS, but to be involved with two of the more legendary heritage urban radio stations in America--I had run BLS [WBLS Radio, New York, New York] and LIB [WLIB Radio, New York, New York]; I had run KISS FM [WRKS Radio; WEPN Radio, New York, New York] here in New York, and now I have an opportunity to go to Philadelphia and run WDAS AM and FM under a new company, and my wife is ready to leave New York and, and get out of New York--it was a--it was a godsend.
Speaker 1: And so you were there--so you were there.  I just wanna step from nine--you started in 1997--
Speaker 2:  	I went there in June of '97 [1997], and I left there in January of 2000.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	So I was there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Three years.
Speaker 2:  	--really three, three years.
Speaker 1: So what is that experience?
Speaker 2:  	It was a marvel--it was a wonderful experience.  One, going to WDAS, which had a very good staff, a legendary program director, Joe "Butterball" Tamburro, which was the greatest asset that any general manager could have going into a market.  He gave me an opportunity to learn, not only Philadelphia--Philadelphia--any aspect of Philadelphia, whether it was community; whether it was political leadership in the--in the marketplace; whether it was the social environment; whether it was a recording industry in the marketplace.  If there was anything about Philadelphia I needed to understand or anyone I needed to get to know at a meeting or be introduced to Butterball was the individual to do the introduction.  And I'm coming in with a new broadcast company that is looking to grow conc- in this new consolidated environment and not only on WDAS AM and FM.  They owned five other radio stations in the Philadelphia market, and they were buying stations in other cities also.  They owned urban stations in Chicago [Illinois].  They owned an urban station--the number one urban station in, in Los Angeles [California], in Cleveland, Ohio, and they were growing.  They had twenty-five radio stations at that point.  In a very short period of time they grew to ninety-six within year.
Speaker 1: Ninety-six stations?
Speaker 2:  	Ninety-six stations in a year--consolidation.  This is post-Communications Act [Telecommunications Act of 1996]--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2:  	--rewrite.
Speaker 1: Right.  And so who, who--wait a minute.  So was it Beasley [Beasley FM Acquisition Corporation]?  No, Beasley sold--
Speaker 2:  	They sold--Beasley sold the station to--
Speaker 1: Evergreen [Evergreen Media Corporation].
Speaker 2:  	Evergreen, which became Chancellor Media, which became AMFM, Inc.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2:  	So it's Evergreen, Chancellor, Chancellor became AMFM and then ultimately merged with Clear Channel [Clear Channel Communications, Inc.].
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2:  	So I started, it was Evergreen.  Shortly after I got there, within six months, it was Chancellor, and ultimately a year and a half down the road it became AMFM under another--
Speaker 1: I--
Speaker 2:  	--merger.
Speaker 1: I see.  So nowadays it's all Clear Channel?  Or did AMFM--
Speaker 2:  	Nowadays--
Speaker 1: --come back beca--
Speaker 2:  	No, now it's all Clear Channel.
Speaker 1: --(Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Clear Channel bought AMFM in mid-2000s.  I had--I'd left at the beginning of 2000, and their merger occurred in, in mid-2000.  But I had an opportunity to exit along with a few other senior managers at that point.  But it was--it was one of the best experiences of my--of, of my career.
Story_ID: 650069
Speaker 1: One of the challenges--and, and I--and I take this seriously, with being one of the few African Americans given the opportunities that I've been given in this industry, I have to speak on behalf of those that did not get the opportunity that I have.  I have to speak on behalf of the communities that we serve.  And when I started with this company, I mentioned that it grew from roughly twenty-five stations to ninety-six.  And they had a staff meeting in Phoenix, Arizona, where they brought in the managers of all of all ninety-six of their radio operations.  Six of us were African American out of these ninety-six managers.  And I'm--and I'm in the room, and there's six people whose careers I followed-- Verna Greene in Detroit [Michigan]; [HistoryMaker] Jerry Rushin in Miami [Florida].  There was not an African American in, in Phila- in Los Angeles [California].  I'm running DAS [WDAS Radio, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] AM and FM.  Chester Schofield was running Power [WUSL Radio] in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  [HistoryMaker] Marv Dyson was running GCI [WGCI Radio] in, in MXD [WMXD Radio, Detroit, Michigan]--I mean, GCI in--
Speaker 2: In Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1:  	--in Chicago.  Legendary individuals in this business, very successful in their own right, and they're all under this umbrella of Chancellor Media [Chancellor Media Corporation] at this point.  In '98 [1998], I was approached by Jimmy deCastro as to whether I would be interested in overseeing the urban properties.  Because I'm challenging them every opportunity I get, why aren't there more qualified African Americans that you can hire to run some of these radio properties, not just urban.  I can run more than urban.  That's what I run; that's what I'm comfortable with; that's what I been challenged to do and I've been successful at, but there need--there's the need for more diversity here.  And you, you--if you're in the room where you can have the conversation, you have a responsibility to have the conversation.  They gave me an opportunity for about six months to oversee the urban operations, so I was not only running DAS AM and FM in Philly, I was also over Power in Philadelphia.  I was overseeing EDR [WEDR Radio, Miami, Florida] in Miami [Florida], Marv's stations in Chicago, ZAK [WZAK Radio] in, in Cleveland [Ohio]--there are two stations in Cleveland--the Beat [KKBT Radio; KRRL Radio] in L.A. [Los Angeles, California].  I had--we had ten of the top urban radio stations in America under Chancellor Media that I had an opportunity to be involved with.  In my, my under--what I do, I don't tell them how to run their radio stations.  I can't tell Marv Dyson how to run a radio station.  He's been doing that successfully for more years than I have.  It's how do we help bring resources to help these stations continue to grow under the banner of Chancellor Media?  And from there a few months later with some corporate changes, I was given an opportunity to, to drop the urban operations title, and I took on a cluster of thirty radio stations for Chancellor Media, AMFM [AMFM, Inc.], which concluded all of their stations in Chicago, Philadelphia, Cleveland, Atlanta [Georgia], Miami, and Puerto Rico.  So I had a thirty station region that I was responsible for which was all different types of formats--
Speaker 2: That's--
Speaker 1:  	-- (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous)huge then.  So what--how long did you do that?
Speaker 1:  	I did that for about a year and a half, until the announced merger with, with Clear Channel [Clear Channel Communications, Inc.].  And I had an opportunity to stay with the company or to leave; and I exercised an option to leave (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) To leave (audio disturbance).
Story_ID: 650070
Speaker 1: But how is WVON [WVON Radio] still in existence?  That's what I--?
Speaker 2:  	It's--it struggles in Chicago [Illinois].  It has a very unique place in the marketplace (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But--
Speaker 2:  	It doesn't have debt.  It doesn't have debt--
Speaker 1: Oh (simultaneous).
Speaker 2:  	--(simultaneous) so it doesn't have the requirement to be as--
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2:  	--to generate--
Speaker 1: I get you.
Speaker 2:  	--as much revenue--
Speaker 1: I get you.
Speaker 2:  	--you're not servicing the debt.
Speaker 1: The debt. Okay.
Speaker 2:  	That is what ran Inner City [Inner City Broadcasting Corporation] into bankruptcy and ultimately caused the company to lose its properties.  It borrowed more money in an evolving, consolidating industry where values were much higher, but for a number of reasons the company was unable to continue to service its debt.  And at some point the banks just like with your mortgage, at some point the bankers--you gotta pay us back.  If you can't pay us back, we've gotta find someone that can step in and replace you.
Story_ID: 650071
Speaker 1: Let's talk about the syndication part; and then--
Speaker 2:  	Syndication in our industry, for the longest period of time there were only a couple of major urban syndicated opportunities.  Tom Joyner was the first that comes to mind.  [HistoryMaker] Doug Banks was doing a morning show.  They were both with ABC Radio networks going back to the '80s [1980s]--late '80s [1980s], early '90s [1990s].  I don't know when Tom started.  It--the interest in syndicated programs began to grow with the consolidation of our industry.  'Cause one of the offshoots of consolidation is our industry did an exceptional job in, in managing operating expenses.  You've got numerous radio stations in the same op--in the same marketplace in one building, so you're saving, you know, on rent and overhead; one general manager instead of general managers for each one of the properties.  You've got one general manager.  You might have one program director over all of these operations consolidating down the necessary staff.  Economies are scaled as a result of consolidation.  (Unclear)--done an amazing job with that.  Fifty percent of your operating costs of radio operations is people.  So how do you--how much more consolidation can you do?  You've consolidated down to one general manager, and you're consolidated down to one or two program directors, depending upon the format.  You're putting all of the sales staffs under one sales manager.  Maybe you have a general sales manager and a, a national sales manager, but over all of the radio stations.  You consolidate sales staffs so that they can sell the combined entity and not just their individual stations.  So, every one of these consolidation opportunities reduces your cost of doing business.  One of the largest costs in operation is air personalities.  Morning show personalities make a lot of money.  Afternoon jocks make a lot of money.  How can I, within a broader platform--if I have--I need a morning show in, in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]; I need a morning show in Chicago [Illinois]; I need a morning show in, in Cleveland, Ohio.  I'm paying X number of dollars for a show in Philly; an X number of dollars for a show in Chicago; I gotta pay X number of dollars for a show in Cleveland or St. Louis [Missouri].  Maybe I can find a talent that we can put on each one of these radio stations to reduce my cost of operation.  Whether the company does it or whether a company such as ABC Radio networks develops a talent like that that can then be offered to radio stations so that they're sharing the cost of that talent, they're reducing their cost of talent, and it's a win win for the operation.  You're creating this new syndicated opportunity for the radio format.  So all of a sudden Tom Joyner has a lot more competition as Doug Banks.  There's Russ Parr.  We put top--we put--as a competitor to Tom Joyner, we put Steve Harvey on the air beginning here in New York [New York] in 19--in 2005 [sic. 2000].  We put Wendy Williams on the air as an afternoon syndicated talent that we could put on in a number of different markets.  And it, it becomes more compelling programming, a national figure, and it's happened across all different types of formats.  You're creating a revenue--we created a, a, a revenue generator with Steve Harvey because we were partners in the--in the syndication along with Premiere [Premiere Networks] and Steve Harvey.  So, Steve's making money as a talent; Premiere is making money as a syndicator; we're making money as a partner in the transaction; and we're working together to see how many stations we can get to carry the Steve Harvey show.  Sixty-five different radio stations, and people will look back at it and say, well, that was sixty-five individual morning shows that you guys helped eliminate.  We look at it that what we've helped to do is elevate the profile of these sixty-five radio stations in a marketplace to make them more competitive so that they can generate more money so that they can continue to operate profitably and successfully and protect the remaining jobs that are in the marketplace, many of which are employees, employees that are coming out of our community and a better service to community.  These are--this is--these are the out--this is the outcome of syndication.  And it's, it's slowed down a little bit because right now there's Tom Joyner and there's Steve Harvey in the morning.  Russ Parr's show ['The Russ Parr Morning Show'] is still there.  It hasn't grown.  Doug Banks has moved from the morning ['The Doug Banks Radio Show'].  Now he's got an afternoon opportunity.  We were looking to syndicate way--Wendy Williams.  Wendy was a little bit too edgy for some of the markets, but the talent was certainly there, as Wendy has transitioned into syndicated television.  It's about the talent.  Can we find talent bigger than life, bigger than the local talent that can help grow who we are in these individual markets?  And that's the--that's the upside of syndication.  The downside is it, it sort of calls out talent--future talent for our industry.  All of these radio stations at some point had local radio shows that are no longer in the business and no longer available because they've been replaced by the big 'Steve Harvey Morning Show' ['The Steve Harvey Morning Show'] or the big 'Tom Joyner Morning Show,' and that's number one and number 1A; nothing else really matters.  So if you wanna win, those are the two shows that you need to have.  Maybe you'll put somebody on in the afternoon.  Maybe you'll do a Michael Baisden ['The Michael Baisden Show'] in the afternoon, and that's another 105 radio stations that carried Baisden for a period of time.
Story_ID: 650072
Speaker 1: But, some people say that all radio is local; and after a while, it became also all- just all the same--it had no personality.
Speaker 2:  	I think smart broadcasters understand the, the need to serve the community, and every community is different.  A syndicated program can come out of Chicago [Illinois].  Steve [Steve Harvey] came out of New York [New York] for the longest period of time.  But you localize it for information and news of relevance to that marketplace.  For example, when we were working with Steve here in New York, we put Ann Tripp on to do the music and to make it a locally oriented kind of a show.  You know, the, the ability to be local is not just your morning show.  It's the overall requirement of that radio station to get involved in the community, to go into the community.  I always argue that it's--you know, at Inner City Broadcasting [Inner City Broadcasting Corporation] we had nineteen radio stations at one point.  New York picked its music; San Francisco [California] picked its music; Jackson, Mississippi, picked its music; Columbia, South Carolina, picked its music, 'cause each mu- market is different.  So this homogenization that people accused the industry of being wasn't true in, in every individual situation.  No one knew how to better service that community in, in Columbia, South Carolina, than our local management team and program director.  Same thing was, was true in Jackson, Mississippi.  We were able to remain top radio station in both of those markets, both urban.  We had Tom Joyner on in Jackson, Mississippi.  He began on that radio station when he first went into syndication.  We had Steve Harvey on in the mornings in Columbia, and he was a homerun in that market.  We could have putten Steve ['The Steve Harvey Morning Show'] on in Jackson, Mississippi, but you got the number one morning show.  Why would you do that?  And that marketplace respects and likes that show.  Each market has to be looked at for its own unique--its own nuances in order to be successful.  In order to be successful, you do have to be local.  I think today in, in the radio industry you are seeing broadcasters going back to being more live and more local.  You know, I think it's tipping in the other direction.  Some people will say that's because we can't find the next Steve Harvey, or we can't find the next Wendy Williams.  Someone has to go out in your community and represent you.  If you're bringing an out-of-town show, Steve Harvey from Chicago in the morning, and let's say an out of town show from Atlanta [Georgia] with Michael Baisden in the afternoon, who are you sending out in the community to speak to your--to speak to your commitment to the community, to do the fundraisers for the not for profits in the community, and for your audience to vote for because they get to see who these people are?  We grew up in an environment where no one was bigger than their local air personality.  They're still big in the local communities if the companies are committed (audio disturbance) to servicing that community to the best of its ability (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 650073
Speaker 1: When you go and you're, you're with Chancellor [Chancellor Media Corporation] still, and you're managing those thirty stations and their different formats, what do you learn in that?  'Cause you do that you said for about two years?
Speaker 2:  	About a year and a half, yes.
Speaker 1: Ya- year and a half.  So what do you learn or is it like a lot more--do you like it or don't you like it?
Speaker 2:  	I, I, I do love it; I enjoy it; I enjoyed the group I was working with.  There were probably six regional guys--six of us, not just guys, six of us who split up the country.  I had thirty markets under, under my management.  My job--and each one of these individual radio stations at this point in the industry with AMFM [AMFM, Inc.] had its own general manager.  We had two general managers over urban properties, [HistoryMakers] Marv Dyson and one other general manager in, in Chicago [Illinois], but we had other formats in that market.  We had other managers for those markets.   We believed that you needed an individual general manager to maximize the return on each one of the radio stations in the market.  My job was to get them to maximize their opportunities in the marketplace, to generate revenue for the company, to be a successful entity themselves, and to improve themselves working together as a group, following the, the--utilizing the resources that are being provided by the company, and clearly understanding what the expectations were.  I understood--I learned how to better budget; I learned different formats besides urban, 'cause my experience at this point has been primarily urban; I learned that there's good radio and there's bad radio regardless of the audience that you're--that you're targeting.  If you play a bad record, and you don't have right formatics for your radio station, or you don't have the right talent on the air, or you're not committed to our community, or you're not in the community, it doesn't require--it doesn't matter whether you're in an urban environment or a general market environment.  You're not going to win.  And to bring that understanding to people that are in different formats, whether it be urban, whether it be country, whether it be news talk, whether it be CHR [contemporary hit radio], it was a learning experience for me.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that was a learning experience?
Speaker 2:  	That was a learning experience, and also to show people that African Americans can do more than just urban radio was, was also an, an offshoot from that.  I was successful as a radio--a broadcast executive, not an urban broadcast executive.  Good radio is good radio.  Successful radio is successful radio.
Story_ID: 650074
Speaker 1: But that was good, that--so there weren't many of you in the country like that though, right?
Speaker 2:  	No (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I mean--
Speaker 2:  	--there were not.
Speaker 1: --so is--so, really wasn't Marv still more urban in his--
Speaker 2:  	Marv [HistoryMaker Marv Dyson] was more urban; Don [ph.] in that market was more urban; [HistoryMaker] Jerry Rushin was urban.  They ran their urban stations in those markets, but there were other stations in each one of these markets.  We had a radi- we had radio stations in, in Puerto Rico.  None of them were urban.  You know, they were locally oriented radio stations in that marketplace.  The radio station in Atlanta [Georgia], it was a standalone FM.  It was not an urban radio station, had an excellent general manager, Marv Nyren, in that marketplace--a good broadcaster.  I had--I learned from good broadcasters.  I respected good broadcasters.  They respected me for the role that I played in the company, and it wasn't for me to tell them how to do their jobs.  I was a resource to help them do their jobs better.
Speaker 1: And so Clear Channel [Clear Channel Communications, Inc.] comes in.  Do you not--is Clear Channel the sort of--viewed as that--the, the Pac Man that's eating everyone up.  They're not, not a good company overall or--I mean, why do you decide that you're retiring?
Speaker 2:  	Well, at that point I didn't decide I was retiring.  At that point, in 2000, I decided that it wa- there were other opportunities that I was afforded the opportunity to look at.  I didn't wanna necessarily go from being a, a regional--a corporate regional from--for AMFM [AMFM, Inc.] to become a market manager, for example, back in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] only for Clear Channel.  Because their organization structure was gonna be different than it was AMFM, and it was clear that was gonna happen.  It wasn't a secret.  I was offered an opportunity.  I could oversee the market in Philadelphia.  I had done there.  I had done that, been there.  I felt that here's an opportunity that may be some other opportunities.  There was the dot.com era at that point.  There was some interest shown in me from some dot.com companies.  Fortunately, I did not select one of those opportunities.  There were other broadcast companies that were out here at that point.  There was Radio One [Urban One, Inc.]; there was Blue Chip [Blue Chip Broadcasting, Inc.]; there was Inner City Broadcasting [Inner City Broadcasting Corporation] that were all available; there's Sheridan Broadcasting Network, all people that I--that I knew in the business that had opportunities that I could have pursued.  And what I wound up settling, settling on or decided on, not settling on, was going back to the devil that I knew, 'cause it--what my challenge was for myself is I wanted to work--go to work for a company that I can help them be better than they were, not that I can do that myself just became I'm Charles Warfield [HistoryMaker Charles Warfield, Jr.].  But in terms of how they operate and how I operate, I can help them be better than they were.  And Inner City was in an expansion mode and needed--they were looking for a chief operating officer, and that's what I had been doing for that year and a half with, with AMFM--overseeing a thirty station cluster successfully.
Story_ID: 650075
Speaker 1: Well, at this point, Percy Sutton is still ali- he's--?
Speaker 2:  	Percy's alive.  He's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He's ali-
Speaker 2:  	--not involved in the day to day operation of the company.  His son, Pierre [HistoryMaker Pierre Sutton], is now the chairman.  The company was being restructured.  The outside interests that the station had were moved over to a--the parent company, Inner City Broadcasting [Inner City Broadcasting Corporation].  I was brought in to own--to run what became known as ICBC Broadcast Holdings, Inc., which was strictly the radio operations of the company.  It had nothing to do with cable television.  It had nothing to do with any other investment interests that they may have had--it may have been interested in.  And my focus and the focus that I wanted to have was on growing the broadcast operation itself, and that structure was put into place, which, which enticed me to come back in 2000.
Speaker 1: So who was the key leadership (unclear) then?  It was--
Speaker 2:  	At that point, it was Pierre Sutton as the chairman of the board, and they put together a board of directors that was required by the--by the lending institutions at that point.  Some individuals were insiders of the company, but they were also outside directors that would provide some oversight of the company.  And there was a commitment to focus on broadcasting and to grow the company as a broadcast company--
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2:  	--that interested me.
Speaker 1: So, so tell, tell us what happened then?
Speaker 2:  	Inner City--the, the, the biggest challenge of Inner City--and many broadcasters have run into this same issue--in 2000, which was--some would argue the height of the consolidation craziness--the last phase of that--overpaid for radio stations.  Radio stations were generally valued on a, a multiple of your cash flow.  If your cash flow were ten million dollars, your station was worth ten times that.  So your $10 million radio stations are worth #100 million.  That cash flow is worth $100 million, and people were willing to lend you money based upon you having enterprise value of $100 million, but you have to pay that money back at some point.  In order to do that, you gotta continue to grow your top line and your bottom line.  In order to do that, the industry itself has to continue to grow at a, a 6, 7, 8, 10 percent growth rate year over year.  Our industry stopped doing that in 2004, 2005, and then with the economic crash of 2008, we've never recovered that.  I mean, growth in our industry is now probably two, three percent annual growth a year.  It's not enough growth that you can continue to service your debt, repay your debt, and to be a viable company.  When Inner City bought stations and other broadcasters did the same, they paid close to twenty times the cash flow for the radio stations that they bought.  They overpaid.  It was a--in hindsight a bad business decision, but that was the market; that was the going market at that point.  And it catches up.  It caught up to many, many broadcasters.  And Inner City was one of those that over paid and couldn't, couldn't service that debt and ultimately the debt was called by the financial institutions.  The company wound up going into bankruptcy; and the family lost the company--the family, the shareholders lost the company in 2012.
Story_ID: 650076
Speaker 1: So where were you on the, on--during this, it would have been, well, twelve--twelve year period you came back, right?
Speaker 2:  	I came back twelve years.  I was--
Speaker 1: Twelve years.
Speaker 2:  	--back for twelve years.
Speaker 1: So where were you on the decision, you know, with all of this?  Because you come back--what, what--how has the company [Inner City Broadcasting Corporation] changed in the time since--
Speaker 2:  	We--
Speaker 1: --you were gone?
Speaker 2:  	When I came in the radio--the company had already made the commitment to acquire the Jackson, Mississippi, and Columbia markets.  But one of the requirements of financial institutions placed on them in order to lend them to money is it needed to hire a president slash chief operating officer, which was my role, to oversee the day to day operations of the company, to hire the market managers for the company, to report to the board of directors of the company, and to manage day-to-day the successful operation of the broadcast properties.  The overpayment commitment had already been made, but no one was considering it as an overpayment at that point.  My job was to hire a general manager, for example, in Columbia, South Carolina.  The--one of the radio stations that we bought in that market had fallen from being number one in the market to being number six or number seven.  We had to get it back to number one, working with local management to do that.  We were number one in the Jackson market.  How do we stay number one in the Jackson market, and how do we continue to be successful in the San Francisco [California] market, and how do we also reelevate WBLS [WBLS Radio] from being an also-ran in the New York City [New York, New York] market to being one of the top stations in this market?  Those are day to day challenges that fell on my desk to, to take care of.  It required some management and staff changes in the New York market.  And in order to do that it took five years before we were able to get all of that done for a lot of different reasons.  But it took five years before we could put a Steve Harvey on in the morning to improve the morning show.  I had to hire a new general manager in this marketplace to guide the day to day operation of the station.  We had to replace the director of sales in this market.  There was some heavy lifting that we needed to do here in, in New York City.  In Columbia we needed to hire a program director.  I needed to hire a market manager for that operation.  We needed to do some research so that we could determine how do we--how do we re--how do we move the big DM-- WWDM [WWDM Radio, Sumter, South Carolina], back to number one position in the market.  And ultimately that became possible by acquiring our primary competitor in that market, Hot--Hot 103 [WHXT Radio, Columbia, South Carolina].  So once you have the primary urban--adult urban and a primary mainstream urban, you have an opportunity at this point to control what the value of advertising on that station is.  There's no low cost provider anymore, because if you wanna reach the African American audience you have to buy our cluster of radio stations.  So that helped us to improve the operation in, in the Columbia market to the point that WWDM became and still is the number one radio station in the market.  Kixie [WKXI Radio] and JMI [WJMI Radio] are still two of the top three radio stations in Jackson, Mississippi.  The KBLX [KBLX Radio] in San Francisco [California] has had its ups and downs.  The biggest challenge to that--those radio stations is that the African American makeup of the San Francisco marketplace is less than 6 percent.  So the audience just was not large enough to support an urban radio station that was there.
Story_ID: 650077
Speaker 1: But a number of other things happened beginning in 2004, 2005, and that is that Arbitron [Nielsen Audio] was considering a change in its--how it measured audiences across the country.  They went from a hand maintained diary, which was recall of what you listened to, to developing an electronic measurement that was supposedly measuring what you heard--what you were listening to.  As a result of that, and it began in 2005 when we started to look at some of the preliminary information of test markets to 2006, 2007, when they were--wanted to roll it out in New York City [New York, New York], what was seen by myself and a number of other broadcasters is that the audiences primarily for ethnic radio stations that's minori--that was black stations as well as Hispanic stations was cut in half from what the size of those audiences were under the, the hand maintained diary methodology.  PPM [portable people meter] was showing that other audiences were 50 percent.  And the way that we make money in our business is that we sell the value of our audience.  If our audience is cut 50 percent, soon to follow will be a reduction in our revenue of 50 percent if nothing is done to address that.  My challenge and what many of us in the industry is that there is something wrong with this methodology.  It's not to say that, that electronic methodology is, is inferior to a paper methodology, but there is an issue here that we're not seeing, you're not addressing, that is resulting in such a disproportionate decline in the health of urban radio stations.  At market (unclear) we had a five year battle with Arbitron about the methodology and changes that they needed to make.  Unfortunately, we didn't have a lot of support in the industry outside of, of ethnic broadcasters.  But with the support of, of the city council here in New York [New York City Council], with the support of an oversight committee that Ed Towns [Edolphus Towns] chaired in Washington, D.C., we were able to get non interested parties, who also saw the impact that this could have on their African American constituents, who also supported us in our battle with Arbitration, that ultimately resulted in a settlement with Arbitron where they were making changes to the methodology to improve the measurement of the African American community that was underrepresented in the initial roll out of PPM.  The downside, though, is that they rolled it out anyway before we were able to negotiate these improvements, which had a tremendous negative impact on the health of many urban radio stations around the country whether they were black-owned or not.  BLS [WBLS Radio, New York, New York] was probably more impacted than any other of those radio stations, 'cause we went from being one of the top two or three stations in the market to being number nine or number ten in the marketplace.  And you cannot be successful financially with that (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I see.  So that took a five year battle.
Speaker 1:  	A five year battle with Arbitron.
Speaker 2: So what did you--you had to involve the community in that battle, right?
Speaker 1:  	I had to--we had to involve the, the political establishment in it; we had to engage Arbitron in it; we had to engage other broadcasters in this battle who were also negatively impacted by it.  We had to make the audience aware of it, but there's a fine line there because we could not interfere with the measurement of the audience.  So we couldn't go on the air and say: hey, radio listener out there, this is what Arbitron is doing to our radio station.  Because you cannot make reference to measurement, just like TV stations can't on and talk about: make sure you tell Nielson about that you're watching my show.  We couldn't go on to say: make sure that if Arbitron reaches you that you tell them that you will participate in the--in the methodology.  There were a lot of shortfalls in the methodology that we had to get Arbitron to address.  There's also an oversight committee called the Media Rating Council that met that evaluates measurement of all media that also sided with, with our efforts against Arbitron, but it was a long drawn out battle.  Our, our--we probably lost about 40 percent of our revenue, though, when they did implement the PPM methodology into New York marketplace, which happened to occur at the same time there was a financial meltdown of the U.S. economy in 2008.  It all began--it all happened in fourth quarter, 2008.  Many broadcasts and certainly Inner City Broadcast [Inner City Broadcast Corporation] or ICBC Broadcast Holdings, Inc. did not--never recovered from that and was never able to recover from that and wound up going into bankruptcy.
Story_ID: 650078
Speaker 1: What about the role of--there are two things, you know, XM and Sirius [Sirius XM Radio, Inc.]--I mean, do--are, are those having an- any impact, impact at the same time and the whole issue of the--I saw testimony of where you were testifying before [U.S.] Congress about the--
Speaker 2:  	Performance royalty.
Speaker 1: --performance royalty, so that's--
Speaker 2:  	The first side of that, XM, Sirius--the potential impact of them on our business was overstated.  I would argue that if a broadcast--if a local broadcaster is doing the right thing in its local community, it will not be beaten by any satellite radio radio station.  The satellite is a national platform; it's not local; it's not gonna tell you what's going on in your local community; it's not gonna be engaged in your local community; it does not have local air personalities and talent; it's not providing local news and information about what's going on in the community.  They should never beat a, a, a well run, locally oriented radio station.  There also subscription based, so they're not drawing revenue away from our advertiser base.  So the impact of them, it's competition for your ears; it's competition for your time that you spend with the media.  The great old days is you got into a car, the only thing you could do is listen to AM, FM radio and talk to whoever was in the car with you.  Then it became you can listen to AM, FM, you can go to the eight track, and then you can listen to AM, FM, and you can deal with your cassette.  Then it was AM, FM and, and your CD [compact disc] players.  Now you get in the car, it's AM, it's FM, it's satellite radio, it is HD radio, which is your local broadcaster's digital signal.  You could still listen to the CDs in the car; you could plug your MP3 in; you can talk on the telephone.  So we're still competing for your time.  We still have to entertain you.  And what we have to do is, is what TV stations are doing today.  We try to get you to make an appointment with us.  Why would you listen to us rather than the other alternatives that we have.  So we have to better at programming locally and engaging our local community than we ever were.  But radio stations are still strong today.  Ninety-two--93 percent of the--of the audience still listens to the community--the population still listens to radio every day.  There are arguments that they listen less time, but we have less time to do those fun things that we used to do, and there's also competition for our ears.  But if we provide news, traffic, information we're supposed to do locally, your local radio stations are still gonna do very well.  This, this also leads back to--a little bit to the syndicated programming.  We have to provide better programming.  Syndication has also been helpful to that, particularly in urban radio with Tom Joyner, Steve Harvey, Wendy [Wendy Williams] when she was on the air, the Michael Baisdens of the world.  And we're always out here looking for the next new big talent.
Story_ID: 650079
Speaker 1: For a period of six years, running through 2011, I was a--I was invited to join the board of directors of the National Association of Broadcasters, headquartered in Washington, D.C., which has allowed being an advocacy organization that represents radio around the country.  I served in a posit- served on that board for six years, then I had to rotate off because there were term limits on the board.  For a period of time, as--of that board, I was on the executive committee for the National Association of Broadcasters.  And for the last year that I was on that board I was also the, the chairman of the radio board of the NAB.  The NAB has a radio board and a TV board.  I was the chairman of the radio board of that.  When [U.S.] Congress began to talk about charging a performance royalty or imposing a performance royalty on radio broadcasters for music that we play on the air, it, it created a, a huge outcry from the industry.  In--earlier as, as we talked, we talked about the role that the local radio stations and their personalities played in the development of recording artists.  Without your local radio station who would have known Prince?  Who would have known Luther Vandross?  Who would have known [HistoryMaker] Dionne Warwick?  And these artists have always talked about the importance of radio and the value of radio in the development of their careers.  But here--now we have an industry that because of digital opportunities to buy music, because of a lot of reasons, we have a younger audience that wasn't buying music that it used to.  Maybe some of it was the--you know, the--maybe the cost of the music was prohibitive for people to buy it.  But the sales of, of, of a CD [compact disc], the sales of, of, of an album decline precipitously for the recording industry, so the recording industry was looking for a way to generate additional revenue, and for also a way to continue to pay the artists that they were now deciding that they were not gonna cover anymore.  They, they called a lot of these artists off of their--off of their rosters, so these artists were losing the support of these labels.  And they wanted radio to step up and let--pay these artists.  Well, without radio these artists would not have had the careers that they've been blessed to have.  And quite honestly, in 2008, with the downtown of the economy, with the change in methodology, urban radio in particular--minority radio in particular--we can't afford to pay a fee, nor should we be required to pay a fee because of the symbiotic relationship that exists between record labels, record radio--record artists and radio stations.  They all work hand in hand for the success of, of each other, unlike the new formats.  If, if--how do you learn about new music today?  It is still by listening to radio.  Record companies are still looking for airplay for the development of, not only their established artists, but new artists.  It doesn't happen without the support of radio.  We've always been there to support these artists.  We shouldn't have to pay, and we are excluded from having to pay a royalty to them because there are other benefits that these artists and these record labels get from us.  So the industry stood up and very vocally objected to this, and particularly urban radio.  As a member of the--of the board of directors, I was thrust into the middle of this representing radio broadcasters, but also as a minority broadcaster that was absolutely opposed to having to pay a fee because of the value of radio to these artists.  I use as, as a perfect example for is Luther Vandross.  One of his greatest frustrations as an artist is that the never crossed over.  He was always perceived as an urban artist.  I mean, he--you know, with--when formats went to smooth jazz, some of the jazz oriented stations would play him and Anita Baker.  But his greatest frustration--he's never crossed over to pop radio.  So if, if without urban radio, who would Luther Vandross have been?  There's the value of, of local radio--the value of radio to these artists and these record labels, that is the compensation that they should get, and that more than balances off any advantage that we get for using the product without having to pay these artists.  We have been paying.  We pay every time that we play--it's free advertising for these artists, and without us, they don't exist.  You know, there was a digital requirement--a digital copyright requirement put in place for other formats, for satellite radio, and some of these other servicers that are out here.  That's all fine.  They don't provide the same service to the record labels and to the artists that radio does.  And I became a, a center point or one of the representatives within the industry to speak, not only on behalf of the industry, but also very vocally on behalf of minority broadcasters, part of which resulted in me testifying on behalf of the NAB in the industry at the Senate Commerce Committee [U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation] hearing in 1997.
Story_ID: 650080
Speaker 1: So why did the, the--the fight, though, emerged while--within the black community really between [HistoryMaker] Cathy Hughes and [HistoryMaker] Dionne Warwick, you know, with some very aggressive statements between the two of them.
Speaker 2:  	Well, we think there were a lot of mistruths that were being expressed by the record labels.  I would make an argument to Dionne Warwick.  I'd make the argument around a lot of the Motown [Motown Records] artists that: don't come after us for what your labels did not pay you.  Don't come after us for what they underpaid you or didn't properly report that they owed you.  If anyone owes you, they do.  Without us, the career that you had would not have been--would not have been possible.  Congressman Conyers [HistoryMaker John Conyers, Jr.] in particular was, was the--was one of the architects of the performance royalty bill [Fair Play Fair Pay Act], and he and Cathy chose to agree to disagree.  And Cathy quite honestly did what she thought was necessary with her voice across her company [Radio One; Urban One, Inc.], to take it to the public that it's an unfair ask of the music industry, it's an overreach, that, that there is so much that radio does, that he--she brought it to a, a fever pitch.  There were a lot of people in, in [U.S.] Congress obviously that were upset that she attacked a sitting member of Congress.  But he was the architect; he was the one driving this, as well as some other members of the Congressional Black Caucus.  At the end of the day, we could not afford to pay it, nor should we have been required to pay it, and the industry fought against that, along with the National Association of Broad--Broadcasters and NABOB [National Association of Black Owned Broadcasters].  And it's not been implemented against terrestrial broadcasters, and I don't believe it will be.
Speaker 1: So you won?
Speaker 2:  	We won.
Speaker 1: So Cathy Hughes should be your, your, your poster child then.
Speaker 2:  	We're very proud of the job that, that Cathy does--did.  You know, no one likes to--you don't want to attack some of the leading voices in your community, the African American community.  But when that individual is leading what is potentially the demot- the further demise of urban radio, you have to become very aggressive in fighting your position and making your position very clear.  And that's what Cathy did utilizing her (air quotes) platform.  If Cathy didn't have that platform, the outcome could have been different.  Cathy with the platform can talk to the African American community unlike any other broadcaster.  Steve Harvey quite honestly chose to stay out of the fray, because Steve is--Steve is an artist.  Many of the artists are his friends.  He didn't wanna get muddy with that, so you didn't hear it on 'The Steve Harvey Morning Show.'  Same holds true with Tom Joyner.  You didn't hear Tom talking about it.  As a broadcast owner whose business could have been irreparably harmed by it, Cathy had to speak out on behalf of her company, while many of us were speaking out on behalf of minority radio but--broadcasters in general.
Story_ID: 650081
Speaker 1: So now let's talk about Inner City [Inner City Broadcasting Corporation] and--I mean, really its demise.  I mean, we--you know, you've spoken some about it, but what I was saying off camera was that it's all--it was like the demise of Johnson Publishing [Johnson Publishing Company, Chicago, Illinois], you know, in, in Chica- well, Chicago [Illinois] and the nation.  But, you know, Chicagoans sort of sat dumbfounded that this happened.  So I'm wondering what, what were some of the missteps?  Was it just--are you saying that it was just--
Speaker 2:  	Over (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) like a confluence of--
Speaker 2:  	It was a confluence of, of, of things that occurred.  There was the, the acquisition or possibly some people's observation--the overpayment of the assets that we--that was bought by the company in 2000 in its efforts to grow and become a stand--a larger broadcast company, but that was the going price at that point.  The company refinanced that debt in 2004, and there were some missteps in that refinancing that in hindsight should have been done differently.
Speaker 1: Were you part of that?
Speaker 2:  	I was president of the--of the company at that point.  I was not negotiating that transaction.  There were other individuals in the company that were involved with that--as well as advisors, and there were people who did not take some advice that was given at that point.  It was a miscalculation and a bringing together of poor partners--business partners in 2004 that ultimately led to the demise of Inner City Broadcasting--
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2:  	--which was hastened by the demise--by the downturn of the financial industry in 2008, and the implementation of PPM [portable people meter] at the same time was the final straw that, that led Inner City down the final path to bankruptcy--
Speaker 1: I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	--(simultaneous) and ultimate sale.
Story_ID: 650082
Speaker 1: Yeah, I just felt--I was surprised to see Ron Burkle's name, because I always think of him--you know, and Reverend--and being a supporter of Reverend Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] and friend to the black community.  But they were the ones who were calling in the--were they part of going in the--
Speaker 2:  	They, they bid on the--they bid on the debt.  They did bid on the debt.  To their credit, they did retain the company.  The moved all of the employees of WM--of Inner City Broadcasting Corporation--or ICBC Broadcast Holdings, Inc., which was the operating company under the YMF umbrella [YMF Media, LLC].  They allowed us to continue to operate successfully I will say under that.  But it was always understood that, unlike Inner City Broadcasting and the sixty-three shareholders, they never intended to be owner/operators of these stations.  It was an investment for them, so it was a matter of time.  But I will say that it was an orderly--if you can call the demise of the historical black company orderly, it was--it was done in as respectful manner as anyone could have done.  It could have been a lot more painful, if it had happened under the, the ownership of other entities.  But still at the end of the day, the outcome--Inner City Broadcasting or ICBC Broadcast Holdings, Inc. no longer exists as part of the history of, of many other family-owned and operated businesses that were founded by an entrepreneurial group of businessmen in the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s] whose businesses did not change with the times, or confluence of circumstances resulted in the dramatic change in, in their businesses.  However, the radio stations are still strong; they're still viable, and in many cases, they're stronger than they ever were; they're still serving the African American communities in Jackson, Mississippi, Columbia, South Carolina, here in New York City [New York, New York].  WBLS [WBLS Radio, New York, New York] has never been stronger than it is today.  KBLX [KBLX Radio] is still serving the African American community, though under a new ownership in, in San Francisco [California].  So the stations still survive.  The voice of the communities still exists.  I watched them very carefully just to, to find out, you know, how are people treating our communities and the assets that are so valued by our communities.  But it is--it's discouraging.  It's unfortunate that there hasn't been another wave of minority entrepreneurship in broadcasting.  There's been a lot of talk about re- reimplementing the, the Minority Tax Certificate [Minority Tax Certificate Program].  I don't anticipate that happening in the short term.  In the meantime, I think we're gonna continue to see fewer and fewer minority owned and operated radio stations.  Somehow, though, we have to hold accountable the new owners to continue to properly service the communities that we have all come out of.  And that nev- that responsibility never ends.  Whether I'm in the business or not, it's still a responsibility that I have.  Today I am no longer with--I am with YMF in a different capacity, as a senior advisor.  The position--I stepped down from the position of president and chief operating officer.  There really isn't one necessary when all the company owns is an AM and an FM in New York.  There's very pop- very good local management to do that, but I'm still an advisor to them.  And I also continue to serve--today I am the joint board chair of the National Association of Broadcasters.  So I'm still engaged in this business and I'm still in what I do every day, still committed to the service of, of our community and, and not allowing minority broadcasters to be forgotten, the African American community to be overlooked, or for there to be any actions taken that are going to be--going to undermine the success of a--of a Radio One [Urban One, Inc.] or, or a WHUR [WHUR Radio] in Washington, D.C., or the remaining radio stations in these cities that still do serve the community, whether they're owned by a Clear Channel [Clear Channel Communications, Inc.], an Entercom [Entercom Communications Corporation], or any other broadcaster.
Story_ID: 650083
Speaker 1: But there's a difference in owner- when people own something as opposed to--you know, they--the--you know, that they employ.  Let me put it this way, when it's--so there's a pride like the--there, there's a difference.
Speaker 2:  	There's absolutely (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) There's a huge--
Speaker 2:  	--a difference.
Speaker 1: --difference.
Speaker 2:  	There's absolutely a difference.  I--you know, I, I challenge broadcasters today when I look at their operations to ask them why their operations--the employment of their operations is does not reflect the communities that they serve.  You gotta put people on notice.  You have to hold them accountable.  Why is it that we're capable and, and have always been capable of identifying and hiring qualified African Americans but many other broadcasters cannot?  There's a commitment to do it.  There's an obligation to do it.  There's a responsibility we have to give people that look like us that opportunity.  When you don't own the asset, you lose control of that, and that is gone.  It is unfortunate that that is gone, an opportunity that I've been given.  Where is the next Charles Warfield [HistoryMaker Charles Warfield, Jr.]?  They're out there some way.  Will they be given the opportunity that Percy Sutton gave me?  Will there be another Dion Livingston, who's running the radio station here in, in New York City [New York].  The opportunity for him to grow and to have a larger role in this--in this industry.  I have too often sat in industry events in, in 2013 being the only African American or a minority of two or so that are in the room.  As I say to broadcasters today: what's wrong with this picture in 2013?  But I see it all too often, and it is a loss.  It is--it is a tremendous loss to, to our communities.
Speaker 1: Well, it's a forty year history and it's like it didn't happen.  I mean, what you're telling me, it sounds like it didn't--it's--it didn't happen.  It was--so my, my question you're saying really nothing could have been done to salvage Inner City [Inner City Broadcasting Corporation].  Is that what you're--
Speaker 2:  	No--
Speaker 1: --telling--
Speaker 2:  	--I'm, I'm not saying that.  There, there are decisions that could have been made differently between 2000 and 2000--the bankruptcy of 2012 that could have resulted in a different outcome.  Inner City Broadcasting, for example, could have sold its radio station in San Francisco [California] for a value that could have significantly reduced the, the debt on the company that might have resulted in investors or, or ins--financial institutions being willing to refinance the debt that existed.  There were opportunities there--that there are decisions that could have been made differently.  I don't--I don't wanna get into the internal specifics of that--decisions and, and why they were made or who made 'em.  I don't think that anyone is served by that.  But there certainly were decisions that could have been made differently that could have resulted in a different outcome.  But I'm sure in many other circumstances, situations like that, the decisions you make are the decisions unfortunately you have to live by.  I was very fortunate to be able to work through the bankruptcy, to work with YMF [YMF Media, LLC] coming out of the bankruptcy (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 650084
Speaker 1: Who is YMF?  You've mentioned--
Speaker 2:  	YMF is--it's Yucaipa [The Yucaipa Companies, LLC], Magic Johnson company [Magic Johnson Enterprises, Inc.] and Fortress [Fortress Investment Group, LLC] with--they're all hedge funds; they're all investors that took an interest in this entity that took int--an interest in it, and they saw a, a gain opportunity.  They saw the upside that was there with the in--infusion of some resources, such as what was done here in New York [New York] to elevate WBLS [WBLS Radio, New York, New York] back to the top of the market in its place.  They had resources to be able to do that.  But Inner City did not have it at its disposal.
Speaker 1: So they were the funders then.  That's Ron Burkle--
Speaker 2:  	Ron Burkle is the Yucaipa.  Magic Johnson is the M in, in M, and then Fortress is a, a hedge fund that is the F in YMF.  They came together to form their, their entity that bought--that forced the bankruptcy and bought the assets out of bankruptcy.
Speaker 1: They forced the bankruptcy and then bought the assets?
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: In an attempt to save it?
Speaker 2:  	They did save it for the short term, but their investment in it was to--was a gain.  Their investment was to make a gain on assets that had upside value.  This is not like an entity that just went away.  The radio stations that were underlying the value of Inner City are still viable assets in the marketplaces they, they serve (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So who--
Speaker 2:  	They're not owned by a black family; they're not owned by a black company; and African Americans don't dictate the direction that they will take today or in the future.
Speaker 1: So who's managing then?  It's YMF.  Are they owned by YMF?  Is--what was pe- previous Inner City or is it a totally different company.
Speaker 2:  	What became ICBC Broadcast Holdings, Inc. no longer exists.
Speaker 1: And now it's YMF?
Speaker 2:  	Now it's YMF.
Speaker 1: And YMF is--who's man--who did they hire to manage things then if you're a consultant and [HistoryMaker] Pierre Sutton is no longer involved in--
Speaker 2:  	No longer there, no longer involved--
Speaker 1: --and [HistoryMaker] Lois Wright is no longer there.
Speaker 2:  	Right.  The, the day to day operation and understanding that the only two radio stations from the ice--ICBC Broadcast Holdings, Inc. family that still are owned by YMF are the New York stations, WBLS and WLIB [WLIB Radio, New York, New York].  It is very likely that those radio stations will be sold by YMF at some point in 2014, which will be the final dissolution of what was formerly known as Inner City Broadcasting Corporation, ICBC Broadcast Holdings, Inc., and the forty year history of a company that was founded by Percy Sutton and sixty-three African American individuals here in the City of New York.
Speaker 1: That shows the dead can't come back alive, 'cause he would be turning over.  He will be killing a lot of people.
Speaker 2:  	There are those who might say that without the decline in his health, this may not have happened because of the, the power and the contacts of a Percy Sutton that unfortunately we did not have at our disposal at the end.
Speaker 1: There's no--okay, there's no chance that IC can come back and buy itself back?
Speaker 2:  	Those assets are gone--the Jackson, Mississippi, market, six stations.  Columbia, South Carolina, had been sold to a new company called L and L Broadcasting [L and L Broadcasting, LLC; Alpha Media LLC].  The San Francisco stations of the FM, which was KBLX [KBLX Radio] has been sold to a company by the name of Entercom [Entercom Communications Company].  The two AMs are pending a closing sale shortly to a local company out there that will continue to keep them in an Asian formatted position.  And the two radio stations here in New York, which were the founding stations for Inner City Broadcasting Corporation, are the only two remaining under the YMF ownership, and it's very likely that they will sell those stations within the next twelve months.
Speaker 1: Do you think (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) So can enter- could someone have done it?  That time has passed.  That, that time has passed.  Again, there are--there are decisions that could have been made that could have reversed the ultimate outcome of, of Inner City Broadcasting over the last ten years, but those decisions were not made when it could have made a difference.
Speaker 1: So let me ask would it--would there be a chance that our Radio One [Urban One, Inc.] would come in?  They--
Speaker 2:  	There's a--there could be a--there ca--there's a possibility that Radio One could be interested in WBLS.  They do not have stations here in this market.  They understand the value of it and it would certainly enhance their portfolio of radio stations.  If they can outbid any other interested parties--I do know that Radio One showed an interest in the radio stations when they were being offered out of bankruptcy; but they were outbid by YMF.
Story_ID: 650085
Speaker 1: So where, where are you now in your career?
Speaker 2:  	In, in, in my career, I call it transitioning.  I've transitioned before as I, I, took a year off in '94 [1994].  When, when KISS [WRKS Radio; WEPN Radio, New York, New York] was sold I took six months off, and I was trying to determine what I wanted to do after I left AM, FM in 2000.  Today I am an advisor to YMF [YMF Media, LLC].  I will wind up doing some consulting work in the industry.  I will remain as the joint board chair of the NAB [National Association of Broadcasters] for the next year and a half--still involved in the industry.  What materializes beyond that I don't know.  I love this business; been--I've spent the last thirty-six years of, of my life in this business; more than back, giving back to the African American community that I came out of; and I still have a commitment to do that.  I don't say goodbye.  I didn't say goodbye to my--to my staff.  I indicated to my staff that I was gonna transition out of the company 'cause it--it made sense.  You don't wanna overstay your welcome.  Quite honestly, I also did not wanna go through the dissolution of the rest of the company, which was too painful.  I've, I've gone through that before.  There's a role out here.  I'm not sure what it might be.  My wife [Mary Warfield] does not allow me to talk about retirement.  I'm not retired; I'm in transition.  So that's a word that I use; it's a word my wife uses.  I'm still fully engaged in the industry, but what I had been able to do in New York City [New York, New York], in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and again in New York City over the last thirty-six years, I'm through--I'm at a transition period now as to well what is next for, for Charles Warfield [HistoryMaker Charles Warfield, Jr.].  I don't play golf, so that's, that's not part of what I am going to do.  I am still working with some broadcasters and some opportunities down the road.  Is it ownership?  Is it consulting?  Right now, quite honestly, I owe my wife and my family quite a bit of time.  I've been on the road for the last fifteen years.  So it was the right time to transition to where I am today.  My wife already, already recognizes that I'm not very good at being a stay-at-home husband.  So I'm--my eyes are open, and we'll see what's down the road.
Story_ID: 650086
Speaker 1: What do you feel is the state of urban radio; or, or the future of even NABOB [National Association of Black Owned Broadcasters] as an organization, and the future of ownership?  You know, so if--right.
Speaker 2:  	I believe, and I have believed this since Inner City [Inner City Broadcasting Corporation] started going through its challenges, there's absolutely today a greater need for NABOB than there's ever been.  There needs to be a voice representing the African American broadcaster, not just radio, but television.  Maybe it needs to even be broader in the talk about media--African Americans in the media industry.  And I think that's a transition that I hope NABOB will go through.  Someone has to represent the interests of our community and the interests of black broadcasters on Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.].  No one does that better than, than NABOB.  I have encouraged NABOB to partner where, where appropriate with the National Association of Broadcasters because there are opportunities there that can benefit NABOB and black broadcasters, as well as the broadcast industry overall.  And there are areas that they're gonna be differences of opinion, but I think that we have more in common than, than we do not.  So I have encouraged some kind of partnership from time to time with NAB and NABOB.  I stay in touch with the executive director, Jim Winston [HistoryMakers James Winston], of NABOB.  I have encouraged YMF and other broadcasters to support NABOB and speak of NABOB whenever possible.  Someone must speak on behalf of our industry.  There is no replacement for NABOB.  They must find a way to survive.  And they--the minority industry broadcasters have to continue to support it.  But I think support from other constituents that can benefit from it and have benefitted, whether it be Hispanic broadcasters, the general broadcast community in the fight with the performance royalty was, was supported by NABOB, needs to be there.  PPM [portable people meter]--the PPM battle was under the umbrella of NABOB.  We would have never gotten to first base in our battle with, with Arbitron if not for the, the value of NABOB, the support of NABOB, the support of the Hispanic broadcasters [Association of Hispanic Advertising Agencies], the support of, of SBS [Spanish Broadcasting System], and Univision [Univision Communications Inc.], a coalition that can form under the umbrella of NABOB.  There's no more critical time for the survival of an organization like NABOB than there is today.  And I support Jim Winston in surviving NABOB in any way that I possibly can.
Speaker 1: So what about media?  Where does that fit in the whole mix?  Because that is what has come in and taken the wind out of a lot of sails.
Speaker 2:  	But we should be a part of the new media development.  The challenge for new media, the challenge for minority broadcasting, it hasn't changed.  It's about a--access to capital.  There is no lack of creative ideas.  There's no lack of creative people that are out here.  It is the challenge of equity financing and also the challenge of, of investment capital for new entrepreneurs that happen to be minority.  It remains the biggest challenge that minority broadcasters have today and have had over the last fifteen years, access to capital.  We continue to talk about that on Capitol Hill, whether it's NABOB or just National Association of Broadcasters.  That's a constant concern that is expressed.  We have not found a way to bring back the tax certificate [Minority Tax Certificate Program] that--not that there's a lack of, of interest in doing that.  There's broad base support for doing that.  We've just not been able to fashion something that in the current political environment will withstand judicial scrutiny unfortunately.
Story_ID: 650087
Speaker 1: So what do you feel that you've contributed to--when you look back, what have you gained out of this industry and what have you contributed?
Speaker 2:  	I've gained a career out of this industry.  I've been able to continue to su- to, to service the community and to make--give back to the community that I came out of as, as a broadcaster who touched everyone in the African muni- African American community and had a commitment to do that, employing African Americans across the spectrum in different companies, giving them the opportunities to have careers in this industry.  I think I have also helped some of these radios to survive serving these communities than they would have under different management and ownership throughout my career.  I think I've also helped to elevate the profile and the value of urban radio in the eyes of the general market, in the eyes of the buying community, in the eyes of the general broadcast industry for my being allowed to be in this business as long as I have.  It's been a struggle, but I've loved every minute of it.  I'm still committed to the people that are in it.  One of the hardest things for me when I was leaving my presidency of, of YMF [YMF Media, LLC] is that I had many people--and, and I'd said this to the staff--there's probably half of that staff that worked for me somewhere between Inner City Broadcasting [Inner City Broadcasting Corporation] in the '80s [1980s], KISS FM [WRKS Radio; WEPN Radio] here--KISS FM here in New York [New York] in the '90s [1990s], and AM, FM.  I've helped to develop careers with individuals who are still in this business.  I've helped to develop new talent that's in this business today, whether it would be Steve Harvey, Ken Webb, Wendy Williams.  It, it--we talk about XM Sirius radio [Sirius XM Radio, Inc.].  It, it brings a smile to my face when I turn on the radio, and I have XM Sirius in my car.  My wife [Mary Warfield] has it in her car, but when I can turn on the urban oriented radio stations, and most of those air personalities worked for Inner City Broadcasting at some point, or worked for me at Emmis [Emmis Communications Corporation]--I'm sorry--at Summit [Summit Broadcasting Corporation] here in New York [New York], or worked for me here, be it a Jeff Fox, Harold Ford [ph.], a Fred Buggs, a Wanda Ramos.  These are air personalities that came out of the experience of Inner City Broadcasting, came out of the experience of the heyday of black radio in this country, which from my view goes from the late '60s [1960s] to today and it continues.  Unfortunately, it's not under our ownership.  We still have the ability to develop talent; we still have the devep--the, the ability to keep these radio stations and to ensure that these radio stations continue to service the community.  It, it's--nothing's been more frustrating to me than to see in New York City, the largest African American market in the country, to lose one of its two adult urban radio stations, KISS FM, because it was not capable of being financed due to a lack of support from the buying community.  You know, the--it-BLS [WBLS Radio, New York, New York] and KISS could not generate sufficient income to warrant both companies keeping it in an urban format.  So we lose one of the two adult voices in New York City?  There's something wrong with that.  I don't believe if that company were owned and operated by a minority company that that could have happened, but it did, and there was a business reason behind it.  And I'm not critical of Emmis for making the decision that they did.  It was necessary for Jeff Smulyan to, to save the overall viability of his company.  But New York City can't support two urban--adult urban radio stations?  There's something wrong with that picture.  That's reflective, not only of the broadcast industry challenges, but also the buying community that we have to rely upon to support minority media.  And those battles don't end, rather I am occupying a seat in a, a corporate--a corporate seat in a company or something I will continue to do as the joint board chair of the NAB [National Association of Broadcasters] or whenever I am called upon to speak on behalf of this industry.  My--it's a commitment, it's in me, it's part of who I am; it's what I will always be committed to doing, and will always find a way to be engaged.
Story_ID: 650088
Speaker 1: So as you sit here, what hopes and concerns do you have for those who are still--African Americans who are still in the radio industry--in radio business?  I'm talking about management.  I'm not talking about on air personalities.  What are your hopes and concerns?  And what do you see as bright lights?
Speaker 2:  	My concern is that they--they're not giving the breadth of opportunity that I and others like me, the Barry Mayos [HistoryMaker Barry A. Mayo], the Deon Levingstons, were given in the '80s [1980s] and the '90s [1990s] to learn to business and to show people that we are as smart as anyone else that we can put in these positions.  I mentioned six African American general managers under Chancellor Media [Chancellor Media Corporation] back in 1997 at a corporate meeting.  I was the last one standing of that group still in the industry.  And we're not old.  I don't consider myself old, and the others are not old, but we find ourselves in a sense on, on the outside.  We haven't been replace, and I think that we, we have a lot that we can be proud of for what we have helped develop, not just talent, but people who still have careers in this industry.  Will our young people get the opportunity that we will--that we were given?  Will young people, whether it's in broadcasting or other business--we are committed to going out of our way.  My challenge to the industry has been for years: don't give us jobs.  We don't want you to give us anything.  What I want you to do is I want you to broaden the pool that you recruit from.  And I'm, I'm confident that if you broaden the pool so that it is not just that, that narrow group that your managers tend to pull from, they're qualified people that will fall in there that you will hire and who will get an opportunity to do what I've been given an opportunity to do.  There has to be a commitment, on ownership part, to do that.  Where I sit today, I still challenge owners to, to--owners that are in the business today they have a responsibility to do that.  I have been in the room with them.  I can have that conversation.  My biggest concern is there are not enough people like me that are in the room that can have the dialogue that can force the thinking that there needs to be.  And there needs to be a social aspect to wanting to make a--wanting to make a difference, so will they have the opportunities.  I've been in too many meetings, too many industry functions.  As I said before that I am the guy in the room in 2013, 2012, 2011, 2010.  Where are the opportunities gonna come from that were given to me?  That is my concern for those that are in the business, those who want to get in the business.  That's a challenge; that's a concern that I have.  And with my last breath I have a responsibility to raise those challenges whenever and wherever it's gonna make a difference.
Story_ID: 650089
Speaker 1: What do you feel the prospects are for the radio industry going forward (pause) overall?
Speaker 2:  	I, I pray for the continuing development and growth for a company like Radio One [Urban One, Inc.].  I, I pray that they will broaden their--the opportunities they present to qualified African Americans in and outside of their--of their company.  It's a--it's a tremendous responsibility that they have that I hope they live up to it, as the general broadcast community has a responsibility to do that.  I hope that there will become an opportunity for investment--entrepreneurial investment in media that minorities can participate in when it--when it still will matter--development of new media companies, new technology companies that are out here.  I've been in a room with very many smart, smart people that have creative ideas that, that should be germinated and gener--and, and developed into viable businesses down the road.  Will they be given the opportunity?  Our comp- our country right now--the haves and the havenots--whether it's an entrepreneurial have or havenots, or whether or not it's an educational system, the haves and the havenots--our children, our communities that get left behind.  How do we elevate a generation the way that the Percy Suttons and the John Johnsons [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson] did in the '50s [1950s], the '60s [1960s], and the '70s [1970s].  Where is that opportunity gonna come from?  How do we bring that about?
Story_ID: 650090
Speaker 1: So when you think about Charles Warfield [HistoryMaker Charles Warfield, Jr.], you know, who was--grew up, you know, in, in your neighborhood [in Washington, D.C.], which was primarily Catholic, and, and, and a quiet child, and yet your really sort of grew to be a leader in this industry.  What, what are your thoughts that I--I mean thoughts about that journey?  Have you given a lot of thought to that journey?
Speaker 2:  	I don't--I, I consider this a journey that is--that is ongoing.  I have an obligation to my church and the membership of my church in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], Sharon Baptist Church, in support of my pastor that is there.  I have a--I have a commitment to the public education system.  My daughter [Jada Warfield] is a teacher in the Philadelphia public school system [School District of Philadelphia]--to support her and the efforts--the heartbreaking efforts that she go--undergoes every, every day when it deals with giving a damn about her students and about the environment that she finds herself operating in with the passion she has for her students, and too many adults that just seem to let things happen.  I have a great frustration with what is going on in our--in our major cities around the education system, the healthcare system, those who need support and help, and I just watch day after day that that--those support systems are being pulled away and pulled away and pulled away, which bothers me and hurts me and doesn't allow me to, to sort of enjoy the, the benefits of a career that I have had.  There's still much to be done.  I think I can have an involvement and a role in that.  I look for that every day.  It's difficult to say no when there's such great need.  I'll go back to something Percy Sutton said to me when I became a general manager, which not all--a lot of people--I've--I don't necessarily preach this to a lot of people.  But Percy said to me in the ear- in the early '80s [1980s]--he said, "Mr. Warfield, one thing you may wanna be careful of is don't get too involved in too many of these boards of these organizations that service our community, because there is such need in our community, and the voice that the radio station has and the outreach the station has, we need to have a broad enough impact that we can say yes to anyone whose need is great enough."  When you become a member of a board, you become beholding to the--to the goals and the aspirations and the needs of that organization whose board you joined.  Whereas, if I'm not on a board of the--of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], I'm not on a board of the Urban League [National Urban League], I can support both.  And I've sort of followed that to, to a point.  I like to be accessible, because there is so much need that's in the community.  Sometimes it can be harmful when we have to say yes to one and no to the other, but the reason is not the need itself, but the commitment that we have made.  I always took that to heart from Percy.  And I've limited the--my involvement on boards of these organizations, but not limited my commitment to the communities that, that these organizations serve, and I'm accessible and reachable by all of them.  And you know, I, I--I'm committed to those who are committed and willing to do the same thing, because there is such a need in our community today.
Story_ID: 650091
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be, Charles [HistoryMaker Charles Warfield, Jr.]?
Speaker 2:  	I want my legacy to be that, that he cared about where he came from.  I've--we still own our home on 11--the 1110 Chicago Street in Southeast [Washington, D.C.].  My friends in Washington, D.C., are still my friends today, those who are still living--never forgot who I came from.  I understand that I am a reflection of who--where I came from and who I came from and the extended family that helped to get me here.  And I have an obligation to do that for the next generation, and I have the obligation to do that, not just for my kids, not just for my grandkids, but for the community that I am still a part of.  And I, I want people to look at it and say that he always cared; he continues to care; he always cares; and he's always gonna be accessible.  This is journey.  There's no end to this journey.  God will bring an end to it, but until that day comes, there's much to be done and too few to help bring that about.  So a legacy, looking back on it, others will write that.  I live this every day.  I feel this commitment to the community every day, not just my own personal family.  And that's my own situation that I'm in.  But I visited the radio station and the staff today.  Their needs that they're going to have--as long as I'm on this earth, and they're involved in this business--I don't change my phone numbers; I don't change my emails.  If someone has--calls me, I owe them a phone call back.  I've always operated with that mindset, and I hope, god willing, that I'll be able to maintain that as long as I have breath in my voice; that I can help others because that's how I got to where I am.
Story_ID: 650092
Speaker 1: One last question and that is why do you think you were--what made you successful in this industry?
Speaker 2:  	Opportunities that I was given.  I, I think I always reflected in what I did day in and day out that what I did mattered and who I did it for mattered, and a responsibility to the job that I was given to do.  And fortunately that job has been tied to our community, tied to our people, tied to our institutions to, to a great degree.  I respect people, and that respect is, is regardless of race, creed, or color.  If I don't like someone, I don't like someone because of something that they did to me.  It is not who you are or what you believe in.  I believe in seeing the good in people.  I believe in trying to develop the good in people, and that's something that you can't put on a--you can't put that on a--on a--on, on your desk in a few--in a few words.  It's how you conduct yourself day in and day out.  I respect people for who they are.  I have always respected people for who they are, and I always have a responsibility to do that.  Everyone has, has the right to be treated fairly.  Everyone does not have the right to be treated equally, but you also have the responsibility to do the best that you can with what you have.  And you can't quit.
Story_ID: 650093
Speaker 1:  	This is a picture of my grandmother who I never met, Lillian [Lillian Morris Warfield] and her, her father, my great-grandfather, George [ph.], neither of whom I ever met.  She passed before I was born.  But those are the only images that I can recall and maybe one other picture to hear of my father's family.
Speaker 2:  	That was Congressional--Congressional Black Caucus reception that Congressman Rangel [HistoryMaker Charles B. Rangel] gave in Washington, D.C. in the early '80s [1980s]--don't know the exact timeframe, but I was able to attend with, with my father [Charles Warfield, Sr.].  You can see the smile that's on his face in the involvement.  My father developed a very close personal relationship with Percy Sutton; partly, Percy's respect for my father.  He also understood the health issues my father was going through as he was dealing with prostate cancer.  They had their own dialogue and communication.  Percy wouldn't come to Washington without coming by to visit my father when he was making a phone call.  And this was at a reception in the early '80s [1980s] when my father was able to get out and sort of see and enjoy a little bit of what his son was doing in New York City [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Is that your mother [Ruby Carroll Warfield] and father?
Speaker 2:  	No, no, that's siblings of my, my mother.  The only thing there is my high school--my high school graduation picture down there in the lower left corner.  That's my high school graduation [from Anacostia High School, Washington, D.C.].  That's that quiet, shy Warfield [HistoryMaker Charles Warfield, Jr.] guy, and--
Speaker 1: Is this--this is Michele [ph.]?
Speaker 2:  	That is my mother being crowned as Miss Agriculture Department of 1960.
Speaker 1:  	That is a picture of my--part of the staff at Uptown Records, 1997--'96 [1996], '97 [1997] with Heavy D, Jean Riggins, myself, one of our artists there, Monifah--
Speaker 2: You're going--you're going left to right?
Speaker 1:  	No, I went from--I went from right--I just jumped all over as a matter for fact--Nicole Ballison (ph.), who is one of the staffers; Lou Tucker [Lewis Tucker], who is a vice president at the label; Monifa, who is one of the artists on Uptown; Heavy D, my boss; myself; Gene Riggins; and Michael Horton, who I believe is still at Universal records [Universal Music Group] today.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause Univer- that's the other thing.  That consolidation when you were working with Barry Gordon--I mean, (unclear) couldn't believe that.  It's only Sony [Sony Music Entertainment]?  I think it's only Sony and Universal.
Speaker 1:  	This was a--at a station event with the group EU [Experience Unlimited]; one of our air personality, Fred Buggs, in the back to my left, but also Spike Lee and [HistoryMaker] Russell Simmons were at that event back in the--I'd have to say that's in the early '80s [1980s]--mid-'80s [1980s].
Speaker 2:  	Tina Turner in the offices of KISS FM [WRKS Radio; WEPN Radio, New York, New York].  I would venture to say that's probably 1992.
Speaker 1:  	I had to find a photo that had my wife in it and my daughter [Jada Warfield] with Mariah Carey here at a Columbia Records event with Mariah Carey.
Speaker 2: Okay, is this a different (unclear)?
Speaker 1:  	That's a different one.  I, I got both of those 'cause I didn't know whether you want--whether you wanted Mariah's breasts all out in the (unclear), so I gave you two Mariah options here.
Speaker 2:  	That was at a album release party with Mariah at a local club.
Speaker 1:  	This was in Atlantic City [New Jersey] with some staff members of WBLS [WBLS Radio, New York, New York]--our program director, B.K. Kirkland, my wife, B.K. Kirkland and his wife, and Anita Baker and my wife, Mary [Mary Warfield].  I had hair those days.
Speaker 2:  	This is one of the photos taken when I was recent general manager at WBLS with Percy Sutton and his son, [HistoryMaker] Pierre Sutton, and  also the publisher of one of the local Brooklyn [New York] newspapers.
Speaker 1:  	This is the hair transition for Charles Warfield.  This is mid transition hair.
Speaker 2: What year?
Speaker 1:  	I'd like venture a guess.  On that picture, I'd have to say that it is--I would say that's '96 [1996], if I could venture a guess.
Speaker 2:  	That is clearly in the '70s [1970s] at WBLS.  That was pra- no, I'm sorry.  That's in the '83 [1983] or so at WBLS.
Speaker 1:  This is the further transition of the hairline.  That was also--that was probably KISS right there in '89 [1989].
Speaker 2:  One of the--that was at a WBLS fundraiser station event with Mayor Ed Koch and Mark Jackson, who was a very big supporter of, of the radio station in the early '80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: You're talking about Inner City [Inner City Broadcasting Corporation]?
Speaker 2:  	Inner City Broadcasting.
Speaker 1:  	Stevie Wonder in the Inner City Broadcasting studios in the early '80s [1980s]--'83 [1983], '84 [1984].
Speaker 2:  	Another event with Mark Jackson--fundraiser--Spike Lee and Kenny Webb, who was our morning show host at that point.  That's also WBLS.  Interesting 'cause I have an Uptown Records jacket on at that (unclear).
Speaker 1:  	[HistoryMaker] Hal Jackson, my best man at my wedding in 1987.  Hal was my best man.  That's Hal with myself and with [HistoryMaker] Isaac Hayes.  And we--that's an Inner City Broadcasting picture.
Speaker 2:  	This was at a time that WBLS used to do a, a walk in Manhattan [New York, New York] that would terminate in Central Park [New York, New York] with the United Negro College Fund [UNCF].  That's with Nick [Nick Ashford] and [HistoryMaker] Valerie Simpson.  That would have been the late '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1:  	Another friend to the radio station, Dave Winfield, when he was playing for the New York Yankees.  We were supporters of his foundation at an event with [HistoryMaker] Melba Moore.
Speaker 2:  	Mayor Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins].  I believe that's 1981.  There's a date on the back, and I think it's '81 [1981].  Is it '81 [1981]--'91 [1991]?
Speaker 1: It doesn't say--oh, '91 [1991].
Speaker 2:  	Ninety-one [1991]--'91 [1991].
Speaker 1:  	That is Senator Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] visiting the, the radio station at ICBC Broadcast Holdings, Inc. in New York.  I believe that was '96 [1996], '97 [1997].
Speaker 2:  	That magazine, the one on top, not that one--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA CONVERSATION)
Speaker 2:  	That's the bald headed guy.  I'd made the full transition of hair by that point.  That was the Radio Ink Radio Executive of the Year honor that I received in 2008.
Speaker 1:  	I'm the--I'm the superhero in the gray under the B in battle.
Speaker 2:  	That's the ICBC Broadcast Holdings corporate staff.  I'm recognized in the thirty-fifth anniversary of ICBC.  It's--I'm in that picture with [HistoryMaker] Skip Finley, who was our vice chairman, Hal Jackson, who was a vice chairman, and Pierre Sutton, who was chairman of the board.
Speaker 1:  	Three of the--two of my most respected contemporaries, Barry Mayo [HistoryMaker Barry A. Mayo] and Zemira Jones, as we were talking about the power of urban radio.  Zemira was at Radio One [Urban One, Inc.], and I believe Barry was at Emmis [Emmis Communication Corporation] at that point.
Speaker 2:  	Two of the power personalities of black radio to this day, Steve Harvey and Tom Joyner.
Story_ID: 650094
Speaker 1:  	That's my current wife.  That's my second, it won't be a third.  That's my wife, Mary [Mary Warfield], at, at our wedding at home.  [HistoryMaker] Hal Jackson was the best man.  That top photo--the young lady behind my shoulder is Mrs. Debi Jackson.  She wasn't Debbie Jackson at that point.  That was 1987, and Hal and Debbie got married in September of that year.  This was April.
Speaker 2: Is this you as a little boy (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1:  	(Simultaneous) That's me in a--yeah, that's me on the bottom left, and--well, me, that's my brothers, but that's me on the bottom left on the front porch of our house in Southeast.
Speaker 2: Okay, right here.
Speaker 1:  	That is me.  This is all family.
Speaker 2: Is that you?
Speaker 1:  	That's me; that's me.  That's me at age six.  That's me graduating out of college, going out every now and then.  Folks don't wanna believe that I had hair.
Speaker 2: I'm going to put this here.
Speaker 1:  	This is the five boys and my mother.  That's my mother with her five sons; Carroll Warfield, Gerard Warfield, Darnell Warfield, Rudy Warfield [Ruby Carroll Warfield], Charles Warfield [HistoryMaker Charles Warfield, Jr.], and the other twin, Gerald Warfield.  Gerald and Gerard are the twins.  Gerald on the left; Gerard on the right.  That was in 1991.
