Story_ID: 201790
Speaker 1: My name is [HistoryMaker] Sandra Johnson and I'm the interviewer.  [Edgar] Carey Lane is the videographer and today we have no observers for our interview.  Please state your name and spell your name including your middle name.
Speaker 2: Barbara, B-A-R-B-A-R-A, Dodson, D-O-D-S-O-N, Walker, W-A-L-K-E-R.
Speaker 1: Your date of birth and location of birth?
Speaker 2: January 18, 1930 in Washington D.C. at the old Freedmen's Hospital [Howard University Hospital, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Today's date?
Speaker 1: Today is Thursday, March 4, 2004.
Speaker 2: Please tell us the location of this interview, the address.
Speaker 1: We are at 1700 Shepherd Street, NW Washington D.C., zip code 20011.
Speaker 2: And your occupation?
Speaker 1: Right now I'm retired but was a volunteer who has--does many different things now that I am retired.  Right now I can do lectures, I do--I'm a treasurer, I'm a past president, I'm a consultant I don't know what else I could say 'cause that covers a awful lot of things.
Speaker 2: And you're truly a HistoryMaker because you study history.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Story_ID: 201791
Speaker 1: I'm going to now ask you about five People magazine-ish type questions and just bear with me please.  What is you favorite food?
Speaker 2: Fish.
Speaker 1: And your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: I really don't have one; I just like it all the time.
Speaker 1: And your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue, even though I have all green to death. I love blue I--in fact turquoise blue really.
Speaker 1: What is your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Anywhere that I can do things. Most of the time I go, vacations are really research vacations or things like that.  But sometimes with the family we go places but really haven't been on a vacation--real vacation for a very long time.
Speaker 1: What is your favorite research destination?
Speaker 2: Right now my favorite research destination would be in the South. I need to go to North Carolina and I need to go to Virginia and I need to go Maryland.
Speaker 1: And what is your favorite phrase or saying?  Do you have one?
Speaker 2: I don't know. I don't think so. I don't have any that I can think of right now.
Story_ID: 201792
Speaker 1: Please tell me about your mother.  What's her name?  Where was she born?  Where did she grow up and what do you know about her background and her growing up?
Speaker 2: My mother's name--her first name is Naomi but she liked Althea so she goes by--she went by the name of Althea.  She was a Neal; her father was Joseph Payne [ph.] Neal from North Carolina.  She grew up in Washington, D.C.  She grew up in the northeast section of Washington around--between 11th [Street] and 12th [Street] on G Street Northeast.  She went to Armstrong high school [Armstrong Manual Training High School, Washington, D.C.] where her grandfather was a custodian and nobody ever knew it until he died and then when they saw her crying and all--they wondered why she was so upset and she said that was her grandfather who worked there. She went on to Miner Normal School [University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.] it was when she was there and she went on to teach in the South.  She went to North Carolina to Greensboro [North Carolina] there to teach. But my mother--it was really funny we had a conversation one day, I'd ask her about why she went there and how she went there and all and she went down to teach but my mother had very pretty legs and she made her own clothes so the principal was walking up the steps behind her and he was making all kinds of passes at her, so she packed her clothes and came home, and she left teaching there.  And later she--because home economics was her major, she taught at Parker-Gray High School, that is no longer, in Alexandria, Virginia, in the home economics area and then she taught at Lyles-Crouch School [Alexandria, Virginia], that Lyles-Crouch is still a school now [Lyles-Crouch Traditional Academy] in Alexandria and she came back to Washington and she taught at Mrs. Howard's Nursery School [Washington, D.C.] which was a private nursery school where she taught grades one to three, may not have more than one student but she had--that's what she did and when the children came out of nursery school they were just tops because they had one on one education.
Speaker 1: Tell me again her full name, first, middle and last name.
Speaker 2: Naomi Althea Neal and she married a Dodson.
Speaker 1: Very well and when was she born--what year?
Speaker 2: She was born February 18, 1908.
Speaker 1: And when was it that she came to teach at this private school in Alexandria?
Speaker 2: Alexandria was not a private school; the private school was in Washington, D.C. where--she went to Alexandria to teach.  It was in the '30s [1930s] because I remember we used to get a ride every morning to take Mama to school and so it was in the, I'd say about 1935 because I was born the year with a zero [1930]--I was in kindergarten and so I remember we would take her to school and then bring me to school.
Story_ID: 201793
Speaker 1: And schools at that point were segregated, were they not?
Speaker 2: Very much so.  We were segregated but I find now that I think that one of the worst things that happened to schools in Washington, D.C. was desegregation because we had strong teachers, we had well-prepared teachers and we know we had prepared teachers because when we had integration and we looked, and right now I'm speaking on the college level, our professors, our teachers had Ph.D.'s and when we got to look at Wilson Teachers College [University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.], they were having certificates.  They had white teachers who were teaching with certificates.  When we finished Miner Teachers College [University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.], we had Bachelor of Science degrees which is a higher degree than the Bachelor of Arts and we had people who were going away each summer, they had to go to New York to go to school and get their degrees and that was even for the people who taught on the elementary level, not necessarily college level.  But most of the teachers that I had in the teachers college and I was there from 1947 to 1951, most of them had well beyond even a master's degree.
Speaker 1: So you've covered a lot of territory there and what I would like to know because you've made a very powerful statement that the desegregation brought what you feel was not the same quality in terms of education.  Now are you speaking of the quality of education for--afforded to black children--African American children or are you saying that the teachers went to teach--the well qualified teachers went to teach elsewhere?  They were recruited to go other places.  What do you--can you explain that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I would say that in--I was on the elementary level and we, before integration, we had on the high school level--elementary school we had well prepared teachers.  When we got to the high school level, we had one school that was college preparatory, one school that was vocational and one school that was clerical and when you came out of those schools, you had a skill.  Now you will always--you might hear something negative about [Paul Laurence] Dunbar [High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.] because it was a preparatory school.  People came from Cardozo [Senior High School; Cardozo Education Campus, Washington, D.C.] that was the clerical school and they came from Armstrong [Manual Training High School, Washington, D.C.] and came to Dunbar to take the languages or the math or whatever they needed that they didn't have at their particular school.  So they went on to college, know this for a fact because it was one of the ushers in my wedding took romance languages on a scholarship all the way through college to a Ph.D.  He came from Armstrong to Dunbar to take the languages that he needed.
Speaker 1: So what you're saying is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What I'm saying is that when we broke up that system, it tried to make every school a community school, you cannot do that and I think in the year 2004 we are slowly realizing that we need to have vocational high schools.  Everybody is not ready for college.  We had people to open up shoe shops to learn how to do carpentry, to learn those skills that make a family, make a home, to give them a job and we don't have that anymore and you can't put that all over the city.  You need to have one place where you can put all of those machines; you need one place.  When the people came out of Cardozo, they had any type of machine that was used in the business, any form that was needed.  They could come right out and get a job in the government.
Story_ID: 201794
Speaker 1: We got a little sidetracked there and I want to bring you back to your description of your mom [Althea Neal Dodson] and about her background and her growing up.  How would you describe your mother?  Can you share any stories about her and give us a sense of what she was really like?
Speaker 2: Well my mother as I look at it--she inherited a lot of positive genes in that my mother sewed, she knitted, she crocheted--anything with her hands, she was just good at it and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She grew up here in Washington [D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Yeah she grew up in Washington.
Speaker 1: In what neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Northeast neighborhood and probably went to Lovejoy [School, Washington, D.C.] which is now a condominium--has condominiums.  She probably went there to school.  I don't know--she was before the time of junior high school, junior high schools hadn't started until a little later.  But then she went to the [Miner] Normal School [University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.] when Miner was a two year school.  But she grew up in the northeast area and she grew up as Episcopalian and the church was on the opposite corner from where she lived.
Speaker 1: What church was that?
Speaker 2: Calvary Episcopal Church [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Is it still there?
Speaker 2: Yes it's still there.  The church itself has moved, I think, to 8th Street [sic. 6th Street] now but it is--my aunt is still Episcopalian so I do get a regular report on what's happening at Calvary.  So but their family were the first and it's strange because (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) First what?
Speaker 2: They were the first among the first people in the church--in that church.
Speaker 1: When it was established?
Speaker 2: When it was established with Reverend [Franklin I. A.] Bennett.  Grandmother [Florence Neal] was Episcopalian but Grandpa [Joseph Neal] was a Baptist and he was at Israel [Baptist] Church [Washington, D.C], he was the deacon at Israel Church when it was on, I guess that's 11th Street [sic.], yeah it was probably 11th Street.
Speaker 1: So now you're talking about your mother's father?
Speaker 2: Yes and he was a lawyer here in the district [Washington, D.C.].  He came to the district--he graduated from North Carolina A&T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina] I think it was.  I got a record that he had been a teaching assistant there and then he came here to Washington, D.C. and he and Grandma married and they raised their family in northeast, in that same block of housing.  Grandmother did a lot of things with her hands too.  She worked for the recreation department at one time (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's why you said that mother has--
Speaker 2: --has a lot of skills, good genes.
Speaker 1: --has good genes.
Speaker 2: Yeah and grandmother did that.  And even though grandmother was an only child who went through a couple of stepmothers but that grandmother--she worked on the playground and I was telling the children the other day that she used to make paper flowers when you could buy crepe paper and she'd put the light color and the dark color together and make the roses and things.  And I said, I kind of remember how to do that, but you don't do that anymore, nobody does that anymore.  You go to the store now and buy silk flowers and that's it. But we learned to make paper flowers 'cause we spent summers with grandma and she taught us how to do those things.
Story_ID: 201795
Speaker 1: Any other stories that you recall from your mother [Althea Neal Dodson]?
Speaker 2: Well I asked mother one day, "How did you meet daddy [Joseph Dodson]?"  Well, my father was at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], went to undergraduate school at Howard and graduate school but they said--I said, "How did you meet daddy?"  She said, "Well they told me there was this good looking man over there and I need to go see him," and she said, "We were not supposed to cross the street."  Now, Miner [Normal School; University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.] was on--it was really a matter of crossing the street to go from Miner to Howard and she went over there and she saw him so that was that.  And they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) One look?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) She didn't go into the one look part but it didn't seem to take them too long to make that decision but dad went to medical school after that and I found out that he had been offered a scholarship and I don't know whether it was Dartmouth [College, Hanover, New Hampshire] or Amherst [College, Amherst Massachusetts] and he went to visit but he couldn't find a job and the scholarship wasn't enough to cover all costs.  But he couldn't find a job where he was so he came back here to go to school.  And he worked in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You're jumping ahead, let me stop you right there.  Let's start again and tell me your father's name and where he was born and those kinds of things?
Speaker 2: Okay my father's name was Joseph Norman Dodson.
Speaker 1: Spell it, please.
Speaker 2: Joseph, J-O-S-E-P-H, Norman, N-O-R-M-A-N, Dodson, D-O-D-S-O-N.  He was born in Washington, D.C. in Georgetown in October 22, 1902.  He comes from a long line, the family has been there for a very long time.  He went to [Paul Laurence] Dunbar [High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.].  I don't know whether he and Mama--well no they're too far apart in years to have met each other there.  But it just dawned on me that they were right across the street from each other in school both times.  You had to walk to school, he had to walk from 36th [Street] and O Street to Dunbar and he told me that when his father [Joseph Dodson] died, he grabbed the--he had to ride his bicycle and it was snowing.  His father died in January.  So he rode his bicycle from 1st [Street] and O to 36th and O.  And that's--you have to remember there's some little blocks in between.  Some of them not so short, there's some good city blocks in between there but that's the way he had to get to school and that's how he got--he went to Dunbar also.
Speaker 1: Now why was that?  Can you explain that?
Speaker 2: Well, how 'bout money (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) There weren't any schools any closer?
Speaker 2: There weren't any high schools, no there weren't.  No the nearest high school to where he was, was, if it was built then in the '20s [1920s] was Western [High School] which is now known as the [Duke] Ellington School of the Arts [Washington, D.C.] and that's in Georgetown also just makes it because it's on the other side of S Street (laugh).  We were very particular about where the boundaries are for Georgetown.  But that's where he--he's a Georgetown person and so his family is right there from that area.  They've always--this Dodson family has lived there and I found a mention of a purchase of a grave for a Joseph and I don't know, there's an A, a B and a N Dodson, Joseph with three different initials.  I know it's not N because that's my dad but he bought a grave for his father in 1832.  So they have been there for--been in Georgetown for a very long time--
Story_ID: 201796
Speaker 1: But why is it that your father [Joseph Dodson] didn't go to that school there? Western [High School; Duke Ellington School of the Arts, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: Because segregation. You remember what was it, 1964--or no--when was it '64 [1964] that the--'64 [1964, sic. 1954] was desegregation and so it wasn't a school for him to go.  That's where he had as many things in Washington, D.C. during segregated days, there were many things there we had to pass up and go other places.  The playground was one; there was a playground on Volta Place that was for white children that had a swimming pool but there were children who lived up in that area, they wanted to swim.  They had to go all way from 35th [Street] and O to 25th [Street] and N Street to go for a swim.  If they wanted to play tennis, they had to do the same, they had to go--well they could go to 26th and O Street to play tennis but there were many things that happened that way.  A reverse of that is that I had in my neighborhood there was a little Jewish girl and she had to pass [Wendell] Phillips School [Washington, D.C.] to get to Corcoran School [Washington, D.C.].  Phillips school was on N Street and Corcoran School was there on M Street.  So she had to pass Phillips School to get to her school and so that's one case where I know it was a reverse situation.  But we played together but we just couldn't go to school together.  But that was the nature of the city before integration and even now, we are still not really integrated very well because the almighty American dollar does that and without some good education and an improved system of what we're doing, we will not have--people will not be able to move--be as well prepared as we were in--those who were born in the '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s].
Story_ID: 201797
Speaker 1: How would you describe your father [Joseph Dodson]?  Can you tell us any stories that would give us a real sense of what kind of person he was?
Speaker 2: Well dad was--he was a good father.  One thing I did decide though that I would never marry a doctor because he was never home a lot for us to see him.  But when we were together, we had a good time.  He was a practicing physician and so he had office hours from two to three and six to eight and in between he made calls.  See that's what they did in the '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s], they went to visit the sick people.  So, but we had Sundays and weekends together a lot of times except don't get sick on Wednesdays because doctors play golf.  He was one of the first school physicians.  We used to have physicians who would visit the schools to check out the children and do some physicals, do some height and weight and got so that we got more schools and then it became so that we--classroom teachers were asked to do some.  And he came with one where a teacher had put down that the child's vision was 20/20; the child had one glass eye.  Then when he was at Garnet-Patterson [Junior High School;Shaw Middle School at Garnet-Patterson, Washington, D.C.] that was one of the schools that he had and he would go and we'd have conversations and he'd tell them I told them they need to clean up, they need to this, that and the other.  I said, "Daddy you better be quiet, you don't know what might happen."  But I tell you, he was a person who was well thought of.  He grew up in Georgetown [Washington, D.C.], he opened his office in Georgetown and I think that if he had collected his two dollars from everybody who visited his office, we would be multimillionaires by this time, but he didn't.  He was there to serve and he did and when he passed, everybody said, "We will really miss him."  Unfortunately, dad passed and everybody came to the--he died the 4th of February so everybody came to the viewing because it was said that there would be a snow storm the next and there was a terrible snow storm.  It was so bad my mother [Althea Neal Dodson] said, "We are not even going to the cemetery."  We barely got to the church and so we don't know exactly when the interment happened.  But people still--you know they say, "Oh your dad was a good person," and he was. He was just nice, just a good person.
Speaker 1: That's a wonderful memory (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I say one of the good men in my life was my dad.
Story_ID: 201798
Speaker 1: How far back can you trace your ancestors?  I know that you're a historian and I know this is a major part of your history.  Can you tell us, give us some sense of how far you are tracing your ancestors?
Speaker 2: I told you on my father's [Joseph Dodson] side, I got a purchase for a grave, 1832 and that burial is in Holy Rood Cemetery [Washington, D.C.] which is a part of Holy Trinity [Catholic] Church [Washington, D.C.], it's cemetery.  It's there off of Whitehaven Parkway and they have--you can go to Georgetown University [Washington, D.C.] and the records are there with the location of the graves and everything.  They had half price graves for colored people and they buried us together.  So I can go back that far on my father's side.  Now my grandmother [Mary Dodson], I have no idea what her mother's name was.  She came from a family of women.  They were all daughters and it's very hard to trace women but I am getting some kind of idea because I did find a deed for Peter and Dorcas Jones and when I looked up Peter and Dorcas Jones, Peter had died but Dorcas--thank goodness for these odd names--Dorcas had living with her a grandchild who was a Gordon [ph.].  And so people have been saying the Gordons are related to you.  So now I've got a thing where I can put the Gordon family in with the family but there were four sisters.  And so I don't know who her mother is and my grandmother married.
Speaker 1: So that would take us back to what year?
Speaker 2: Grandmother said she remembers my--father's mother says she remembers the soldiers coming up the road from the Civil War.  So it means that she might have been--she was born maybe around 1860-something.
Speaker 1: And spell that name for us please?
Speaker 2: Which one?
Speaker 1: The grandmother, Dorcas.
Speaker 2: D-O-R-C-A-S
Speaker 1: Do I have it right, that's grandmother?
Speaker 2: No that's not grandmother, that's not--I don't--I haven't figured out how she's really related even though I did find another great-grandmother on the manumission papers.
Speaker 1: On the what?
Speaker 2: On a manumission paper.  Manumission paper was what in 1865--I think this one is--1862.  People who owned slaves, people who were enslaved--this is the word we need to use need to say that the people who were brought from Africa were enslaved.  There is nothing saying they were slaves in Africa even though that's one thing that people like to say but when you know that when you go to lectures and it is good for us to go to lectures and learn.  Africans believed that the more they have in the family, the richer you are.  The more people you have around you--does not mean they need to be blood relatives but the number of people.  My understanding is from some of the lectures that I've heard is they, yes they did sell people to come to America but they thought they were going to be treated like indentured servants.  Indentured where you worked for a time to pay off the money that it took to bring you here but that's not what happened.  We were--Africans were brought to America and they were enslaved and just look at where most of them came into, they came into the southern states.  Who populated the southern states?  The people that Europe wanted to get rid of who were mostly the laboring class they were sending here to hold the land.  So they knew how to treat people because they had been treated that way.  So now since they were the kings, they owned the land and they now brought people in to work for them.  They knew how to treat you.  'Tis true all weren't treated bad, some were, and there were different ways and all that people were handled-
Story_ID: 201799
Speaker 1: We were talking about the use of the word enslaved and you had suggested that we need to start using that word (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --as opposed to--
Speaker 2: Slaves. I was saying that yes it is true that some Africans were sold to be brought to America but the idea was that they were to be indentured.  By that we mean they would work to pay off the cost of their coming of the travel here.  And those were, there were white indentured people and then there were black.  The only person I know that right now is Patricia Roberts Harris who was--whose family were indentured.  She was the dean of Howard University law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] at one time.  But the Africans' idea was the more people you have around--your wealth was with the number of people that you had.  So they thought that these people were going to be brought over and then work for a while, get your freedom but that's not what happened.  We were made slaves and slavery didn't begin with the Africans being brought to America, slavery was in Egypt when they built the pyramids.  You read about those, go way back in ancient history.  But we kind of get an idea that it's something that just happened here in America but there have been slaves.  There's always an underdog. There's always--somebody's got to be on the bottom for somebody to be on the top.  If there's only one on each end, it's somebody there--
Story_ID: 201800
Speaker 1: Now in 1862, people were encouraged to free the people that they owned and what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was before the end of the Civil War.
Speaker 1: Yes. They were encouraged because they were given a payment for them.  I have a manumission paper that my husband [James Dent Walker] brought home to me because he worked at the National Archives [and Records Administration (NARA), Washington, D.C.] and he said, "Here's your grandmother [sic. great-grandmother]."  I said, "Okay," and I put it aside, I've been using it to give demonstrations of this is what you might find if you got a hold of a manumission paper.  One thing this one had very clear handwriting, it gave a lot of information.  It gave the name of the person, it gave their height, it gave their health, it gave their color.  So you knew what you were getting and you got a certain price for the people that you were selling; not selling but freeing, freeing.  There were people who were freed--they were given their freedom with the manumission paper.  And this grandmother I found just by accident because she was in the 1900 census, she was living with her son.
Speaker 2: So tell us a little more about the manumission paper.  Where would you get--where would you find it and how did you know that this person was related to you?
Speaker 1: Well let me tell you, I can tell you only a little because my husband was a genealogist.  He was like--if you had a genealogy problem, you call Jimmy [James Dent] Walker.  I don't care where you were, you call Jimmy Walker.  But he--when I got the paper and I finally read it last year when I finally settled down to really do some research and on this paper it said, "Judy Harris the mother or grandmother of," and they listed all these people, all but one person and that person had been willed to her by her father, gave her father's name and it would go to Port Tobacco [Village] in Maryland and you would find these records.  Now the manumission papers are in the National Archives and I have no idea--I can't tell you honestly how you would go about finding one but I think if we use the Internet, we will find out how to--if you were looking for one, how you might find one.  But I was just very fortunate in that I had the genealogist in the family and did not really use it--didn't know how to use it.  That was his career and mine wasn't that.  But the manumission paper was a freedom paper.  It freed people who had been enslaved.  So we have manumission papers for quite a few people and in the district [Washington, D.C] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In your family?
Speaker 1: No I only have that one from my family, the rest of them on my mother's [Althea Neal Dodson] side, I can't find anything and I'll tell you about on the mother's side in a minute.  I can't, I have--that's the only manumission paper I have is for that great-grandmother--
Story_ID: 201801
Speaker 1: So then her [Walker's paternal great-grandmother] son was born free and in the Georgetown [Washington, D.C.] church records there, the priest would write on some of the places I saw "free born" and that was 1840.  I saw some people were free born.  So we haven't always been enslaved.  Every black person has not been a slave.  I think that's a positive attitude that helps give us dignity and pride in that we know that you weren't a slave or even if you had been enslaved that you learned while you were enslaved and you brought those qualities and values into your home.  And that, over a period of time, I've learned is what families did.  I had a  friend of my grandmother's who said that when anybody was ever invited to a party in Georgetown they went because they knew that they were going to get top quality service of everything.  The dishes, the table settings, the entertainment because they brought the things they learned home and this is what I think is happened to a lot through a lot of families, we have learned to do that.  You just carry on those values, it doesn't have anything to do with I don't know, anything because my grandmother [Mary Dodson] was a wash woman, my father's [Joseph Dodson] mother [Mary Francis Dodson] was a wash lady.  She did people's laundry.  She'd walk me to school--to Wormley School [Washington, D.C.] up there at 34th Street and she went to Dr. Reedy's [ph.] house to do laundry.  So I mean, she did what she had to do and her sister was a parlor maid and that's how my father got through medical school.  They paid his tuition and my aunt never called him Joe or anything, she always called him "Dr. Dodson, Dr. Dodson," she was so proud of what he was able to do.  And so, we bring--many African American families bring with them a lot of the values and things that they have learned over a period of time.
Story_ID: 201802
Speaker 1: That's a very interesting story.  What did you know about your--what other stories do you have about your grandparents [Florence Neal and Joseph Neal] on your mother's [Althea Neal Dodson] side?
Speaker 2: On my mother's side I've been able to use my oral history which is the very first thing you do when you start doing your family history.  You should write down the stories or record the stories.  I say tape the stories.  I say tell people to get out a tape recorder and tape--start with yourself because you're the most important person and then go to the other people because as you start talking about yourself, you go to your Mama, your grandma, your great-grandmother and start telling all those stories.  Well on my mother's side of the family, I'm going to talk about her father's people.  The story was that grandmother--my grandfather's mother Lena [ph.] Lowe was that her master [John W.S. (ph.) Lowe] was her father, that makes her my great-great-grandmother [sic. great-grandmother].  That her master was her father so I had a story that my grandfather's sister had written that said that Mary [ph.] came down to the house and said, "My isn't this a lovely baby, she will go far," and she said, "too bad John didn't see her."  Well I knew that my great-grandmother's surname was Lowe.
Speaker 1: Spell it.
Speaker 2: L-O-W-E and the story was that they were German Jews.  They were Lowes, L-O-W-E, there were Lowensteins, L-O-W-E-N-S-T-E-I-N and then there were Steins, S-T-E-I-N and they broke up those names because they were Jews.
Speaker 1: Why would they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Because there was a lot of prejudice.  There's been prejudice against the Jews for many, many years because if we could all be like--if we could get it together like they get together to support each other through thick and thin, we would all be a lot better off.  But I found that story, I had that story and I was looking--I went to the archives in Raleigh, North Carolina many years ago and I found a record of the--about Lena Lowe and who married Jessie [ph.] Neal.  I never knew Jessie Neal, Jessie Neal made about five or six babies and left.  He went off--he was a tobacco prizer which meant he has something to do with packing tobacco, I'm not sure.  I just found a meaning for that but he had something to do with tobacco in the area.
Speaker 1: This is your mom's dad [sic. mother's paternal grandfather]?
Speaker 2: This is my mom's dad; this would be on her side.
Story_ID: 201803
Speaker 1: I went back using--when you're doing genealogy now, you can use the Internet for a lot of things.  'Tis true that the Internet is only as good as the information that is put in there.  Everything on the Internet is not necessarily true but it gives you a head start on where to go, what you might look for.  I knew that they had lived in Winston-Salem [North Carolina] so I had to get a book of maps.  It didn't mean anything to me, Winston-Salem okay I knew it was in the northern part of the State of North Carolina.  I was told I had relatives from Danville, Virginia all the way across the northern part of North Carolina.  So I looked in there and I found that this was a--this family was in, I think in Rockingham County [North Carolina] and I started putting in, I got the name of John [W.S. (ph.)] Lowe because that was the name that was in the story that my great-aunt had written.  So I put his name in and I found a will of his that named Harriet [ph.], who was my great-grandmother's [Lena Lowe] mother, named her child-they called him Morris [ph.] but it's spelled M-A-U-R-I-C-E, like Maurice we would say and Mary--did not mention Lena [Lowe] because Lena--John W.S. Lowe died in 1859, three months before Lena was born.  So I made those connections and I went, using the Internet--in the will, John W.S. Lowe never mentioned a wife so I went into marriage records to see if any of that information had been put into the system.  And I couldn't find a marriage, I said  well this is strange, you know he's got names of all these brothers and his sisters is in there but I can't find a wife.  But John W.S. Lowe comes up not as being married, but as the justice of the peace which tells you John W.S. Lowe was an important person.  It wasn't until after 1859--the justice of the peace was like the justice.  He handled everything in the court up to that time.  Shortly after that, they changed the rules in the State of North Carolina so that the justice of the peace wasn't really--wasn't in charge of everything in the court.  So now I've got to go back now and today my research was going to be look back and look under--put in all the Lowes, Lowensteins and Steins and see if I can find out when they came to the United States, see if I can find out how John W.S. Lowe got Harriet that's what I need (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Who would Harriet be?
Speaker 1: Harriet would be Lena's mother, would be my great-great-great-grandmother [sic. great-great-grandmother].  If I could find out--I've got her name and she was a Lowe.  Now see that was her name she took because of family--the family that owned her.  What you try to find out is one that's a blood relative (laughter).  See Lena is a blood relative; she's a blood Lowe because her master was her father.  So she's a blood relative, Harriet wasn't.  So I would like to know where did he--how did Harriet get into the Unites States, how did he get her?
Speaker 2: I imagine this is just like solving a mystery and a puzzle--
Speaker 1: It is.
Speaker 2: --for you.
Speaker 1: When doing genealogy you're a detective, you're a geographer, you are all the things that curiosity just--I mean you could sit at the computer--I talked this morning at ten o'clock and I was ready to go, I said no I've got people at three, I would still be there right now.   What's another word you could use, what's another place you could use and you really have to learn--you learn your history because a lot of the state lines, county lines change from different years and because it's a different county, the records are still going to be where they were originally made.
Story_ID: 201804
Speaker 1: Did any of these people from your past write their stories down?  Do you have any written accounts of how they lived and--you see 'cause you've covered quite a bit of history from 1859.  A lot of things happened in those days.  Is there any written account?
Speaker 2: No, not that I've found.  Unfortunately our family is dwindling down to a very, very few because just as I was--that story of that [maternal] side of the family was during that aunt--my great-aunt's family and just as I was getting that done, they called and told me that her grandson had died, and Johnny [ph.] was in his eighties.  The story of that family that was written last year [sic. 2001] was 'Pearl' ['Pearl's Secret: A Black Man's Search for His White Family,' Neil Henry] written by Neil Henry was a story of not his--his mother's side of the family out of St. Louis [Missouri] that they had called--they knew that there was an Aunt Pearl but Aunt Pearl was an Indian [Native American].  This is how we get African Americans and Indians get mixed up in the census and there's nothing you can really do about it because we weren't white, we were another color.  Sometimes they would allow us to be mulatto which means you weren't Indian and you weren't black, you were mulatto.  But this is where a lot of African Americans can hardly not find a family who didn't have a grandma who sat on her hair and grandpa who looked like the Indian on the buffalo nickel.  But we cannot claim any of that because we don't have a number.  The doors, two or three rolls they had numbers and they had (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who had numbers?
Speaker 2: The Indians had numbers.  If you don't have those numbers, they're not going to accept you.  A good place to look is Oklahoma--look in the Oklahoma website and they will give you information on what you need to have to claim to be Indian.  And now that the Indians are doing so great with the casinos and things, they built their own museum; the monies and things for their museum.  A lot of that came from them and because they've got casinos all over the place and they were able to do that.  But there's hardly not a family that doesn't have an Indian.  But I say do you have a number, if you don't have a number off of the Indian rolls then forget it, just have the memory that grandma looked like--had the long hair and grandpa looked like a Indian.  Well, see they--children don't know anything about that anymore.  The Indian that was on the Buffalo nickel, that nickel doesn't look like that anymore and we're getting ready to change the Jefferson nickel.
Story_ID: 201805
Speaker 1: I just wanted to ask you though, you mentioned about Raleigh, North Carolina. Now how would you know to even go to Raleigh, North Carolina (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Because Raleigh, North Carolina--Raleigh is the capital of North Carolina and usually the state--the counties--there were some that they had to turn into the state archives and there were some that they kept in counties but the states required some records to come to be at the archives.  And fortunately now a lot of them have been microfilmed and because we're using CDs [Compact Discs] now, I'm not too sure about how long a CD will hold up.  Microfilm has been holding up for a very long time.  So we can say thank you for the states microfilming some of the records and the other we need to say thank you for are the Church of [Jesus Christ of] Latter-day Saints properly known as the Mormons because their--each religion has a specific thing that they do.  Their thing is to gather your family and to gather your family they know you need records.  So they have been going through the world not just the United States but throughout the world microfilming records and making them available either through what they call their family history centers that they have in many cities or some of them are on their websites, some of them you can even borrow.  They have a lending library, you can't bring them home, you have to use them at the family history centers.  So we need to thank them for wanting to do family history because we're able to use the records that they have filmed.  They didn't film everything; they filmed those records that they were allowed to film.
Speaker 1: This is very interesting.  Do you suggest, Mrs. [HistoryMaker Barbara Dodson] Walker that people wanting to pursue their genealogy and their family history have to have a special kind of computer program to do so?
Speaker 2: After a while you need to go on the computer and we're talking the year 2004, from the computer now you can print out forms, you can print out the lessons on how to do your family history.
Speaker 1: Without a special program?
Speaker 2: Without a special program.  After you get these names and I call the names and the birthdates and the places of birth, those are things that you must have; I call those the bones.  The stories are the meat, it goes on the bones but then you buy a computer program and computer programs depend on, I guess you would say your computer ability, your computer skills because you would buy like me, I'd say limited computer skills, I bought one that I could handle.  I don't expect to have as--they all hold many thousands of names and information but I don't have that much of a family now and I don't think the family--I won't ever fill out what I've done.
Story_ID: 201806
Speaker 1: When your family history takes you back to North Carolina, are you also seeking some stories of the history and the context within which they lived?  Do you know anything about that?
Speaker 2: No I don't really--I know about this great-grandmother because, [great] grandmother Lena [Lowe] was--she taught school and she had a boarding house and that's one way she made money to keep the family going because Jessie [ph.] [Neal] left her and went to West Virginia, worked in the coal mines but then moved on to Detroit [Michigan].  But Lena taught school and she--I know she was there.  I forgot the question, I get to talking and I forget.  What were you asking?
Speaker 1: The context within which your family lived between North Carolina and migrating, I suppose, up to Washington [D.C.].
Speaker 2: Only one person came to Washington and that was the son, Joseph [Neal], which was my grandfather.  The rest of them went other places really.  In North Carolina beside grandmother [sic. Walker's great-grandmother Lena Lowe], grandmother worked at the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association] helping young women learn skills, housekeeping and being, I guess you'd say house servants and when that closed then she took them into her home and taught them there.  They tell me there's a story in an old [The] Crisis magazine, which I need to get, that honors her for having done the work in North Carolina.  I know they say that grandma did not waste anything.  When my mother [Althea Neal Dodson] and aunt and they never said anything about my uncle going but when they went down visit their grandmother, she had a box and they stood up there and washed those dishes and she did not cut the wood because you'd be wasting.  You know when you cut wood, some little pieces come off, and they said she just chucked the wood into the wood stove to cook.  So she didn't waste anything and I look at my girls now cooking and when they're cleaning out the bowl they leave a lot.  I say, "Y'all got enough stuff left in here to make another whatever it is."  I said, "You should have been here--they said your great-great-grandmother would just take her finger and go around that bowl and clean it out.  You've got spatulas now and you're wasting."  So they say she was a very thrifty person and I do know that our grandmother [Florence Neal] said--my mother's mother now--said that when she came to visit, she asked, "Would you like for me to cover an umbrella for you?" so that's a special skill, she could do that.
Speaker 1: Cover it how?
Speaker 2: Make a cover for an umbrella.  You asking me how do you cover an umbrella, what do you do now with an umbrella? If doesn't work, what do you do? Chuck it.  She knew how to cover an umbrella.
Speaker 1: Interesting.
Speaker 2: She had those skills.
Story_ID: 201807
Speaker 1: What is your earliest memory of growing up here in Washington, D.C.? What was your neighborhood like, how did you celebrate your holidays with your family and so on?
Speaker 2: I had a big family; I had the family of Georgetown [Washington, D.C.] (laugh).  Everybody took care of me because my dad [Joseph Dodson] had grown up there and he was a physician there.  So everybody took care of me and holidays were--let's see now which holiday you want to talk about.  I never liked Halloween and I never liked the 4th of July.  I don't like to be frightened so I never liked those two and if they never had Halloween and the 4th of July, it would be fine with me.  But we lived in Georgetown and in 1939 we moved from a house--2443 that was owned by a black physician, Dr. Hugh Lee Martin [ph.] and we bought a house on the 2700 block of P Street which turned out to be a block of mostly African Americans--well we were Negroes then but it was African Americans there.  It was just about a full block of us and I remember I could look out the window and I thought it was fun, I could look out the window and see the top of the Washington Monument [Washington, D.C.] and I thought it was great fun to see move back and forth until I got my eyes examined and they told me you've got a problem (laughter).  But I used to put my finger up and say, "Oh it moves," but it was my eye problem.  But growing up in Georgetown you had--it was special, it was family.  People were--people intermarried--I mean families intermarried.  My sister married the boy next door.  It was that kind of a thing and it didn't have anything to do with religion because she was Catholic and he was Methodist but they just happened to be whatever happened.  We were--I think those were some of my best friends.  When we see each other now, it's a great hugging and a kissing and we just stop and think about, we talk about things that we did as children and we did a lot of things together.  We had--one thing we had at Rose Park playground that--those sisters are gone now, the Peters sisters [Margaret Peters and Matilda Roumania Peters] that went to Tuskegee [Institute;Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] who were great tennis players before African Americans were even recognized as playing tennis.  They played clay court, that clay court is gone now, it's a cement court but something is over it now, I think.  But we had playgrounds, where there was a--we went during the summer and you had--there were things for you to learn to do and you went there, you played, you went home and you had friends and then we had during the summer we had the Bible schools--summer Bible schools.  It went from one church to the other so all the churches weren't having them at one time.  You spent two weeks at this church and two weeks at another church.  So by the time summer was over, we had visited about four or five churches with the same teachers.
Story_ID: 201808
Speaker 1: Mrs. [HistoryMaker Barbara Dodson] Walker, from what you've described, it truly is a story of the village (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, it was. It was.
Speaker 1: --in Georgetown [Washington, D.C.].  Can you tell me what sights, sounds and smells remind you of growing up?
Speaker 2: Some were rather unpleasant and they were--it was a horse rendering factory around Prospect Avenue and I just saw a house sold over there on Prospect Street for over a million dollars the other day.  It had that odor of the horse rendering and it was really an odor we did not like to do because I went to [Wendell] Phillips School [Washington, D.C.] and Wormley [School, Washington, D.C.] was the sister school to that so sometimes we had to go Wormley and we hated to walk up there to that school.  And we could walk without a teacher too; a group of us could walk, it was class size.  But that was one thing we hated, the other thing that was really--that we liked when we went was that was an ice cream factory where the--I think it's called Georgetown Inn [sic. Holiday Inn Washington-Georgetown, Washington, D.C.], it's on Wisconsin Avenue.  Well there was a mist that came out of there and so you like that.  You got this little mist on you as you walked through there.  Other thing that was fun was Mrs. Smith's Bakery [ph.] used to be at Wisconsin Avenue and O [Street] and sometimes they'd send us to--you could go in the evening up to the bakery and you could get a fresh pie and one time my father [Joseph Dodson] sent us up to get a pie and the only pie they had was chocolate so what did we get, two chocolate pies, they were totally upset with us (laughter) because we got two chocolate pies.  Now, the other place in Washington to go for good pies was Stephenson's [Bakery]; it was on the other side of the [John Philip Sousa] Bridge from the stadium--the RFK [Robert F. Kennedy Memorial] Stadium [Washington, D.C.].  They used to have a checkerboard and people used to line up there to get their checker box pies.  I mean they were going to buy pies--big pies and things like that, they were delicious.
Speaker 1: And how did you get around?
Speaker 2: Well some people had cars (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That was quite a distance.
Speaker 2: And we had streetcars too because you could buy--you could get a pass for, I think it was a quarter and you could ride the whole week and on the weekends if your mama would let you buy the pass, three people could ride on a pass and we could ride--ten cents was the whole thing and school tickets you could buy a book of school tickets that would last you for a month for two dollars, three cents a ticket.
Speaker 1: So you could ride a streetcar all the way from Georgetown over to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Anywhere ever.
Speaker 1: Was the stadium where it is now?
Speaker 2: Oh we didn't have any stadiums, the stadium is new.  The Robert F.K. Stadium, that's a new thing over there.  To me that's new, it wasn't there when I was growing up.  They played at Griffith Stadium [Washington, D.C.] where Howard University Hospital [Washington, D.C.] is now.  That was the old Griffith Stadium, that's where you played baseball, football, the high schools had their drills, we had a special physical education day there one time.  That's where you had all your games and things was there and then we had Uline Arena [Washington Coliseum, Washington, D.C.] that is on 3rd [Street] and M Street, that came along in the '50s [1950s, sic. 1940s].  Everybody's been hollering about that because that's where The Beatles had their first concert and that's where they played sports there too.  But that was a hockey and I think, basketball and things of that sort.  But we had those kinds of things, but that's--we got around on the streetcars.  They've been riding--streetcars have been here in the district [Washington, D.C.] for a very long time--
Story_ID: 201809
Speaker 1: This is how Charles Sumner was beat because he was worried about people having to ride on the back of streetcars when he was a senator here and he got beat terribly and did not--and never regained his health and he's one of the abolitionists and this is how you know in Washington, D.C. black schools before integration were named for black people or white people who were abolitionists.  Thaddeus Stevens, Charles Sumner--Franklin School [Washington, D.C] was a white school but built by the same person who built the Charles Sumner School [Washington, D.C.] but that was our administration building.  But you will know those two, [Alice and Ernestine] Shaed [Elementary School, Washington, D.C.] was named after the Shaed sisters [Alice Shaed and Ernestine Shaed], Moten, Lucy [Ella] Moten was one of the educators here.
Speaker 2: Did you know these people?
Speaker 1: I did not know them but my uncle--these were people who were--yes I knew the Shaed sisters.  They had been our instructional teachers when we were at Monroe School [Washington, D.C.], which was a school we went to do our student teaching. So yes, I did know them--
Story_ID: 201810
Speaker 1: What elementary school did you attend?
Speaker 2: Well I went to Wormley [School, Washington, D.C.] at first which is--is it Charles Wormley [sic. James Wormley] who was--who owned a hotel [Wormley's Hotel, Washington, D.C.] downtown. 5th [Street] and H [Street], don't know what corner it was but lots of important things happened in that hotel.
Speaker 1: He was a black person?
Speaker 2: He was a black person and that was important.  But he knew how to run a hotel.  I went to Wormley School, I went there for kindergarten, first grade and half of the second grade and then I went to [Wendell] Phillips School [Washington, D.C.] and I went there until--I finished the sixth grade and then my father [Joseph Dodson], because my father was the school physician, he said they were passing us because of him so he put us in St. Augustine [Catholic] School [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Were they any teachers there that influenced you in that period of time?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I got in lots of trouble (laugh) with Ethel Radley [ph.] who was at Wormley and I remember I said to her one day, "Aren't you supposed to be on duty Ms. Radley?" and she made me stand up in the back of that classroom and had every---told me Mr. Savoy, Mr. A.K. Savoy who was the superintendent, was coming that day; she had me scared to death.  I can see myself standing in the back of that room right now.  She told me, "You stand there young lady," and I said, "okay."  I had a fifth grade teacher, Sara Moore [ph.] and when I started teaching, she was in the classroom right above me.  And Marvel Abrams [ph.] who was teaching sixth grade at Wormley School when I was in kindergarten was teaching sixth grade at Garrison [Elementary] School when I started teaching.  So I had lots of good--I've had a good life.  I think I can say I have lived a life through rose colored glasses.  I have had--I've been afforded many experiences and yes I have met prejudices but I don't know that they were overwhelming.  I think our parents made us strong so we knew how to handle 'em.
Speaker 1: Did you have dreams and aspirations as a young person?
Speaker 2: Not really, I guess I just knew I was going to be a teacher.  I guess I just knew that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How did you know that?
Speaker 2: I don't know, I don't know, I guess I just decided--I was too dumb to go anyplace else so I went to the [Miner] Teachers College [University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.].  I enjoyed life believe me, everybody can say [HistoryMaker] Barbara [Dodson Walker] enjoyed life.  I mean poor Ms. Knights [ph.] she would say, "Oh Ms. Dodson, you are making too much noise." "Yes, Ms. Knights." And so I said okay, but I've had a good life.
Story_ID: 201811
Speaker 1: Did you and your family attend church?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  My father [Joseph Dodson] grew up in Georgetown [Washington, D.C.] and this is one of the good things that I found out when I worked on 'Black Georgetown Remembered' ['Black Georgetown Remembered: A History of Its Black Community From the Founding of "The Town of George" in 1751 to the Present Day,' Kathleen Menzie Lesko, Valerie Babb and Carroll R. Gibbs]. At--they went to Holy Trinity [Catholic] Church [Washington, D.C.].  Blacks had to sit in the choir loft and there was a screen to separate blacks from whites.  I know this to be true because I went with my father when churches could be--Catholic churches were opened during the day so we were encouraged to drop in and say a prayer.  And we dropped in one day and we had to go to the choir loft to pray (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What years were we talking about?
Speaker 2: We're talking about until integration.  You know, the Catholic schools integrated before the public schools, a year before public schools and the Catholics at Holy Trinity wrote a letter to the Washington [D.C.] and Baltimore [Maryland] to what they call an archdiocese and they wrote a letter and said that they wanted a church of their own.  Now the letter was written by my grandmother [Mary Francis Dodson] and a cousin.  My grandmother went to maybe the third grade.  My grandmother didn't write that letter, I know who wrote the letter.  Who wrote that letter was my father and the cousin who wrote that letter in 1925.  They had that much education to get that rollin' but they put the old people up front to push this thing.  The integration of the--they decided that they were going to build the church.  So they built the church down on Dunbarton Avenue, 27th [Street] and Dunbarton--between 27th and 28th Street on Dunbarton Avenue in Georgetown.  It's a church that everything that's happened for our family has been there in that church.  The baptisms, the marriages, the deaths have all been celebrated there.
Speaker 1: And the name of it?
Speaker 2: It's Epiphany Roman Catholic Church [Washington, D.C.].  It was staffed initially by the Josephite Fathers which was an order of priests to serve Negroes and Indians [Native Americans].  One of their major seminaries is out here on St. Joseph Seminary [Washington, D.C.] across from the Providence Hospital [Washington, D.C.].  An interesting thing about that too is that the priest that married me, Father Chester Ball was black, they did not know it.  He came to that seminary, he looked like an Italian and he came to the seminary before--over the weekend and they were say oh he and a black guy is coming and when he came down on Monday morning and they introduced him, they were quite astonished.  Father Ball grew up just across the creek so he didn't live in Georgetown; he lived on the other side of the creek.  But he was the first black priest in Washington, D.C.  Before he left, he was teaching Greek and homiletics and he had been sent to the [Pontifical] North American College in Rome [Italy] and that--your mama doesn't decide you're going there, somebody else does.  So that church has a lot of good history to it.  It was one of the first churches that worked on integration of the priest, things of that sort.  We've had many different ethnic groups who come there for Mass.  There's a French Mass, I think there is a Vietnamese Mass.  In fact, Father Ball had a friend who was a priest who was in the Jesuit seminary but they didn't know where to send him so he went to Canada to school.  He spoke French very fluently so when he was--he became a white father of Africa and when he came down--he would come to visit Father Ball, they were very happy because he could speak French so he could hear French confessions.  We never had any real flourishes of integration happening over there.  We all lived side by side.  I mean you had your little petty things you know like the kids next door to us, their grandmother didn't want them to speak to my sister and myself but that was their problem, not ours.
Speaker 1: Do you still attend there?
Speaker 2: No I don't go to Epiphany anymore; it's a good distance away from here.  I go now to St. Augustine's [St. Augustine Catholic Church, Washington, D.C.], which was the first black church--first church established in Washington, D.C. of African Americans.
Story_ID: 201812
Speaker 1: Where did you go to junior high school?
Speaker 2: Didn't.  My father [Joseph Dodson] took us out of public school and sent us to St. Augustine's [St. Augustine Catholic School, Washington, D.C.], so he said, "Y'all can learn something."  So a sister said, "If you don't understand, raise your hand," and my hand went up so often sister wanted to know what do you understand (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Is St. Augustine's in North Carolina?
Speaker 2: No St. Augustine's is in Washington, D.C.  It is now--St. Augustine's School is now located in what had been the, I think it where the Holy Cross Brothers [sic. The Brothers of Holy Cross] used to be on V Street right off of 15th Street.  In fact, St. Augustine's Church [St. Augustine Catholic Church, Washington, D.C.] is no longer, that is now--the original St. Augustine's Church is now where the Washington Post building is.  They sold that church and they had started a church there and there was a school on 15th Street between R and S Street and they have now sold the convent and the rectory and all and they made--you talk about a village, they've got a village right back there where we used to play in front of school.
Speaker 1: So now we're talking about high school.  How did you spend your time when you were in high school aside from going to school?
Speaker 2: Gosh, how did we spend time?  Oh we got together--oh we had teen clubs on the playground then.  Rose Park Playground and you know they're building communities now and children have malls to go to.  We had playgrounds to go to where they had teen parties and things like that on the weekend.  We had teen clubs, we had--I remember being--speaking at some local--it was a citywide program that I spoke at when I was a teen and we had things like plays and things that we participated in.  Those things were encouraged through the recreation department and now they have just about closed the recreation department and the children have no place to go to do anything.
Speaker 1: Because we didn't have television.
Speaker 2: No the best thing you had was a radio and you sat and listened quietly to the 'Gang Busters.'
Speaker 1: Did you play sports?
Speaker 2: Yeah I played tennis.  When the tennis courts opened and we had shuffleboard and we had badminton and those kinds of things but no great team stuff.
Speaker 1: And was it at this time that you had decided that as a career person, I'm sure your family was talking about your career and you're going to college and those kinds of things.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah that was a known fact.
Speaker 1: Yes and so when did you actually decide that you were--it was a fact, in other words, that you were going to college?
Speaker 2: When I was born (laugh).
Speaker 1: Yes and so but when did you make the conscious decision or was that made for you by others that you were going to be a teacher?
Speaker 2: I don't know, I guess--I tell you I just lived life, I just had fun and maybe somebody did guide me and say, "This is what you ought to do," but I don't remember.  I just enjoyed it; I don't know, I don't remember.
Story_ID: 201813
Speaker 1: Tell us about your college experience.
Speaker 2: I had a good time.  I went to Miner [Teachers College; University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.] and I was looking--I passed the school the other day and I said, Lord I used to walk up those steps in my white tam and my white gloves.  I had--I think I had about three so you had to wash them every other day and had bags of white gloves.  I don't think you can even find a white glove now, can you.  But I wore white gloves to school and my white tam and we went to school and I liked morning classes so I could get over with it and then I liked college.  We had a nice girls' room.
Speaker 1: Let me ask you Mrs. [HistoryMaker Barbara Dodson] Walker, were you the only one that was wearing white gloves or was that the custom?
Speaker 2: No a whole lot of us must have been because we all did, I guess we all came that way.  I must have been like everybody else, I don't think my mother [Althea Neal Dodson] would have sent me out looking simple or looking different.  It was thing where you just did those things.  But we had a nice girls' room.  What did they call it, the girls' room?  We'd go around and we would play cards, had a good time.  I learned to play pinochle and bid whist.
Speaker 1: At school?
Speaker 2: At school, I learned bid whist at home, I learned that at home.  Bid whist at school, whist, just plain old whist at home.
Speaker 1: Did you belong to any sororities or black student organizations or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --sports or academic clubs, debate?
Speaker 2: I wasn't smart enough to be in the academic club, I was too busy enjoying things.  I was a Delta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority]--I am a Delta and at this stage of your life I daresay there are some people who like red and there are some people who like light red.  And so I put it that way because it's all being friends at this time and we all have goals and all of the sororities and fraternities have goals so you just--you're in one wherever.
Story_ID: 201814
Speaker 1: And when you finished college [Miner Teachers College; University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.] then how did your life go?
Speaker 2: Well I taught for a couple of years and then I got married [to James Dent Walker].  Then I had babies and every school--I came home to have one baby and had two.  Before I could finish that one baby, I was pregnant again and so I went from--I started teaching at Garrison [Elementary School, Washington, D.C.] and then I taught at [Charles] Sumner [School, Washington, D.C.] and then I went to Scott Montgomery [Elementary School, Washington, D.C.] and then I went to, where did I go after that, I went to Scott Montgomery--
Speaker 1: And this is about the time now it seems that we're talking about Brown v. Board of Education [of Topeka, 1954].
Speaker 2: Oh I answered the phone that day.
Speaker 1: Tell us about it.
Speaker 2: I was teaching first grade, I was teaching Garrison and it was lunchtime and my room--Garrison was like two different buildings, we had a hallway in the middle.  And so the phone rang and rang and rang well I was the youngest thing there so I went down to answer the phone and I came back, "Hey they passed it!" Brown versus the Board of Education.  It was very interesting because when they did that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What led up to that day?
Speaker 2: You know we were--I guess people were wondering what was going to happen and that we were going to have some kind of riot or something but it just happened.  You know, now that this is the year--the celebration fifty years after Brown, people ask, "What do y'all do?" we go to work.  There has never been, that I know of, any kind of a celebration that Brown--that that was passed, I don't know of any.  It might have been small celebrations somewhere but as a big citywide thing, I don't remember us ever having anything like that.  What did happen with that was to have integration, they integrated the school--teachers and a black teacher was interviewed by the people.  I don't know who it was; I don't know what the content of the panel was that interviewed the black teacher to teach their children.  But that's what you had to do and one person that survived it all and that was Betty Brooks.  She survived it, she was elected to serve the schools, and she served there until she retired west of the park as we knew it--as we call it here west of the park.
Speaker 1: She was interviewed to be a teacher (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well she became a principal--
Speaker 1: --in what had been traditionally a white school--
Speaker 2: She was the principal.  We never had it, black teachers taught black children and white teachers taught white children.  But as I said, we don't know whether that was good or not because black teachers came out with Bachelor of Science degrees and we know that some of those white teachers came out with certificates.
Speaker 1: So did any of the white teachers come over to teach at Garrison for instance?
Speaker 2: No!  Now they might, I don't know what's happened now.  We didn't--I didn't--many, many years later after Brown versus Board was passed, we began to get people, white teachers in with black teachers.  We had 'em at Harrison [Elementary School, Washington, D.C.] and I went there in '61 [1961].  I'm trying to think did we have 'em? We had white teachers at Harrison, 'cause the kindergarten teacher was white and we had a sixth grade teacher and we had a fifth grade teacher--
Story_ID: 201815
Speaker 1: Well at the time, with your family being a prominent family in the community, were any of your friends of the family involved with that Brown v. Board [of Education of Topeka, 1954] decision?  Was there any campaigning; was there any politicking about the whole thing?
Speaker 2: You have to understand this--
Speaker 1: Were you voting?
Speaker 2: No!  We didn't vote.  They call this the last plantation.  We don't vote, we have--even here in Washington, D.C., we have the second highest taxes in the United States.  We have sent more people to war, more people being killed.  We've got--you want to say the most--we got it and we have no representation in the [U.S.] Congress.  We have Eleanor Holmes Norton who can come to the floor, make a suggestion and sit down, that is the extent of her activity.  They at one time until this--the [President George Walker] Bush people came in, she was allowed to vote in some kind of--I shouldn't say insignificant but didn't make much difference.
Speaker 1: But take us back to that time in '55 [1955] when integration happened because that was a big decision.
Speaker 2: It was a big decision but in Washington [D.C.]--you can have all the passing of the law you want but people live in neighborhoods and that's where the schools are so the children go to the schools and if it's predominantly black--children were black before Brown, that's where they still go.  But we did have--I will say I think we did have a thing where we had children that were bused from--they were bused, it took them almost an hour to get to school.  They went to school in Montgomery County [Maryland] to be educated and they had--they didn't have that community thing, how could they.  Number one if they brought them from an area that was limited in access to owning automobiles.
Speaker 1: How did we decide though at the time who was being bused (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know what, I really don't know.
Speaker 1: This was the attempt at desegregation is what I'm hearing you say.
Speaker 2: Yes, it was an attempt to do that.  To bring black children but I don't know that many white children went to black schools.  It has never been a thing where that really happened.  I don't recall too much.  This has been a city that is not political.  It's political on the hill [Capitol Hill, Washington, D.C.] but its people because we have not had the opportunity for many years, not until [President] Lyndon [Baines] Johnson could we vote for president.  I don't know what year was that about the '60s [1960s], [President John Fitzgerald] Kennedy was killed in the '50s [1950s, sic. 1963] so we're talking about the '60s [1960s] that we could vote for the president.  We vote for the president, we don't have anything--now we have an election and it's for a shadow.
Speaker 1: Did you have any involvement or did you hear about any involvement with [Reverend] Dr. Martin Luther King [Jr.]?  What kind of an influence did he have--did his teachings have with the exception of the March on Washington?  Did you hear anything as a young person?
Speaker 2: I think I was busy raising children, I have four children that I had to get out every day and I think--I wish I had paid more attention to what was going on.  But I guess--we trusted those people who were in charge.  Some of those people who were involved in the Brown v. Board decision--some of those were friends of my father's [Joseph Dodson] but I lived in Georgetown [Washington, D.C.] and it was like a gate was there, nobody came over there.  There were very--most of the black professional people lived on the east side from us.  So I did not grow up with people whose children were of my father's profession or my mother's [Althea Neal Dodson] profession.  I grew up with real people, not that those people were not real but I grew up with a good home people and the only time I had with the professional people's children--people who would have been involved with Brown was when I was in school.  And then we didn't--I don't remember talking about what our parents did or anything like that.  But some of the people who were involved with that decision had been friends--were friends of my father's.
Story_ID: 201816
Speaker 1: Please tell me about putting your life into an historical context from your whole life.  Now you are--you want to tell us?
Speaker 2: Yeah I'm seventy-four, the alternative is not so good.  I would say that I had seen a lot of changes in Washington, D.C.  Changes that--some have been good, some have been bad, some of which could have been better but I look at the career that I sought as a way of trying to make an impression, trying to help others to learn better--to learn more, to share what I had learned, what I had been taught.
Speaker 1: Your profession being?
Speaker 2: Education, being an elementary teacher.  I felt that--no I wasn't involved politically but everybody can't be involved in one particular field.  There are many different ways that you can be involved with making corrections in things and they don't all have to be upfront.  It is better to be one of the people behind, I feel because you can do more, you can say more; you can do more if you're one of the supporters.  I felt that through education, I was being one of the supporters of what was happening.  I don't think that Brown v. the Board [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], the integration went--like many people thought we were going to have race riots things of that sort. Washington was never that kind of town. We all--this is been the town that is always lived with each other if you look at the census you would see the whites and blacks live in areas together, sometimes even next door to each other, because that's where we could live, we didn't have any real segregation activities here until I heard Woodrow Wilson's wife [Edith Wilson] who came in, that would begin the separating out--ethnic groups were--you can't define an ethnic group.  The only ethnic community you could find here is maybe Chinatown.  Other ethnic groups are all mixed in, have always been as far as I can tell.  So, I think that through my life I have seen good things happen (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Name a few.
Speaker 2: --and I think that the things that we try to do when we make an asserted effort to exchange our feelings and things of that sort.  I've participated in church activities, between Holy Trinity [Catholic Church, Washington, D.C.] and Epiphany [Roman Catholic Church, Washington, D.C.].  I've participated in other activities where we sit down and just talk about each other--with not about but with each other.  Belong to a prayer group that was predominantly white but it gave us a chance to see and learn about other people who need--then that's the only way, I feel, we can learn and enjoy other people's company.
Story_ID: 201817
Speaker 1: Would you share with us some of your other, I'll call them extracurricular activities and events and interests?
Speaker 2: Well I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Organizations that you've participated in?
Speaker 2: Okay.  I have in--some of these are because of the career of my husband [James Dent Walker] because he was--he's a Washingtonian, his family is native Washingtonians and he worked at the National Archives [and Records Administration (NARA), Washington, D.C.] and he was--when the Mormons [Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints] had their World Conference [on Records and Genealogical Seminar, Salt Lake City, Utah] in 1969 he was the first and the only black to speak at that conference. And he had been selected.  He doesn't know how but he was told that there were two people and they decided--they chose him. After 1969 my husband was home two weekends out of the month, he was away so often, speaking about the records and the National Archives that they'd ask him, "When do you gonna work?  When are you going to come to work?"  And it increased everything that happened at the archives.  He also in his career led him--he worked a bit with Alex Haley in doing 'Roots.'  That--Alex said, "If I'd only met you two years before, this book could have been out," because Jim knew the records at the archives, he learned them himself.
Speaker 1: His name?
Speaker 2: James Dent Walker.  So he was a big influence--I guess on even making me feel more positive about what things were because I always said you know there aren't any records about black folks.  They said they couldn't read or write and now I'm learning to help other people understand that yes, there are records. Yes, we did write. And yes, there was Phillis Wheatley who wrote the book ['Poems on Various Subjects, Religious and Moral,' Phillis Wheatley] early, early, early, and I'm constantly pointing this out--
Story_ID: 201818
Speaker 1: Now because of my husband [James Dent Walker], sometimes I'm Mrs. James Dent Walker. Then sometimes, I'm just [HistoryMaker] Barbara [Dodson] Walker. And I've used that to the advantage to build an organization: the Afro-American Historical and Genealogical Society [AAHGS].  It was founded in 1977 here in Washington, D.C.  That has always been a mostly ethnic group, its founders were multi ethnic--predominately black but there were whites there too--to help because we knew--I think the founders knew that they needed people who were the professionals in the field of genealogy and history to help them get started.  So now we have just celebrated our twenty-fifth anniversary of the founding of that organization and we have over 1200 paid members, and I do mean they are paid members.  And it's a national organization now.  So we are well represented by colleges, the universities and people.
Speaker 2: What kind--what sort of people join, are members?
Speaker 1: What we're doing, we are doing the history of our families, we are using our oral histories and connecting the history of our family and I call that the meat.  The stories are the meat and we're getting the bones we got the names and we get in the dates of birth, the places of birth and things of that sort.  But always names, dates and places are what you start with.  So we have those things to start with and we are helping people to learn how to do that.  We have an annual conference each year and this year, the year 2004 is the first time--it's not the first time, it's the first time in ten years.  We have been out of the City of Washington, D.C. up until that time.  We had our last ten right here in Washington, D.C.  Our annual conference which runs about three or four days and I've been working with our presenters, our people who had been doing research.  You know once you get on a thing, you've just got to learn a little bit more and a little bit more and we had many blacks who are very knowledgeable about areas. We got a group that's written a book on Mississippi. There are people who've written--blacks in Mississippi maybe just a small part but enough to give you information.   There are people who have written and published their family histories at their own expense.  We encourage that kind of thing.
Story_ID: 201819
Speaker 1: What's the difference please between history and genealogy? Or how do they connect?
Speaker 2: They gotta connect. It takes people to make history and history makes people.  It involves people and what they are doing. So what we are doing is we are putting people in the place along with--see what events happen.  You were asking me about what happened during integration?  What happened with Brown versus The Board [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], well go back and look and sometimes now when I'm working with especially adults, I have a timeline and ask them to write down certain things that have happened at certain times of their life and they say, "Gee, this is interesting because it makes you stop and think what are some of the highpoints."  So you put--taking the history and putting it with the people and how they help make that history.  What was their influence, what did they do, how did it affect them?  What was the response to you, your family, and the neighborhood?  What happened at that particular time and this is what we get doing your history and your genealogy.  Everybody wants to get back to Africa but we have to first get what's here.  We start with where you are right now, we start with today and go backwards and you don't stop even grandpa might be really interesting and you heard he was a great person.  But you've got to start with yourself and move back.  And I could tell you that if you don't, I had an occasion to look at a 1900 census and there I found a grandmother in the house--she was living in the house and she was I identified as the mother of this son.  So if I hadn't looked there, I would have missed her altogether if you don't start and go back to the numbers that you need.
Speaker 1: How do you feel about the way you've lived your life and what's important to you?
Speaker 2: I've had a great life.  I wish everybody had had a father [Joseph Dodson] and husband [James Dent Walker] like I had.  I don't say that they adored me, I don't think--I think that we had a very comfortable life.  We communicated, we each had our own careers, we supported each other, we have four children and we supported them and they support us.  At this time as you get older, you need that kind of support.  And you don't do these things because you're looking for support in your later years but you do 'em because you're human.
Story_ID: 201820
Speaker 1: What do you still want to do that you haven't done yet?
Speaker 2: I wish I could travel a lot more; wish I could leave home and go do some research and do those kinds of things.  You asked me about what organizations did I belong to and I think that's important for me to let you know because they were--I think I made good contributions to the organizations.  Besides the Afro-American Historical and Genealogical Society [AAHGS] that I served ten years as its national president, at that time I joined the Federation of Genealogical Societies which numbers in the millions of genealogists.  You have to be a society to join it and I was on the board of directors, I was elected twice and asked if I wanted to go a third time but by 9/11 [September 11th, 2001], I fell down the steps in Iowa so I've been a little incapacitated as to what I feel I can really make a good contribution in.  So I served on that board and the Carter [G.] Woodson Organization that gave us black history that many of us forget to even say anything about him and we need to bring him up.  Bring the Association for the Study [of] African American Life and History [ASALH], we need to bring that up and we really need to let people know that because of what he did, it was the beginning of our learning to be proud of what we did.  Carter Woodson's first black history was one day and it became a week and now it's a whole month.  Many organizations, national organizations, are beginning to participate in that and we have McDonald's has been doing ads for that and I think the Safeway [Inc.]--the store puts out a little booklet about people and they're beginning to know that somebody besides Harriet Tubman and Fredrick Douglass that lived and did something.  I saw an advertisement the other day for the stop light, the vacuum cleaner, egg beater and the--something about the washing machine, might not have invented it but a lot of things African Americans have improved on.  The Smithsonian [Institution, Washington, D.C.] used to have a huge wall chart of children and the things that African Americans had invented or improved upon.
Story_ID: 201821
Speaker 1: I just want to hear you say--tell our listeners why do you think history is so important?
Speaker 2: History is important and I think a lot of children are missing this because I feel that a lot of teachers are not comfortable in covering all subjects that are necessary.  I feel and not only--the teachers are not just responsible but it's the book people-the people who print the books too.  You know, we are now and people get upset a bit when African Americans want to say we need our history included but when you go and look at what contributions African Americans have made, it is very, very important.  Maybe your children now want to be an astronaut but are they aware that there were black men who made the little the mobile that moves around on the moon, do they know that?  Are they aware that there are African Americans who worked on the atomic bomb?  We are making many, many important things that have influenced the way history has come.  During election years, you get this thing where they are looking for African Americans to vote and they don't--I don't think that they really understand why we need to do this.  We need to get out and make ourselves heard so that if we don't tell it, who is.  We lived it, we've heard it, we've got to know the history because history tells you the yes's and no's, the pluses and minuses of what you do and if you don't the history, why would you want to do it.  You don't want to do it; you don't want to repeat the same mistakes.
Speaker 1: What values do you consider most important and why?
Speaker 2: Love got to love one another to really make things go; hate gets you nothing.  So I think we all need to pray for a lot of love 'cause it's really--when you look at it, it really makes you bring out your gut feelings.
Story_ID: 201822
Speaker 1: How do you want to be remembered Mrs. [HistoryMaker Barbara Dodson] Walker?  What do you want people to say about you?
Speaker 2: Well I don't know.  That I did try to make some things different.  I have a friend who says, "You are a Capricorn barely," because I wasn't born until a quarter of nine on the eighteenth of January [January 18, 1930] and she said, "You are a goat and a goat is always climbing, and not going to be beaten.  They don't let things get 'em down, they always find a way," and just the other night I was on the computer and found a horoscope and how to do it.  So I printed it out and put in the dates and times and things and it said the goat is not--they're going to keep on climbing, they're going to make contributions, they're going to do things.  They are people who are inquisitive, I guess I'm--I hope they don't say I'm nosey.  But I hope that they say that I tried to do the best of what I'm doing.
Speaker 1: And you're still doing it, aren't you?
Speaker 2: Yes, I just did I was just elected the acting secretary--acting treasurer for the Association [for the Study of African American Life and History (ASALH)] and I think that I can--I said, "Y'all must think I can make a contribution, I tell y'all I will do the best I can for you," because the other organization I was ten years with, we're doing something else.  I think this is a test.  Can this organization get up and do it? I think it can.  'Cause got a lot of nice young people, young people I mean below fifty (laugh), fifty and below.  So I think we can make a difference.
Story_ID: 201823
Speaker 1: What message or lesson do you have for your own children, your grandchildren and the world?
Speaker 2: Well do the best you can, and as I said, love each other, but do the best you can.  As my godmother used to say, with the few tools you have.
Story_ID: 201824
Speaker 1: And what do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: I guess that I tried, made some successes, some things she might have done better.  Maybe say I had some good suggestions. That I was thoughtful and cared about other people.
Story_ID: 201825
Speaker 1: Will you be working on your own family history in terms of getting it published?  I know you've done a lot of work, will you be--and is that something that you've passed on so that it can continue?
Speaker 2: Well I've done part of it.  I've done some of the--I've gotten some of the bones together and that is the names and the dates, the places of birth, death, marriage that kind of thing.  Now we need to start doing the stories.  I think that's the saddest part is that now I have one great-aunt and I don't--all the stories are gone.  This is what happens to us with doing family history.  We have all the questions and the people who can answer them are no longer here to give us the answers that we need.  And this is why I say don't try to write it, don't try to put it on your computer disk, get a tape recorder and record your stories.  It don't have to be in chronological order, just do 'em and somebody else can transcribe them or get your tapes and put the meat with the bones after you've collected all the names and things.
Speaker 1: That's a great message for young people.  You're saying to them to while the family and the relatives are here to try to interact and get the story on tape.  Worry about composition of the book later on.
Speaker 2: That's right and don't do too much videotaping because I don't want to sit and hear you talk about something for a long time.  I hope this is received in a good way but I say use the video cameras to take videos of what's in the home or what people are interested in; pictures of the home that they lived in, the area where they used to live, favorite things that they might have but tape record the things.  One thing when you get old, you want to be dressed up looking good, with a tape recorder you don't have to do that.
Story_ID: 201826
Speaker 1: When you look back over the years of your life, what stands out as being historically, having the most significance for us as African Americans?  Just name me two or three things because you've lived through a real development in our country and in our communities?  What to you has made the most difference? Two of three things that you wanna--
Speaker 2: One thing is education.  I wish that we could--the whole nation is in turmoil as far as education right now.  I wish that some of us could go and talk with the people who are making the decisions about what worked for you when you were teaching.  After you get past the first, second and third grade, if you don't get in the first, second or third grade, you're lost.  And I remember I went to one school where I taught fourth grade and we decided to use the test scores and breaking children up into groups. Maybe four or five or six grade students in one class where we did the math and the reading and that kind of thing on those levels.  So that they got a better education and I think education is one thing-I think if you get education, you're not angry.  You don't have time-because you learn the subjects there is a future-you can see a future in what's happening if you have an education and through education you learn an awful lot of other things that make you a person.  They give you your values and help you to understand the when, the where and the why of life.  And I think if we could do that, I think education is about the--is the best for all three answers because with those comes so much if you have that, and good teachers.  We're not getting our best people to teach these days I don't think.  I think we're getting people who are taking education as an alternative to a different career.  People who--they don't have mothers with--they don't have little bitty learners of how to take one thing and make it another.  If it's not written down they don't know what to do and this is what we did in the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.].  We went through--I worked with a committee on identifying the reading skills for primary grades and doing this before we came up with the CBC [competency-based curriculum] plan.  We had done that and then when we came with that, I worked with the English on that part of it.  But I worked with the primary grades that were identifying skills using three or four different textbooks to line them up and see what you had to do and when I did my master's [degree at Federal City College; University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.] I used the PSA [public service announcement] system to say hey baby can't stand up before he crawls.  There are certain developments that you have to have.  So I think if we get a good education with some good teachers, I think that would help a lot and the teachers had a good education.  I think that would make a tremendous difference, people who are positive about what's going on.
Story_ID: 201827
Speaker 1: Did the Civil Rights Movement of the '60s [1960s] have a great impact on you and your family or people around you?
Speaker 2: I guess--I think it did.  I know my children lived through that.  They went to Catholic schools, there were predominantly white--predominantly multi-ethnic white and when they went to college--when they went to high school, I let them choose their own high schools.
Speaker 1: Tell us about your children, how many do you have?
Speaker 2: I have four children.  I have one son and three daughters.
Speaker 1: And they all went to college?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the boy [James Dent Walker, Jr.] did not finish and the youngest girl [Susan Walker] is--she did not finish.  But the boy works at the post office and one girl--the oldest girl [Barbara Walker Brissett] is--went to Maryville College [Maryville University] in St. Louis [Missouri].  She was their first exchange student they ever had and she finished in three and a half years because the segregation out there was so bad.  She finished in three and a half years and she came to American U [American University, Washington, D.C.] and did finish her half year here.  She became a court commissioner for Montgomery County, Maryland and just recently she left that job and now she's corporate security for a bank.  The other girl [Althea Walker Davis] is--went to Rennsselaer Polytechnic Institute [Troy, New York] and she was an electrical engineer.  She worked on the development of film there and then after she had worked there for them about six or seven years they said they no longer needed her services.  So she decided she was going to law school.  So she's now a litigating lawyer for a--vaccine litigation lawyer.  The youngest girl is a manager of a retail store which she has done very good.  She's opened stores, she's--when you go in now and you tell, "Oh that's thirty-five cents," they say, "that's not what I need, I need the number," she worked for museum company, she knew the numbers for everything she had in her store.  So she's doing well with everything.  It shows you that college isn't for everybody but they can with a good basic education, they can have jobs and they can do that.  I look at my children and I say the only thing about them that's alike is their last name.  They are all different personalities, they are all different likes and dislikes accept the oldest and the youngest are people who have to work with people.  The other two are planners and operate with plans and things of that sort.
Speaker 1: Is there anything else you want to add to your interview today?
Speaker 2: I don't know is there anything else you want to know?
Speaker 1: No I think you've covered the waterfront and it certainly has been a pleasure talking to you and hearing about your experiences throughout your lifetime.  You've been so gracious with your time and thanks for the life you've led--
Speaker 2: Well, thank you.
Speaker 1: --and the messages that you've passed on during this interview.
Story_ID: 200264
Speaker 1: This is me at grandma's house--my grandmother's house on G Street Northeast [Washington, D.C.]. I can see--
Speaker 2: When?
Speaker 1: I guess, looks like I'm maybe about two or three so that's about 1932.  That's my mother [Althea Neal Dodson] and she probably made that outfit because she was a great sewer and that had to be about the same time in the '30s [1930s].  That's my mother with her hair cut short in her 1920s dress on--her '30s [1930s] dress.
Speaker 2: That's my mother and father [Joseph Dodson].  These pictures look like mom still has on that same dress and she used to say I was the first grandchild so they would say, "Mama will you keep [HistoryMaker] Barbara [Dodson Walker] while we go to the movies?"  And then she'd have to beg to get me home because I was the first grandchild, my grandma spoiled me.
Speaker 1: What year is this?
Speaker 2: That's I guess--this must be in the early '30s [1930s].  This looks like grandma's house--Grandma [Florence] Neal's house, my mother's mother's house in northeast Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: That's the naked baby.
Speaker 2: Who is it?
Speaker 1: Me, looks like I might be about, I guess about five or sixth months.  You had to get that one in huh?  Yeah get me focused with my bald head and my fat bottom.  I remember that quilt too, I wish I had it but I don't.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay, here we go.
Speaker 2: Okay that is me.
Speaker 1: How old?
Speaker 2: Maybe, looks like maybe five years old.
Speaker 1: What year?
Speaker 2: Would have to be 1935, I was born in the year '30 [1930] now, so I-- not hard to say five since I was born, so 1935.  What is that in the background?
Speaker 1: Where was this taken?
Speaker 2: I don't know, let me see the back--I don't know, I was wondering where that was too.  Looks like it might--you know what, it almost looks like Howard University [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Oh, that's Jean Marie [Dodson Jackson], you know we were born in the '30s [1930s], so Barbara Ann and Jean Marie and there we are.
Speaker 1: What year?
Speaker 2: Well, it looks like it's--that's the same dress I had on before so it would be 1935 so I was five and she's two years younger than I am.
Speaker 1: And where?
Speaker 2: Aw I can't tell--you go that one? That's it, Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: All these pictures were taken the same day; we've got the same thing on.  That's my dad, that's my daddy in Washington, D.C., where I have no idea.  I don't recognize that fence or the building behind it.
Speaker 2: That's us a little later.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay looks like I might be about ten there and so she would be eight so that's about 1938 and that's about--it looks like I was at my grandmother lived in McLean, Virginia so that dog was at that house.
Speaker 1: This was about 1940?
Speaker 2: Thirty-eight [1938].  And this is--that's my Grandpa Joseph Neal, Florence Neal and going from left to right that's Josephine Judkin [ph.] Neal, Naomi Althea Neal and Alfred Neal who was known as Tim, nobody knew that his name was not Timothy.  My grandmother's friend wanted him called Timothy and she said his name was Alfred, he's name after his grandfather and I met the lady when she was a supervisor and she didn't know that his name was not Tim.  I said, "Do you know Alfred Neal?"  "No I don't know Alfred Neal.  Do you know Tim Neal?" "Do I know Tim Neal?"
Speaker 1: Those are three grandchildren taken about--he was born '80 [1980], he's what, eighteen now so that's Dominick Etienne [ph.] Brissett, Jacqueline Mignon [ph.] Brissett and Robin Nicole Walker.  They are about--they were born in the '80s [1980s] accept Robin was born nine month after my father's death, September.
Speaker 2: So this picture was taken when?
Speaker 1: I would say about '80 [1980]--when was Dominick born--'84 [1984].
Speaker 2: And where was it taken?
Speaker 1: Right out on the front porch.
Speaker 2: In Washington, D.C.?
Speaker 1: Washington, D.C.
Speaker 2: That's Jimmy [James Dent Walker], that's a great picture somebody took of him.  I don't know it was probably at one of our family get togethers.
Speaker 1: So this is your husband?
Speaker 2: That's my husband, James Dent Walker, bless his heart.
Speaker 1: And this was taken what year?
Speaker 2: I would say about the late 1980s.  Looks like it's out--on a pole on the umbrella out in the backyard.
Speaker 1: This was a celebration of my daughter's graduation from law school.  She is the oldest one--the one with the mortar board on, graduated from George Washington University [Law School, Washington, D.C.], May of 1993 and that is--the girl in the blue is the oldest girl, Barbara [Ann Brissett] with her two children, then there's me, then there's her friend Lisa [ph.] and her husband, and girl with the red pocket book is Robin [ph.] and my sister Jo Anne [Dodson], and in the red jacket I think it's Aunt Charlotte [ph.] who really is one of those aunts that you adopt and my husband has the cap on behind my sister in the flowered dress there on the far left and daughter with the sunglasses on--youngest daughter [Susan Walker].
Speaker 2: Now these are three girls, Barbara [Walker] Brissett on the left, Althea Elizabeth [Walker Davis] middle and Susan Victoria [Walker].
Speaker 1: This picture was taken when?
Speaker 2: May 31, 1993
Speaker 1: Where?
Speaker 2: Down near George Washington University [Washington, D.C.] when that girl got her J.D. Degree.
Speaker 1: He's got his sunglasses on and there we are the three of us with--under my daughter's arm is her Po--is her hippopotamus.  She had stuffed hippopotamus as a child and when she graduated from RPI [Rennsselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, New York] my mother made her another one.  Made the hippo a cap and gown and when they said Althea Elizabeth Walker, she held it up-she held her Po up and the youngest daughter took a picture--snapped a picture just at that time with her with her Po.  So here's her Po and I think Po might have on the stole also.  I want you to know the white children want to know if they could have a stole like that.
Speaker 2: I don't know what we're celebrating there but whatever it is that's us.  Grandfather was still living there because--grandfather didn't die until '93 [1993] so he was still living when Dominick was that age.  So he might have been taking the pictures, no Frank took the pictures.
Speaker 1: Oh that's a terrible--that's a picture of me with those great eyeglasses and hair, never thought I'd wear my hair as short as I have it now but I did.
Speaker 2: What picture is that behind there?  This is November 21, 1953; we are leaving the house of my aunt, of Jimmy's aunt up the street in Washington, D.C.  Between the wedding and the reception, we went to the movies to see--something with Laurence Olivier in it.  We decided we were not going to have breakfast at my house, my mother's house in Georgetown [Washington, D.C.] because a neighbor had breakfast at her house after her son got married and everybody left the church and came down for breakfast.  So we had the breakfast at another house.
Speaker 1: What year?
Speaker 2: 1953, day we got married.  That's a brown mohair suit my mama made me.  She didn't make the hat, but she made everything else.
Story_ID: 200265
Speaker 1: Oh there we are.  This is the church that my grandmother [Mary Francis Dodson] helped get built.  This is Epiphany [Roman Catholic] Church in Georgetown [Washington, D.C.], 27th Street between 27th and 28th [Street] and the maid of honor is my cousin because the lady there, first one there with that little white hat on is my sister who was pregnant at that time.  So she couldn't be my maid of honor and the best man is my husband's [James Dent Walker] brother, Billy [ph.].  The church doesn't look like that anymore.
Speaker 2: There we are at the breakfast and I remember saying, "I thought you weren't hungry," and I said, "You bet I am now."
Speaker 1: Oh, that was my--this is my last year of being president of the Afro-American Historical [and Genealogical] Society [AAHGS] and the person next to me is a person who is now president, Catherine Rowe [ph.]
Speaker 2: What's the award?
Speaker 1: I don't know what it says, it's something that says thank you for being the president, I guess.
Speaker 2: What year is this?
Speaker 1: That's 2003.
Speaker 2: And where was this taken?
Speaker 1: Gallaudet Kellogg Conference Center [sic. Kellogg Conference Hotel at Gallaudet University], Washington, D.C.
Speaker 2: This is a book, 'Black Georgetown Remembered' ['Black Georgetown Remembered: A History of Its Black Community From the Founding of "The Town of George" in 1751 to the Present Day,' Kathleen Menzie Lesko, Valerie Babb and Carroll R. Gibbs], that was the history of the black community.  One of the English teachers at Georgetown University [Washington, D.C] saw these people coming to church, she didn't live in the area and so she wondered where were all of these people coming from.  So she got--her name was Valerie Bibbs [sic. Babb], I think Bibbs or Babbs.  She got Kathleen Lesko with a grant to do this.  Georgetown was celebrating this 100th anniversary, I don't know whether it was 100th anniversary and they invited all the people in Georgetown to come to the university for a showing of a video that they had made and when they asked a question, "You don't know anything about Georgetown?" I said, "Oh wait a minute, I need to be on the committee."  So I got on the committee and I did the research for the history of Epiphany Church and I did the history for the two black schools--elementary schools, [Wendell] Phillips [School, Washington, D.C.] and Wormley [School, Washington, D.C.] schools in Georgetown Washington, D.C.  I was a contributor to that.
Speaker 1: My first published work was the indexed to the Journal of the Afro-American Historical and Genealogical Society that we were doing as a quarterly at one time and now we do it as an annual affair.  But I indexed the first ten years of the index.  It took me; I'd say nearly four years to do it.
Speaker 2: Thank you very much.
Speaker 1: Let me see if I can find a picture of my other grandchildren.  This is Malcolm Kerwin Davis [ph.] and Miles Wendell Davis [ph.].  Malcolm is now five and Miles Davis is three so I'm glad to have all my grandchildren.
Speaker 2: This was taken when?
Speaker 1: This is Christmas about two years ago.
Speaker 2: Two thousand two [2002]?
Speaker 1: Yes
Speaker 2: And taken where?
Speaker 1: The year 2002, taken at a studio in Washington, D.C.  You didn't get my other granddaughter.  This is Robin Nicole Walker [ph.] who is my son's [James Dent Walker, Jr.] daughter and she is now working for XM Radio.  She started there as an intern.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This was taken when?
Speaker 2: That was taken--she's out of school--the year 2000.
Speaker 1: Where?
Speaker 2: That's her graduation picture from college.  She graduated from Bowie State [University, Bowie, Maryland], she transferred there because of the strong communications field they had there.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That is Jacqueline Mignon [ph.] Brissett who is now in her second year at Eckerd College in St. Petersburg, Florida.  She's studying marine biology.
Speaker 1: And what is her relationship?
Speaker 2: This is my granddaughter; this is granddaughter number two and grandchild number two.
Speaker 1: And she is the daughter of?
Speaker 2: She's the daughter of my son, James Walker, Jr.
Speaker 1: This was taken?
Speaker 2: This was taken two years ago, 2002 yeah that's her graduation picture.
Speaker 1: And she graduated from?
Speaker 2: From Connelly School of the Holy Child in Potomac, Maryland.
Speaker 1: Last one.
Speaker 2: Yes the last one, I have to give them all their honors.  This is the first boy born in the family in thirty-two years, Dominick Etienne [ph.] Brissett.  That's my number one grandson, that's the first grandson.  He will be graduating from DeMatha [Catholic] High School [Hyattsville, Maryland] this year.  That picture was taken for the yearbook so it was taken really 2003 and I think right now he's going to Hampton University in [Hampton] Virginia; that's Barbara Brissett's son.
