Story_ID: 639535
Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson and I'm the interviewer and Scott Stearns is the videographer and Thomas Jefferson is observing.  So I wanna start out, I wanna have you state your name and, and spell it for us, including your middle name.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So my name is Deborah Chequeta Wright [HistoryMaker Deborah Wright].  And that's D-E-B-O-R-A-H, C-H-E-Q-U-E-T-A, W-R-I-G-H-T.
Speaker 1: Who, what is the Chequeta, where, where did that, where (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --is that, who are you named after or what is the--
Speaker 2: My mother [Joan Bell Wright] has Chequeta as a middle name.  I, we can't figure out what my grandmother [Josephine Cook Bell] was thinking. She just liked it.  And my daughter, Peyton [Peyton Wright], also has it as a middle name.
Speaker 1: That's nice.  So we've got a legacy going on there.  Okay.  And I wanna have your date of birth and your occupation?
Speaker 2: January 30, 1958, and I am a community banker.
Speaker 1: And I also would like to have our location?  We're at The--
Speaker 2: 1900 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) The HistoryMakers.
Speaker 2: Oh, The HistoryMakers, nine--your, the address.
Speaker 1: 19--
Speaker 2: 1900--
Speaker 1: South Michigan Avenue [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: --South Michigan Avenue.
Story_ID: 639536
Speaker 1: We're gonna start (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You're asking me too many hard questions.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's okay (laughter).  This, we're gonna go a few more but--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --I'm gonna ask you five People magazine-ish questions.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Just short answers--
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: I'd like to know what your favorite food is.
Speaker 2: I'd say Indian chicken and rice.
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: Probably this color now--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --whatever this is. Salmon or--
Speaker 1: Okay.  Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation?
Speaker 2: Any place with a beach.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: My friends would say that would be, I have a phrase that goes: is that right?
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's good.
Speaker 2: When I don't wanna answer a question, which I got from my mom [Joan Bell Wright] also.
Story_ID: 639537
Speaker 1: I wanna start out by asking you about your father.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And, and can you tell his name and what you know about his background?
Speaker 2: His name is Harry Wright [Harry S. Wright, Sr.] and he's still living.  He lives in a town called Bennettsville, South Carolina, where we were all born.  And he's a minister.  His dad [Arthur Wright II] was a minister also, and grandfather [Arthur Wright I] was a minister.  And he is a very scholarly kind of guy.  He was the president of Bishop College, tried to save it in the '80s [1980s].  And Bishop is in Dallas, was in Dallas, Texas, and so we've lived in both places in the South.  And he's still preaching but he's preaching now when he wants to as opposed to when he has to.
Speaker 1: Can you, how far back on your father's line do you know?  You mentioned, you know, three generations--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --of ministers, do you know any more than that going back--
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't.
Speaker 1: Do you know much about your great-grandfather on that side, his name and--
Speaker 2: I don't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Bowen was the great-grandfather on, his grandfather [Eldridge Bowen II] on his mom's [Maggie Bowen Wright] side and he was a pastor in Mount Vernon [New York].  And I don't know much about the other side of the family.
Speaker 1: Now, were they in the Baptist tradition--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --like your father?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So were they were very active, you know, in the National Baptist Convention [National Baptist Convention, USA, Inc.]?
Speaker 2: I'm sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now, your, what about your grandfather?  How much do you know about him?
Speaker 2: He died, well, on my dad's side--
Speaker 1: On your dad's side.
Speaker 2: --he died before I was born, a year, a year before I was born, of a heart attack at fifty-four.  And my father, and actually was a pretty extraordinary guy.  He, along with my grandmother built a church during the Great Depression in Bennettsville, which is Shiloh Baptist Church, it still stands.  And we go to Bennettsville for many of our vacations so we, we go to church there as well.  And on his, on my father's side also a terrific guy. Fred Bell [Fred Bell, Sr.], was my mother's [Joan Bell Wright] father.  He worked for the Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America] in the southeastern region for thirty-five years.  And died in his early eighties about a decade ago.
Story_ID: 639538
Speaker 1: So, your family really owns Bennettsville [South Carolina] in many ways (laughter)?
Speaker 2: It's, it's, it's a family.  It was on this side of the Mason Dixon Line versus that side.  And interesting enough, a pretty famous banker on that side of the Mason Dixon Line, a guy named Hugh McColl who created what is now Bank of America [Bank of America Corporation] was part of the stalwart, white families in that community.  He's still alive as well.
Speaker 1: Now, when you say this side and that side of the Mason Dixon Line, what do you mean by that?
Speaker 2: Where the black folks lived and the white folks lived (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The black folks lived and the white folks, okay.
Speaker 2: And Main Street and Cheraw Street were kind of those boundaries.
Story_ID: 639539
Speaker 1: Did your father [Harry S. Wright, Sr.] talk much about his growing up?  Do you remember any stories he would tell?
Speaker 2: He talked a lot about it in terms of how he was raised and, and you know, who played which roles in the family.  My grandmother, who I was extremely close to, her name was Maggie Bowen Wright, and she died when I was finishing graduate school actually.  And was a very important part of my life.  She lived next door to us.  And my grandmother [Josephine Cook Bell] on my mom's [Joan Bell Wright] side lived about thirty miles away in Florence, South Carolina.  And I talk more with my father about this now, I'm a single parent and we talk about the help that they had, there were four of us, which I can't imagine quite frankly (laughter) now that I'm in this.  But he reminds me when you have the two grandmothers, one next door and one thirty miles away you got a lot of, a lot of good help.  But I had asthma as a child and so I was out of school a fair amount but it was a lot of fun for me 'cause I would get to go with her grocery shopping and snuggling up watching the stories as they used to call it, and help her cook and prepare 'cause she was a very active lady until, until the day she died.  But there were five kids in my fam- in my dad's family.  All but one is still alive.  And he and his older sister, Olive [Olive Wright Covington] share a driveway in Bennettsville [South Carolina], they both went back.  The baby of the family is [HistoryMaker] Marian Wright Edelman which you probably know.  And she's there when she really needs a rest from all the stuff she does.  She heads to, in fact, everybody heads to Bennettsville when they need a rest.  But they seem to have had a pretty wonderful childhood in spite of sort of the external environment.  And you get the impression of a very tight nuclear family, and a very tight black community there which I experienced also growing up.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We, I was twelve when we moved to Dallas [Texas] so I still have pretty fundamental memories of, of the experience growing up in Bennettsville.
Story_ID: 639540
Speaker 1: You think you spent more time with your [paternal] grandmother than you did with your [paternal] grandfather [Arthur Wright II] then?  He was busy taking care of the--
Speaker 2: My, that side or dad's side of the family, my grandfather, that grandfather died before I was born.  My mom's parents were divorced so I did see my grandfather, the one that worked for the Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America], but less than my grandmother [Josephine Cook Bell] because she was just thirty miles away, my grandfather, Fred Bell [Fred Bell, Sr.], had moved to Atlanta [Georgia].  And so we saw them for kind of important events, you know, graduations and that kind of thing.  But, but we called my mom's mother grandmother and we called my dad's mother Mama Maggie [Maggie Bowen Wright].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now, did your, I'm gonna go back to your father [Harry S. Wright, Sr.].  Did, are there any stories that you remember he told you about his growing up, about the family or, you know, or his, you know, the, his, with times with his sisters and brothers?  Do you remember--
Speaker 2: I think the most, the most searing memory obviously is when his father died.  My, my dad was in seminary at Colgate Rochester [Colgate Rochester Divinity School; Colgate Rochester Crozer Divinity School, Rochester, New York] and he got a call saying his father had a heart attack.  And this was, Marian [HistoryMaker Marian Wright Edelman] was the only kid that was home.  And I think legend has it that she was the last to talk to him, though she won't say what that conversation was.  So that one was a searing memory 'cause obviously it was a very, a very traumatic event for the family.  But they also share a lot of stories of who got in trouble most and dad was the middle kid so he tended to be the one that was more clutching to Mama Maggie's hem, and trying to do the right thing as much.  And then we had a couple of outliers that were trying to get in trouble the most.  And there's a pretty, there was a pretty big age span between them 'cause Marian was the baby and I think, there's probably a fifteen year, at least a ten year span between Olive [Olive Wright Covington] and Marian.  But they grew up very much in the segregated South.  And so did I actually because we were the kids that integrated the Bennettsville [South Carolina] public schools and at dad's insistence.  And they had a sense of stature in the black community because of my grandfather's profession and a very proactive generation of people, both.  They all went off to college which is a miracle during that time and became teachers and health professionals and all of that.  But the advocacy really comes out of that, you know, that period, '30s [1930s], '40s [1940s], '50s [1950s], and being in a, in a very different climate than today.
Speaker 1: That comes out of the church too, right?
Speaker 2: Very much.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: But also and maybe it's a southern thing and maybe it's the personality of the middle child but my father was also a peacemaker.  He was always trying to bring people together.  And even when I was born in Bennettsville, you know, we still had segregated schools and different entrances at hospitals and the whole bit.  But interesting enough as I mentioned I had asthma and the white doctor, the main doctor, a Dr. Mays [ph.], would always sneak my parents into the side door or make home visits when I was ill and so I grew up knowing there's a, it was an odd paradox in a sense that there were the official rules but there were unofficial relationships that really governed that period.  And when my grandmother died in, in 1983, there were as many white folks in the, in the church as black because that's just the way those families interacted back then.
Story_ID: 639541
Speaker 1: Talk about a little bit about that, you know, the unofficial, you know, what really sort of happened because you're talking about your parents [Joan Bell Wright and Harry S. Wright, Sr.] were sneaking into, you know, a white doctor's office, and him sneaking to take care of you.  So can you talk a little about that, you know, what you observed or remember as a child?
Speaker 2: I remember when we, when we started school there was one school for all blacks [East Side Elementary and High School, Bennettsville, South Carolina], from zero to twelve [kindergarten to twelfth grade].  And I remember the difference when we switched to the white school [Murchison School, Bennettsville, South Carolina] because all of a sudden we had to go in a car.  We used to just kind of, it was a gaggle of kids, the older kids would pick us up on the way to the trail to our school.  And, you know, my parents, there was sort of no drama about it.  And the three of us which were kind of lockstep eleven months apart, would go off with the older kids and we had uncles and aunts along the way and members of the church obviously, good and bad 'cause they would see whatever you're doing.  But when we, when we switched to the, to the white school, as we called it, all of a sudden we had to get up a little earlier and because my father was gonna take us, my mom was a school teacher in a nearby town so she would get out of the house first.  We'd go next door to Mama Maggie's [Wright's paternal grandmother, Maggie Bowen Wright] and it sounds silly but it was so funny, I remember the first day she had in these little plastic Ziplocs or whatever, they weren't Ziplocs, what she had in these little plastic bags with our favorite cookies in them.  And I remember thinking, boy, that's, that is really something if we're getting cookies on the way to school.  And then my father had some very strict rules also which is, "I'm dropping you off here, I'm picking you up here, or Mama Maggie is picking you up.  And you're not allowed to leave here on your own or get in a car with anybody else," which is a, again a big change in the routine.  So I remember the tenseness of that.  And although I don't remember any particular experiences I have, it was, I do remember my brother [Harry S. Wright, Jr.] having a very rough time of it, you know, sort of getting spanked at school and sent home and just, it's kind of a lot of drama.  And I think that had a very big impact on him even though he was younger because I don't think he, I don't, not that I don't think any of us understood it fully but I think for him it was, it was a pretty searing experience.
Speaker 1: More traumatic.
Story_ID: 639542
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I wanna go back 'cause I sort got off on the chronology (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I wanna go back to your mother's side.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your mother a bit.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And let's talk, can you give her name and talk about her background?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Joan Chequeta Bell [Joan Bell Wright].  And her mother [Josephine Cook Bell] was a more typical homemaker and she worked also at schools and at daycare centers.  And her father, Fred Bell [Fred Bell, Sr.], was the Boy Scout executive, southeast region of the Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America].  And they lived in Florence, South Carolina, which was about thirty miles away from Bennettsville [South Carolina].  And she and my father [Harry S. Wright, Sr.] married very young.  She met him at a Boy Scout camp because my father was an Eagle Scout and was the head of a troop of young black boys in the, in the region, and was at one of the camps where my grandfather was managing the camp.  And so the rest was history.
Speaker 1: So when you, now, how would you describe your mother?
Speaker 2: Beautiful.  In fact, stunningly beautiful.  Very much the life of the family.  Always kind of on the go, always the person, I mean, she, she never slept.  And, and even later in life when we were all living in New York, she was always the person that wanted to go to the Apollo [Apollo Theater, New York, New York] or to a play or whatever, just always kind of ready to do the next thing.  So she had a, just a great, just big personality.  And she was the first lady, you know, of church.  And so I think being the first lady at the beginning of their relationship was very difficult because here she is, she's this eighteen year old, drop dead, you know, gorgeous woman, walking into this family.  Now, I say that just, it is Bennettsville, South Carolina, but, you know, there's sort of the, that family in Bennettsville and all of a sudden a preacher's wife and expectations around what preachers' wives do and, you know, all of that.  So I take it there was a fair amount of conversation (laughter) around that growing up.  And even later in life when she was the first lady at Cornerstone Baptist Church [Darlington, South Carolina] which is where my father retired, she was a pretty uniquely loved first lady because she was always focused on everyday people, and, you know, rebelling less about the duties of the first lady but finding her peace I think with that role at the back end of her life.
Story_ID: 639543
Speaker 1: Did she [Wright's mother, Joan Bell Wright] ever talk about that though, I mean, the issues because that probably was very hard?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, she talked about it (laughter).
Speaker 1: What did she say?
Speaker 2: And screamed about it and yelled about it (laughter).  And I think because of the way the, all of that started, it was just a lot for a young woman.  I think that's what really propelled her to get, go to college so she went to Clark College [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and there are some pictures in our families of when she graduated.  I have a bottle in my mouth and I'm standing but I have a bottle in my mouth and my grandmother [Josephine Cook Bell], her mother is holding my sister, Harryeta [Harryeta Wright Hill], and she's holding my brother, Harry, Jr. [Harry S. Wright, Jr.] with a bottle in his mouth, so she had three children and it took her a while but she got through college, Clark College, and she was just determined that she wasn't just gonna be, just Harry's wife.
Speaker 1: That says a lot though, you know, because, so you're saying they got married at eighteen?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And then he [Wright's father, Harry S. Wright, Sr.], so tell me what, so they got--
Speaker 2: He was, he was twenty-three, twenty-four, or twenty-five.  She (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, so he had already--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --finished school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But did, were they living in Atlanta [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Living in Bennettsville [South Carolina]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --initially.  And her parents sort of insisted that she--
Speaker 1: Finish school?
Speaker 2: --you know, go on and finish school.
Speaker 1: That is cool.
Speaker 2: And so that was, that was a journey.  But it shows, I think a lot it was her determination to continue forward and her parents very much believed in education.  And he was a good husband to understand--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --that was important.  But it took a while but they got it done.  And he had to interrupt his graduate school when his father [Arthur Wright II] died 'cause he had to come back home to pastor the church.  And I don't remember the geography of that but he also went back to finish up school at Colgate [Colgate Rochester Divinity School; Colgate Rochester Crozer Divinity School, Rochester, New York] at later, at a later period.  And again he credited the grandparents, particularly the grandmothers for watching over us while that all happened.  So but education was a big ethic in both families and a lot of sacrifice.  I it's amazing when you think about when that was, I guess, that's the '30s [1930s], '40s [1940s], (unclear) to get all five of the kids in my dad's family to college and some graduate school and for my mother, who had one brother [Fred Bell, Jr.], who had, who is still well, living, they both, he went to Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] and mom went to Clark and so that's a pretty big, big thing in that, in that era.
Story_ID: 639544
Speaker 1: Now, did your mother [Joan Bell Wright] talk about her family and growing up?  Did she share any stories with you at all?
Speaker 2: Mostly centering around her mother [Josephine Cook Bell].  She didn't talk much, she talked about the pain of that divorce but was able to maintain a relationship with both parents, obviously a little less with, we had less time with my grandfather [Fred Bell, Sr.] because he was in a different city.  But we formed a relationship with his, his new wife Aunt Bernice [ph.], as well and because my three siblings [Harryeta Wright Hill, Schawannah Wright and Harry S. Wright, Jr.] went to college in Atlanta [Georgia] and they were living there, they spent a fair amount of time with her.  But I don't, I'm just trying to think if I have a good example of a memory of hers.  She talked a lot about her high school years, I guess that was pre-marriage.  She was a majorette in high school.  And she and her brother [Fred Bell, Jr.] were extremely close, a year apart, and they did everything together.  And she talked about how strict her dad was in dating for example.  And my dad [Harry S. Wright, Sr.] was apparently the only guy he ever liked (laughter).  They both told the story of when they got engaged and my father took her to Myrtle Beach [South Carolina] to celebrate and he asked her father if he could bring her home a little late and the answer was absolutely not (laughter).  And there was that, my father loves, actually we meet him in Myrtle Beach now for our summer vacations, it's about an hour from Bennettsville [South Carolina] where he lives.  And he, every single time he takes us to Atlantic Beach [South Carolina] which was the black beach where they were allowed to go.  So I've heard that story from both, both vantage points.  But I don't, I don't remember a lot of stories from her childhood so much as the later years.
Story_ID: 639545
Speaker 1: Who are you most like you think, your mother [Joan Bell Wright] or your father [Harry S. Wright, Sr.]?
Speaker 2: Oh, that's a hard question, that's a hard quest--I think most people will probably say more like my dad because I tend to be a little schizophrenic in the sense that when I'm my mom, I'm really her, which is a lot less today in terms of wanting to be on the go and all that 'cause I have a lot more, (laughter) Peyton [Wright's daughter, Peyton Wright] has kind of anchored me between the two poles of work and home.  But I have her energy which I never under, understood.  I really thought I always viewed dad as the one that was sort of working all the time.  And now that I'm a parent I realize that she was working all the time too.  When we were in our, kind of our formative years, particularly in Dallas [Texas], my memories are much stronger of her leaving, you know, seven o'clock in the morning to head off to school where she was teaching.  And there was kind of a separation of duties where dad would do the cooking in the morning 'cause he was a breakfast guy and he'd go out on cold mornings and kind of get the car warmed up for her and, you know, it was just a gaggle of activity trying to get, you know, four kids up and ready for wherever they were going.  But what I didn't understand until most, you know, late in life was how much work happens overnight (laughter) to get everybody (makes sound) you know set and ready to go at eight o'clock in the morning.  And so in later years when they were living in New York while I was living in New York [New York], I was just constantly saying to my mother, I didn't know where her energy came from because she'd wanna go after work to all of these things.  And she would leave the house in the mornings, and talk about a shopper, (makes sound), she would leave the house early in the morning, not get home 'til very late at night, and just would just go, go, go.  So I have that as split up in different activities.  I have my father's side which is that cerebral, cool under pressure side and I have become a lot more like him in that regard because I really appreciate silent spaces and my mom didn't like silence, she really liked activity and, and being on the go.  He could be a hermit in his, you know, his study for three months and you'd never find, (laughter) find him.
Story_ID: 639546
Speaker 1: I wanna ask you what your earliest memory was of growing up, the earliest.
Speaker 2: (Pause) I would say probably, god, I'm terrible with time, but we left Bennettsville [South Carolina] when I was twelve and so I have early memories of that year going to the white school which would have been three, two or three years earlier, or actually, probably three years earlier (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No but you would have been what, nine?
Speaker 2: I'm just thinking.
Speaker 1: Do you have any memories going back earlier (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That would have been first--
Speaker 1: First--
Speaker 2: --first grade.
Speaker 1: So you were five or six, say?
Speaker 2: Let's see.  I don't know.  I have memories before that mainly of our church [Shiloh Baptist Church, Bennettsville, South Carolina] and it was a big deal for us at Thanksgiving for example to cook meals and deliver them to the sick and shut in as, you know, they say at church.  And I have memories of getting to go in the truck with the, with the deacons to some of those deliveries.  I have memories of the Saturday nights when the program, dad [Harry S. Wright, Sr.] would let us help him, help him put the program for the next Sunday together.  And he had one of those old fashioned kind of mimeograph machines and my job was to fold them (gesture), you know, in those two.  I have memories of his inspections, Saturday mornings, whoever's room was the best, you know, kept, particular focus on the beds and, you know, the little four corners of, you know, neatness, and you'd fold the Boy Scout fold and tuck the sheets underneath the mattress, whoever won on Saturday mornings got ten cents.  He, even though he's, has a very serious side, he has a very goofy side too and on Saturday nights we would watch Red Skelton.  And his favorite character was, I'm a mess this name but Clem, Clem Kadiddlehoffer [sic. Clem Kadiddlehopper] or whatever, where he had this sort of goofy thing with his legs where when he was happy or surprised about something he would jump up and his legs would get all tumbled up and down and do this (gesture), we would just crack up on that.  And I also have memories of going next door with my [paternal] grandmother [Maggie Bowen Wright] on those mornings that I was having an asthma thing and we would stay in bed and watch, you know, some, the stories and when I was feeling better I would go with her to grocery shop that was a big deal for her 'cause she was all, ever the homemaker.  So I have a lot of, I have a lot of sort of Bennettsville anchoring which the younger kids don't necessarily.
Story_ID: 639547
Speaker 1: Let me ask since we're there in Bennettsville [South Carolina], can you describe the block that you lived on and the neighbors?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  It's, it's Cheraw Street, 119 C-H-E-R-A-W, Street, and at least at the time.  So it's literally a church on a hill and the parsonage is connected [to Shiloh Baptist Church, Bennettsville, South Carolina] and there's sort of a middle area that we called the hut where everybody kind of met and gathered for things after church or before.  And so that's, those are all red brick buildings.  And when we were kids it seemed like this interminable hill down to Cheraw Street, which is kind of funny now, it's just, it was not much of a hill.  But and then next door is a white wood house where my [paternal] grandmother [Maggie Bowen Wright] lived, kind of a shared driveway.  And behind it is what we used to call a old folks home which was a really a small house that was put together because there was no place for older seniors during my grandfather [Arthur Wright II] and grandmother's time.  And my father [Harry S. Wright, Sr.] expanded it and but, you know, a dozen seniors or so.  And Cheraw Street is actually a major thorough- was a major thoroughfare before I-95 [Interstate 95] because it was the only way to get to Myrtle Beach [South Carolina].  And I remember we used to sit on the front porch waving to the white kids on the way to the beach because it, we weren't allowed to go but there would just be this interminable traffic during the summer days of those families kind of heading off to the beach.  And so it's really, it's some houses and some retail and a neighborhood around it, so the Mason Dixon Line is, was Cheraw and Main.  And Main Street was where all of the kind of stately big houses of the, of the, sort of the, some of the major white families on Main Street leading into downtown Bennettsville.
Speaker 1: Can you--
Speaker 2: I also remember, this has just popped up in my, I also remember that the theater in Bennett- the movie theater in Bennettsville blacks could only sit in the balcony.  And I remember the first movie where we could sit downstairs was 'Robinson Crusoe.'  And my mother [Joan Bell Wright] dropped us off to the movies and when she came back to pick us up she couldn't find us downstairs and she eventually made her way up to the balcony and she was furious with us.  And I remember thinking, god, why is she so mad?  She said, "'Cause you can sit downstairs and why are you upstairs" (laughter).  And we said we like it upstairs 'cause that's where we, (laughter) that's where we've been.  But that was important to her.  And so anyway that was Bennettsville.
Story_ID: 639548
Speaker 1: Let's take you still back to them, what sights, smells, and sounds would you say remind you of growing up?  You've talked about some sights but--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you know, what, when you take your memory back there, what do you think of in terms of sights?
Speaker 2: Cooking, you know, my dad's mother was always in the kitchen it seemed, and so you kind of, either she's propped up in the bed watching, I'm visualizing this woman but I can't think of her name, it'll come to me, or she's in the kitchen, or she's fussing, she was always fussing about something, something misplaced or needed to be done or whatever, and looking for her glasses.  Which I actually now appreciate that since I'm wearing glasses and can never find them, I appreciate that a lot more.  And cooking also at the, in the hut, you know, because that's where everybody was constantly kind of preparing meals for somebody else or having some celebration after church [at Shiloh Baptist Church, Bennettsville, South Carolina].  And the sanctuary also was very important.  I remember when they, it was a big fundraiser to put stained glass windows in the church and there's a very large one for our family to the left of the sanctuary down front.  Cutting the grass with dad on the weekends, it was a big lawn in front of the church and he used to do that himself many, many Saturdays.  It's a very small town, rural community and so it is, it is as you would imagine that kind of little town America.
Speaker 1: Smells, would that be cooking?
Speaker 2: Definitely food, turkey, (laughter) macaroni and cheese, cakes galore, cupcakes, cookies, there was sort of the sights, smells, sounds of church living.
Speaker 1: How about, how about music?  You don't like--
Speaker 2: Lots of hymns.
Speaker 1: Do you have a hymn that reminds you of growing up, like a favorite hymn that you--
Speaker 2: I think 'If I Can Help Somebody' was, you know, practically every Sunday.  I'm trying to think of that, our church was, and our [paternal] grandparents [Maggie Bowen Wright and Arthur Wright II] were very much kind of traditionalists, so all of those, there was no guitar playing and, (laughter) and that kind of thing, they were pretty straight Baptist.  My grandmother's favorite was 'How Great Thou Art.'  And I remember even in my twenties of sort of flying around as an investment banker and she would say I need, I need So and So's version of 'How Great Thou Art.'  And I remember being in Europe some place looking for (laughter) this particular version of it and found it.  And sneaking into First Boston [First Boston Corporation, New York, New York], copying them to send to, so the whole choir could have it.  The organ was a big sound because church started when she got to her, her post as the organist and, yeah.
Story_ID: 639549
Speaker 1: Your siblings, give their names and the birth order.
Speaker 2: My, the next child born was Harryeta [Harryeta Wright Hill], H-A-R-R-Y-E-T-A, from Harry, my father [Harry S. Wright, Sr.] was sort of giving up on having a boy (laughter) so Harryeta was born eleven months after me.  And then Harry was born, Harry, Jr. [Harry S. Wright, Jr.] was born eleven months after Harryeta, so our, our, our birthdays get kind of jumbled up in the winter.  And Harryeta is, lives in Dallas [Texas] and she's the mother of one son, John [John Hill].  And my brother Harry, actually lives in the home that my [maternal] grandfather [Fred Bell, Sr.] lived in in Atlanta [Georgia].  And then my baby sister Schawannah [Schawannah Wright], S-C-H-A-W-A-N-N-A-A-H [sic.], was the late baby.  And she lives in New York also.
Speaker 1: Now was, so what's the difference in age between the, Harry and Schawannah?
Speaker 2: Let's see, there's, there's eight years difference between me and Schawannah so there's, there's what, five years or so difference between those two.
Story_ID: 639550
Speaker 1: How was it being a minister's child?
Speaker 2: Strict (laughter).  You very definitely had, it's not like we didn't, I don't feel like I missed anything.  We were consistent with the, the energy of our grandparents and parents [Joan Bell Wright and Harry S. Wright, Sr.].  We were just always on the go.  And so my brother [Harry S. Wright, Jr.] was in the Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America] and my sister, Harryeta [Harryeta Wright Hill] and I were in drill dream, I don't know if that resonates with you the whole, the football thing was huge in Dallas [Texas], of course.  And so I couldn't dance much so my sister, Harryeta, was in the drill team and doing all the formations and everything.  I was part of the girls that would kind of keep them dressed and all of that, just wanted to be a part of it so we could get to the games.
Speaker 1: This is once you moved to Dallas, though (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were twelve when you moved to Dallas though?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was the elementary school and I'll tell you about some of those experiences but a very tense time racially also.
Story_ID: 639551
Speaker 1: How would you describe yourself as a child though?  I mean were you quiet, were you, you know--
Speaker 2: I think I was a classic first child, very sure of myself, talking up a storm, very bright kid, I take it a lot of personality, in a lot of adult rooms because I was the first, really doting [paternal] grandmother [Maggie Bowen Wright] next door, and very sure of myself even at very, very young age come, comes through.
Speaker 1: Did you, the asthma, what, now when do you, do you remember your first asthma attack and do you remember, you know, your parents' [Joan Bell Wright and Harry S. Wright, Sr.] or your grandparents' concern about it, and--
Speaker 2: I don't remember the, any, any attacks.  I do remember having to get a lot of shots and seemingly in the doctor's office a lot.  I was a preemie.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Weighed less than three pounds.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: So, as I've said in some speeches, being born in the rural South at under three pounds in 1958 was not a very auspicious beginning.  So I don't remember, you know, the fear or pain or anything. I just remember a lot of doctors' visits and a lot of time, I was aware of being out of school, although I loved hanging out with my grandmother, just, I just felt different in, in that regard.  But I don't remember having any searing memories of, of, of that.
Story_ID: 639552
Speaker 1: What was your elementary school that you went to, you know, in, in Bennettsville [South Carolina], what was the name of it?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I just called it the white school.  (Laughter) It was the black school [East Side Elementary and High School, Bennettsville, South Carolina] and the white school [Murchison School, Bennettsville, South Carolina].  And actually of all the ironies there's a library being built in my [paternal] aunt's name [Marian Wright Edelman Public Library, Bennettsville, South Carolina] and it's next door to the white school.  I was by there this summer and just stood up looking at this pitiful building now that's empty.  And, (laughter) and relative to all the terror of, of switching, switching over to that school.
Story_ID: 639553
Speaker 1: What prompted the move to Dallas [Texas]?
Speaker 2: My father [Harry S. Wright, Sr.] was recruited to be the dean of religion at Bishop College [Dallas, Texas] which was a black school [HBCU] there at the time (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --and it broke my [paternal] grandmother's [Maggie Bowen Wright] heart.  I mean, everybody was, everybody was mad at my mother [Joan Bell Wright] because they thought that she was just tired of being in Bennettsville [South Carolina], which she was (laughter).  And so that was, I do remember leaving the porch and what joy it was to return and we would get, you know, my father would practically have us, have to lock the doors to keep us from sort of opening the door as the car is going up the hill 'cause we'd just make, you know, just run flat out to my grandmother's porch.  I remember just the pounding of the feet because she'd hear and she would make it to the door, the side door because she just missed us so much and we her as well.  But we would naturally during that period we would be driving home.  And I remember we had a station wagon and my father always sort of piled the back with blankets and pillows and stuff and we'd just kind of head to Bennettsville which was a pretty long drive and--
Speaker 1: How long a drive was that?
Speaker 2: Oh, forever.
Speaker 1: It's--
Speaker 2: It was definitely kind of, at least two days or something.  And once in a while we would get, we would stop at a Holiday Inn or something, when it changed so that we could.  And would pile up all these snacks and games and everything for us to play with in the back, in the back, and head out of, the hardest was to get out of Texas, since Texas was such a big state.  And we knew when we got to Louisiana that we were sort of halfway done.
Speaker 1: So this was when you, did, did you like being at Bishop?  Was that a change?  I mean, you know, for you, 'cause I would assume that all the kids sort of maybe fell in lock step behind you as the oldest or were told too?
Speaker 2: We really loved Dallas.  The, Bishop was, we weren't, I guess, I don't have a lot of memories, you know, we would go with dad, you know, sometimes to the office on Saturdays to kind of, you know, just keep him company.  And obviously we were visible there but it wasn't like being in Bennettsville where we were, you know, in the center of things.  He traveled a lot more when he got to Bishop and I remember them making kind of this fundamental decision that we were going to join a church that we could walk to in the neighborhood.  Which was interesting enough a Lutheran church because he didn't want us to be uprooted by his travel schedule and wanted us to kind of stay in a, anchored in a place where we could go to Sunday school.  My father also took us to other churches.  We went to a synagogue growing up.  And we went to, because it was important for him, now I know that we understood that faith was about how you live your life as opposed to which denomination you're in or which particular brand of religion that you believed in.  And so we, I think it was not like we were kept separate from the school but it just less of a, of an emphasis for us as kids when--
Speaker 1: Now were you growing up at that point on Bishop's campus or were you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: --living, you were living off in the community, and--?
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 639554
Speaker 1: What was the community that you moved into in Dallas [Texas]?
Speaker 2: We lived in a place called Oak Cliff which when we moved there, was a largely white community and it very rapidly became a black community.  The elementary school that we walked to was T.L. Marsalis Elementary School [Thomas L. Marsalis Elementary School, Dallas, Texas] which was a half a dozen blocks away.  And my, I guess, my first kind of hell raising memory was when Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed.  I remember our principal--
Speaker 1: And you would have been (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Let's see, that was fifth grade, I think, let's see--
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: --sixty-eight [1968], (unclear), no, what's that?
Speaker 1: You were born in '58 [1958], right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So you would have been--oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Ten, eleven, twelve, let's see.  I was at, I was a year ahead always as I was skipped at a, at a, at a younger age.  But I remember that experience because we had, we had a couple things going on.  We had at that point the school was again largely white but a good representation of blacks.  And he would not lower the flag and I thought that was just so odd (laughter).  And so I asked him about it and I got one of those, you know, kind of buzz off kid kind of answers.  And then, you know, but I then sort of staged a walk out (laughter) of our classroom.
Speaker 1: From this, at the, with the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause I just thought it was unfair.  And so that was a little bit of a, you know, kerfuffle as one of my friends would say.  And he sort of, was a big discussion about, you know, us being expelled or something.  And I remember my parents [Joan Bell Wright and Harry S. Wright, Sr.] having to come up and, you know, we weren't expelled but it was, it was just kind of a, a real awakening that we were different at this school and in a very tense time.
Story_ID: 639555
Speaker 1: And I would say those--there were several years of really, really tense moments because we also were bused a couple of years later to our middle school which was Atwell [William Hawley Atwell Middle School; William Hawley Atwell Law Academy, Dallas, Texas], we were bused into a definitively white neighborhood [in Oak Cliff, Dallas, Texas], you know, and who hadn't changed over.  And there was a lot of fighting that year, just people just couldn't get along.  And I remembered my parents [Joan Bell Wright and Harry S. Wright, Sr.] being a part of a group of parents that were meeting at night to figure out, 'cause there were literally police and everything kind of having to be stationed at the school because of that period.  And the parents were meeting at night trying to figure out how to get things settled down.  And I was one of the students that, I think, this was a real transition for me where I was part of a group of black and white students that were trying to figure out how to work out this relationship and join the student government and all of that.  And a lot of white parents moved from that neighborhood at the time and so when we all went off to high school, a school called Carter, David Wendel Carter High School [David W. Carter High School, Dallas, Texas], which was, would have been, I don't know ninth or tenth grade, it was a real testing period.  We were through that horrible, you know, kind of police in the hallway kind of thing.  And but we were tested a lot, and it was really, it was really an integrated school at that point, everybody who was gonna move, moved, everybody who was staying, stayed.  And we had gotten to know each other in junior high school, sort of went off to high school where more students joined us.  But I remember some real testing moments where the football team, we had a fantastic football team, and actually by the time we got to high school it was the city champion.  And we would go to play all-white schools or all-black schools and there was a real sense of testing us as a, as a group.  And by the time we got to senior year there were articles, people were trying to figure out kind of how this school figured it out.  And our class gift to the school followed an article which was written on our school and it, and it said, "Carter Has a Good Thing Going" because they were profiling, getting to know the different schools that were in this championship race.  And in the interviews with the students and the parents and everything they talked about us getting to this place as a, as a group.  And so the name of that article was "Carver--Carter Has, Has a Good Thing Going."  And so our class left a plaque, a huge wooden, wooden, wooden plaque for the entry way of our school saying "Carter Has a Good Thing Going" because we had figured out how to make peace with each other and held together as a senior, junior, senior unit as we went off into these other environments where they hadn't figured it out.  So I look back on that period as a pretty fundamental part of my personality changing from going from this cocoon, if you will in Bennettsville [South Carolina], where I, you know, in an odd kind of way, in the South and being a preacher's daughter and my family having a certain role in the black community, I felt a big change and a little fear around this moving from the black school [East Side Elementary and High School, Bennettsville, South Carolina] to the white school [Murchison School, Bennettsville, South Carolina].  But I never feared that anything really bad would happen to us because it just felt like such a tight knit world.  When we went to Dallas [Texas] however, we were, you know, starting over, we were unknowns.  And starting out in a year like that crazy time in the, in the late '60s [1960s] and then actually being in a school environment where people were fighting and police and all of that through the busing.  But somewhere and I guess, just in the middle of that in junior high school, the peacemaker part of my personality, which I think is pretty consistent with my dad's actually, just kicked in, it was just too intense.  And by the time we got to high school, I felt really, again back as in charge of my element and very confident about the space that I was in, and as distinct from sort of elementary and, and junior high school days.
Story_ID: 639556
Speaker 1: Moving to Dallas [Texas] was a, you know, you're leaving your cocoon and, and all of a sudden, I mean, nobody knows anybody but dad [Harry S. Wright, Sr.] and he, he knew the people at Bishop [Bishop College, Dallas, Texas] because of the preaching circuit.  But for the rest of us, you know, we're just moving into a neighborhood [in Oak Cliff, Dallas, Texas] where we know no one and no one knows us.  And also a different stage at school [Thomas L. Marsalis Elementary School, Dallas, Texas], it's a different time in the universe 'cause it's 1968 which was a crazy time for everybody.  And so you got the external world where, you know, leadership was being shot, gunned down.  And in, you know, and, and we're watching our parents watching TV in tears and, you know, it was just a nutty time.  And then we're sort of, you know, you're fifth grade, fourth grade, third grade, going off to an integrated school environment but it's, you know, it's Dallas, Texas, (laughter) you know.  And so my parents, we actually quickly in our neighborhood I have had, we had such a lucky experience in terms of the black families that we met that that first year and the extra mothers that we had.  There were two women in particular, a woman named Sarah Dorsey [ph.] who was the wife of a, of a doctor.  They had three girls our age.  And then Aretha Jones who's still living and still living on Woodacre Drive where we lived, she and her husband, Bill [William Jones, Sr.].  And so we were able to replicate sort of the cocoon, if you will. They all had kids the same age and so we would leave our home and we'd get to the bottom of that shallow hill and we'd pick up Billy [William Jones, Jr.] and Connie [Constance Jones] who were the Jones family, we'd go a few more steps in the alley way, we'd pick up the three Dorsey [ph.] girls and we'd head on up and then we'd pick up my sister's best friend, Kathleen [ph.] so by the time we got to school there would be a good dozen of us there.  So it didn't take very long because there were black families in that integrated community that, you know, they're feeling the same way.  And my mother [Joan Bell Wright] made some really incredible friends during that period.  In fact, I think of those as kind of our anchor relationships.  And dad was traveling a lot and working pretty hard, you know, there on the weekends for again, Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America] and this, that, and the other.  But in the midst of this chaos we formed the, probably the most formative relationships of our lives during that, from elementary to high school [David W. Carter High School, Dallas, Texas] years.  But it still was a sense that the external world was a lot more important than it was when we were kids.  And I guess that's the nature of things but it was stuff happening.
Story_ID: 639557
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Nineteen sixty-eight [1968] you have Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] is killed, Robert Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy]--
Speaker 2: Robert Kennedy.
Speaker 1: --is killed.  I think Nixon's [President Richard Milhous Nixon] im- is he impeached or he's elected [sic.]?  I mean--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's the--
Speaker 1: --but you have a lot of things going on that, so there's a lot of turmoil--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and as a young person you're becoming aware of--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --what's going on in the outside--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --community.
Speaker 2: And the whole integration struggle.  You know, in Bennettsville [South Carolina] it wasn't, you know, wasn't no, any discussion about integration, it wasn't even expected until the Brown decision [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] and the whole thing around schools.
Speaker 1: So that's, I wanna, with Bennett- so 1954 is when Brown happens--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --but when you are going to school, you know, integrate- 'cause Brown takes a little while--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you know, so when you're going, when it, you--did go from the white school [Murchison School, Bennettsville, South Carolina], I mean, black school [East Side Elementary and High School, Bennettsville, South Carolina] to the white school?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What actually happens?  Does the black school, I mean, tell me about that story in Bennett- is--
Speaker 2: It, I remember my father [Harry S. Wright, Sr.] in the pulpit talking about the need for us to integrate the schools.  And I don't know if it was ordered or voluntarily agreed to by Bennettsville, I don't, I don't, I don't know.  But I remember him talking about this is progress and we need to, and he said from the pulpit, "My three children are going."  And so something about that felt like it was voluntary but I, you know, I could just have it jumbled up.  But I remember feeling like we were definitely sacrificial (laughter) lambs so to speak.  And as I said to you, I remember the--emotionally the changeover just because it, all of a sudden there were these rules around who's taking us, who's not, you know, forbidden to leave, and just being in a car, you know.  We were, you know, in the black communities, black schools are sort of, you know, a few blocks away and we're all sort of walking together.  And so I remember feeling tense about the change but not really understanding the full import.  And as I said I don't have any memories of being mistreated or anything.  I do remember my brother getting spankings at school and my father's rule is if you got spanked at school you got spanked at home.  And so I remember some heated discussions between my dad and mom [Joan Bell Wright] and the rest of us feeling like Harry [Harry S. Wright, Jr.] was getting a, the bad end of the stick.  And I think if my brother were sitting here he would say it was a pretty negative way to start school 'cause he would have been in first grade, I think I was in third.  But it was, it didn't compare to the, you know, fourth, fifth grade experience at Marsalis [Thomas L. Marsalis Elementary School, Dallas, Texas] with, I think the combination of being in a new place where there was no, the people had the sense that there was no responsibility to us as kids 'cause nobody knew us, first of all, so we're in this new place, you know, you're coming home at night and your parents are watching, you know, the news and all of this insanity, so it just felt like an environment that was just hostile.
Story_ID: 639558
Speaker 1: You were going to the black schools [East Side Elementary and High School, Bennettsville, South Carolina], there are black teachers, you're going to the white school [Murchison School, Bennettsville, South Carolina], what is, what's happening, are there white teachers?  Are there--
Speaker 2: Everybody's, in Bennettsville [South Carolina]?
Speaker 1: In Bennettsville.
Speaker 2: Everybody was white.
Speaker 1: Everybody was white.  But you're not talking in Bennettsville about any trauma or being called out of your name or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: --being treated any differently.
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: How many kids were at, were, at the, how many of the kids were white at the white school, you're not--?
Speaker 2: I have a, and that's what I have to ask my dad, if this was kind of a, a voluntary thing or what but I did not, I don't have memories of a lot of people taking him up on his (laughter) offer. It felt like a few of us and the rest of the folks stayed at the black school.  So I gotta check my facts with him.  But I remember the conversation in church that Sunday being more exhorting people to go.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And saying, "My three are going," you know, and this sort of leadership thing.  And at school it very definitely felt like just being in a sea of white people sort of for the first time and, as opposed to going to the doctor's office or, you know, the library or something.
Speaker 1: But none of the kids called you out on your name?
Speaker 2: I don't, I have no memories of it (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No memory of that.  And when--
Speaker 2: I have no memories of it.
Speaker 1: And in Texas?
Speaker 2: So maybe that was bad (laughter)--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 2: --and I just blanked on it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But in Texas nothing like that?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, Texas.
Speaker 2: Oh, well, Texas was, was deep, you know, 'cause that was kind of, you know, and I just try, I don't remember what the windup is but for me to, at, in fifth grade [at Thomas L. Marsalis Elementary School, Dallas, Texas] to say we're walking out of this class kind of thing that it, it must have been a lot of drama leading up to that.  I remember the principal just saying, you know, "No, we're not doing that."  And I was like "Well, every, everybody else is, everybody else is lowering the flag, you know, post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service], this, why wouldn't our school do that kind of thing?"  And I remember the black students sort of following me out, you know, blindly, if you can imagine that, it was like why did, why did they go with me?  But, you know, they're at home hearing the, you know, the righteousness in the conversation as well.  And I remember being sent home and my parents [Joan Bell Wright and Harry S. Wright, Sr.] going up there and I was reinstated, you know, as were the other, other kids.  You know, I don't, we didn't stay out a day.  But that was kind of a, just a real awakening for me and, and, you know, I think it's the combination of what was happening in the world and feeling it at home.
Story_ID: 639559
Speaker 1: In Bennettsville there were only a few of you so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --that's what you're saying.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: In Texas, what is the, what is the mix, the ratio of black to white?
Speaker 2: It was a good mix.  I, my, my guess, you know, and I, and I don't, I don't know but I didn't feel alone.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, so it, it had to be at least a third.
Speaker 1: Now, were you all bused?
Speaker 2: No, in, at elementary school [Thomas L. Marsalis Elementary School, Dallas, Texas], we walked to school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But--
Speaker 2: So it was a very, it was a very integrated community at the beginning.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And then it became black (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And it quickly became--
Speaker 1: Black.
Speaker 2: --black.
Speaker 1: So was it, when, so was it a middle class community or what, what--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You said it was white?
Speaker 2: Yeah, a working class family.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Working, okay.
Speaker 2: A working class.
Story_ID: 639560
Speaker 1: Is that [Dallas, Texas] where you ended up staying for, until you graduated?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So Carter [David W. Carter High School, Dallas, Texas], was it Carter, Carter (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, are you involved in activities and things?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So you're, I mean, big sports, you say sports is huge?
Speaker 2: I wasn't playing--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: --sports. I was in--
Speaker 1: You had said you were making the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) the--they called it the drill team.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know what the equivalent is in, in the North or but in, in Texas football was everything, right.  Basketball was a second, you know, second run and baseball didn't exist (laughter).  But so at every football game, and I mean these are big stadiums and everything so there, I guess, the drill team was sort of the same thing as like majorettes kind of thing.  But I mean, it's like, uniforms, and getting there at seven o'clock in the morning and practicing and this, there's a big deal, competitive with the other schools in terms of the bands and, you know, the whole thing.  But as I said, I don't have any rhythm so I didn't make the drill team, my sister, Harryeta [Harryeta Wright Hill] did.  But there were these, you know, a few girls who kind of organized things so, you know, everybody's gotta have the uniforms ready by six o'clock the day before and blah, blah, blah and, you know, so.  My good friend, Ava Wheatley [ph.] and I were two of those, I forgot what they called us but so we did the administrative stuff 'cause we couldn't dance so (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, you said you were active in government, so was that, what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, the student government.  Coming out of the junior high school experience [at William Hawley Atwell Middle School; William Hawley Atwell Law Academy, Dallas, Texas] where we formed a student government to kind of deal with all of the, the chaos of the middle school experience and that was when we were bused--
Speaker 1: In, in--
Speaker 2: --to, into another neighborhood in Oak Cliff [Dallas, Texas] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So in high school?
Speaker 2: Junior high school.
Speaker 1: In junior high.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And high school too?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 639561
Speaker 1: And busing how far, how long was the ride?  Was it a--
Speaker 2: Not far, fifteen minutes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Twenty minutes.
Speaker 1: And that school, were there, were there any black teachers or many--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So integration was happening on all levels?
Speaker 2: Definitely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: 'Cause a lot of that, you know, you hear how some black teachers, well they lost jobs completely (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --after Brown [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], they never could get hired.
Speaker 2: Unh-uh, unh-uh.
Speaker 1: So, so, I want to--but you don't, do you remember, so you don't remember any racial incidents or anything like that, much?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well junior high school was, I mean, people fighting--
Speaker 1: Fighting, okay.
Speaker 2: --in the halls.  And the black boys from our neighborhood [in Oak Cliff, Dallas, Texas] were, you know, fighting for their place on the sports teams to be included, you know, for example.  And at least that first year at Atwell [William Hawley Atwell Middle School; William Hawley Atwell Law Academy, Dallas, Texas], I remember a couple of incidents where police were called which was kind of unheard of.  And again this is this, you know, early 1970s and the whole (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 2: --busing thing obviously was very controversial.  But that was the period I mentioned where the parents sort of said, "Okay, we got to deal with this."  And the white parents got together with the--
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: --black parents and they would meet at each other's homes to just sort this out.  And it, the neighborhoods changed over.  I mean, a lot of white families left those three or four neighborhoods where the kids were being bused to, us bused to.  My neighborhood at that point was all black.  And, but I think it was the people who decided to stay were some really remarkable families.  There was a woman that I, a white student by the name of Karyn Peters and her family, Jackie Peters [ph.] was the mother, and we all became very, very close during that period because we just, we just wanted to do the right thing.  And the school also, you know, the black teachers, and my mother [Joan Bell Wright] knew them since she was a teacher and they're all in the, you know, similar social circles, at that point we were well integrated into the Dallas [Texas] black community.  And so I didn't feel there was any lack of black role models in high school [David W. Carter High School, Dallas, Texas] in particular.  I don't remember many of the teachers in junior high school.  But that, to the eighth, ninth grade period was very difficult with everybody just trying to figure out their space.  But as, when we get, got to high school in tenth grade, we had, we had had our wars and whoever was gonna move, moved, and the people that stayed said, "Okay, let's get," (laughter), "let's get on to educating our kids and, and having fun," which we did.
Story_ID: 639562
Speaker 1: During all that time you were a good student?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, very good student.
Speaker 1: Throughout the whole period?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: As?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And what subjects did you gravitate to more?
Speaker 2: More of the history, English, that side of the world as opposed to math and science.
Speaker 1: Now, who were, did you, who was influencing you though, to, I mean, I know you talked about sports being big and, you know, your role there but are there other things that are, you know, are there any teachers that are your favorite teachers or there are, you know, other people outside the school that, you know, you look up to and--
Speaker 2: I had a Spanish teacher who I, I took Spanish the three or four years in high school [David W. Carter High School, Dallas, Texas] who was a constant.  There was an English teacher who was very proper, a black woman that was very proper, always trying to focus us on the proper English and all of that.  I thought I could write until I ended up at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] which I'll tell you about a little later because she was the person focusing us in our writing.  And there were some people who were I'd say well meaning but in their own way had in their minds kind of limits for us, so my college counselor so to speak.
Story_ID: 639563
Speaker 1: You may have heard that I told this story before, a black woman unfortunately.  But so I'm straight A's, can't remember what role in student government but very prominent in the student government, voted student most likely to succeed, all that going on.  And so I show up for my three minutes of college counseling and, so remember I have this external, I've got, you know, my parents [Joan Bell Wright and Harry S. Wright, Sr.] at home fiercely focused on education and the success of their kids.  And then I've got [HistoryMaker] Marian Wright Edelman--
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: --you know, flying around the world and sending me postcards from Russia and Switzerland and (laughter) all this kind of stuff.  And so my junior summer she was living in Boston [Massachusetts] or Cambridge [Massachusetts], so I'm trying to remember why we ended up going to visit her.  And--
Speaker 2: Marian Wright Edelman?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And she took me over to the Radcliffe campus [Radcliffe College, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and I just fell in love with, you know, just the whole ivy and the cloistered square and all of that.  So I go back, so I'm, I sit in front of this lady and I said, and I said, you know, just clear up my throat a little bit, I said, "You know, I think I'd like to go to Radcliffe."  And she's busy, you know, getting ready to write down my list of (laughter) schools and she looks up and she said, "I know you're smart but you're not that smart."  (Pause) And so I remember thinking, so you think kind of thing.  And so she was like, you know, Rice, so being smart in Texas meant going to the best school you could go to was Rice University [Houston, Texas] and, you know, SMU [Southern Methodist University, Dallas, Texas].  And then everybody else was, you know, the big schools, University of Texas [University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas], University of Houston [Houston, Texas], or the black school [HBCU] was Texas Southern University [Houston, Texas].  So anyway, but when I called to get my student application it was, Radcliffe, Wellesley [Wellesley College, Wellesley, Massachusetts], my father really wanted me to go to Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], and so I made the applications.  I was a little insecure obviously because getting into those schools was tough, you know, I knew that.  But so I did my applications and I told my father, my parents that I wanted to go to Wellesley because I was a little insecure about getting into Radcliffe.  And I remember those interviews, so those alumni interviews that you did sort of in Dallas [Texas] and I remember my parents dropping me off to these, again totally different neighborhoods, this is sort of North Dallas [Dallas, Texas] now, these rambling mansions and whatever.  And I remember the Wellesley alumni was, you know, which you might imagine very well put together, very friendly, and, you know.  And the Radcliffe woman was a complete kook (laughter).  You know, (laughter) she was, I remember being in this library with, that was a complete junk, you know, place and I'm just thinking I don't wanna be that kind of intellectual, you know, where I'm just completely--and back in those days when you got in, you know, there were the thick envelopes.  And so I come home and there I had those two thick envelopes so I got in both places and I was just over the moon.
Story_ID: 639564
Speaker 1: Then the real drama began because my father [Harry S. Wright, Sr.] really was putting his foot down about me going to Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] and I jokingly said in one interview that I knew he was desperate when he offered to get a, get me a car (laughter) if I, if I stayed in Texas or went to Spelman.  So and, so this kind of ratcheted up to a little bit of a confrontation.  So finally he said, "You know, the whole family is gonna be eating peanut butter and jelly sandwiches to send you to Radcliffe [Radcliffe College, Cambridge, Massachusetts]."  So my mother [Joan Bell Wright] was in that, in the room in that discussion.  So I went to my room and I remember her coming in and closing the door and she said, "Okay, what do you wanna do here?  Do you really wanna go to Radcliffe?"  And I said, "Yeah, I really, I really do."  She said, "You're sure?"  I said, "I'm sure."  She said, "Okay.  You're going.  And we're not gonna be eating peanut butter and jelly sandwiches, so, not to worry. I'm gonna take care of this."  So she left and so she called my dad's mother [Maggie Bowen Wright] (laughter).  And so it was sort of like, he said what?  You know, so his mother called my Aunt Marian [Wright's paternal aunt, HistoryMaker Marian Wright Edelman] and so all of a sudden he is Attila the Hun because all the women of the family are calling in saying, "She's going to Radcliffe. What are you thinking?"  Right.  And so anyway it was done.  The, the ladies took care of business.  And it took a while for us to talk about that but it wasn't until I'd say two or three months into the Radcliffe experience that I, that I understood where he was coming from.  And he was really afraid of his baby going off to an experience that he knew was not gonna be full of what I expected.  I thought that I was gonna be breaking free from the low expectations of the South, and that for the first time I was gonna just be a smart kid and I could just focus on learning, no drama, no low expectation, just be there with the other kids who were smart kids and not having to either pretend you're not as smart as you are or the racial climate and all of that.  And, you know, it, the truth is, there's a different kind of racism in the North but it's still very much present.  And he thought that that would be a heartbreaking experience and he thought he was gonna break me from that but the reality is, you know, you do have to left your--let your kids learn these lessons on their own, on their, on their own.
Story_ID: 639565
Speaker 1: Did he speak of that--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --three months afterwards or did it take longer than that for you to talk to your father [Harry S. Wright, Sr.] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He sent me an article that, I'm trying to remember, he was a big reader of The Christian Science--
Speaker 1: Monitor, Monitor [The Christian Science Monitor].
Speaker 2: --I don't know what, yeah.  He sent me an article about the disillusionment of a student going through this same transition.  And we talked after that article.  And it must have been, it was, it was during my first break, I think it was the Christmas holidays, and there had been a couple of incidents pretty early in the Radcliffe [Radcliffe College, Cambridge, Massachusetts] experience.  The first of which of all ironies, the busing controversy, you may remember, in South Boston [Boston, Massachusetts] was jumping off, now, so here I am, I'm finally kind of, I'm escaped to the North right, and the first thing we have is this drama.  And we were counseled not to go to South Boston and to kind of watch our steps where we, which subway lines we took.  And it really ratcheted up where kids from South Boston would come into Cambridge [Massachusetts] with bats in their trunks and a couple of students got beat up.  I remember being, you know, cars racing by and being called nigger.  And so (laughter) here I am, you know, sort of right back to what I thought I was leaving.  There was also that year, there was one of the Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] professors, I'm trying to remember was that Shockley [William Shockley] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Shockley.
Speaker 2: There was some--
Speaker 1: He had come out with a report.
Speaker 2: About our innate--
Speaker 1: That's right.  Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --gap in intelligence.  And so there I was again back to the issue of race.  And he, of course, couldn't have predicted that all of that would happen but he did know that there would be a point in time when I would recognize that there's no escaping.
Story_ID: 639566
Speaker 1: You go to Radcliffe [Radcliffe College, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and it's Radcliffe when there was a Radcliffe now.
Speaker 2: That's right.  The last year.
Speaker 1: Right, oh, okay.
Speaker 2: The last degree.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So had they made the decision at, with the entrance of you or that just was made after you got there that they--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah--
Speaker 1: Right.  All right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So when you arrive, you arrive with a lot of anticipation?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what role is your [paternal] aunt [HistoryMaker Marian Wright Edelman] playing in this and she is the one who took you to the campus.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Is she very encouraging of you going?
Speaker 2: Oh, sure, she thought it was, you know, obviously being a very strong personality in her own right, believing as her parents [Maggie Bowen Wright and Arthur Wright II] imbued her with get the best education that you can, not that she didn't think I could get a great education at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] or someplace else but she was, hey, if this is your dream, you're connected while you're on campus, then you need to follow your dream and your passion.  And so at this point I think she's in Washington [D.C.] and--
Speaker 1: She--
Speaker 2: I'm just trying to think, is she in Washington at this point?  Maybe not (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I think she's at Washington.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And so that was a train trip down which I made a number of weekends just to get reconnected.  And a really good anchor in terms of just kind of not getting spooked by all this stuff because it was quite a transition.
Story_ID: 639567
Speaker 1: Tell me what was the transition like?  You know, what did you find there? Like your roommate was that, your roommate white or black or--
Speaker 2: Actually very lucky, my roommate was someone I had gone to elementary school [Thomas L. Marsalis Elementary School] with in Dallas [Texas].
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: Who had moved away to Iowa and we had stayed in touch and so we requested to live with each other.  And so--
Speaker 1: Her name?
Speaker 2: Cynthia Polusha [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I went off, in, in fact, we just, we just took my nephew, John [John Hill], started at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] this year and we marvel that I went to school by myself which is just inconceivable now, right?  And I remember taking a cab and my mother [Joan Bell Wright] had, of course, packed this huge trunk (laughter) with all the little, you know, sort of neatly folded things and what she thought was a winter jacket, (laughter) not even close.  And there were two black male students coming out of a door when I pulled up in this taxi and they stopped because they saw a black woman and which was a wonderful thing 'cause I would have never been able to get that trunk, (laughter). They're still laughing about that, that green trunk with all the stuff, and so it actually very quickly felt like home.  And the black students of which there must have been, you know, thirty or so in our class which was a record, were all kind of nervous to be there and happy to be there and it was a very, very close knit group of people.
Story_ID: 639568
Speaker 1: Who are some of the people that were in your class that we might know (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There was a guy named Ray McGuire [HistoryMaker Raymond J. McGuire] who was, been a very successful person in the, the financial field.  My roommates later on Jane Howard [Jane Howard Martin] is a, prominent lawyer at Toyota [Toyota Motor North America, Inc.].  Paula Randolph is a gynecologist in New York.  There ended up being a lot of doctors in that, doctors and lawyers in that group.  We were viewed as, there's a guy I don't know if you ever heard of a guy named Dave Evans [David L. Evans], who was the black admissions officer and still is, this will be his fortieth year.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: And he's the guy that found all of us and we in fact have a, put together a scholarship fund in his name a few years ago.  But he viewed us as a, as a bridge class because we were viewed as a, a more cerebral, a mix of cerebral and fun.  And the classes before were kind of sort of leaned more to the fun side and the classes after us more of the cerebral kids that were coming.  Our class was largely still kids coming from public school.  And as, you know, now most of the kids are coming from private schools.  But it was a great, it was a great time in terms of the relationships made and the breadth of intellectual opportunities.  But the, you know, the race thing was still there and it was a big, a lot of drama over the, where we ate dinner and ate lunch, you know, the whole controversy over the black table and the white students being--
Speaker 1: Why don't you talk about that?
Speaker 2: It, (laughter) I can't believe how, how controversial that was but it was just sort of a natural thing.  Again, you're in a completely foreign environment and you come down after a long day of class and there's a dining room and so if you walk in and, and there's two black students sitting there, we all ended up sitting there, you know.  And so after a semester or so there began to be a lot of discussion about it and the administrators would try to subtly break up the tables by sitting there with us as though they were creating, you know, committing a crime or something.  And I can't believe, you know, years later, I mean, decades later we're all in New York [New York], successful people, and the then president of Harvard, Larry Summers [Lawrence Summers], came to meet with a group of alumni, black alumni, and don't you know the first topic somebody raised is this, the black table (laughter).  And, you know, whether he had succeeded in breaking that up.  And I'm telling you it was, here we are, having this huge fight about the black table twenty, thirty years later, whatever it is, and we're like we're sitting with the president of Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts], do you think we could talk about something more important than the black table?  But it was really, I find it an annoying issue.  You know, if you walk into this large dining room and you painted all the jocks blue, and all the artistic people red, and all of the geeks yellow, you'd find that people of commonality are sitting together.  And so it's not a statement about, a negative statement about somebody else, it's a statement, a positive statement around shared experiences.  But anyway, I hate to get off on that tangent but it was, (laughter) it was just one of those things I found very odd.
Speaker 1: You mean odd that people would try to break it up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, we're not having a conversation about them sitting to themselves.  So what, what's the, what's the beef?
Speaker 1: So was there a lot of discussion?  Would, did the, did (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --the administration didn't like it or--
Speaker 2: I don't know who resented it. It ended up bubbling up to what were the headmasters 'cause, you know, Harvard is split up into houses and so it got to the house master level, again, I'm not connected to the administrative thing at that point but there was a very definite impression that it was not appreciated, and attempts to have us to disperse.  And I guess in a positive, with positive motives, you're here at this, this university, don't segregate yourselves.
Speaker 1: And get to know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I get that too.
Speaker 1: Get to know and experience other people--
Speaker 2: I get that too.
Speaker 1: --and take advantage.
Story_ID: 639569
Speaker 1: You talked about some things being unsettling.
Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What other things were unsettling to you or felt isolating?  Because you had come with great anticipation--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --to, you know, go to a learned place and all these opportunities--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and new things that called, you know, universities are worlds opening up.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Very much so.  And I, you know, I left high school [David W. Carter High School, Dallas, Texas] with a, with close white friends which again given everything we had been through is really quite a miracle.  But I guess, you know, you're going back to this whole world opening up and it's sort of the point of being there but the entry level experiences are, you know, back to, you know, kids with bats in their cars and being told, you know, not to stray from the campus.  And, you know, so, there was a kind of going back to the cocoon again.  And I really didn't make any white friends at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] until I got to graduate school.  And it's actually kind of a joke with a good friend of mine, a guy by the name of Strauss Zelnick.  And so I was sitting in law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and there, blacks definitely segregated themselves and, with college and graduate school.  And so I was in tax class and I remember Strauss because if you're sitting as a black student and there are empty seats around you, it's not like a lot of white students came to sit with you either, right.  So Strauss comes and sits next to me and I remember, and I have told him this story, I remember saying, "Now who is this white guy sitting next to," (laughter), "sitting next to me?"  And so he's talking to me and everything. It was like, you know, (laughter) and 'cause it was, it was somewhat unusual, right.  And so we got to know each other in this class and so one day he says, "You wanna go get some ice cream? I'm going to Steve's Ice Cream [Somerville, Massachusetts] and over there" (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Which was a big ice cream place.
Speaker 2: The big ice cream place.  And I said, "Well, sure."  So he has a red convertible and so I'm in this car with him, we're scooting through the square and so I get home a couple of hours later and I have like four messages on my (laughter) answering machine, "What are you doing driving through the Harvard Square [Cambridge, Massachusetts] with some white guy?  Who is this guy?"  Right (laughter).  And so we laughed so much about that now all these years, many, many years later because, you know, it's, it was just, I guess a product of our times and when people get, I think part of it was, you know, we were insecure and, you know, you're, every little battle you, you know, you come back to home base.  And there weren't a lot of us, you know, it was thirty of us in college and even fewer in graduate school.
Speaker 1: Now, how many, thirty out of how many at Radcliffe [Radcliffe College, Cambridge, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know, a thousand.  I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --this is, this is a lot of--
Speaker 1: Thirty in the class?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the class had a, no it wouldn't have been, would, where--
Speaker 2: Wouldn't it be a thousand?  I don't know how many people in each (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'm not, I'm not, I'm wondering.  I'm not sure.
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'll, we can figure that out.
Speaker 1: But it might be, you're, but you're probably right, you're probably right.  'Cause the, I'm not sure how the, how, how large the whole university--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 639570
Speaker 1: Describe your black experience there and describe some of, I mean, I'm just trying to understand what is forming you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --at that time.  Because this is a time--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --I mean, really, you know, I was looking at The Wall Street Journal yesterday talking about Barack [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], you know, a lot of this--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --is, this is formulating during this period.  And--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --the thing that I'm thinking of is I'm, you know, you, you're very young for our collection.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You know, our collection has people mainly in the seventies.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, you know, we haven't done a lot of these, you know, stories, so it's--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and it's a very stark contrast, you know, as I'm, you know, with the interviews that we've done but go on.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So what--
Speaker 2: Well, it, you know, one of the best things I remember which my nephew [John Hill] tells me is not the case now, the black students at this period are really a collection of people, first generation going off to Ivy League schools, largely public school students and not a lot of history of sort of thirty, forty students being admitted.  And I remember one of the best memories was just being bewildered standing out in front of the, this huge building where we're supposed to pick our classes and kind of get your name tags and all this, and a young woman walks up to me, and says, "Hi, I'm Carla [ph.], I'm your big sister."  I remember saying, "Who, what?"  You know, so the black students, the seniors, took it upon themselves to get the freshmen book and everybody divvied up to kind of provide a support.  And most of those relationships, you know, were what you might expect but we became really close.  And I realized through that experience that I missed having a big sister.  And she was such a, just a, an anchor during that experience.  And for many, many years after that I would go visit her for several days a year and we still, we are still in contact.  But and my big brother was a guy by the name of Tony, who was from Houston [Texas].
Speaker 1: Tony Chase [HistoryMaker Anthony R. Chase].
Speaker 2: And ironically, so Tony (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tony Chase?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  Tony was roommates with David.
Speaker 1: Wilkins [HistoryMaker David B. Wilkins].
Speaker 2: And obviously I met--
Speaker 1: Ann Marie [Ann Marie Wilkins].
Speaker 2: --Ann Marie later on through David.  But so we had our informal way of, and I did the same.  I remember, I, I'm told now that they don't do that which is, I think sad.  But that was a way of again, I view those four years in totality as a wonderful period of growth and after an initial year of a lot of self-confidence.  For example, I thought I could write when I went to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and, you know, two of the things you have to get through freshmen year, you gotta pass the writing class and you gotta be able to swim.  And I remember writing my first paper and getting a terrible grade on it.  And being really shocked and sort of having this conversation with the woman and she said basically, you know, you went to an inner city high school, you can't write.  And so my, you know, the hair on my neck sort of stands up and I'm feeling like she's being a racist and, you know, the whole, old, the whole old script.  And now she said, "Look, I'll make a deal with you. First of all you have to get by me to get past freshmen year.  Second, though, I think you will learn how to write but you've gotta be committed to it and I'm committed that you can write every single, rewrite every single paper 'til you get to a grade that you're comfortable with but you gotta get by me," (laughter), "to get through this year."  And I don't remember that woman's name but let me tell you I'm so grateful that I met her because she taught me how to write.  And in my high school [David W. Carter High School, Dallas, Texas], you only wrote one paper, your senior thesis.  And by the way you can't learn to write with one paper.  So she was a, like I said the whole freshmen year the rest of it is a blur in terms of the professors but she made me put the effort in to, to learn how to write.
Story_ID: 639571
Speaker 1: You're a typical college student. What are you doing during summers and, you know, are you involved in any activities on campus and, you know, what are you learning?  Your [paternal] aunt [HistoryMaker Marian Wright Edelman] is very active during this period of time (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Always active.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Always active.  I actually decided to do some different things with sports.  So, for example, I would just take a different thing a year.  So one semester I took horseback riding lessons.  One semester I did crew (laughter) which was definitely not a fit. You gotta be on the water at, you know, whatever it is, six o'clock in the morning.  And just experimented, it was just kind of hey, it's different, I didn't do that in Dallas [Texas]. I just wanted to see.  I remember the Black Students Association [Harvard - Radcliffe Black Students Association] very actively.  Summers were back to Dallas and doing some fairly boring jobs just to kind of make money for the summer 'cause that's a, the money I'm going to take back to school with me for spending change.  And I didn't, I don't think I went abroad any of those summers.  I'm just trying to think--
Speaker 1: Did you spend any time abroad during that time?
Speaker 2: No.  My time abroad was a trip with my, it was actually a trip, we worked for in senior year actually, it was our first trip abroad.  And, and subsequently, this was much later when I got to New York [New York] and doing a lot of traveling in my first job.
Story_ID: 639572
Speaker 1: What we know about this period is a lot of the network of black students is on all the campuses.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You know, a lot of, you know, a lot of parties, and, you know, people beginning to know each other--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and, you know, things like that, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now, the other thing, was there any messaging about being a Radcliffe [Radcliffe College, Cambridge, Massachusetts] woman?  That you too--
Speaker 2: Some.
Speaker 1: But not that you took any seriously or anything?
Speaker 2: There was, I mean, on the, just on the social scene, I guess the two memories I have were, it was an awkward thing to come home.  And I remember actually being very self-conscious about it because we would be out to dinner. I mean this is a, you know, for a kid from Carter High School [David W. Carter High School, Dallas, Texas] to go off to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] was a thing. I mean this is, this is a place that graduated, you know, itself a thousand students a year.  I remember being out to dinner once and with, with my family and someone recognizing me on a school break and coming over to the table and not saying hello to anybody just saying, "Aren't you the one that, that goes to Harvard?"  And just wanting to just crawl under the table because I felt like it was, it, in trying to ingratiate themselves with me they were diminishing my family and it sort of made everybody else look like, you know, chopped liver just because they weren't off to Harvard.  And so it was a real, going away creates and, you may have gone through the same thing, it creates a little bit of dissonance because it was the reason I wanted to be away, again to just kind of strip away everything and just allow your intellectual abilities to be explored.  But in coming home you're back in that cocoon.  And same thing at work.  You know, I was this curiosity, oh, it's this kid that went to Harvard, that's going to Harvard. Everybody wants to know, what's that like, you know.  We used to, and then on the, on the relationship front, as, you know, there was a lot of, you know, Wellesley [Wellesley College, Wellesley, Massachusetts], Radcliffe competition and they were always viewed as sort of smart enough but--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --you know, but it's not in the, getting in the way, right.  And so we used to call it, the H bomb because if you, you know, you're going out with any guy or you're at a party, that's not on the Harvard campus or whatever, and the minute somebody says, "Well, where do you go to school?"  And you're like, "Do I really have to answer that question" because all of a sudden it stops conversation, right.  And, (laughter) and there's something about that that's really just the opposite of what you want which is you wanna just be left alone to explore your greatest potential but just in the society, particularly at that time, it's just one of those names that just stops conversation.  That having been said, you know, it is what it is, you know, you make your, you make your tradeoffs in this world.
Story_ID: 639573
Speaker 1: Your sisters [Harryeta Wright Hill and Schawannah Wright] went to Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my brother [Harry S. Wright, Jr.] went to Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Oh, so they had the total black college [HBCU] experience that was a whole different--
Speaker 2: Yes, really, yeah.  So it was three, three out of four they got.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So how did they, was there, did that, did that create any conflict between you guys?  Were you sort of the--
Speaker 2: (Shakes head).
Speaker 1: --odd, you, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Not at home.
Speaker 1: Not at home, okay.
Speaker 2: No.  And quite frankly, you know, when I went to their graduations, I cried through every single graduation because what you lose in going away to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] is your, you know, you're this small group in this larger thing.  There's also, I remember (laughter) the first time I saw the Harvard song was at graduation, you know, it was kind of on this sheet of paper and, you know, it's half Latin and, you know, whatever.  (Laughter) And you go to a Spelman graduation, everybody is hugging and holding arms and they're swaying by, and they're singing all these songs. Everybody knows the school song and, you know, I, you know, that's one of the things that I didn't get.  But again, you know, I spoke at Spelman a few years ago and I talked about that, you know, the part I missed and the, you know, the unity and the, you know, the family feel which you just don't get at a large university, especially when you're a small part of it.  But again, you know, you make your, you make your decisions and, and there are some great things about the decisions I made and I wouldn't change them by the way but there are some things you miss, too.
Story_ID: 639574
Speaker 1: Did you know you were gonna go directly into business school?  Was that the talk?
Speaker 2: (Shakes head).
Speaker 1: No, so, I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: --business, law school, you went into the joint program, right?
Speaker 2: I started out in, to go, to go to law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  And I'm sitting in civil procedure class, kind of two or three months in--
Speaker 1: Who taught you civil procedures?
Speaker 2: Clyde Ferguson [Clarence Clyde Ferguson, Jr.].  So now remember this is a person who was always going to law school, always following my [paternal] aunt's [HistoryMaker Marian Wright Edelman] footsteps, arguing in class, challenging people and so there was never any doubt that I was gonna be a lawyer.  And so I'm sitting in this class and I'm like (makes sound) this is terrible (laughter).  I'm bored to death, I don't wanna even know this subject, right.  It's two things happening: this subject which is basically if somebody sues you, you got four days to put a, you know, lick a stamp and get a response back.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And I'm like this is not the way my brain works at all.  And the second thing that's happening is I'm thinking because the only thing I know about the law is the kind of law my aunt practices, civil rights, right, and I'm thinking the law is the vehicle to bus people out of the, you know, the situation we've been in as a people.  And I'm, then I'm sitting in law school and I'm taking contracts law, and I'm finding out, oh, that's not what the, this ain't what the law, the law is about keeping the stuff you got (laughter) no matter how you got it, right.  So I'm like, (makes sound) this ain't, this is just not what I thought.  First of all, I was bored to death.  And secondly, I'm like well, this ain't, you know, I'm about the revolution, I'm not about, (laughter) you know, joining up with these guys who were, are trying to hold us back kind of thing.  So there I'm in a real quandary, right, because I'm in, you know, I don't even know how to have this conversation with my parents [Joan Bell Wright and Harrys S. Wright, Sr.].  So I had taken a year off in between college [Radcliffe College, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and graduate school and gone down to work for Goldman Sachs [Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.] in New York [New York].  And I liked business that, you know, it was just kind of new, nobody in my family was in business.  And so I decided to go over and sit in a couple of B school [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] classes and sort of see how that was.  And I was just ecstatic.  I mean, first of all it's no books, it's just cases.  It's current events.  It's not some professor standing in front of the room and giving a lecture. It's this whole dialogue between students.  So I decide, gee, you know, maybe I should just go to B school.  So I get the applications and everything and so I call my parents to break the news that I was not that happy in law school and, and I was thinking about quitting (laughter) and going to business school.  And so there's dead silence on the other end of the phone and so, I don't know if it was mom or dad, I think they said, "We'll be out there in the next couple of days."  And so what I learned subsequently is they thought I was just hitting the wall, just losing it.  'Cause in my family there are no businesspeople: what do you mean, what's business school (laughter)?  And so they think their kid, their oldest kid has finally just kind of like hit the, hit the wall, hit the limit.  And so I call 'em back a couple of days later. I said, "You guys don't need to come up here. I really am all right. I just not, you know, feeling this kind of thing."  So they have everybody calling me, you know, my aunt, my this, or whatever.  And so ultimately being the first kid and having to make it all right for the parents, I figured out that there was a joint program of business and law and it was a, you know, you gotta, it was a mess 'cause you have to apply to one, then you have to apply to the joint.  But anyway, so I got in the joint program and made it all right for everybody 'cause I'm gonna do both which cost me a couple of extra years in school and a ton of money but that made it, that made it okay for everybody.
Story_ID: 639575
Speaker 1: You were actually a den, not a den mother, a tutor?
Speaker 2: Tutor, um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A tutor at Eliot [Eliot House], so you're--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you're, you're still living on, you're living off campus--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --but in Harvard College [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: And I'm doing it, it's a, it's a tough program because there were only ten or eleven of us and they, you know, could just never figure out the scheduling and all that, if you, if you kind of think of Eliot as at the river [Charles River], B school [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] is the other side, law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] is the other side, so it was a busy time. I'm shuttling back and forth and--
Speaker 1: Well you don't really have time when you have those--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --joint programs?
Speaker 2: No, you really don't.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So I really wasn't at a lot of, I went to some Boston [Massachusetts] meetings--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --but I wasn't really heavily involved.  I got, I tended to have more friendships on the B school side, the black students association on the B school side [African American Student Union] was a very--
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: --was a very together--
Speaker 1: So who was there, and there on the B, in the B school with you?
Speaker 2: Ray [HistoryMaker Raymond J. McGuire] 'cause he was in the joint program.
Speaker 1: That's right he was in the joint program, that's right.
Speaker 2: And let's see Bill Lewis [HistoryMaker William M. Lewis, Jr.], goodness, I'm just trying to remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A ton of people.
Speaker 1: So now what, so you're, you did law first then that second year you do business?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And then what, how does it work passed that?
Speaker 2: You do both.
Speaker 1: You do both--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the third and fourth years?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Which is a mess but--
Speaker 1: Okay.  So who were some of your, so you had, the first year you had, you said Clyde Ferguson [Clarence Clyde Ferguson, Jr.]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --for civil procedure.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Who did you have for contracts, do you remember?
Speaker 2: Areeda.
Speaker 1: Areeda, okay.
Speaker 2: Phil Areeda [Phillip E. Areeda].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you remember torts who you had?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Lance Liebman.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, who was a friend of my [paternal] aunt's [HistoryMaker Marian Wright Edelman].
Story_ID: 639576
Speaker 1: On the business school [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] side how was that experience then if you said that the law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] was like you just wanted to get through it that first year?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: And are you saying then, you know, the whole case method and everything you took to and were there smaller classes over there?
Speaker 2: Much smaller, no windows.  I think eighty students in a room or sixty students in, in a, in a kind of a curved classroom that they designed.  As I said no textbooks. It's cases, it's current events, and it's not a professor lecturing. It's, he or she kicks off the dialogue but it's really, and it was a really great experience.  My, the professor I connected with was a guy named Mal Salter [Malcolm S. Salter] who, who just retired at the B school last year.  They had a joint program coordinator that would kind of touch bases with us.  So I was, I was, before I took one of his classes I got called into his office a couple of months in and he said, "So what's the matter?"  And I said, "What do you mean what's the matter?"  And he said, "You haven't said a word in class. You're about to flunk out of here."  (Laughter) And I said, "What?"  He said, "Look, calm down," he said, "this happens with some law school students 'cause it's a complete disconnect, right.  In law school, you're in a class with three hundred people, there's a guy in front, Phil Areeda [Phillip E. Areeda] wrote, the twelve books on contracts so the, the thought of you raising your hand to volunteer a comment to Phil Areeda, it's not done, right?  But in the business school it's completely different."  He said, "Look this is the way it works. This is about arguing, stating your case, and defending it with your peers.  This is not about impressing the teacher or the teacher imparting all this knowledge because over here you're learning from each other and you're also learning how to succeed in business which is when you speak in business you gotta have some other people that think you're making the right decisions and the right points.  And oftentimes that requires collaboration and others believing the strength of your argument and so you gotta speak up," (laughter), "in class."  And he said, "The other thing that law school students do in business school is you assume that what you say has to carry this great intellectual weight. It really doesn't. It's about being persuasive and hitting the moment when it's the right moment to make this comment as opposed to later or earlier.  And again that's not something you, you know, at, in law school, your whole grade is the, that blue book.  In B school, it's a range of things. The examination is one part of your grade but the other part is all of this interaction with your peers."  And so he and I actually when there was a piece that was in The New York Times on me about three or four months ago and he emailed me that he had seen it and, you know, how proud he was.  Just, he was a, he's a wonderful guy.
Speaker 1: So he was like a mentor for you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Very much so.
Speaker 1: --there in the B school?
Speaker 2: Very much so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 639577
Speaker 1: You know what is interesting about this is remember when you said, "Math was not my thing?"
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And that, you know, it was, you said it was history and English.  So you didn't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --find that that was an impediment over it, that your brain sort of wrapped around--
Speaker 2: It was harder 'cause I'm not, I'm not instinctively a math, science person and those parts of the experience were harder than others.  So accounting, for example, (laughter) I was like called on in a class. I had no, as, you know, there's a famous thing in B school about being cold called they call it and so I didn't have much to say that day [in class at Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] (laughter).  But I would, I would call that part, that part of the experience sort of the remedial part of, of my work 'cause that other side of the brain still works more.
Story_ID: 639578
Speaker 1: Let me ask you what you were doing summers. Each summer what did you do?  Where did you work?
Speaker 2: Well, my, the immediate (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Summer after your first--
Speaker 2: --the immediate prior experience was that year at Goldman Sachs [Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --that I took off between college [Radcliffe College, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and graduate school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  And that was the first time I had ever been in a business environment.
Speaker 1: And you liked, you said you liked that?
Speaker 2: I liked it.  It turns out as we, as we'll talk about my career that it was a bit of an unreal experience 'cause, you know, it's kind of a year in between and you're kind of getting the cliff notes version of what the profession is about.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: But I liked, I keep saying current events, I liked the notion that you're not, you know, learning, learning to learn which is kind of what law school felt like to me, you know, you're reading all of these things that are from the 1860s so you can understand something (laughter).  And I was like ah, life is too short, you know.  Plus the, I learned in the summers in graduate school so the first summer I was at the Dallas Legal Services [Dallas Legal Services Foundation, Inc.; Legal Aid of NorthWest Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I remember my Aunt Marian [Wright's paternal aunt, HistoryMaker Marian Wright Edelman] telling me that I was gonna be on the wrong side of the law if I was in, you know, corporate law.  And so, of course, the case I get put on is a woman who was being sued. They were, they were taking custody of her children.  And so I'm sitting with this woman who's like a chain smoker and for many law school students this would have been the pinnacle, I mean, courtroom--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --thing and, you know, working on briefs with the lawyers and, you know, I'm with the legal services, so you're really involved 'cause they don't have the money to pay for it.  And so we get in court and I'm with this woman who's like this chain smoking woman and, and then so the lawyer to the other side presents pictures of the back of her young son, who has been hit by a boyfriend that had a belt that was made from a motorcycle chain that had broken.  And I'm sitting there thinking, my aunt said I was gone be on the wrong side of the law. I said, "Is this the right side of the law?  I don't wanna be here, you know."  And so I was really testing this do you really wanna chuck the law, so I did that for a summer there.  I did my last summer at Davis Polk [Davis Polk and Wardwell] on Wall Street [New York, New York].  And the summer in between was working for Chase Bank [Chase Manhattan Bank; JPMorgan Chase and Co.] in London [England].  And so I found that I liked the people at Davis Polk and I liked the people at Dallas Legal Services but I hated the work.  And for, for the same reasons which I just didn't like legal research, I got bored with just how long it took to get to the real thing--
Speaker 1: Department, right.
Speaker 2: And in terms of the courtroom and stuff like that even, you know, the courtroom it was just exceedingly boring, you know, Exhibit 46, Exhibit 46 A, Exhibit 46 F, it's the same pictures of this kid's back.  I was like we know this guy is a creep, we know this woman is a creep, let's move on.  Same thing in, actually in, at Davis Polk which was that I was on deals which was fun but I was doing the part of the deals that was boring which is wrapping up, you know, the transaction.  And the experience of living in Europe was great.  And being involved--
Speaker 1: So you were there for the summer?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And so anyway, it just turns out that I don't know what it was about it, but I, I just preferred to be a decision maker for one thing and, and to be involved in current events.
Story_ID: 639579
Speaker 1: I wanna put this in context because these joint programs, first of all, M.B.A. is the thing to have around the time that you--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you know, there's a lot of that is like, that has a lot of cachet.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You know, and I think that, you know, even, you know, previously people would go to, I'm not saying the same people would go to medical school but--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you know, it has a lot of cachet.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You know, Wall Street, all of that.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: We're in the '80s [1980s]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you know, Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan], you know, I mean, all of that is really sort of happening--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and so how many, like women in the B school [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts], how was, were there a lot of, like what was, what were the numbers percentagewise were you like, was it for (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's not like it is today where it's 50/50. It was, I would say probably closer to a quarter.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And again a small number of minority students.  I had never heard about B school until I was in graduate school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  I mean, it was when I was growing up the black businesspeople in Dallas [Texas] were the person that owns the, the funeral parlor and the, you know, whatever, it just was unheard of.  Still unfortunately, I think in, in Dallas, it's not New York [New York], but the B school thing was a fairly new--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --thing in our generation.
Speaker 1: Right.
Story_ID: 639580
Speaker 1: Your family is probably looking at you as an oddity (laughter) in many ways.  So let me ask you, how do you decide to, I mean, you're interviewing 'cause that last year is the interview process, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Especially when you come back--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and you had worked at Davis Polk [Davis Polk and Wardwell, New York, New York]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --that summer.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So how do you decide to go to First Boston [First Boston Corporation, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: It was, it was tough.  I remember my mentor at Davis Polk, who's still a good friend, was really convinced that I was making a big mistake and he said, "You know, if you don't come now, you won't be able to get back in."  And he said, "I can live with it if you do two years here and you, and you tell me, I've tried for two years and I've gotta go."  And but I just felt like I knew that I didn't wanna do it.  And to this day he's still broken hearted.  We have, we have lunch once a year, (laughter) once a year.  But I just knew that I wasn't prepared to do another something to get ready for something else.  You know, at the end of the day, I had been in school eight years (laughter) and it was just time, you know, time to get on with it.  And several of my close friends were going into investment banking.  And in retrospect, and it took me a long time to come to the core truth about it. I guess psychologically I was in that place where there were eleven joint program students and they were all headed off except one or two, they were all headed off to investment banking.  And I think psychologically I had put myself in a place where if they're doing it, then I'm good enough to do it too.  And really didn't understand kind of the path I was on until, 'til later which was a painful way to learn it.  But I had gotten a little far away from my core truths and, and I had to, to, to go through a couple of hard knocks to get back to center.
Story_ID: 639581
Speaker 1: Talk about that.  I can, I call that conveyer belt.  You know, that I found that, you know, even in law school 'cause I didn't really wanna practice, it was my father's dream, but I--it's sort of the conveyer belt (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --belt mentality.  You're sort of on a path.  So you, that's what I was gonna say 'cause even, you know, invest, you have to start small, I mean, you're doing grunt work a lot of times, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --at the beginning so--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --so, and you're working like a lot of hours too.
Speaker 2: Oh, it was terrible.  It was terrible.  It was a really hard experience.  First of all, I didn't know anybody.  The other kids had been interns in the break between college and graduate school. They had gone off to these firms for two years where you were, where you learned all of the financial analysis and, you know, how you put together a merger book or a deal book or whatever, learn the politics of it.  There weren't a lot but people like Bill Lewis [HistoryMaker William M. Lewis, Jr.] had gone off to Morgan Stanley [Morgan Stanley Wealth Management] and Ray [HistoryMaker Raymond J. McGuire] had been at First Boston [First Boston Corporation, New York, New York] and so had a, you know, he had a rabbi there and Ray had, Bill had rabbis.  So for me--
Speaker 1: You called them rabbis?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  (Laughter) That's cute.
Speaker 2: And so I go into this, and again I've already said I'm not a math person, right, so I go in, I have no, it's just all new and I'm the only black woman there. Ray was there in mergers and acquisitions. I was in corporate finance.  And I just didn't know what I was doing.  And there was nobody to--
Speaker 1: Mentor.
Speaker 2: --you know, I just, I didn't connect to anybody there.  And it was really a, just a bewildering experience.  And so in 19--I was there for three years, in 19--
Speaker 1: So what are your hours?
Speaker 2: Oh, the twenty-four hours. I mean it was just, you know, all day, all night.  Even I say this to young people that, in discussions around success and all that, there was a whole culture about the place that I just didn't get.  So, for example, I'm not a morning person or at least I wasn't until Peyton [Wright's daughter, Peyton Wright] came along, and so the people who came at seven o'clock in the morning were viewed as the, you know, the stars 'cause they're up, you know, and they're early and they're the wet hair and they're, you know (laughter).  And I'm showing up at nine o'clock and I'm thinking, you know, if we're working twelve hours or eighteen hours it doesn't matter which twelve you work, you know.  No, that wasn't the culture.  People had prior relationships from having worked there for the summer. There were partners that they knew or whatever, I just didn't connect to anybody.  And the financial analysis was foreign to me and I felt very insecure about it and there was, it wasn't like there was a class or anything to take, you either you just, the culture was just throwing you in.  So without prior experience, feeling pretty insecure about my financial skills, no mentor, whatever, it was just a disaster.  And so for them the excuse to sort of send me off to my next career was the crash in 1987.  And so I was sort of called in to sort of just say, "Well, we think you're in the wrong job and, you know, maybe you should, you should do municipal finance."  So you remember municipal finance was when all the black mayors were being, you know, whatever.  And I had, I had a couple of friends in that world, I just didn't think that was for me.  And so I interviewed kind of a, around the firm, around another division to go to and it just wasn't the place, and so, you know, there I was, you know, do this or else or whatever.  So I remember I talked with several friends about it and most of my friends just thought I was at the wrong firm.  And just, you know, just leave and go to this place or that place.  And there was only one friend who just said, "This is just not, this is just not for you.  Ain't nothing about it that's consistent with who you are, you just need to just find your, your right place in the world."
Story_ID: 639582
Speaker 1: I remember going home one weekend and I've described this before of having this conversation with my parents [Joan Bell Wright and Harry S. Wright, Sr.] and just being in tears and just, this was my first failure.  And my parents were very serious and we were sitting in the kitchen and they're both listening and so my mother in her usually blunt self, she said, "Well, we don't even like you this way, you know.  We never get to see you. When we do get to see you, you're in a bad mood, and your skin has broken out, your hair is falling out, you know, it's like," (laughter), "who are you doing this for?"  And so my father who was mainly quiet and, so he said, "Well, you, we're gonna love you no matter what and if you, if you wanna sweep streets for a living, that's okay too.  But don't do, don't stay for any reason other than yourself kind of what you wanna achieve.  And we view this as having, you know, we view you externally as this has been very, very tough.  And you should feel at peace, if the, if the, if you feel in your heart that this is not what you wanna do, no arguments here."  And so I went back in that following Monday and I said, "You're right, this isn't a fit and, you know, I'm gonna leave.  I don't think municipal finance is gonna be any, any better of a fit."  And I have to say I spent a lot of time crying.  It was a very tough thing because not only was it awful to just fail at something but I had no idea what I wanted to do.  I wasn't, just was not even in touch with who I was.  And so I literally spent several weeks just kind of going to Central Park [New York, New York] and with this yellow pad to just sort of write down just blue sky, what would just be fun or interesting.  And it was pretty bewildering, I would leave the park, you know, with nothing written on the page because I just, my identity was so caught up in, you know, the friends I had, and they're succeeding--
Speaker 2: The lifestyle.
Speaker 1: --and the lifestyle, blah, blah, blah.  And, so I finally just made it much simpler, kind of what subjects.  And so I came up with seniors because I had lost my [maternal] grandmother [Josephine Cook Bell] during that three years.  And that was one of the experiences that let me know that I was definitely in the wrong place 'cause it was just, no support, no--seniors, housing, because my dad would drive me up, he was trying to find the house where his [maternal] grandfather [Eldridge Bowen II] lived in Harlem [New York, New York] and I was just amazed at just the blocks and blocks of vacant property and, you know, kind of how did this happen.  And so long story short, my [paternal] aunt [HistoryMaker Marian Wright Edelman] sent me to see David Rockefeller's daughter and a few other people that she knew to just go brainstorm about stuff to do.  And she sent me to the New York partnership [Partnership for New York City, New York, New York] which Mr. Rockefeller had started and it had a housing division.  And I ended up working for them making thirty thousand dollars a year from a hundred fifty or whatever it was at First Boston [First Boston Corporation, New York, New York].  And it was, it was one of the best years of my life.  So that obviously set me on a different course.
Story_ID: 639583
Speaker 1: Now, had you saved money that you could take that pay cut so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you, 'cause you're making, you were making a lot of money?
Speaker 2: And not spending it really.  And I moved back home, my parents [Joan Bell Wright and Harry S. Wright, Sr.] were living in Brooklyn [New York] at that time, so I let my apartment go 'cause that was the biggest expense I had.  And I had banked my bonuses and all of that.  And so I felt, listen, I was so miserable it didn't matter what I got paid.  And they were embarrassed to, but it was, the job they had was to go to Harlem and put together a sales office for a development called Towers on the Park [New York, New York] which was the first major development done in Harlem in over thirty years.  And so the irony was all this insecurity I felt about, you know, computers and calculators and everything so what did I have to do?  My boss sent me up there and here's your budget, hire a sales team, get the computers, bought a, you know, the HP 12Cs. I had to teach everybody 'cause it's not like anybody, the sales team was from the community, I was, you know, the one negotiating the deal with the banks that were doing the in loans for the homebuyers.  So here I was, it was finance but in a completely different context.  And so over, over time I kind of licked my wounds and it was, once I was in something that I really loved, I came to the epiphany that I did really love finance, I just didn't love it in the context that I was in.  And it was ironically that experience was where I met the then president of Carver Federal Savings Bank [Carver Federal Savings and Loan Association, New York, New York], Mr. Greene [Richard T. Greene, Sr.].  I met all of the political leaders and the people who would ultimately be very important in my career.  And I think the best touche moment was when the development was finished and we had to bring the, you know, the important people by to see it, I got to escort David Rockefeller through the building which, you know, if I had stayed at First Boston [First Boston Corporation, New York, New York] the rest of my life I would have never met him and there are many other people.  So, you know, my mother had this phrase, "What's for you, is for you," and she said that very frequently.  And it was really about you ultimately have to figure out what makes you tick and get there and that takes time.
Speaker 1: Now, you said you did that a year, just--
Speaker 2: Three years.
Speaker 1: Three years (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I was gonna say--
Speaker 2: Yeah, three years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I was gonna, so you're--
Speaker 2: So this is 1990--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --when I'm ending up at the partnership [Partnership for New York City, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you're, and the partnership had been formed in what year?
Speaker 2: The mid-'70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: Mid-'70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So and who had been the, who had, you said the founder had been--
Speaker 2: David Rockefeller (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) David Rockefeller.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Now, who was head at the time that you--
Speaker 2: It was a woman by the name of Ellen Sulzberger [Ellen Sulzberger Straus] who became a mentor also.  Her family was the family that owned The New York Times.  And she was a wonderful woman.  And I'll tell you some stories about her but she was classic, she was, actually I wanna say, real New York [New York] but she also, she and her husband [Peter Straus] were, were very politically involved and they had homes in Washington [D.C.] and in New York.
Story_ID: 639584
Speaker 1: That first year you were talking about, the second year you said that you were running a neighborhood, you know, you were running this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was a--
Speaker 1: --neighborhood entrepreneurs--
Speaker 2: --it was a new program called the Neighborhood Entrepreneurs Program.  It was a very successful city housing development effort but they were largely well established white contractors.  And so this was an effort to get minorities engaged in the game 'cause after all of these neighborhoods were minority neighborhoods.  And so my job was to, was to go out with these five minority developers, contractors, really, and we had developed through an RFP [request for proposal] process and so I had to go on a hands on basis to try to encourage these guys to put in the infrastructure to become developers which is different than being a contractor.  And so these were normally family businesses where the father was a contractor and the wife did the paperwork or a son engaged but they really didn't have the infrastructure to manage a banking relationship, multiple subs to do the various pieces of development, understanding the cash flows to get from the beginning to the end, understanding that you've gotta have a lawyer who really understands how to box with a Chase Bank [Chase Manhattan Bank; JPMorgan Chase and Co.], not just kind of your friend at church, kind of.  So it was, it was a great experience.  And if, it really anchored my experience in all of the neighborhoods of New York [New York] instead of just Harlem where I was for Towers on the Park.  And it was that experience that really anchored me in the neighborhoods, the relationships with the pastors, the city council people, the state assembly, blah, blah, blah.  And that all became very important when I went into public life later.
Speaker 1: So you're learning really New York?
Speaker 2: For the first time.
Speaker 1: For the, on the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Cause at First Boston [First Boston Corporation, New York, New York] I was just on a plane, so it's not like you really--
Speaker 1: So who--
Speaker 2: --know the neighborhoods.
Speaker 1: --so who were the movers and shakers sort of, I mean, did you, like this board, did you have much interaction with the board?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Who was, who was on the board?
Speaker 2: Oh, everybody that was anybody was on that board, you know.  And for me being, you know, twenty-seven years old whatever, my boss, Kathy Wylde [Kathryn S. Wylde] was a really terrific boss because she exposed us to the board of directors, it wasn't about her just taking our work in.  We're sitting around the table with, you know, the Henry Kravises and Jerry Speyer and [HistoryMaker] Basil Paterson and, you know, it was just, it was just a who's who.  And for me again as a, as a twenty-seven year old whatever I was at the time, I didn't really know these people because I, you know, I had lived in New York but I was living, you know, in Manhattan [New York] and flying out to, you know, every place.  And my only connection to New York was going to my dad's [Harry S. Wright, Sr.] church.  And I had an uncle [Wright's paternal uncle, Arthur Wright III] that lived in Brooklyn [New York] as well but I really didn't, it was the first time I had gone to Harlem really was his travels up there, trying to find his [maternal] grandfather's [Eldridge Bowen II] house.
Story_ID: 639585
Speaker 1: What happens then? Were you, did you become, start, you got to, started to learn the political structure, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And now Koch [Ed Koch] was mayor how long?  When did he--
Speaker 2: It was 1990, David Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins] was elected mayor.
Speaker 1: Had you worked on his campaign?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No. Okay.
Speaker 2: And so but friends had.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And so I get a call saying, "I put your name in today to be a, to go on the City Planning Commission.  A guy named Charlie Shorter [Charles A. Shorter] who lived in the Upper West Side [New York, New York] was in the, and I forget how I met Charlie.  Anyway long and, long and short of it was I got it.  And the City Planning Commission was a part time thing but very prestigious, it's the entity that approves all real estate development in, in New York City [New York, New York].  And so back to Ellen Straus [Ellen Sulzberger Straus].  So she calls me up and she said, "I am so proud of you, this is just (unclear).  I want you to come for tea."  So I come over and she has her little fancy, you know, tea set and whatever, she was like, so after a lot of chitchat, she said, "Now, Debbie [HistoryMaker Deborah Wright], let's talk turkey," you know, and so I'm, so she says, "Now, this is what I want you to do. When you join the commission don't say anything for three months," and I'm thinking what?  She says, "And so during that three months though you're gonna be studying and learning and you're gonna figure out who can take you around and teach you about the zoning regulation and this and blah, blah, blah."  And she said, "Everybody else is gonna be yapping away and you're also gonna be listening to them because in the three months you're gonna know everything they think because they're gonna be talking all the time because they wanna impress everybody with what they know."  And she said, "You're gonna be silent because you and I both know that you don't know anything," (laughter), "about this but nobody else will know that if you don't say anything.  They'll think that you're just being coy and by the time it's the fourth month and you raise your hand everybody's gonna be listening because they're gonna wanna know what you think."  Isn't that brilliant?
Speaker 1: That is brilliant (laughter).
Speaker 2: Hey, this woman was tight.  She was tight.  She knew (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That--
Speaker 2: She knew her stuff.  And I did just what she told me to do and she was absolutely right.  As--
Speaker 1: So how large was the, how large was the planning commission?
Speaker 2: I think it was twelve--
Speaker 1: Twelve.
Speaker 2: --twelve or thirteen people.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All appointed by the mayor?
Speaker 2: No, and that was what, it was fascinating. This was a new commission. It used to be a very small kind of cloistered make decisions in a back room kind of thing and this was a new part of the democratic process that came in with--
Speaker 1: With David Dinkins.
Speaker 2: --David Dinkins.  So he had a certain number of appointees, the borough presidents had each one.  And it was a very delicate relationship because everybody expected us to be at war because of the different political appointees and it turned out to be just the opposite which is, it was really a very collaborative thing.  And I met some people there who are still some of my closest friends on that commission.  But it was, I did that a couple of years.
Story_ID: 639586
Speaker 1: Then there was a big scandal at the housing authority [New York City Housing Authority] and David Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins] asked me to go over there and be one of three board members.  And I ended up being, well in a, in a very important operational role which was there was a billion dollars in development money that hadn't been spent and it was a big scandal that it hadn't been spent and so I was sort of--
Speaker 2: Tasked with--
Speaker 1: --tasked with getting that done.  And it was a real test of diplomatic skills because this was a real, this was sort of a tough place.  So the chairman of the board was a Hispanic woman, really brilliant woman who had been at the--
Speaker 2: Of the housing authority.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Her name?
Speaker 1: Debbie--Sandy Hernandez, Hernandez Pinero, Sally Hernandez Pinero was a deputy mayor for David Dinkins.  So she went over to run it and then I went with her and was tasked with getting this development money running.  But they, it was a very, you know, it was the largest housing authority in the country; it's six hundred thousand residents.  But it had this very delicate relationship between the administrators who were largely white, the managers who were some white, some black, and then all this sea of residents this, was black and Hispanic.  So it was a pretty unusual thing to have the two of us run, and generationally we were much younger than these guys.  The guy who ran development was a guy named Dominick Catania, short, chain smoker.  And so here he has this boss that's this black woman that's like twenty-five years younger than he is, and he's got the unions to deal with 'cause, you know, the way this, it was slow because they were managing how this was, you know, going.  So that became a really interesting relationship.  And--
Speaker 2: Interesting or difficult?
Speaker 1: It was a good relationship, nobody predicted that it would be but there were several tests.  What I, what I felt we needed to do and, and Sally concurred was that we needed to pull construction out of these individual contracts and, you know, get with the real world, hire one of the major construction managers, external, private sector, and get this thing rolling.  And poor Dominick was in the middle between all these, these, you know, he was a civil servant too.  But so my job was really to convince him that it made sense.  And he was nervous about keeping his job, he was nervous 'cause he's got this, you know, this black woman, I'm sure everybody around him said, "What does she know?  She'll be here two years, she'll be out."
Story_ID: 639587
Speaker 1: And interestingly enough, the moment of truth didn't come from him. It came from a guy that was running the technology department ironically 'cause I was being a very polite, southern, you know, whatever.  I had the agenda and we, you know, we did that but there hadn't been any blowups and ironically there was an incident where this guy was essentially refusing to deal with my laptop, it was a silly issue of it wasn't compatible because they had IBMs [International Business Machines Corporation] and this was an Apple [Apple Inc.] and whatever.  And I didn't know all of this drama was going on behind me and I walked into a very difficult conversation.  He was essentially yelling at my secretary and saying, "Well, we don't, we don't service those and if she wants that then she needs to go someplace else and whatever" (laughter).  And so I walk into this, I overhear this because it's in the hallway, I walk into this and, and so then everybody is beet red because I'm standing there and they both know I've heard this conversation.  So I just proceed to dress him down.  And I said, "You know what?  It's just the opposite. I'm using this computer and it's your job to figure out how to make it happen.  I've got a meeting downtown. I'll be back in three hours and if that computer is not working when I get back, you are gonna need another job," at the very top of my voice which ricocheted through there.  So I get downstairs to my car and my driver, a guy named Eddie Overton [ph.], who still checks in on me every day.  And I called my father [Harry S. Wright, Sr.] and I was a little ashamed of myself actually 'cause I had really just gone off but I think it was just, it was the tension of all of those weeks of, and so I called my father, and I said, "You know, Dad, I really lost my temper just now and I used some bad words too" (laughter).  And he listened and he said, "You know what?  It's a good thing you did because now everybody knows that you've got a temper and they also know that you're in charge.  And my guess is you won't ever have to do that again at the housing authority because at this moment everybody else is talking about it."  And for sure that's what happened.  And so Dominick [Dominick Catania] and I, I took him with me to the partnership [Partnership for New York City, New York, New York] and other places to meet with some of the major developers and talk about the role of construction managers.  And he became convinced over a period of weeks that that was really the only way that we were gonna deploy that money 'cause the tension was that the federal government had threatened to take this money back.  And so you've got the residents and their advisors going ballistic because these resident are living in these conditions that the money is for.
Speaker 2: Who--
Speaker 1: You've got this scandal, the New York Post every other day, you know, tick down time running out for the billion dollars, and so there was a lot of pressure for him to get with the program.  But I also felt like his reputation was an honest guy who was caught in the middle and I felt that if I gave him two or three weeks to come around to this, that he would have the confidence to sell this to the unions which is really what we had to do.
Story_ID: 639588
Speaker 1: Who preceded you at the housing, housing commission?  Who was--
Speaker 2: It was a woman who got caught in the scandal.
Speaker 1: Now what was her name?
Speaker 2: Laura Blackburne [Laura D. Blackburne].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Laura Blackburne.  And she had, she was housing commissioner or was--
Speaker 2: She was the head of the New York City Housing Authority (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Housing authority, I'm sorry, housing authority.
Speaker 2: And Laura had unfortunately had some custom furniture made for her office and somebody dropped a dime on her and so this was the hit, this is in front of the New York Post, five thousand dollar pink couch and so she was out.  And then this, then this billion dollars got discovered and it was sort of weeks of--
Speaker 1: So you mean, so it was, was it just sit, so this is the thing where the federal government, HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development], had actually given money--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you know, that was due and because of red tape or not doing the filings or whatever the govern- HUD was saying they were gonna take the, the money away?
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 639589
Speaker 1: In the context of housing there's a lot of discussion about how, public housing around the country (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --at this point, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And, I mean, I know here in Chicago [Illinois], you know, we're trying to--
Speaker 2: I came here during that period.
Speaker 1: Okay.  We had--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I'm wondering if that's around the time, did we have Vince Lane [HistoryMaker Vincent Lane] here?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yes, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Vince Lane was here.  And this is, this is 1990, '90 [1990], 1992?
Speaker 2: Yeah, 1992 to '94 [1994] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Ninety-two [1992] to '94 [1994].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So you, but this is a huge thing for someone.  I mean, you've catapulted yourself up in a very short order.
Speaker 2: Completely.
Speaker 1: You know, with the public sector.
Speaker 2: Completely.
Speaker 1: So but it's also a time where they're trying to figure out public housing.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I mean, what to do with this monstrosity.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You know, and what to do with the residents and how to, you know, change things.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So what, so you leave, you leave the housing authority board [New York City Housing Authority] to go over, but you said there were three of you, you know, that went, and you only mentioned two, you and Sally [Sally Hernandez Pinero].  But who (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In the complex political structure of the housing authority it has to be two members of the party that's in office and one of the other.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: So a guy named John Trubin was the Republican on the board.  A wonderful guy who had been Jacob Javits' [Jacob K. Javits] law partner.  So in '94 [sic. 1993], David Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins] loses the election to Rudy Giuliani.  The other important thing that happened for me was that in doing the, in dealing with the--
Speaker 1: The--
Speaker 2: --development money--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --I became a manager which I never thought of myself as before because in addition to my board role I had to manage Dominick [Dominick Catania] and this, you know, development thing.
Speaker 1: But see what I'm finding strange about this, who, so, it was a, you guys were actually running, you actually were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --running the--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So Dominick was in charge sort of and you were running--
Speaker 2: The day to day.
Speaker 1: --him and really trying--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --to help him figure out--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and you were very hands on?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And worse than that, the board, then there's the general manager who's supposed to manage everything so this development piece had been carved out for me to run.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then the general manager gets fired 'cause he didn't work out.
Speaker 1: Now, who was the general manager?
Speaker 2: I've forgotten his name (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Unfortunately a transplant, not a, not a New Yorker--
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: --and just couldn't, just, it just didn't work.  And so I had to step into that job for several months until we found a successor.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So now I'm really in the soup.  But--
Speaker 1: So now what is the annual budget of the housing authority?
Speaker 2: Oh, $20 billion at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know what it is now.
Speaker 1: How many units?
Speaker 2: Two hundred thousand, 189,000.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Six hundred thousand official residents we used to say.  Unofficial probably a million.  And so but I had never thought of myself as a manager.
Story_ID: 639590
Speaker 1: Rudy Giuliani wins.  I had met Dick Parsons [HistoryMaker Richard Parsons] in the course of my time at the New York partnership [Partnership for New York City, New York, New York].
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: And he had become a bit of a mentor at some--
Speaker 2: But now what was his role at the--
Speaker 1: He was on the board.
Speaker 2: He was on, he was one of the people on the--
Speaker 1: At the time he was running Dime Savings Bank [Dime Savings Bank of New York, New York, New York].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And so over a course of breakfast twice a year or whatever, I was gonna go work for him at the Dime Savings Bank.  And so he was Rudy Giuliani's transition chairman.  And so--
Speaker 2: Because they had been law partners?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So he calls up and he says, "You know, a lot of people are recommending that that you become the housing commissioner. You got any interest?"  I said, "No, no, Dick, I'm, I've done my time in government.  I'm ready to get back to private sector and I wanna do this thing that we had talked about."  He said, "Okay, just checking," you know.  And so then there's radio silence for a few weeks and then he calls me back and he said, "I need you to come up and to talk a little bit."  So we have this joke about the fact that I'll never sit on a couch in his office again because I sit on this couch and when he goes through this whole speech about how the city needed me and it's a very tense time racially and, you know, all of the drama, the, you know, the Dinkins people and the Giuliani people--
Speaker 2: Well, he was right about that, it was a tense time.
Speaker 1: He was right about that but, you know, (laughter) why me kind of thing.  So he says, "Just do me a favor and just go meet him.  You don't have to make any commitments just go meet him and sort of see what you think."  So I was like, oh, my god, here I am, you know, so I did.  I went to meet him and to my surprise I actually liked him.  And he was very disarming.  The first thing he said was, which I really appreciated, he says, "It's not, it's not just me interviewing you. I know you're interviewing me too.  And I can understand how awkward this might be."  But so we talked about housing and it wasn't a field that he really had a ton of strong opinions about.  But the one thing that he and I agreed with completely was all of the press from the housing division was around the new houses and nobody focused on this sort of backwater secret of what was sixty-five thousand units of housing that the city had taken in foreclosure and was managing.  And these are sort of multifamily buildings or townhouses that the landlord either abandoned or the city took from them because they didn't pay their taxes.  And we got a couple thousand people sort of managing, its people living in these houses, right.  And so, we talked, it was a really long conversation.  We talked about my [paternal] aunt [HistoryMaker Marian Wright Edelman] in this, in this, and somebody had briefed him on that and he said, "As long as you have your own opinions, it--." (Laughter) "I can live with that kind of thing."  And so what came out of it was that we had this common view that for different reasons, interestingly enough he had a philosophical point of view about the city owning property.  I had a practical point of view around the misery that those buildings were creating for everybody else on the block because I had been in development and knew that nobody wanted to live on those blocks.  And so again, for some reason I'm trying to remember why I was in Atlanta [Georgia] but I flew to Atlanta, maybe it was a holiday or something, and I was in Atlanta when he called to ask me to be the housing commissioner.  And so then, you know, that was a whole family, (laughter) that's a really family conversation at this point.  And so my parents [Joan Bell Wright and Harry S. Wright, Sr.] came down just where Dick was which is, you know, it's not about you, you know, you need to do this 'cause it's a moment in time.  And I called David Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins] and I asked him how he would feel about it and he said, "I would be honored if you did take the job."  And so I called back and took the job.  And he put out, David put out a press release that his person was getting selected.  And, and it was front page New York Times [The New York Times] because he had, he didn't have any black appointees (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right.
Speaker 1: --at that point and the pressure was building around that.
Story_ID: 639591
Speaker 1: It was a, a very tough two years.  It, I'm extremely proud, I think of everything in my career. That would be the one job where getting those sixty-five thousand units off--
Speaker 2: The public dole?
Speaker 1: --the public dole.  Also creating the Neighborhood Entrepreneurs Program, which was the parallel to the Neighborhood Builders Program where for the first time, minority property managers were given an opportunity to own these buildings through a competitive process, brought the same banks back to the table, told them, "I've got the buildings, I'm paying for the construction, I want you to finance these guys just the way you did with the New York builders," and created a whole cadre of property owners, larger property owners 'cause they had a building here, a building there.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: Had the New York partnership [Partnership for New York City, New York, New York] manage it and outsourced it from my agency [New York City Department of Housing Preservation and Development].  Even cut a deal with the union 'cause they were freaking out about their two thousand property managers, what are they gonna do?  And NYU real estate school [Real Estate Institute; Schack Institute of Real Estate, New York, New York] agreed to take these guys as students so they could get their, you know, education around property management broadly defined.  The union paid for half of it, NYU [New York University, New York, New York] reduced the price for the other half and we, our contribution was that they could get off work to go to these classes.
Story_ID: 639592
Speaker 1: But I have to tell you a good story about Rudy Giuliani 'cause there's a lot that that that's negative.  As you might imagine being the, the Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins] person in the administration (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --it was, it was, it was tense.  And--
Speaker 2: Did people resent you being there?
Speaker 1: Big time.  Big time.  A lot of, you know, just a lot of the stuff that happens.
Speaker 2: But was that a, that seems so unusual though.  I mean, I, you know, that he would have reached out to, was it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was Dick.
Speaker 2: It was Dick.
Speaker 1: It was Dick Parsons [HistoryMaker Richard Parsons].
Speaker 2: Okay.  Because Dick was trying to make--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --sure he had--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --the right mix.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And what ended up happening was that there was a lot of resentment of the people who were part of his political apparatus.
Speaker 2: But there's also, was a philosophy he came into the position with, not only--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --was it a hard fight with the first black mayor--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --and only black mayor--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --of New York [New York] but it was, it was that he came in with a mission to clean up the city, right?
Speaker 1: (Nods head) And, you know, a different point of view about what the city should be doing and not.  But I was tested the first few weeks but when I came to meetings, and he would have these cabinet meetings and I was always prepared and it got to be a little bit of a joke because I used to start getting invited to meetings that I had nothing to do with because he just respects your opinion and wants to hear what you have to say.  But this notion of exiting that business, 'cause we didn't, we didn't just set out to sell those units, we stopped foreclosing and created some very innovative ways to help people manage through that process of getting behind in their taxes, so we stopped the door of them flooding in, and then but the process, even the notion of selling these buildings was extremely controversial because Koch [Ed Koch] had auctioned them which was just a return door.  Dinkins had said, "Sell them only through nonprofit groups or to the tenants."  And so there was a whole infrastructure, LISC [Local Initiatives Support Corporation] and Enterprise [Enterprise Foundation; Enterprise Community Partners, Inc.] and all of these organizations that built up around teaching the tenants or helping nonprofits, a lot of subsidy involved in this, a lot of money.  And to suggest that it be sold to the private sector, albeit smaller, it was heresy, right.  So I spent about nine months fighting with the left and some of these folks had the stupidity to try to go back door to the ministers and everything to block this, right.  And then to the right, all the guys who had been waiting to get these buildings were livid that this is happening.  Legal Aid [Legal Aid Society, New York, New York] threatened to sue, so I just took 'em one at a time.  I cut my deal with the, with Legal Aid, their main issue was displacement and I said, "Look, I'm doing this for the residents. If they're legitimate residents, they get to come back or they can stay there while the construction was going on."  And so that was done.  Then the left folks, when the ministers started calling me, Reverend Butts [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Calvin O. Butts] at Abyssinian [Abyssinian Baptist Church, New York, New York] and some of the others, and I told 'em what the deal was, you know, they got that.
Story_ID: 639593
Speaker 1: --The housing, the department, I mean, I mean, like (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's three thousand people, it's--
Speaker 1: Three thousand people?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was probably, I don't know, 5, $600 million a year in terms of the budget.
Speaker 1: Now, is this rent control that falls under here too?  'Cause a lot of the depart- does, or is that different, is that a different--
Speaker 2: I didn't have that, I didn't have that.
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: That's a separate, that's separate in New York [New York].
Speaker 1: That is?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  I'm sorry.  Okay.
Speaker 2: So, so there's two moments of truth.  First with the liberal orthodoxy.  So Legal Aid [Legal Aid Society, New York, New York] is done and that was a big threat 'cause they were gonna sue to stop the program.  And then so then I had the advocates to deal with in the housing community.  And so I essentially got challenged to a duel to go to the neighborhoods and meet the residents of these buildings.  And I said, "Sure.  That's who I'm doing this for."  And so everybody is stunned, right.  And my agency freaks out 'cause they're like, you know, the whole job of the agency is to keep the commissioner from actually meeting these folks.  So I don't know if you've ever been to the state office building, Adam Clayton Powell Building [Adam Clayton Powell Jr. State Office Building] in Harlem [New York, New York].  So we set this thing up one evening and I asked my staff to put together a presentation like a board of directors, you know, boards, here's the issue, here's, you know, the solution, here's why we need to do whatever.  So in comes hundreds of black and Hispanic women with their children and these essentially white liberal men who are, you know, telling me how I should be managing my relationship with these (laughter) women.  And so we do this presentation, everybody is silent as a pin, this must have been three, four hundred people plus all of the, you know, the staffs of these advocacy organizations.  And so then we do Q and A.  And all of their questions were what I thought they were gonna be about, which is their living conditions.  These buildings are, were lawless because essentially drug dealers would move into them, every time they'd call to say a door is missing, we'd go send out somebody to replace the door, it's kicked down again.  So we go through about an hour, so the presentation is an hour, Q and A for an hour, very polite questions but to the point, you know.  So then the advocates are getting upset because they're, you know, they're thinking this is gonna be a lot of rancor.  By the way, no housing commissioner had ever met with them before and they didn't even know that I was a black woman.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: So we go through, it's the third hour now and the advocates are sort of zinging me with this and that and whatever, god comes up, just nasty questions.  So I said, "Well, look, we've been at this for three hours I think the residents have a good feeling for the issues. Let me just ask a basic question. Raise your hand if you would like HPD [New York City Department of Housing Preservation and Development] to continue to be your landlord."  And the whole room just burst into laughter and it was done.  So I closed the meeting, they rushed up, wanted to take pictures with their daughters and whatever, and my staff who was just, you know, just (makes sound), going (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --like this (gesture). They were just like in, just--
Speaker 1: Amazed.
Speaker 2: --in heart failure that I was gonna get yelled at or screamed on or worse.  And it was ridiculous.  This was about the advocacy agenda. It wasn't about the people.
Speaker 1: The residents, themselves.
Speaker 2: So this was so successful that one, after, after my time leaving 'cause again I only had a year at this point, won awards from the Ford Foundation [New York, New York], everybody in terms of innovations in government.
Story_ID: 639594
Speaker 1: Moment of truth two, was when the other side tried to, tried to kill the program with Giuliani [Rudy Giuliani].  And--
Speaker 2: These are the conservatives then?
Speaker 1: (Nods head) Who thought the buildings should be auctioned.
Speaker 2: Because they could make, then that's when they pick up the--
Speaker 1: Right.  So I get this phone call saying that the mayor wanted to meet with me the next day.  And I immediately get just furious because I've gone through, this has been a year of just trying to get the thing designed, ready to go.  And so I called up, I called up Dick Parsons [HistoryMaker Richard Parsons] and I said, "Look, I've been called over to city hall [New York City Hall, New York, New York] for this meeting and, you know, I'm not the type of person who threatens to quit but I just want you to know this is a resignable moment for me."  And he said, "Now, I want you to calm down, you know, Rudy is the type of guy he likes to hear both sides of the issues and don't assume that he's not gonna agree with you."  And so my, the deputy mayor that I reported in to was a great guy named John Dyson [John S. Dyson] who had been with me through thick and thin through this program and whatever.  And so sure enough I get called down to the private offices of the mayor and a couple of people in the administration who were vociferous on the other side.  And so I get down there ready kind of to shoot my argument saying, and then all four of them had a big fight (laughter) and I wasn't even saying anything.  And so the guy, this guy whose name I won't mention, finally said, "Well, she's your housing commissioner so I suppose you have to listen to, you, but I'm telling, telling you it's not gonna work 'cause the capacity is not there in the neighborhoods to own and manage these properties."  And so the mayor got mad and he sort of flashed red, he said, "You're right, she is my housing commissioner and we're gonna do it her way and if it doesn't work, we'll try something else," and that was it, case closed.  And that was one of the great things about him as a boss, I'm telling you, he did not put up with people trying to undercut another commissioner.  And when they went back and forth and he sort of heard the arguments and he made up his mind that it made sense.  And that was it, there was no more warfare over the subject.
Speaker 2: So it took then, in another year you got it done?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, the first round got done that first year and off, I left as, you know, to go up to the empowerment zone [Upper Manhattan Empowerment Zone Development Corporation], and it took ten years to sell all those buildings, it's, sixty-five thousand units of housing.
Speaker 2: So now who was buying the build- tell me, the, the structure.  So you had--
Speaker 1: These were foreclosed, these are (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Foreclosed--
Speaker 1: --people who didn't pay their taxes.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And so our agency would take them from the private owner--
Speaker 2: And then--
Speaker 1: --and we would manage them but they had occupants.  And so there wasn't enough capacity to get these buildings sold through either the tenants themselves or nonprofits who would manage them for the tenants.  And so the numbers kept building up over a period of time and there wasn't enough avenues to get them out.  So the innovation was to not just sell them to the private sector but to actually pick local property owners who had a couple buildings here, three or four buildings, 'cause my, part of my agenda was building up stronger minority businesses, local businesses, and I couldn't say that. We're called the Neighborhood Entrepreneurs Program not the minority entrepreneurs program but it, it took over a decade to, to ultimately get that portfolio done (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's amazing.
Speaker 1: So we can move on.
Speaker 2: But there was a commitment to the program even after you left?  Now--
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Story_ID: 639595
Speaker 1: Why the empowerment zone [Upper Manhattan Empowerment Zone Development Corporation]?  What, what, how did you, because two years that was, where in his, well, he [Rudy Giuliani] was still, he was still--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, no, he was still there.  Yeah, that was hard leave, saying, telling him I was going.  But so Dick Parsons [HistoryMaker Richard Parsons] was the chairman of the empowerment zone and he knew that he couldn't call me to do another thing so Charlie Rangel [HistoryMaker Charles B. Rangel] called (laughter) and said, "You gotta come up here 'cause we gotta get this thing going."  It was late in getting off the ground and there was a concern 'cause all of this money, it was unique in the nation 'cause it had the federal money but it also had city and state money so it was a pool of $250 million to invest in bringing business back.  And so I actually, actually I was shocked to get the call because I figured if anybody was gonna call me it was Dick and since he didn't call I figured I was off the hook.  And so, you might have remembered reading about this horrible incident where there was a, a record store that was being evicted from a store in a, on 125th Street and the owner was refusing to move and some crazy guy came in and blew up the store and several people died.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And the leaders in Harlem [New York, New York] asked me to ask the mayor to come up and meet with them in the aftermath of that.  And it was that day that I took the subway up and I had to walk from east to west and I just had this really emotional epiphany that people had died over rent.  And meanwhile just two blocks east of that store there was all of this property vacant that this guy could have, if he had had, if somebody had been a honest broker and sort of said, "You know, what?  You can, you can pay half your rent and we'll give you a loan to renovate a store two blocks east," and that that entity did not exist in Harlem and that was a perfect role for the empowerment zone.  So I felt like a, like a person being, you know, walked off, a pig being walked to slaughter 'cause I knew it in my heart that day that I, that I should take that job.  And so over the course of a few weeks I then started to do (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So when you went up there, who was it that talked to you that day?  Was it Dick?  Was it Rangel?  Who was the--
Speaker 2: Rangel, Rangel.  So I left Rangel's office and I called Dick and, "I said you chicken, you could, you could have gave me a heads up that I was gonna get this call."  He said, "Well, I was scared to 'cause I knew you had already done your duty with HPD [New York City Department of Housing Preservation and Development] but you and I both know you're the right person to do the job," so I did, I did.
Story_ID: 639596
Speaker 1: What was the task ahead of you with the empowerment zone [Upper Manhattan Empowerment Zone Development Corporation] was to--
Speaker 2: The housing had been built, we have all these residents there who put their, you know, their down payments down and all their lifely savings to buy a home but there was no place to buy milk or go to the movies or, you know, buy a dress or whatever, and so that was the task which was to use this $250 million to get businesses to come to the neighborhood.
Speaker 1: But isn't this really the beginning of what is the new Harlem [New York, New York] or, you know, the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, definitely.
Speaker 1: --change in Harlem?  I mean, what people are saying that Harlem we won't recognize anymore--
Speaker 2: Definitely.
Speaker 1: --you know, that--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --it's--
Speaker 2: Definitely.
Speaker 1: --maybe it was the Harlem, you know, it was the Harlem that maybe it's, but people are fearful in Harlem now is that--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, I understand that.
Speaker 1: --it's gonna (laughter) go back to what it was in the, early 1900s, you know.
Speaker 2: I understand that.
Speaker 1: But that was the beginning really of the development.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean, it's changed 'cause we're talking about nineteen--
Speaker 2: That was 19--
Speaker 1: --ninety-six [1996] to ninety--1999.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And the big development that we put, I don't know $10 million in was a development called Harlem USA [New York, New York].  Which was the first sort of shopping, not shopping center but just a big complex with Magic Johnson theater [AMC Magic Johnson Harlem 9, New York, New York], a Disney Store, that kind of stuff--
Speaker 1: The Gap [Gap, Inc.], Gap.
Speaker 2: --but not really what--
Speaker 1: When you had the Gap there.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  And so that was the catalyst for what has been a really remarkable--the housing had to happen first 'cause you couldn't have blighted streets and you needed the families to come back.  But it has been a remarkable renaissance.
Story_ID: 639597
Speaker 1: Can you tell me what, what, did you have trouble getting the retailers there?
Speaker 2: (Nods).
Speaker 1: I mean and what did you have to give them to get them there?  I mean to convince them to come?
Speaker 2: Well, we were armed with some data from Michael Porter's organization in Boston [Massachusetts], Initiative for Inner City Competitiveness [sic. Initiative for a Competitive Inner City] had done some analytical work.  We also had the great benefit this is something that Dick Parsons [HistoryMaker Richard Parsons] provided that no other empowerment zone had. We had McKinsey and Company work with me and my team for the better part of, you know, six, eight months to develop our strategy and to zero in the three or four industries that made sense for Harlem [New York, New York].  Tourism was an obvious one, retail because of the lack of options, education because, you know, Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York] and the other universities were there and healthcare 'cause a lot of the hospital infrastructure was there.  And so we had a bit of a target list from that and we worked with the developers on the real estate side who needed the data to show the chain stores that this was a, just a ripe opportunity.  And once the first couple of developments got done, it was, we didn't need to do any selling. It was just done.
Speaker 1: But Manhattan [New York] was running out of space too wasn't it (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No question.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I mean, didn't it need to like, it was trapped.
Speaker 2: And the, and middle class whites could not buy apartments in sort of the mainstream area.  So it was a confluence of things that all sort of came together.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, with you, what were the key things, one this is during Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] administration (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --right?  Okay.  So--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --we have that going on.  Dick is, he's at Time Warner [Time Warner, Inc., New York, New York]--
Speaker 2: At that point.
Speaker 1: --at this point, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: He's moved passed the board, right?  He's actually working at Time Warner, I think.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And what are the other things happening in New York [New York] at that point that's what I'm just wondering, the things that are sort of critical?  So it's a good time financially, there are a lot--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --of these, you know, deals. There's, there's plenty of money, the country, you know--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --there were, you know, there's a lot of that.
Speaker 2: Crime is down.
Speaker 1: Crime is down in New York, that's right.
Speaker 2: Dramatically.
Speaker 1: Because Giuliani [Rudy Giuliani] has taken care of that.
Speaker 2: Right.  Although it was through the Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins] safe streets, safe cities [Safe Streets, Safe City] program that was approved as he was leaving--
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: --that provided the budget to significantly expand the number of policemen on the street.  So all the conditions are ripe.  Wealth increasing, income increasing, middle class white families unable to afford an apartment on the Upper West Side or the Upper East Side. Crime is down, new stores popping up, lots of news about, you know, this is the next place to live, and so that's what happened, people started moving north.
Story_ID: 639598
Speaker 1: Now, how are you dealing with the community groups?  Like who--
Speaker 2: (Makes sound).
Speaker 1: Okay, because they're, there are tons of them, you know, who say you're threatening, you know, you're changing the nature (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: You're a traitor, you know.
Speaker 2: Yep, yep.  Well, it was, it was very controversial because the empowerment zone [Upper Manhattan Empowerment Zone Development Corporation] had been talked about for so many years that everybody thought that I was just supposed to come and write 'em a check.  And so we, here we got McKinsey [McKinsey and Company] doing this study that's creating a framework for these are the four things we're investing in, we're not building schools, we're not building senior citizens, we're not building parks, this is about the economy.  This money will largely be used to attract businesses to Harlem [New York, New York] because businesses mean jobs.  And that was very controversial because in the Harlem psyche a job is working for the man, right, entrepreneurship is valued, working is not.  And we had a lot of fights, you know, with McKinsey around, 'cause their recommendation was go straight for these four industries, the biggest companies you can get because that will help to close the job gap, which was around twenty thousand jobs, I mean, there was a huge amount of unemployment and under employment.  But Gene McCabe [Eugene L. McCabe] who ran North General Hospital [New York, New York], God bless him, he was my vice chairman, he said, "You know, what?  That might be the right technical answer but you're never gonna get anything done if that's what you announce.  So there's gotta be some programs for entrepreneurship."  He said, "It's the earplugs for the rest of your work because otherwise it, it'll be," and he was right about that.  So at the end of the day, we deployed the money for some of the marquee projects that couldn't get off the ground to send a message that things are moving north.  And we did fund a ton of things, we created a separate subsidiary that only did small business lending.  But what we learned pretty quickly was that we had to provide a lot of subsidy for the supports for small businesses 'cause people, take a, take a small issue, like a lot of people that were applying had not paid their taxes.  And I was getting written up in the Amsterdam News [New York Amsterdam News] for rejecting people, I said, "I can't give somebody federal money if they haven't paid their taxes."  But stepping into that, sort of, okay, they didn't have real accountants, to get a real accountant you gotta have computers because you gotta be able to track your receipts, costs, you know, I mean, it was just so complicated.  And we ended up paying for a lot of that stuff.  I said, "Hey, okay, business groups come to the table.  Here's a million dollars, if the entrepreneur will invest in himself to pay half the cost of to, the computers to keep data, the software, half the cost of a legitimate audit of your books and," you know, and these were real soft, this is grants.  And I'm sure that that there are many people who will be forever mad at me because they didn't get what they felt they, but at the end of the day, this was a lot of scrutiny, most of the empowerment zones failed.
Speaker 1: That's true.
Speaker 2: And we were, we were, with the serious people that we had around the table it was imperative that we, that we succeed.
Story_ID: 639599
Speaker 1: Who were some of the other key, key players that were part of this and part of your success with that?
Speaker 2: Well, around the table you had our local businesspeople, local leaders, some ministers, some nonprofit heads, as I mentioned Gene [Eugene L. McCabe] was a very anchoring presence for me (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was the, did the Apollo Theater [New York, New York] and its board, did they play a role at all with--
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: Not really, okay.
Speaker 2: They had their own drama going on.
Speaker 1: I, they did have their, okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  But it's, but Dick [HistoryMaker Richard Parsons] came in later to head up the Apollo Theater.  Was he, was it--
Speaker 2: Later.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I got you, okay, that's right.  Okay.  Now talk, so you did that for, well, that was two--
Speaker 2: Three years.
Speaker 1: Three years, and then--
Speaker 2: So meanwhile Carver [Carver Bancorp, Inc., New York, New York] was falling apart across the street.
Speaker 1: Now you, we, you know, what is interesting, we interviewed one of the founders of Carver. Why am I drawing a blank on his name?  I even told you this, Mr., he's--
Speaker 2: Either Mr. Greene [Richard T. Greene, Sr.]--
Speaker 1: No, no.  He--
Speaker 2: --or Bill Hudgins [HistoryMaker William Hudgins]?
Speaker 1: Bill Hudgins.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: We interviewed him.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, and so that was--
Speaker 2: What a sweet man.
Speaker 1: Very sweet man.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So Carver, just talk about the history of Carver because it, when it got started, if you could give a little--
Speaker 2: So Carver was started, got, they got their articles of incorporation sixty years ago yesterday--
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: --nineteen forty-eight [1948].  And they opened their doors on January, January 9th the following year.  So we're gonna have a big celebration around that.  And these were obviously like all of our communities, these were local businesspeople, ministers, nonprofit leaders, who just were mad because there wasn't, there wasn't any financial services to speak of in inner city neighborhoods.  So they went to get a New York charter and were rejected and so they pulled themselves together and went down to Washington [D.C.] and got a federal charter.  And (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They got the federal charter where, in 19--
Speaker 2: Federal banking.
Speaker 1: --in '48 [1948]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah.  And so it had been a very conservatively run organization.  Mr. Greene, I don't know how long he was CEO, it could have been thirty years but he was a very conservative man.  Real estate focus only, some church lending.  And but in the, in the changeover of the generations Mr. Greene was late seventies when he was really sort of encouraged to pass the baton to a new generation.  They had gone public in 1994.
Speaker 1: The bank went public?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Some people believed it saved them, some people believed it destroyed them.  But unbeknownst to them, the, a lot of the individual shareholders had sold their stock to institutions like Fidelity [Fidelity Investments] and others and that was really the catalyst for the leadership change because all of a sudden there are expectations around the level of profitability that you should have as a publicly traded company.  They really didn't run the bank, they were profitable and solid but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Always.
Speaker 2: --not highly profit, yeah, but not highly profitable.  And so that was kind of the seed of the demise because the guy who took over was an ex-regulator, great guy, a good person, but made a lot of promises and in trying to execute on that high growth thing went into some lending areas that were extremely risky but put that on top of a infrastructure that just couldn't handle it.  Most of the people who were running the divisions were Mr. Greene's peers or just short of that.  So these were, were men and women in their late sixties, early seventies.  And so the thing just collapsed.  And so I was across the street at the empowerment zone [Upper Manhattan Empowerment Zone Development Corporation] and David Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins] was on the Carver board.
Speaker 1: Board.
Speaker 2: And he called and said, "You know, we need to talk to you."  So they went through a process but I had had a silent dream of wanting to run Carver 'cause I met Mr. Greene and those guys at Towers on the Park [New York, New York].  And I had all these dreams that I had shared with Dick about making Carver into kind of a, you know, a real powerhouse in the black community and the role it could play.  I was frustrated that Carver wasn't participating, like all of those programs that I just described Carver didn't participate in any of them.  And so some people called Dick when Carver got in trouble, some people called me, and the long, long and the short of it, I was offered the job and had to leave the empowerment zone which was, was difficult but Dick was supportive.
Story_ID: 639600
Speaker 1: How many people were on the board and what were the assets of the bank at the time you took over?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure.  It's a small board.  I would say maybe eight people, about, about 400 million in assets.  And the year I came in it lost about $7.5 million.  So--
Speaker 1: And your appointment though, I mean, your hiring that was, it was, there were people who were skeptics because you had, you didn't have any banking experience?
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: And they're like what is she doing this for?
Speaker 2: Right.  Well, I, actually, it was a, it was a pretty rude awakening because I didn't know at the time that someone else had made an offer to buy the bank [Carver Bancorp, Inc., New York, New York], this was a classmate from law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and his wife was a classmate from business school [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts], and so I walked in thinking that I was gonna be focused on what I usually do which is turning, turning around broken companies or broken agencies, and I immediately get hit with this war for control of the bank.  And their tactic was to--
Speaker 1: Well, can you talk about who they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So they're (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, who they were, you have to identify--
Speaker 2: Oh, Kevin Cohee--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and his wife was Teri [Teri Williams]. I've forgotten her last name but so all of a sudden I'm defending my, (laughter) my credentials and all of that.  And this is just a part of the war to get control of the entity.  And long and short of it is, is it took three years of a lot of money, lawsuits.  To settle a lawsuit, lawsuits I put them on the board.  And so then I'm walking into every board meeting kind of with, you know, two people who wanna--
Speaker 1: Control.
Speaker 2: --take over the organization.  And I got a very good piece of advice from, we went through this whole horrendous proxy battle and this just unbelievable shareholders meeting with, you know, my parents [Joan Bell Wright and Harry S. Wright, Sr.] were there and, you know, I had been up all night writing a presentation. It was packed to the gills, ministers, I mean, it was just the biggest war.  But after, in the aftermath from these I was so depressed about these guys having to join my board and everything and I went out to dinner with a good friend, who I'm not gone tell you on camera but I'll tell you who she is afterwards, and she said, "Okay, now, you got one year to convince the stockholders that you're the person who should be running this bank.  And if you continue to let Kevin dictate the structure of your day and what you're worrying about and all this kind of stuff, he's gonna win 'cause the shareholders don't care. This is not emotional for them. They wanna see better financial results.  So you gotta get mentally strong. No matter how tired you are, when you walk in that boardroom you gotta just ignore everything the two of them say and let your board chairman handle that drama.  You gotta focus on operating the bank so that a year from now, for the next stockholders meeting you've got something to talk about."  And that was fantastic advice and she was absolutely right because what happened the next year was that we won the stockholders vote, which let them know they had one year left in their term and we had so much support from the institutional stockholders, even Wall Street that the following year they just resigned and sold their stock.
Speaker 1: That's like total like victory.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But how did you go about doing that?
Speaker 2: Oh, very hard stuff.  So for one thing--
Speaker 1: How many employees, I'm just trying, how many employees?
Speaker 2: Probably at that point a hundred twenty or so.  So it was really rough, you know.  I had to fire virtually everybody on my management team.  I sold three of our seven branches.  I had to go back to the New York partnership [Partnership for New York City, New York, New York], the big businessmen and ask them to pony up deposits so that when we sold those three branches that the, that the assets of the bank would not drop.  The regulators were in every week, busted loans, I mean, it was just, it was a nightmare (laughter).  But it was really quite frankly, it was like all the other jobs in a sense, it was zeroing in on what do successful organizations in this industry, what do they look like?  Products, services, delivery channels, people.  The second big piece was getting confidence of the constituency.
Story_ID: 639601
Speaker 1: You said you studied other banks.  Can you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --talk about what other banks you, you studied because in the, you are, you are taking over a, a traditional black bank.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.  I think the experience that I had with Carver [Carver Federal Savings Bank; Carver Federal Savings and Loan Association, New York, New York] as my bank 'cause I had some money there and I was a stockholder also but I was shocked that they weren't participants in all of this renaissance happening around them in Harlem [New York, New York] and Bed-Stuy [Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, New York], and St. Albans [Queens, New York], 'cause as the housing commissioner, I couldn't--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --figure out why they weren't lending in some of these programs but they were just a very conservatively--they were, remember Freedom Bank [Freedom National Bank, New York, New York] had gone under.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: 'Cause there were two black banks?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: So their thing was we wanna survive and by the way look, the '80s [1980s], the crisis in S and Ls [savings and loan], they did survive and many closed.  So I looked at the other community banks in New York City [New York, New York].  At that time there were many, it's been a big consolidation since, but they were heavy participants in residential reconstruction, not office buildings but the neighborhood stuff, small businesses, less so churches, that's a market that Carver really had locked in.  And so because I was well connected in the housing infrastructure that was a first place that I knew that we had to participate.  And obviously I had put a lot of people, a lot of entrepreneurs in business in those several jobs and so we looked at those guys for deposits and loans as well.  So that whole infrastructure, the housing partnership, the New York partnership [Partnership for New York City, New York, New York], the big businessmen, you know, the Jerry Speyers, the, the Henry Kravises, there was a guy who was a chairman at MTA [Metropolitan Transportation Authority] that had, Virg Conway [E. Virgil Conway] who had been a banker himself, obviously Dick [HistoryMaker Richard Parsons], so those three branches that I sold had around $50 million in deposits in them so they were really not performing very well.  But those guys came up with the $50 million in deposits to replace it.
Speaker 1: Which is a bit, that's a huge thing.  I mean, I was--
Speaker 2: Oh, it was huge.
Speaker 1: --I was wondering how, who was the, thinking, because that, when you said you sold off and then you, you were think, rethinking ahead to replace it.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: How did you, how did even any- anyone think of that? That's what's I'm wondering.  Was that your training or is that a board, you know, is that--
Speaker 2: Listen, I'm just sitting there looking at the numbers and saying, "Okay, this is losing money, this is losing money, this is losing money, we can save these four but I don't want, if assets drop then profitability drops," and so I just called them.  You know, I called my old boss Kathy Wylde [Kathryn S. Wylde], I called a couple of the guys that I knew personally and they just put the word out and they did it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Which was fantastic.  The hardest part was the human part.  You know, I'm sitting there, I'm firing men in their late sixties who they thought of Carver as a community service. They didn't really--they really never embraced this is about profit.  And you do have to balance both, this is a for profit company that's being traded on the, on the American Stock Exchange [NYSE American, New York, New York] at that point.  And there's some realities to that.  And worse there had been severe underinvestment in technology and people and training and facilities and there was not a connection made and unless you're profitable, you can't make those investments.  So those were very, and I had the regulators on my neck, you know, about the quality of this and that and whatever and so those were very hard conversations.  It's a little bit like sitting with your dad and firing your dad.  I mean, it was, it was excruciating.  And those, and the hard part is that they didn't even really understand the connection between, in their view they had not wanted to go down the direction that the prior CEO had gone down and because they objected they felt like they should be exempt.
Speaker 1: Rewarded.  Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Worse still, I couldn't hire great people because we were in this proxy battle.  So there again, I had to go back to the New York partnership and I had to get people on loan from some of the big banks to fill in these slots.  And because it was Carver, a little organization, nobody wanted to see Carver go under and half the people didn't wanna see Carver go under, half the people didn't want me to go under (laughter).  And so my first team was pretty much all on loan from some of the major institutions in the city.
Speaker 1: But you got in brain--you brought in brain power that way?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Had to, had to.  And by the way I wasn't a banker.  I mean, I had--I knew I was a good manager. I knew I was a good strategy person, and I knew there was help to be had.  But the, you know, there's a lot of, the banking business is a nuts and bolts kind of, kind of business.
Speaker 1: So when did you, so, you, how many people did you bring in?
Speaker 2: I'd say the senior management team was eight people.
Speaker 1: So they were all on loan?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And how long were they on loan for?
Speaker 2: About a year.
Speaker 1: Just a year.  So how were you able then to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A year, some more, a couple of people two or three years.
Speaker 1: So how were you able to bring in, you, so is the, you successfully fought off the proxy battle. That--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --took another year, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Sort of, I mean, they were there.
Speaker 2: Two and a half.
Speaker 1: Two and a half--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --years.
Story_ID: 639602
Speaker 1: How did you win the board over?  That's what I'm, I'm and even though the board--
Speaker 2: The board was with me.
Speaker 1: From the beginning?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Because they had, okay.
Speaker 2: And then I brought in a new board.
Speaker 1: How did you do--
Speaker 2: After the proxy, after the shareholders vote which we lost.  So that was kind of a down--
Speaker 1: So you lost and then he (unclear)--
Speaker 2: He came, those two [Kevin Cohee and Teri Williams] came on.
Speaker 1: The--
Speaker 2: And then David Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins] was really the statesman and he spoke up at a board meeting.  He said, "Look, the shareholders have spoken and I think, I'm personally going to leave the board 'cause I think that first the shareholders have spoken, and second it's time for Debbie [HistoryMaker Deborah Wright] to get some people around the table that reflect the future of Carver [Carver Bancorp, Inc., New York, New York] and not the past."  And when he did that spontaneously, a couple of other board members said, "I think that's the right decision."  And so we needed too, I probably wouldn't have done it if he hadn't volunteered but the shareholders were pretty upset about how the place had been managed.  And so I reached back to a mentor Bob Holland [Robert Holland Jr.] who was the first black partner at McKinsey [McKinsey and Company] and very successful businessman, Strauss Zelnick who sat next to me in law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], who was a very successful entrepreneur, Fred Terrell [HistoryMaker Frederick Terrell], and my friend Bill Lewis [HistoryMaker William M. Lewis, Jr.], convinced Morgan Stanley [Morgan Stanley Wealth Management] to make a, an investment in Carver and so it all, you know, all these relationships, it's a small village at the end of the day, and as I said there was a group that said, "We don't want you to hit a wall."  And then there were the community leaders and customers who felt that Carver was important enough to save.
Story_ID: 639603
Speaker 1: How long did that take you, you think that whole process was it three years to reach out?
Speaker 2: That was about three years (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: Three or four years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I've been there nine now and it's, it's not that it's easy today 'cause it's just, it's just hard being small but we're, there's no, you know, we're profitable and there's, you know, we're weathering--
Speaker 1: What--
Speaker 2: --this storm and we're going on.
Speaker 1: Tell me what your portfolio consists of versus, now versus when you started. That's what I would like to sort of understand.
Speaker 2: The bank [Carver Bancorp, Inc., New York, New York] is twice the size it was when I started.  We're instead of going from seven to four branches, we're now ten, we've got double that amount in ATM [automated teller machine] centers.  We bought a small business lender two years ago so we're in that business.  So instead of just essentially securities and real estate, we're now in all forms of real estate loans as well as small businesses.  So our struggle, and I think this is true for the industry, we're the largest black bank in the country, the real issue is getting to scale and increasing our profitability and our relevance.  And that, that's what I'm focused on now.  I also think that given what's happening in banking in this last month where the regulators have essentially shrunk us down to three or four banks that are gonna be, you know, global players, I think banks like ours should really go down market and focus on the unbanked and the underbanked who are now getting their financial services at payday lenders and check cashers and so we're doing a lot of research on that topic right now in terms of what we do for the next decade as opposed to just be, just being a regular but very small bank.
Speaker 1: So you, but where is the profitability in the unbanked and the under- I mean, underbanked that's what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well--
Speaker 1: --I mean, I'm just--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that sounds like you're a social, social service ad coming out and not--
Speaker 2: Not really.  Actually it is a very profitable business.  Some people think too profitable because poor people are being charged too much--
Speaker 1: Usurious charges.
Speaker 2: --for those--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --transaction services and I think that's a place where we could achieve both goals; it can be profitable but not usurious.
Speaker 1: So are you talking about bringing those people into the bank or having, you know, competitive services that compete against the--
Speaker 2: Haven't figured it out.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's kind of, the bridge is financial literacy which we do.  We have our branches open at night teaching people.  We've been focusing on obviously the foreclosure crisis and we get grants from the treasury department [U.S. Department of the Treasury] to do that kind of work and we also put our own money in.  So if it's a separate place, if it's check cashing here, financial literacy in both places to convince people that banks are not this kind of scary place with marble floors where you have to wear a suit when you come in and you have to be middle class. It could well be that it's a Carver express for the separate locations--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --or it could well be that you just have a line inside the branch.  And we're analyzing all of that now but I do think that there's a, we have to as an industry find a place that's relevant to our people and also profitable if we're gonna stay around.  And, you know, trying to catch up to Chase Bank [JPMorgan Chase and Co.], that's gone, that's over.  And that's the mass affluent where, you know, most middle class blacks want to be.
Speaker 1: So, you mean they wanna be with the Chases?
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you're saying (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Cause it's a different generation now. They don't know about what happened--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --sixty years ago, and--
Speaker 1: So you're, so you're, you're really sort of trying to--you're looking at the future of what are black or minority banks, you know?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And that, and they, you're saying that they have to have a niche but the niche even has, it's not like the whole black community anymore?
Speaker 2: (Shakes head).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We get, you know, look, I think, there are people in our generation and probably every generation that have some loyalty.  I call that the love money, you know, where they'll send a hundred thousand dollar deposit.  But many people now have moved on, that's kind of the past and they think that they need a global institution.  The reality is what they actually use at a Chase or a B of A [Bank of America Corporation] or where, a Citibank [Citibank, N.A.] is really the same lender products that that all banks have.  But, you know, I'm not trying to fight that war, you know, I think that there are gonna be, you know, plenty of people that'll be supportive.  I'm really looking at what I view as a, as a tremendous need in terms of those of us who are left behind to generations of subpar services.  And I think there's a learning component here that's gotta happen that we are, are uniquely able to provide.
Story_ID: 639604
Speaker 1: I wanna ask you then what do you see your role in the new Harlem [New York, New York]?  You know, that some people will say, you know, in ten, twenty years it's not gonna look at all like even present Harlem, which is changing it seems weekly.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So where do you, where do you see the bank's role then from that standpoint, you know, where, I mean, 'cause the whole demo [demography] could change very significantly?
Speaker 2: I guess because, because I've been housing commissioner and at the housing authority [New York City Housing Authority] I'm less fearful about it than most because I know that the majority of the residents are living in public housing and in multi-family buildings.  The war is over the brownstones.  And so that's a, that's a population that sadly or reality, you know, brownstones are $2 million now so the, even the average black person is not gonna be able to afford that.  So I try to, I try to be somewhat philosophical and practical at the same time which is, things rarely stay the way they do.  I think if we can focus on supporting the cultural institutions which carry our legacy and the history, the churches, and others, there's gonna be plenty of black people in Harlem forever is my guess.  But whether they know what happened in 1948 or think it's relevant to them, I think that's really where the battleground is and I'm really pleased when I look at the Apollo [Apollo Theater, New York, New York] and the Studio Museum of Harlem [Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 2: So Ray McGuire [HistoryMaker Raymond J. McGuire] is the chairman of the Studio Museum.  They had their gala last week and raised $1.6 million.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: And they're carrying on.  So Dick's [HistoryMaker Richard Parsons] doing the same, [HistoryMaker] Jonelle Procope at the Apollo.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I think, you know, getting our arms around the cultural institutions, the educational institutions, folks like us who can remind people that sixty years ago [HistoryMaker] Ossie Davis and--
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Ruby Dee.
Speaker 2: --Ruby Dee could not get a mortgage any place even though they were stars on Broadway and they got their mortgage at Carver [Carver Federal Savings Bank; Carver Federal Savings and Loan Association, New York, New York].  'Til the day he died, he came in once a year, brought the grandchildren to get their accounts, to meet the bank president and whatever.  So I'm not saying that I'm not concerned at all, I'm worried about it too 'cause Harlem for a kid growing up in Bennettsville, South Carolina, Harlem, nobody said, "We're going to New York [New York]," they said, "We're going to Harlem" (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Harlem.
Speaker 2: And so I think it's important that the Harlems and, and all around the country get our support.  It's one of the reasons why I continue to take these ridiculous jobs because somebody's gotta do it.
Story_ID: 639605
Speaker 1: I have a few, few things.
Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) One, in the area of banking.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I have probably about five, five question areas but in the area of banking--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you know, Bob Johnson [Robert L. Johnson] had this whole move to, and I'm not sure it's actualizing--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --but to start, you know, a national black bank.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What are your thoughts about that in terms of, you know, the viability of it?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: 'Cause some people poo pooed it.  'Cause black banking as a sector came--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --out of a different time, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I think he's still, I saw him recently. He addressed our industry at a conference.
Speaker 1: The national black bank--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --black bank [National Bankers Association].
Speaker 2: And some people are, are skeptical.  I think any time you bring visibility, he's been a hugely successful businessman, he's got relationships that most of us don't have and I think if he can figure it out, you know, God bless him because I think the industry needs to change, if we're the largest at 800 million, then guess what the smallest is?  So I think visibility and talent and all of that too.  I think he would say that he's still trying to figure it out.  Instead of the one branch anchor that they had in Washington [D.C.], they've now switched to a Florida base of branches in Walmarts [Wal-Mart Stores, Inc.].
Speaker 1: Oh, I didn't know that okay.
Speaker 2: And so they, they haven't figured it out but I, my guess is he will.
Story_ID: 639606
Speaker 1: You're still very young and you're a new mother.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And what, what was the decision for you to adopt in the midst of all of this?  'Cause some people say my time is gone and I'm just not getting married and all that--
Speaker 2: You know what? It was really coming. I knew that I wanted to be a mother, I just never met the right guy.  And I didn't focus on it very much 'cause I always thought it would just sort of happen in that package.  And it wasn't until my mother [Joan Bell Wright] got sick; my mother had breast cancer and in the process of doing what she always wanted me to do, which was spending time as opposed to racing all over the place, I kind of became the team captain of her--
Speaker 1: Care.
Speaker 2: Going to the appointments, and we all went and traded off but, you know, when you're traumatized like that, five people go in a room and five come out having heard something different.  But I took a lot of time to go with her to those appointments and it was really, I'm so glad I did. It was just precious time.  But there was sort of a moment where this cancer came back every year, I mean, it was just a virulent, she lasted five years with it.  But there was one day that we took off, I took off and she had all these scans and, and we got, they were still in Brooklyn [New York] at the time, we got to my house, she was dropping me off and she put her hand on my leg and she said, "Now, I don't want you to go upstairs and do all that crying and everything because God has let me see all of my kids grow up to be wonderful people and if this is the time, I can accept that."  And I'll tell you, it just, after about four hours of crying I really, you know, it was just an epiphany, you know, here she is facing death, and she's worried about me, you know, her forty-five year old daughter at this point.  And I also realized that I had become a different person too, for once I'm not putting her on the speaker phone and letting her rattle off about the Neiman Marcus sale because our war was over the Southern belle thing, you know, why aren't you wearing more dresses, you need on more makeup, you know, I think this is a nice guy, you need to, you know.  And so that couple of years of sort of just focusing in on her needs and not resenting it.  And that night, I said, "You know what?  You got all, you know, all this stuff, you've changed your whole life around to do this and you're not, it's not like you're at the appointments tapping your toes." All of a sudden that became our time together.  And I realized that it was a special moment of sacrifice for her as a mother to be concerned about me instead of her, and by the way I'm concerned about her instead of me, and so that says something about the love of a daughter.  And I just made a commitment that night that I was going to explore it.  And so Ann Marie [Ann Marie Wilkins] had adopted at the Gladney Center for Adoption in Texas [Fort Worth, Texas], where I grew up as you know.  And so I decided to call up and see when their next orientation session was and so I called my sister in Dallas [Texas] and I said, "I'm gonna fly down to this." I said, "Don't get too excited, I just wanna see."  And so I just stuck my toe in with that and the rest is history.  And I have just the most remarkable daughter who has yet again rearranged my life but I think but for that I probably would have just ignored the feelings and just kind of, just gotten to, by the way it was pretty late at, at forty-five or forty-six to do this 'cause I don't have the energy that you have at, I might have had at twenty-five but I also would have had more patience at twenty-five or thirty-five and it was, at least for me, the right time to do this and (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What have you learned about yourself?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess I learned through my mom and it's, was, reconfirmed through Peyton [Peyton Wright] that, you know, love is the whole thing, right.  You know, you can achieve a lot of stuff and love comes in various forms and there's something really great about investing in another life.  I didn't know how self-sacrificial it would be because it is, it's 24/7, whatever their needs are, they come first.  And for me putting someone else's needs ahead of mine, needs, desires, goals, was a big transformation again starting with the care of mom and now with Peyton it has ordered life in a very simple way.  She comes first and everything else gets done.  I've gotta figure out how to put me back in the equation at some point because I never sleep anymore.  But it has been the most wonderful experience to see someone blossom right in front of your very eyes.  And it, it's something I'm very grateful for.
Story_ID: 639607
Speaker 1: Where do you think you are in your life?  That's, you know, we end our, our interviews with philosophical questions.  But where, like has your last story been written yet, has your last challenge?  You know, 'cause one, you're, you know, you're a mother and you're still running a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --successful enterprise and--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --active civically and so I'm just wondering, you know, and you've had, been this sort of change agent, going in--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and taking on difficult situations and being successful not, you know--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --your only failure was the first thing out of school, you know.  And--
Speaker 2: Well, I'm sure the last story hasn't written.  I guess I would say, you know, if I walk out of here and get hit by a bus right now, I'll be pleased with the way my life has been used.  I hope not 'cause I want to see my daughter [Peyton Wright] graduate from high school and all that stuff as well.  But I hope, I have no idea what the next thing is, and one of the truths that through all of these jobs is I've never planned for the next job.  The only job I planned for was the first one [at First Boston Corporation, New York, New York] and we know how that turned out.  And I've found in my life that if I'm sort of busy doing what I love, that the next thing usually finds me and I'm sure it will here.  And so my job is to get a succession plan in place at Carver [Carver Bancorp, Inc., New York, New York], and I have some dreams for where I wanna take Carver next, definitely not done there.  But I, you know, I have no doubt if the past predicts the future that they'll, you know, it's not that people don't knock on the door now but it's just nothing that I feel passionate enough to leave what I'm doing now.  And I wouldn't feel comfortable now because I feel like there's a next ledge to take there.  It would also by the way, my number one job is to be able to, my number one goal is to be able to sleep more.  And so it would also be okay with me if I retired from Carver in five years and was able to spend less time irritable and sleepy with my daughter.  So I think: listen, God knows, is the only one that knows what, what the future's gonna bring and I have no, no doubt that it'll be fun and hopefully, hopefully, a little less challenging.
Story_ID: 639608
Speaker 1: What are your hopes and concerns for the black community?
Speaker 2: I'm concerned because it's, in the world I grew up in, poor people and middle class people and, and more well off people were living in the same neighborhoods and that's not true anymore.  And I see it as I'm now focusing in on my daughter's [Peyton Wright] life, the real diversion in poor people live here, rich people live here, middle class people live here, and not the, you know, even in church it's not the same integration.  I see poor people falling further and further behind, repeat generations of poverty and so that worries me.  I have no doubt that we'll continue to produce superstars in large- in larger and larger measure because you can see that trajectory.  But I worry as I see, you know, the neighborhood that I work in, the bridge seems to be a lot smaller than it used to be or at least I felt it was when I was growing up.  I think we'll get to a place though where enough people will focus in on this issue that we do something about it.  And I hope that's sooner rather than later.
Speaker 1: You mean the divide in the black community?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Economically?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 639609
Speaker 1: The two, two last questions, one, I'm gonna ask what you want or what you see as the legacy of your generation and then what do you see as your own legacy. What do you want your own legacy to be?
Speaker 2: I think my generation was a striving generation to prove, take our parents' hopes and aspirations and dreams and actually exceed them because it was a segregated world that most of us grew up in.  Who ever heard of investment banking?  I never did.  And so I think our generation has done that and has made not only our community proud but everybody else, an awakening that intelligent, motivated people can achieve anything they want and we want if given the opportunity.  My legacy, I guess, is--
Speaker 1: But do you think that's a positive legacy then of your generation (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I do, I do.
Speaker 1: The strivers, okay.
Speaker 2: Somebody had to do that to dispel the beliefs and, and usher in the Baracks [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] of the world, you know, there have been a lot of successful businesspeople, a lot of successful politicians but, you know, who would be audacious enough to think the presidency of the United States and a lot of those folks, the Ann Maries [Ann Marie Wilkins] and Davids and Tony Chases [HistoryMaker Anthony R. Chase] and the others who were making money, contributed, rolled up their sleeves, grabbed other people, couldn't have happened without that.  So that's one of the fruits of the labors of our parents and grandparents.  My own legacy I think I'm a, I'm a bridge person in many ways from a family of preachers and advocates and folks firmly rooted in the community and trying to find a way to have that conversation with the investment banking conversation to make sure that we're keeping it real about the institutions that always had a fundamental place in the black community.  And I feel very passionate about those being relevant.
Story_ID: 639610
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'd say growing up in a civil rights legacy of preachers and advocates and bridging, not just generations but professions to the finance world, it's of particular importance to me to make sure that some of the traditional institutions that were so important like black banks, and our cultural institutions, and that they are vibrant for the next generation.  And they'll only be vibrant if we bring this generation's skills and mainstream talents to those institutions.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: And the many that have fallen away--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --got stuck in a prior generation, didn't make the investments, didn't have the talent.  And so I've found my way into these managerial and leadership roles and the main thing is to stay current and to try to impart to our people and our institutions why you have to stay current if the next generation is going to support you.
Speaker 2: Can I ask you what, one last question. This is the last question.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: What would you consider black culture and why is it important?
Speaker 1: We've gotta--
Speaker 2: And I ask this in the context of the black table.
Speaker 1: We have a unique heritage born of slavery and there's no way around it. It's a very different beginning than new immigrants.  And so it's something that our country has not dealt with. The scars are there on both sides of the fence.  And it shouldn't make others uncomfortable in dealing with our reality which is we don't wanna forget that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 1: We shouldn't, we shouldn't stay there. We don't live there today but in telling our story through our cultural institutions, our bank as, you know, was there to provide mortgages created because people couldn't get financial services any place else, even the most successful in our community.  So that doesn't mean we wanna stay there either, you know.  We've gotta provide what twenty year olds and forty year olds and sixty year olds need today and that's what I think our generation has brought to the table which is mainstream talent, mainstream relationships.  And the struggle is to use those relationships and those skills to bring along our history, our historical organizations that will continue to tell those stories, and not just use it to amass wealth for ourselves.  Nothing wrong with wealth but if we don't find a way to invest it in the institutions that are reaching back to new immigrants and those of us in our community that have not been able to get that break to go off to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] or wherever it is, we've gotta always be cognizant that we're not the majority of our people and I would hope that that as many as us, as can continue to make the effort to support the institutions one way or the other.  It doesn't mean everybody has to be at Carver [Carver Bancorp, Inc., New York, New York] and everybody has to be at the Apollo [Apollo Theater, New York, New York] and everybody has to be working at a black church but all of us can find a way to help one or more of those institutions to keep the stories, keep the legends, keep the history ever present.
