Story_ID: 482328
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Lena Marguerite Williams [HistoryMaker Lena Williams] and Lena is spelled L-E-N-A, Marguerite is M as in Mary, A-R-G-U-E-R-I-T-E, and Williams is W-I-L-L-I-A-M-S.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: March 2, 1950, Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, ma'am, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm retired journalist, retired from The New York Times after thirty-one years of service.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is February the what? Eighth (laughter), February 8, 2007.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: You're presently in my home in Washington, D.C., in what we call the Northeast section of Washington, D.C.
Story_ID: 482329
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five, lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that I'm compelled to ask by management that only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food and what is it?
Speaker 2: Favorite food, food?  Has to be fried chicken.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Not really but if I chose one, it would be blue.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: London [England].
Speaker 1: A favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Right don't wrong nobody.
Story_ID: 482330
Speaker 1: Well, I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Ralph Williams] side but we'll start with your mother's side of the family.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name was Lena Marguerite Williams [Lena Adams Williams], and her maiden name was Adams.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: April the 15th, 1913, born in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, tell me what you, what, what do you know about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace that side and--
Speaker 2: My mother's side, I trace most of it through my maternal grandfather, John Quincy Adams [John Adams].  My maternal grandfather lived with us until he died in 1975 at the age of ninety.  And so most of what I know about my mother is through him.  My maternal grandmother, Mattie Adams, died when my mother was five years old.
Speaker 1: Now is there a story behind, you know, we all recognize the name John Quincy Adams?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But is there a story as to why he was named John Quincy Adams?
Speaker 2: From what we were told, John Quincy Adams the, because both John Quincy Adams [sic. John Adams] and his son, John Quincy Adams, were both presidents.  So we, they said he was named after the president and I didn't understand until years later, they said it was something that the president did that really impressed his parents.  And what I believed it was when I saw the movie 'Amistad,' I realize is that he had freed someone or the slaves or something like that and I said, "That doesn't sound right," but I believe that when, it was John Quincy Adams who argued that case, and I think his parents were impressed that he took that case on and they named my maternal grandfather, John Quincy Adams.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So they had a sense of history in terms of what John Quincy Adams role in the Amistad case [United States v. Libellants and Claimants of the Schooner Amistad, 1841]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now is, do you know his father's name by any chance?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.  But he had several siblings, there were all together nine of them.  They, he grew up, was born and raised in Maysville, Kentucky.  And the family I would assume it was during the Great Migration, did migrate north into the Midwest.  My grandfather came to Washington, most of his brothers went to Ohio.  One brother we did lose track of, they said the family said he left and they think he moved west, but they never heard from him again, so we don't know quite what happened to them but most of them ended up in Ohio and my grandfather ended up here in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you said earlier off-camera that you had relatives in Xenia and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Xenia, Ohio, and Yellow Springs [Ohio].
Speaker 1: Yellow Springs, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 482331
Speaker 1: Now are there any stories from that side of the family that you're, are any stories passed down from your mother's parents that--
Speaker 2: Well, I think my favorite story is that after my [maternal] grandfather's wife, Mattie [Mattie Adams] died when she as my, once again my mother was five years old, he said he promised his wife on her death bed, that he would always take care of Little Lena [Lena Adams Williams].  My mother was only 4'11" so I can imagine at five years old she was just a little runt.  But he told her, "I will take care of Little Lena."  And me and my siblings were always impressed with the fact that my [maternal] grandfather [John Adams] lived with her, the entire time, when she got married, she and my father [Ralph Williams] never lived alone; my grandfather was always there.  He was there, all of us who were born, my grandfather was always in that house.  And he was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So he raised her and stayed, okay.
Speaker 2: He raised her and when he died in 1975, it was in April, he was still there with--my father had long since died because my father died in 1963--but my grandfather was always there with her.  He always took good care of her.  And not only her but all of his grandchildren.  So I just remembered when you talk about loyalty and honoring a deathbed wish, I just remembered that and I always respected him and admired him because he raised a wonderful human being, if I have to say so myself.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's something.  Okay.  Any other stories about, that, did he pass down any stories about life in Maysville [Kentucky]--
Speaker 2: He--
Speaker 1: --and growing up or--
Speaker 2: --he, he talked about several of the, of the family members were in the [U.S.] military but not my, my grandfather, I don't think he ever enlisted and I think it was because he was a single father which is very unusual back in those days.  So he never enlisted or was drafted.  But he basically, you know, he was a craftsman, he ended up working for the government.  And when he was talking about Maysville he said that he remembered his parents saying, "We need to leave Maysville, Kentucky."  He never said why, and I would always--we called him Papa--I said, "Papa, why?"  He said, "Well, you know, Mama and Daddy said we need to leave this place."  He never said why they said they need to leave that place, but he said, "Well, they felt there were opportunities other places and so we decided to leave."  I don't know why, however, the siblings went in different directions.  He never said why he ended up here in Washington [D.C.] and they ended up in Ohio but he did say that the parents felt they had to leave Maysville.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's understandable, a lot of families for a lot of variety of reasons that usually have to do with the lack of opportunities, lack of, you know.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: It could be trouble.  But what, what did he do for the government?
Speaker 2: He, you know, once again he ran the elevator, he worked, he ran the elevator for the government.  He said, "I used to run a lot of errands."  So I figured he was the person if, back then if they needed to get lunch he would do that.  And he used to always say I worked with my hands, he was a smart man but he said he worked with his hands.  He said he was a clerk.  And so when I think of clerk, when he was talking about he would, you know, do, run the elevator, get lunch, and work with his hands when I think of the secretaries or the clerks of the 20th century and the 21st century, that's basically what my grandfather would have been doing but back then they called them clerks they were the gofers I would assume.  But by coming here to Washington the one opportunity that he found was that beyond the work at the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service], the federal government was hiring so my grandfather worked, I don't know what agency but he worked in the federal government for years as a clerk.
Speaker 1: Well, that that did mean like benefits and things.
Speaker 2: Yes, it did.
Speaker 1: And a certain amount of security, I suppose.
Speaker 2: Yes, it did, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 482332
Speaker 1: Now did your mother talk about growing up in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] and--
Speaker 2: My mother--
Speaker 1: --what it was like?
Speaker 2: --they talked about he, they grow up on Bates Street.  Bates Street is right off of North Capitol [Street], it's North Capitol and like between 1st [Street] and 4th [Street].  And they talk back in those days, you know, about how everybody knew everyone and they all talked about Mr. Adams [Williams' maternal grandfather, John Adams] and his little girl because I, you know now we see of so many single parents, we think it's so commonplace but you can imagine back in 1918.  Here is this black man with this little girl that he's raising on his own, and by my mother not having any siblings and my grandfather's siblings having left, he was basically on his own.  So she talked about how all the, the neighbors used to talk about Mr. Adams and his little girl.  And she said they were always very good to him, everybody looked out for one another. "What does Little Lena [Lena Adams Williams] need?  Does Little Lena need something?"  And she talked about that.  But she talked about her cousins, her mother [Mattie Adams] had siblings and she was very close to her cousins.  And I only knew them as older women so they were, Louise Barber [ph.], and Wanna Betancourt [ph.] to me but, of course, when they were younger it was Cousin Louise, and Cousin Wanna.  And she talked about they were very, very close because he felt it was important that she have some sense of siblings even though she didn't have biological siblings, they were the closest to siblings that she had.  So she talked a lot about their closeness and the things that they did together.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Are there any specific stories you read, you remember?
Speaker 2: Well, she, well, my grandfather from what I understand was very, very slick, and, you know, very, very strict, I mean.  Back in those days it wasn't going, and he was very, very protective.  Wanna and Louise said, "You know, your granddaddy, he didn't let your mama do a lot of things, he was very, very protective of Little Lena.  So Little Lena couldn't go certain places."  And I always say, "Well, how did she meet daddy [Ralph Williams]?  You know, if she didn't get--."  And they met at a dance, she went to, it was Martha Washington high school [Martha Washington Seminary, Washington, D.C.], it was a high school for girls, since closed but it's in, you know, Northwest, Washington, not too far from Bates Street, I think it's right off of that area.  And she met him at a dance.  And I don't know what she said it was that attracted him about her but they got to talking and she found out that he didn't have siblings either.  Well, back in that time, the 1913s and 1920s, you didn't find a lot of black families where you only had a single child.  And she said, "I finally found someone who knew what it was like to be an only child."  We always said that's why they had seven.  But she said I--that was the one thing that she remembered about my father was that he was an only child and he was also shy and bashful as a result of that.  And the other thing she discovered, he lost his father at a very young age.  And I think those three traits that they had in common, I think those two people just sort of migrated towards each other because of those three traits alone.  And, of course, they were also, you know, he was an attractive young man and my mother was very attractive.  But they were shy and she said right away he became very protective of her.  They all called her Little Lena, I became Little Lena afterwards, but they all called her Little Lena.  And I think that's, those are the kinds of stories that they share and she always said that Louise and Wanna said that he's a good man.  That's the one thing that I remember, they said that when she decided to start dating, first my grandfather approved of him and they all said he's a good man.  And that's the one thing that she would talk, because she didn't talk a lot about her, her youth, and I never understood why, only when she got around her cousins they would draw it out of her but she never talked a lot about it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, so she, she finished Martha Washington high school?
Speaker 2: Finished Martha.  And she was--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --a seamstress, you know, she made a lot of our clothes, she was very good.  And before she had a sewing machine, my mother, I remembered her stitching things by hand, cutting out patterns and I cannot, (laughter) I can't get a hem in straight.  And we all said that none of her daughters took up that trade but my mother was a seamstress by trade.
Story_ID: 482333
Speaker 1: Now can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Ralph, R-A-L-P-H, Williams [Ralph Williams], he didn't have a middle name.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what, what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Daddy was now, that's the one thing I have to ask my sisters, he was born in South Carolina but what we know is that he was raised in Newport News, Virginia, so he considered Newport News, Virginia his home.  And we don't know where in South Carolina he was born but he came to Newport News when he was an infant, so I think that's why he always considered that his home.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But he was also born in 1913, I just have to get the exact month and date.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So they were the same age?
Speaker 2: They were the exact same age, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  They had a lot in common--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --it seems.  Well, what do you know about your father's side of the family?  How far back can you trace that group?
Speaker 2: Primarily, because his surviving parent was his mother, Ada Saunders.  And Saunders is her, she was, when her first husband died, this is her second husband's name.  So she took on the second husband's name.  And I do not know other than Williams the, my, my surname; her first husband was a Williams.  My father was not named after him but he died when my father was around the same age as my mother [Lena Adams Williams].  They said he was a toddler so I would assume it would have been no more than two years old, she, he lost his father.  My maternal grandmother, my paternal grandmother left South Carolina with her baby boy and came to Newport News.  She married Leonard Saunders [ph.] was her second husband, his first name was Leonard.  They married, I don't know when but they were married for at least ten to fifteen years before she died, because she died in 1956.  But what I know about my father, I was six years old when my, you know, paternal grandmother died.  So I didn't know a lot about my father through her and he was the--and Mr. Saunders didn't really know my father well, it was an interesting relationship because my father never really considered him a father, he was his stepfather.  And I think because my father was at that time a young adolescent by the time she married Mr. Saunders, there was never that sort of paternal relationship that he would have had.  And so what I learned was through my older siblings.  Ada Saunders was a very strong woman.  She had some Native American in her because when we looked at pictures she had these very long braids, so she prided herself, she for some reason had this bad habit, I remembered as a child, 'cause as I said she was six when I died, of her putting her hair in her mouth.  And she would just sort of, for some reason--it was bad--she would suck on her hair.  But we would always go to her house for Thanksgiving dinner, for Christmas, and just sometimes for Sunday dinner.  She didn't have a lot of pictures of my father when he was very young but she was always very, very supportive of him.  We, I remembered my mother saying to my father, "You're very spoiled."  And everybody that knew my father said he's very, very spoiled and I just never quite knew why they would say that about him and they would say that his mother, "That's, that's because of your mother."  And from what I heard from neighbors because his father died when he was so young, and here was this woman, a black woman, raising a young male child on her own, that was very, very hard and difficult to do once again between 1913 and, and 1956 when she died.  And so she was very, very protective of him.  But I never knew a lot, he had no other siblings.  She never had any children with Leonard Saunders so he was her only child, but that's why there's this huge gap, this gray area, because I was so young when they died and my older siblings were only like two years apart, so my oldest sibling [Ralph Williams], he would have joined the, he joined the [U.S.] Navy when he was seventeen, he wouldn't have known a lot.
Story_ID: 482334
Speaker 1: Now did your father [Ralph Williams] have stories of growing up in Newport News [Virginia] that he shared with you?
Speaker 2: No, he didn't.  My, my father was a cook at the old Willard Hotel [Willard InterContinental, Washington, D.C.] and I didn't realize then, of course, back in those days, you know, I didn't realize my father couldn't be called a chef so he was a cook, but it was a lot of his dishes he would come home and say, "I made this," and we'd say, "Oh, really Daddy, you cook?"  But he never talked about it.  He never talked about Newport News except that, and it was interesting.  He always said, "Mama [Williams' paternal grandmother, Ada Saunders]," he said, "Mama and I left there," he said, "You know, Mama, Mama, wanted to leave there."  And I said, "Oh."  I wondered why.  She would go back and we don't know, we said, "Well you didn't have siblings."  He said, "Yeah but she likes to go back to Newport News," but he said, you know, "Mama just decided to leave there."  That's the one thing that rang in my ear.  I remember both my mother [Lena Adams Williams] and my father saying that their parents said that they wanted to leave there.  And as a result, we as children growing up we said, well we never had this inclination and this yearning to go to either Kentucky or to Virginia because we said, "Well for some reason they left."  And we always had the sense that they left for a reason, it wasn't, you don't leave a place that you love, you know.  I went to New York [New York] for thirty-one years and I came back to Washington, D.C., because I loved it. I never left Washington; I left physically but not in my heart and my spirit and my mind.  So I think that's why we never went back to those places because the way they said it, they left for a reason.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So did, did he go to high school in Newport News or did he finish here (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He went to high school here and I have to find out where he graduated.  What, what is--?  And that's funny because I--it's, it's a blank.  I have to find out 'cause I don't wanna say something wrong and I'm not sure but I'll have to get that for you.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: But he did, he grad, I, I want, for some reason I wanna, wanna say, McKinley but I don't think it was McKinley Tech [McKinley Technical High School; McKinley Technology High School, Washington, D.C.] but I'm thinking of McKinley because both he and my mother went to technical schools and there weren't a lot of vocational schools back in those days.  So she then, I think that was the other thing that sort of drew them together but I'll have to find out for sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, so your father was a cook at the Willard Hotel, was it--
Speaker 2: The Willard Hotel.
Speaker 1: Now where is the Willard Hotel for those of us who are not from D.C. (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The Willard Hotel right now is at 14th [Street] and Pennsylvania Avenue.  It's been renovated and, and to this day I have this, this warm spot in my heart for the Willard Hotel because it's been, it's a beautiful hotel but whenever I pass there, for years it was dormant, just an old ghost hotel until some new owners took it over and renovated it and now it is an exquisite hotel, but I have this warm spot in my heart for the Willard because of that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so it, at one time I suppose it was a big deal, it's right, it's near the White House [Washington, D.C.], it's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's, yes, you can see--
Speaker 1: --or a couple blocks away--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --I guess, yeah.
Speaker 2: And that was, and, you know, of course, back, you know, we didn't realize until we were older, my God that was an achievement.  He wasn't a chef but he cooked, you know, he was told, and there were dishes, and, and I forgot which dishes he would say he prepared but I love scrapple because my dad would make scrapple, I mean, it was such good scrapple.  And these--
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: --old, this old-fashioned oatmeal.  And he would cook these, these crab cakes and he would bring the stuff home and say I cooked this, and we'd say oh, well, thanks but he didn't cook it at home and we just thought it was odd, well where did he cook it?  And it wasn't until I was older, I said, you are a cook, you would be a chef in this day and time.  Of course, those opportunities were available back in the, in the '40s [1940s] and the '50s [1950s].
Speaker 1: But did it make, well, it, it, it probably increased the options in terms of food that you had to eat having a father--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --who was a cook.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Right?  Bringing, bringing home food.
Speaker 2: And, you know, what's so interesting my brother, two of my brothers of all of us, two of my brothers are just, you know, these eclectic chefs, the way, I can cook, all of my siblings can cook but they're the ones that can just take anything, French, African, Italian, they can do all that and we said they got it from daddy, we didn't, but they did (laughter).
Story_ID: 482335
Speaker 1: Now do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: I do.  We were, we were mentioning that off-camera that I thought about it because I'm now a new great aunt, my niece and her husband have a new baby boy, and I was just thinking about it, you know, and I said I remember it, I used to hug my mother's [Lena Adams Williams] knee, she would lie, and I could hold it, and I could feel the sensation of being rocked.  And I realize my mother was 4'11", in order to get across, I had to have been lying on her lap, in order to do that I had to have been very, very young.  And I just remembered she would braid my hair and she would just move her knee and I would hold on to it, so that's, it was a wonderful sensation so I remembered that.  And, of course, I remembered the bars, the crib, but I didn't realize then just looking out through these bars and now I realize it had to have been a crib and I remembered hearing that tune, the Mills, because my mother loved The Mills Brothers and that tune that would come on the radio (makes sounds) I just loved it.  And the other memory was my mother she used to, some place she would go, she would work sometimes at night.  And I remember she would go off and she would tell my older siblings watch after, and I became Little Lena [HistoryMaker Lena Williams].  And it was something that they did, it was 'The Shadow' was on the radio but I don't remember that specifically but they would always say, "Lena, I'm on the first step.  Lena, I'm on the second step."  And--
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: Okay.  We were talking about your earliest childhood (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, but I remembered they would, they would tease me and then finally they would come to the door and say, "Lena, we got you."  And I just remembered being very frightened by that.  But that's, those are the two things that I remembered well.
Speaker 2: Now, isn't that the story about the woman's liver, the Johnny and the liver, I think, that's, I, I heard it like that.  That this kid named Johnny was supposed to buy this liver and he didn't buy it and--
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: --he goes to the graveyard and cuts it out of somebody and takes it home and the woman comes back and I want my liver, you know, I don't know if that was the--
Speaker 1: Okay.  See--
Speaker 2: --my brother used to tell that story.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: "I'm coming up the first step, Johnny.  I'm coming up the second step (simultaneous)."
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  That could be, I couldn't figure out why he would--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --do that and then he would say I got you.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right (laughter).
Speaker 1: And I just remembered--
Speaker 2: They--
Speaker 1: --peering at 'em through these bars so I had to have been in a crib at that time.
Story_ID: 482336
Speaker 1: Did you grow up in the same neighborhood the, the whole time?
Speaker 2: No, we, I grew up on T Street Northwest, not too far though from where my mother [Lena Adams Williams] was raised.  When I would say, it's downtown Washington [D.C.].  It was so interesting when we were thinking about that story called, what was it, 'Sixteen Blocks from the White House' [ph.] that Bob Maynard [Robert C. Maynard] wrote, that's where we were living, you know, now, of course, that area is so ritzy.  But these, this was a predominantly black neighborhood.  And I remember during the March on Washington we walked to the Monument [Washington Monument, Washington, D.C.] and it took us maybe about twenty minutes.  So literally where T Street is on a good day, you could just walk and you're at, you're at the White House [Washington, D.C.] and, you know, if you can walk at a nice pace, you're there in, in less than thirty minutes.  So that's the neighborhood that we grew up in, a wonderful neighborhood, wonderful, 805 T Street.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was where I was born and raised.
Story_ID: 482337
Speaker 1: Now tell me now, we always ask this question, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Ah, the sounds are oh, it, it, see I'm just flooding with information.  The sights and sounds, Sunday fried chicken, collard greens, and cornbread.  It, it was just Sunday dinner.  Friday dinner and Saturday dinner was baked beans, Campbell's [Campbell Soup Company] pork and beans and hot dogs, and Friday was fish sticks.  So those were, it was like I could, here comes the weekend.  Peanut butter and jelly, Frosted Flakes, to this day, you know, I gotta have Frosted Flakes.  Oatmeal, just getting up in the morning and that scrapple, all of that.  In that neighborhood we were right across from Cleveland Elementary School [Washington, D.C.], we lived right across from it.  That school has been renovated.  So just the sights of looking out the window of our little house and I realize homes seem so much bigger than they are but when I go to T Street now, it was a basement, but an unfinished basement, the first floor, and the second floor, no attic but it seemed like a very big house.  They were all row houses but we were right across the street from Cleveland Elementary School and just looking out at the school at the kids playing, looking across the street, there's a place called Odd Fellows Hall [Washington, D.C.] which was owned by the Masons and it was a pharmacy there.  So I remember that's where we went to get all of our medication.  We went to the pharmacist over there.  Down the street was Dr. Mazique [Edward C. Mazique] who lived there.  And just the sounds of people, you know, outside playing.  We all played in the front yard, you know, you were weren't supposed to leave the front yard after a certain time.  The laughter of kids at play.  I don't know whether it was Winston Churchill I think they said, said that he wanted to be buried, he wanted to be buried near a playground so he could always hear the laughter of children at play.  It is one of the best sounds because when I was growing up, (cough) excuse me, if I wasn't at school I hated being sick because by being that close to the school, right across the street from it, I could always hear the kids during recess playing, and I wanted to go outside and play.  Just the older people, down the street was what we called the, the business district and that's where you had your mom and pop stores, the grocery stores, and, of course, we had our number runners and then (laughter) and the next block.  So I always remembered the sight of looking at 7th [Street] and T Street between 7th and 8th [Street] which is Georgia Avenue and all the big time, you know, the number runners and, and--
Speaker 1: Oh, keep, finish your sentence (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm sorry, the number runners and--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and the bootleggers and all of that.
Story_ID: 482338
Speaker 1: So we were talking about some of the sights and sounds (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The sights and sounds.
Speaker 1: --and smells of the neighborhood.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And, and, you know, it's so interesting, I mentioned what they called the old bootleggers, you know, the guys who were, I, the older folks could get the liquor and, and the people who ran the numbers and, and we thought, we looked up to those men.  Not, it was not something that we wanted to emulate but they were men that always referred to my mother as, you know, "How are you doing, Miss Williams [Lena Adams Williams]?" you know, "How are those kids doing?"  If we needed to find dad [Ralph Williams], "Your daddy's up here in the pool hall, you know, you need him?"  There was--they were people who we knew and I remember one of them saying, "If anything ever happens to you, if you need any help you can always come to us."  And we were sort of intimidated by 'em, you know, my mother said, you know, "Don't be hanging out with those, those, those number runners up there."  But they always said that if anything ever happens to you, and it was one interesting point when an incident in which my sister said that some people were following them, these young men, because Griffith Stadium [Washington, D.C] was only three blocks from our home.  What we're looking at now is 7th Street was basically Georgia Avenue--
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: --and Griffith Stadium was right off of 7th Street.
Speaker 1: Now that's the stadium that the Senators played in?
Speaker 2: That the Washington Senators--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --used to play.  So what would happen?  The other thing that I remembered about my neighborhood is that we could always tell when the Senators were playing because the few times that we would see white Americans is when they would come in and park in our neighborhood to go to the stadium.  And so that was one thing that I always remembered.  Oh, the Senators are playing.  And my, you know, maternal grandfather [John Adams] was a big baseball fan, but I remembered that also.  But those are the things that I remembered about growing up and, and being, and, and the fact that I always thought of the Smithsonian [Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.], this, this national institution as our local library.  I always told people who, you know, now that growing up in Washington [D.C.], it was nothing to go to the [U.S.] Capitol [Washington, D.C.], the Monument [Washington Monument, Washington, D.C.], the National Zoo [National Zoological Park; Smithsonian's National Zoo and Conservation Biology Institute, Washington, D.C.], the Library of Congress [Washington, D.C.].  These were local monuments to us.  So even though they were, it was the nation's capital and I guess this belonged to the nation, we always felt that these were our local institutions and I always felt that that was rather interesting too growing up.  It wasn't a local, it wasn't directly in my neighborhood, but it was something that I could relate to growing up in Washington, D.C.
Story_ID: 482339
Speaker 1: --Any other sights and sounds and smells?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes, yes.  We were right across the street, down the street from the Howard Theatre [Washington, D.C.].  We lived at 805 T Street which was between 7th [Street] and 8th Street.  And if you went from 7th heading towards New Jersey Avenue, there was a little small street, Florida Avenue, between Georgia Avenue and Florida Avenue was the infamous, you know, and the very wonderful Howard Theatre.  And I just remembered we could sit on our front porch and see Ray Charles, Sam Cooke, James Brown, Ella Fitzgerald--
Speaker 1: So they would--
Speaker 2: --Nina Simone and they would walk, because I didn't realize then that, I said, well, you know, for some reason when you get older you say, "Well, weren't they staying at the hotel?  Weren't they at the Willard [Willard Hotel; Willard InterContinental, Washington, D.C.]?  Weren't they at The Hay-Adams [Washington, D.C.]?  Weren't they, you know, at the Hilton or something?"  They were staying with people in the neighborhood, Dr. Such and Such and this person was Reverend So and So.  And so we would see them walking through going to the Howard Theatre, they had just left somebody's house.  And I remember they would see Ray Charles they would, I would say, "Well, why doesn't he have someone with him?"  And Ray Charles with his cane would be walking to the Howard Theatre.  They say, "Ray," and he would listen to the sound, and, and he would just, "How you kids doing?"  I just remembered that.  And I remembered, you know, when you were under twelve you could get to the Howard Theatre, I think we only had to pay maybe a dollar and fifty some outrageous price.  When you got to be thirteen it went up to like maybe three dollars.  But we saw every major artist.  What's, Moms Mabley, Pigmeat Markham, all of these people we saw, we could get front row seats 'cause we would go there early and stand in line.  And I just remembered now in retrospect how wonderful and privileged we were to see all of the, Smokey Robinson and The Miracles.  And then what we would do as we got older, of course, we would go backstage, and you could get an autograph.  Of course, we didn't have the, the, you know, the cellphone cameras then but we would just want a autograph, we would stand there and get a autograph from one of these, I remember that wonderful moment.  And, of course, across from the Howard was the Dunbar Theater [Washington, D.C.].  And Dunbar was where all your kids went on Saturday for the Saturday matinee with the little, what do they call them?  The theater maid, the ladies that wore the hats that would say, you know, have the flashlights to tell you stop talking.  And I remembered they used to tell us we had to spit out our gum, chewing gum.  And I think about that now that you could go to a theater and the theater maid or whatever they called her, the ushers, 'cause they weren't ushers back in those days, would look, you weren't supposed to, dare not have any young man with his arm around you 'cause that could get you kicked out, but they would walk through, "Are you chewing gum?  Hand it to me."  And, of course, and we saw 'Godzilla' there, we saw 'King Kong,' but I also remembered that how odd it was that my mother [Lena Adams Williams] would give us whatever it was, it was just a little bit of money, twenty-five cents would get us popcorn and a soda and maybe I think another twenty-five cents would get us into the matinee, and all of these kids were at the Saturday matinee, parents could let their kids go to a theater alone and watch two and three movies and then they would go home.  And I think about how alien that is now but that's one of my favorite memories going off to Dunbar Theater and to the Howard Theatre and going by myself with neighbors who were like ten and twelve years old.
Story_ID: 482340
Speaker 1: What are some of the other--was television a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Television was a big part of growing up and I just remember that first one which was just a tube.  And, of course, I'm the youngest of seven I have, you know, six older siblings, so we would all gather.  And, you know, my, our family, they weren't rich and just having that first TV when it came in, I just remembered my father [Ralph Williams] coming in with this tube, I'm saying, "What is that?"  And, of course, my older siblings are just squealing because they realize it's a TV, black and white.  And he put it in the back room and we all gathered around and watched this image, and, of course, I remember Ed Sullivan, the Ed Sullivan, the, what was it, Ted Mack amateur hour ['The Original Amateur Hour'].  Of course, 'The Wonderful World of Disney' but Disney came later because I remembered seeing Disney in color but what I do remember about that television was there was the Gillette ['The Gillette Cavalcade Of Sports'], the Friday night fights.  My father loved boxing, loved boxing.  And Friday night, we could watch whatever we wanted on Saturday but he had to watch the fights.  So we would all gather around and we would watch it on these tubes, and I just remember the women walking around with those signs up and Gillette, you know, just advertising it, and to this day I have this warm spot in my heart because my father used Gillette.  And I can remember another image.  I was short enough that I stood underneath him and he was lathering, and I said, "Doesn't that hurt?"  And I remembered he'd put all that stuff on his face and I said, "Is that Gillette?" and he said, "Yes" (laughter) and he was shaving.  And I just thought it was the most wonderful thing.  And then he put on Old Spice.  And every Father's Day he got Old Spice, and there was this blue thing from Gillette that he got.  To this day I keep a little bottle. I kept it in my office; I found a small bottle of Old Spice that I kept in my office.  And it's amazing how things can warm your heart and can make you feel secure.  And when I was having rough times at The New York Times I would look at that Old Spice bottle and just remembered my father splashing it on his face and just finding comfort in that.  So I do remember that.  But I also remembered boxing 'cause I covered sports for The New York Times for several years and boxing was one of my least favorite sports 'cause it's a very brutal sport.  But one of the, the things I loved about it was the fact that it brought the family together and watching that.  And then I remembered [ph.] Joe Louis when he fought--was it Max Schmeling the German, the German fighter, when they didn't think he was going to knock him out.  And I just remembered that when he did, we didn't have a TV then but it was on radio and I remember we were on the front porch and this man running through our neighborhood [in Washington, D.C.] screaming, "He did it, he did it."  And I remembered people coming out of their homes just celebrating and celebrating and I remember that here was a sport that brought people together and here was this man who made people in my neighborhood so happy and so proud.  And I just, I like boxing because of that but I realize it was sports that sort of made our people proud, and I think that's why I ended up wanting to be a sports writer.
Story_ID: 482341
Speaker 1: But those are some of my earlier memories, and it's funny because you would think, we grew up during segregation and I realized that my memories were not of fear.  It wasn't that it was fear and loathing, I was very proud to be who I was.  And I remember my mother [Lena Adams Williams], you know, braiding my hair and I didn't like the straightening comb, but I never felt that there was something wrong with my hair.  I did like Shirley Temple's and I wanted Shirley Temples and around the corner, Madam C.J. Walker had a beauty salon and my mother took me around there and I got Shirley Temples so I was very, very happy, they weren't blonde, but they bounced.  I never, I never saw a cross burning.  I never saw someone in a white sheet.  I don't remember being called a nigger.  I remembered one image when my mother and I went to Woodie's, Woodward & Lothrop was a department store here in Washington, D.C. and we went there and I remembered this man telling her, "You shouldn't come in this door, you're not supposed to come in this door."  And she said, "Oh, oh, I forgot," and we went to another door.  And I realized years later the only reason he told her that was that blacks must not have been able to enter that door.  We couldn't shop at Garfinckel's [Washington, D.C.], it was a very ritzy store the equivalent of Saks [Saks Fifth Avenue] in Washington called, called Garfinckel's, blacks weren't allowed to shop there.  They were, they were not salespersons there.  And so I remember it, Garfinckel's closed and I never shopped there because I remembered, I was old enough to remember that they still had that mindset even when we were older.
Speaker 2: How long did segregation in D.C. last or did it, did it end all at once and then just kind of fade out or--
Speaker 1: It sort of faded out because see we realized, I said, you know, when we were growing up in our neighborhood it was Dr. Mazique [Edward C. Mazique]  who was down the street, across the street was Odd Fellows Hall [Washington, D.C.] and all the pharmacists that was there, the pharmacy was, you know, the pharmacist was a black man.  Officer Ferguson [ph.] was our neighborhood police officer and if anything ever happened Officer Ferguson would come through and we would be able to tell Officer Ferguson about it.  There was a man, the ice man who came, who delivered the ice for the icebox, a black man.  There was a woman who sold crab cakes and soft shell crabs or little crabs, she was an entrepreneur, Mrs. Scrappy [ph.] was black.  My teachers were black and we were told that, you know, we were told that we were somebody.  The one thing I remembered about segregation that I didn't like, I remembered getting my textbooks in school from the time that I was from kindergarten through sixth grade [at Cleveland Elementary School, Washington, D.C.], and they had other people's names in them and I said, "Who are these people?"  And these were hand-me-downs from white schools.  And I remembered telling, you know, my editor, when, when I was writing my book ['It's the Little Things: Everyday Interactions That Anger, Annoy, and Divide the Races,' Lena Williams], it was one of the earliest things that I could remember and I said, "I want a book where my name is first, just once I'd like that."  And I remembered being angry about it.  I remember that there was a park called Glen Echo [Glen Echo Park, Glen Echo, Maryland].  It was in Maryland and it was an amusement park, one of the only ones in the Washington metropolitan area, and it was a, sort of like, it was almost like the Dick Clark 'American Bandstand.'  There was a guy in Washington had a show very much like that and he would take these white kids to Glen Echo and they would film from there and we always wanted to go there and Glen Echo refused to desegregate.  And I remembered that and how much my older siblings wanted to go to Glen Echo.
Story_ID: 482342
Speaker 1: But I never felt that there was something wrong with me.  My teachers at Cleveland Elementary School [Washington, D.C.] always said, they used that phrase you have to work twice as hard to get, you know, half as far.  In my book ['It's the Little Things: Everyday Interactions That Anger, Annoy, and Divide the Races,' Lena Williams], I talked about going to the Ringling Brothers Circus [Ringling Bros. and Barnum and Bailey] when we were in kindergarten and that was my earliest memory and I didn't realize it until years later why I hated clowns but I start my book off by saying I didn't like clowns and I didn't like the circus.  And it wasn't until I was working at The New York Times and I told this to one of my colleagues and it came to me why I hated clowns.  We were in kindergarten and we got dressed up very much like you see me now.  This is how we would get dressed up to go to the Smithsonian [Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.], to go to the circus.  So we're sitting there in our Sunday finest and next to us are white kids in corduroy jeans, corduroy pants and jeans, and a clown came by with all these balloons and we got very good seats, we were center ring, and I remembered Miss Plummer [ph.] was my kindergarten teacher, and the clown is coming by and he's handing out balloons.  And I remembered reaching wanting to get one of those balloons.  And he came to our section and he stopped handing out balloons, and he went to the next section which was white and he started again.  It was, "We want balloons, we want balloons," and, and Miss Plummer said, "(Shushes) We'll get you balloons when we leave."  And we just sat there and we watched the circus and we were fine.  And I remembered years ago when my nieces wanted to go, I said I don't like, I don't like, you know, I don't, I don't like clowns, it was some movie about a clown that was tormenting people and I thought maybe that was it, it was this clown that was a mass murderer, I thought maybe that's it.  But I did not like those funny faces and I didn't like circuses, I said, "I don't do the circus."  And finally I had to break down because my siblings said, "Well we're not taking 'em."  So I went to circus, loved it.  I could see that one of the clowns underneath his, the skin was like this, 'cause, you know, between the white paint and this I could see, I mean, you could see that there were Asians, and the clowns were funny.  And I realized it was that clown, it wasn't the circus, I realized what he did, and my teacher did give us, get us balloons but they didn't seem as big or as bright as the one the clown gave.  And I remembered all these years later but the wonderful thing about that when, the gentleman who owns the Ringling Brothers Circus is a guy named Kenneth Feld and one of my good friends worked for him.  And she gave him the book, she didn't, I had never told this story to anybody, she read the book and she showed it to Kenneth Feld and he said, "I never knew that."  At my book party, my friend said, "I have a surprise for you."  And Mr. Feld, around the corner comes this clown from Ringling Brothers, they're clowns in training, and he's carrying all of these balloons and he starts handing them out to all of us.  And I just thought all those years later this wrong was righted and I said, "And not only that I now know the man who owns the circus, so there."  But beyond that there were little snapshots of things that I just found that irritated me or I hate this, you know, but I didn't feel like the boot of oppression, you know, weighing down on me.
Story_ID: 482343
Speaker 1: We did go to the March on Washington in '63 [1963] because we felt it was so important that we do so.  But I grew up in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now you, you were what twelve then or--
Speaker 1: I was thirteen--
Speaker 2: --thirteen, okay.
Speaker 1: --'cause that would have been August of, August or whatever it was--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --nineteen sixty-three [1963] and I was March 2, 1950, so I was thirteen years old.
Speaker 2: The 23rd, I think was the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And I remembered that very, very vividly.  Just walking down there with my siblings because my mother, by that time my father [Ralph Williams] had died, he died in 1963, and it was July.  So he had passed and my mother, my [maternal] grandfather [John Adams] was saying, you know, "Lena [Lena Adams Williams], I don't know if you should let those kids go down there. They said there may be trouble."  But they said, "We'll be fine, we'll be fine."  And my mother said, "Well, you know, if she wants to go, you all look after your little sister and your little brother," and we went.  And I just remembered seeing over there was Paul Newman he was standing next to Marlon Brando.  And once again something that you see as a child can give you this favorable impression of people.  To this day, two of my favorite actors were Paul Newman, Marlon Brando, and it was because I knew that they said that at that point you were putting your career and your reputation on the line, the whites who showed up at that march.  But there were so many that were there, Peter, Paul and Mary.  I remembered seeing Odetta [HistoryMaker Odetta Gordon].  But I remembered that when King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was speaking, we got tired so we were leaving by the time they got to his speech.  And we're walking away because two hundred and fifty thousand people you can't figure out which way to go, but we knew if we walked away from the Lincoln Memorial [Washington, D.C.] (unclear) we would be hitting north.  So we found our way through that crowd and I just remembered looking back and from there, here was this little tiny, tiny figure speaking and I just remembered hearing, "We hold these truths to be self-evident," 'cause I always said that, yeah, the, the founding fathers got it right and I love that part to the, I just love that part.  And I could hear him reading that part. I don't remember anything else but when he was speaking that, just that favorable memory.  But like I said it was, it was a good childhood and I realize we were poor, we grew up in a segregated Washington [D.C.], we were Negroes, educated in a public school system and I say, I look back on that time now, I can remember when I dream, I dream of 805 T Street.  I dream of my neighbors.  To this day I can remember every single neighbor, Miss Hughes [ph.], then came the Williams, then came Mr. Blackwell [ph.], then came Miss Morrow [ph.], then came the Nelsons [ph.], and then came doctor [Edward C. Mazique].  I can remember our homes.  And, of course, I had to speak to every single one of them otherwise there would be, you know, something to pay.  But that's why it was such a favorable memory.  Right now, I love my neighbors but I'm new--but I don't know them as well as I did when I was growing up.
Story_ID: 482344
Speaker 1: Yeah, the March on Washington.  Now, now '63 [1963] was a big year because the, John F. Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was assassinated I guess another two months after (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --or three months later.
Speaker 2: After that and I, I, that's another memory.  Because it was, it was so funny, we had gotten out of school early that day, there was a teachers meeting and all we were saying, yes, we can come home and watch 'As the World Turns,' which is what we did, we came home, Channel 9 [WUSA-TV, Washington, D.C.], tuned it in and when Walter Cronkite comes on and say, "We interrupt this program," we would normally fuss.  You never interrupt 'As the World Turns,' and we know that something--I just remembered the feeling that something bad has happened because that was the first bad thing in our lives that we had witnessed, and I knew something bad had happened.  And I remembered my mother [Lena Adams Williams] and all of us saying, "Please God, don't let him be black."  And initially I was saying, "Who are they talking about?"  And the assassin.  And so when we finally see Lee Harvey Oswald I remembered them exhaling because so many people, my [maternal] granddaddy [John Adams], my older siblings, the next door neighbors were saying, "Please God, don't let him be black."  And I just realize their fear was that if he were, all of what we were trying to accomplish would have been set back decades.  And that's why we dressed the way we dressed.  We looked a certain way when we went outside, we talked a certain way, because we were trying to integrate into society and trying to prove ourselves worthy.  So we knew that if that assassin had been black, there would have been hell to pay.  And I just remembered breathing that sigh of relief and then the rain that followed and watching that that funeral with the family once again, all of the family together watching that service.
Speaker 1: Because it, it actually came through your neighborhood, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Right down Pennsylvania Avenue.
Speaker 2: Hm, that, yep.  And just seeing that caisson and just going, and years later going, of course, because, you know, my brothers loved all the--he was a military man, so we always went to see the changing of the guard and we always went to, you know, the, the Eternal Flame [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy Gravesite, Arlington National Cemetery, Arlington, Virginia].  But yeah, that was one of those memories, when you realize, and like we said, race in this country came to us in little vignettes, in snapshots, unlike some of my, my friends of my age who grew up in the South.  It wasn't blatant and in your face, there were just these snapshots, things that were said that you realize that made grown men that you respected a little fearful and that's when we knew that there's a problem here.  But beyond that I loved my childhood.
Story_ID: 482345
Speaker 1: I would have loved that my father [Ralph Williams] had lived longer.  My father smoked, my father smoked Camel's cigarettes and one of the other images I had was of that camel.  And I just remembered it reached a time when we would always say, "Mama [Lena Adams Williams], daddy's home."  We could hear my father through the front door and I remembered saying, "Mama, daddy's home."  It was because his, of his breathing.  And eventually Freedmen's Hospital, where we were all born, now Howard University Hospital [Washington, D.C.], had to remove a lung and they told him they said he has to stop smoking.  And my mother came home and she said, "Well, you know, what your daddy said he said, 'Lena, I just can't.  I'm never gonna stop smoking,'" and he died at the age of forty-nine.  But I remembered that, you know, hardly any of my siblings, my two brothers smoke but they don't smoke Camel.  And it's like why not?  And it's be, it's, you can get cancer, it doesn't matter what the brand is.  But I also remembered that memory very, very vividly.  But yeah, it, it passed through our neighborhood and it was just something that the family sort of came together and those were the, the moments that brought the family together that's what I loved about growing up.
Story_ID: 482346
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about school.  Now what school did you attend first off?
Speaker 2: Cleveland Elementary School [Washington, D.C.].  And it's, it's so funny, you can almost remember every--from Miss Plummer [ph.] to Miss, I can't re- but Miss Shephard [ph.] one of my great teachers.  But I went to Garnet-Patterson Junior High School [Washington, D.C.].  And Cardozo High School [Francis L. Cardozo Senior High School; Francis L. Cardozo Education Campus, Washington, D.C.], the big C, I love that school.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Garnet-Patterson.
Speaker 2: Garnet-Patterson, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Is that one person's name or two names together?
Speaker 2: Two names, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: All those schools are still up and functioning and Cardozo High school.
Speaker 1: Now, I think I know that Garnet must be for Henry Highland Garnet--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --but Patterson.  Who's the Patterson?  Do you know?
Speaker 2: That's a good question and I don't know.  I don't know.
Speaker 1: 'Cause I do believe that Henry Highland Garnet lived in your neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Isn't that something?
Speaker 1: And his mother ran a boarding house--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --that that all the black leaders would stay in.
Speaker 2: Because it's right, it's all in that neighborhood, what they call--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --they now call it the Shaw community [Washington, D.C.].  We grew up in the Shaw community and there was this wonderful play that was done on the, on the history of that Shaw area.  But yeah, he would have, that that sounds right.  And Cardozo High School right there at 13th [Street] and Clifton Street, the school on the hill.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So well, did you like school?
Speaker 2: I loved school.  I was a kindergarten dropout initially, I didn't wanna leave my mom [Lena Adams Williams].  And I remembered the one great thing about my father [Ralph Williams] cooking was that he promised to bake me these little good things if I went to school.  And my mother was very sickly when I was young, I was the, the seventh child and she developed a, a condition in which fluid would build up in her stomach and I was always afraid that my mother because of that, they said it was an enlarged heart and they didn't expect for her to live long.  So I was always very concerned about that, but I didn't wanna leave her to go to kindergarten.  I wanted her to go with me.  And I just remembered Miss Plummer saying, you know, "Little Lena [HistoryMaker Lena Williams]," 'cause we lived right across the street from the school so they knew the whole family, "you're gonna be fine."  And she was in the hospital and she told me that she, she had some incident with her fluid and she'd go, had to go to Freedmen's Hospital [Howard University Hospital, Washington, D.C.] and she told me, "I'll get out but you have to go to school."  And I just remembered going to the hospital 'cause I couldn't go up to see her but looking at her from the window saying, "I went to school today."  And after that I loved school.  I just, I just absolutely loved my teachers; I loved learning; I loved the smell of books, the coatroom, the globe that's round, you know.  All those little images that come back to you, all those little things, Valentine's Day (laughter) making wonderful little things that you did.  In elementary school I was the--I remembered we would have plays at night and the parents would bring things and I was the wicked witch in 'Hansel and Gretel,' my debut on (laughter), not on Broadway but I was such a good witch and I just remembered loving plays and reading plays as a result.  I loved school.  You know, all the fairy tales, all the books, Black History Month.  And I remembered when we used to have to get the vaccination.  I remembered we, we had to get our vaccination and all the things that they did for you when you went to school.  Going to the library, the librarian.  Junior high school I didn't like, I was a good student but I didn't like it because you're coming into your own, then you realize this is what they call nappy hair.
Story_ID: 482347
Speaker 1: We had you at Garnet-Patterson [Garnet-Patterson Junior High School, Washington, D.C.] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At Garnet-Patterson.  I think at that point, you know, when you're sort of one of those teenagers you're thirteen years old, your, your body is developing--or not developing (laughter)--as you would like it, and, you know, you realize then that your hair is, is, nappy.  It's, it's not pretty hair.  You know, you start thinking about you may be bright, but you start thinking about how you look.  And I remembered I was very good in school but I was small so I wasn't a good athlete.  And it was the first time that we really had to get involved in playing sports and I was not, I was good at running but I was too small for a basketball and, of course, that was a time when women just didn't get involved in sports.  So it was just--and the one thing I think I hated about it was that they had found that the students would go out for lunch and not come back, and so what they did because a few students were, was doing this that they decided that they were gonna punish all of us and so we couldn't go out for lunch anymore.  So we nicknamed it the jailhouse.  And I just, and it was one of those things once again I keep saying how things that happen can affect you, to this day I hate it when one person does something and the rest and a whole group is punished as a result.  And I said, you know, I just never thought that was fair.  Why not?  I know now my niece always talks about the cell phone.  At her high school some of the kids were using the cell phone in class, it went off so nobody could bring in their cell phones.  And I remembered going back to Garnet-Patterson and saying, "This is what happened when I was very young."  But it was, we went there from seventh, eighth, and ninth grades so it was three years, did very well, was on the honor roll but once again I think because I was going through puberty, and I just never had an affection towards Garnet-Patterson that I did towards Cleveland [Cleveland Elementary School, Washington, D.C.] and towards Cardozo, Cardozo [Francis L. Cardozo Senior High School; Francis L. Cardozo Education Campus, Washington, D.C.].  So, I graduated, enjoyed it, and they had wonderful, I remembered I was a good singer.  We put on wonderful Christmas pageants and spring pageants and it was really nice, but there wasn't anything memorable about the school.
Speaker 1: There were no favorite teachers or anything (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No favorite, and that was the--that was the other problem, no favorite teachers.  And it's just like a blank, it was like a segment of my life that's sort of was a blur.  And that was three full years of my life that I went through but I just never really, I did well in school, and I remembered I did biology and, and we had your usual subjects.  I didn't have a particularly favorite subject.  And once I got to Cardozo, it was like a light just exploded, you know, this light bulb goes off and I just love that school.
Story_ID: 482348
Speaker 1: You get to Cardozo [Francis L. Cardozo Senior High School; Francis L. Cardozo Education Campus, Washington, D.C.] in '64 [1964] (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I get to Cardozo, let's see, I got there in '65 [1965] 'cause I graduated in '68 [1968], three years, tenth, eleventh, and twelfth.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I got there in '65 [1965] graduated in '68 [1968].  It is a beautiful school.  And I realized that when we were growing up Cardozo High School is, it takes up one entire city block, it sits on a hill.  The highest, one of the highest points in Washington [D.C.].  And I remembered what we would do instead of going down to the Monument [Washington Monument, Washington, D.C.] for 4th of July, we would go to Cardozo and we would sit on the wall and we could see, it's the best view of the Monument.  You have a direct view on that hill of 13th Street.  You're at eye level with the top of the Monument.  We would all gather there and watch the fireworks, and I for, you know, I realized not only how privileged we were.  We had this huge football field.  We had an Olympic sized swimming pool in the basement and tennis courts.  Well, it wasn't until I got older I said, I talked to people in other, you know, cities, in other cities, and even looking around Washington, I said, "You guys don't have a swimming pool in your school?"  And they said, "No, you had a swimming pool?"  Now here's this black school, I said, "Yeah, I hated it because you had to take swimming, and I couldn't swim."  And we had tennis courts and we would just sort of go out, you know, and when the net wasn't up we would just hit the ball up against and we'd use a baseball, we didn't appreciate it.  Football, of course, we were great in.  Basketball, they would have the basketball championships there, and I just remembered now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was the team good, good, good team?
Speaker 2: The team, basketball was very good.  I always wanted to be a majorette, they said I was too skinny, the majorettes were supposed to be stacked, you know, we want majorettes that are, you know, have thighs and I always said when I get older I'm gonna make sure I get nice thighs, I wanna be hefty.  Never made it to be a majorette or cheerleader but I was one of the, what do they call it, this, the trainer or the secretary for the cheerleading squad so that was good enough.  But I remembered, our principal, Miss Jackson [ph.], and she was the assistant principal.  And it's interesting because I cannot name the principal at Cardozo during the three years that I was there, but Miss Jackson was this female vice principal, assistant principal I think they called them.  And Miss Jackson was a very petite woman with that blue, the hair that instead of it being gray it was blue, and I remembered Miss Jackson ran that school with a iron fist.  The worst thing that could happen to a young woman at Cardozo was that she became pregnant out of wedlock.  And, of course, the fear was that, oh, my God, if you did, you cannot go to the regular public school.  You were transferred to a school for unwed mothers.  And I just remembered the fear.  I wouldn't have a boyfriend, I just didn't know anything about how you got pregnant, people told me but I said, you know, I was just so afraid that they could touch you somehow or another, and I wanted to graduate from Cardozo with honors.  And I just remembered Miss Jackson would say, "No, muumuus."  Muumuus were the, you know, the Hawaiian dresses they became very big in the '60s [1960s].  Miss Jackson outlawed them because young girls could be pregnant and they could go through their whole pregnancy with a muumuu and we'd never know.  No chewing gum.  I mean, if they tell you once, spit it out, three times, God forbid you're suspended from school.  Oh, that could never happen.  My biology teacher, I cannot remember her name, one of my favorite teachers I wanted to be, you know, a biologist as a result of her and it's a shame, and Miss Williams [ph.] was my counselor so she was one of my favorite teachers and counselors also.  And she was one of the first people to tell me, you know, "You should go to college, you're bright."
Story_ID: 482349
Speaker 1: Cardozo [Francis L. Cardozo Senior High School; Francis L. Cardozo Education Campus, Washington, D.C.] was, it was during the Peace Corps so we began to have some of our faculty members who came through the Peace Corps and through VISTA [Volunteers in Service to America; AmeriCorps VISTA], white Americans.  And it was the first time that I actually had white teachers.  Very, very good, very, very dedicated.  And they were the ones that would also start pushing, pushing us and broadening our horizons to other things, you know, to other kinds of music.  You know, of course, we all loved The Beatles, but Bob Dylan, who, who's Bob Dylan?  So I just remembered they would broaden our horizons too.  I became a fan of Peter, Paul and Mary only because of the March on Washington.  But there were just certain groups that you just didn't quite listen, The Mamas and The Papas, oh, no, no, no.  They exposed us to that kind of music.  Different kinds of playwrights and plays in general.  They were the ones that when 'Hair' ['Hair: The American Tribal Love-Rock Musical'], you know, was on, on Broadway, what was this play all about?  So I remembered just appreciating them because once again they told us that we could be somebody.  And all of our teachers, it was, it was at Cardozo because it was there that you knew, do I go into the [U.S.] military?  This is during the Vietnam War, are they going into the military, are they gonna become a secretary with the federal government?  Maybe now I could become a clerk typist or GS-5 [General Schedule] in the federal government, we could go to college.  And not, if we didn't wanna go to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], we could go to Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio], we could go to Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio].  We could go to, you know, you know, I'm thinking of Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California], I mean, come on Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York], oh, no, Boston College [Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts], there was Smith College [Northampton, Massachusetts].  And I remembered the first time I heard of Smith College was when they came to Cardozo because Miss Williams [ph.] said, "You need to come here, there are some bright kids here."  And there was the infamous Smith College, you know, and they, the first thing they told us is that, "Oh, the Nixon daughters [Patricia Nixon Cox and Julie Nixon Eisenhower] are graduates of Smith," and I'm going, "I'm just a little Negro girl from Northwest Washington [D.C.], I don't belong here."  And I didn't, I looked at Boston College and I looked at Smith College and there were a couple other universities, University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia], we looked at them and I looked for people who looked like me and they were just little specks.  And I said, you know, and then there's Howard and every time I rode up and down, you know, Georgia Avenue, there was the school, the other school on the hill, Howard University, and I just said, "I always wanted to go to Howard."  I mean, you know, I said, "Give me something.  Give me a reason not to go to Howard University," and none of these other schools could offer it.  But it was at Cardozo that I realized you have options.  It was at Cardozo with our white teachers and our black teachers combined, they start talking about the Vietnam War and said, "Here's what's wrong with that."  So by the time we left in '68 [1968], we need to be out of Vietnam, you know.  We need equal rights.  They were the ones, I realize it was at that high school, that I began to come into my own.  You know, you're eighteen years old, seventeen, eighteen, and we're saying there's a march, we wanna participate in this march at the Pentagon [Washington, D.C.].  Parents concerned but we're going with our teachers.  That's what Cardozo did to me.
Story_ID: 482350
Speaker 1: You know, I graduated in the top, I was one of the top tw- I think I was 19 in a class of something like a 150 or something, National Honor Society, enjoyed myself.  And the one thing I loved about that we were bright, we prided ourselves on being bright but we also, we danced, we boogied down to the Four Tops.  We had crushes on [HistoryMaker] Smokey Robinson.  We put on our little lipstick when we went out and then came the miniskirt.  And I remembered there's a picture and I'll hope to send it to you guys of me on the stage at Cardozo [Francis L. Cardozo Senior High School; Francis L. Cardozo Education Campus, Washington, D.C.] with a little, right now it's the same, I realize it's the same length as, as this skirt now but, of course, then it was a mini.  And I'm up there with my mini and we're doing the shake, the Sam Cooke shake.  We had fun.  But we were never told that we were lesser human beings.  We dissected pigs, we dissected frogs.  We had to go to the Library of Congress [Washington, D.C.] and do a term paper using their library.  I mean it can be very intimidating, it's not like going to any other library.  We had to do that on our own.  The first time I ever went inside the [U.S.] Supreme Court was at Cardozo High School.  And I just remembered they all seemed so big, it's this huge podium that they're sitting behind.  I'm going, "Oh, my God."  I was so intimidated by that whole thing.  But I remembered the world was ours, you know, and we could change the world.  That's what I got at Cardozo that I didn't get at Garnet-Patterson [Garnet-Patterson Junior High School, Washington, D.C.].  And I just, my classmates I loved, I loved the setting of the school.  And now I look at it and when I found out years later that Cardozo now has in the basement where the swimming pool was, a daycare center, I was like (gesture) (laughter).  I felt old and appalled and I'm saying, "A daycare center?"  I said, "Miss Jackson [ph.]--we couldn't even go to this school and now?"  I could understand the reasoning behind it but I, you could imagine how far that was, how alien it was for my mind to wrap itself around that thought, that from the swimming pool we now have this daycare center.  But I loved my education, I loved it at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], but it was Cleveland [Cleveland Elementary School, Washington, D.C.], I guess, because it was the beginning of your, your, your, you know, primary education, and the end, what happened in the middle could, you know, could make or break you but the beginning was so strong, and in the back end, it was so strong, that what happened in the middle really didn't matter.  I had such a good start and such a good finish that I think it equipped me for, you know, for life.
Story_ID: 482351
Speaker 1: Did you participate in the--were you interested in writing in school?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And, and one of the things, I, they, we started a little newspaper, one of our, our white teachers at Cardozo [Francis L. Cardozo Senior High School; Francis L. Cardozo Education Campus, Washington, D.C.] said, "We need to, we need to have a student newspaper."  So we started the student newspaper at Cardozo and I wrote for that.  I wrote a story, in fact, I think I have it, when I, in my yearbook.  And I talked about, somebody interviewed me what I wanted to do in life and I'm so proud that I did everything that I wanted to do in terms of the travel and what I wanted to be.  But it was there that I thought about writing because I liked writing, but I was still trying to toy with so do I wanna become a nurse, because one of my sisters was a nurse so I was still toying with that thought.  But I loved writing and it was my sister who convinced me, "You don't wanna spend the rest of your life emptying bedpans.  The hours aren't great."  And I said, "Okay," and her and all of her friends who were nurses said, you know, "You make good money, but do you really wanna do this?"  But I had, I did not know a black journalist growing up.  Carl Rowan we saw on, you know, watching the columnists for The Washington Post.  Beyond that none on, on television.
Speaker 1: Did you get, did you read the African American [Washington Afro-American] when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, we read the African American but I just never thought that this is what you could do.  We read the Daily News [Washington Daily News], The Washington Post, the Washington Star, all three papers, required reading.  And we had the Afro-American.  But I loved Ebony and Jet.  I mean, I was named, when I was named one of Ebony's women of achievement, I just told them, I said I, I was, when I made my little acceptance speech, everybody had something to say, and I said you guys this is a true story, when I was growing up we would read, and I said, "I'm not Lena Horne, you know, I'm not gonna be Willie Mays or, you know, Sammy Davis, Jr., and I'm not gonna be the pin up girl in Jet," I said, "but I wanna make Ebony."  I said, "Mom [Lena Adams Williams]," and mom, and my mother said, "Look at all the other people in Ebony, these are people who are lawyers, these are people who are educators.  And you don't have to be an entertainer or a sports figure to make Ebony magazine.  One day you're gonna make it."  And I just remembered saying when I accepted, it was in 19--it was 2001, I got my award and I said, I just remembered I said, "Oh, mama, I've made it."  I was just so proud of myself.  But I looked at that but it never, there was never that connection that this is what you could do, you know, this, these are journalists, this is what you could do.  I loved writing but I thought of writing the great American novel.  Never wanted to be on TV, never wanted to do radio, I just thought of writing in a different way, in terms of writing books, writing stories, and short stories.  And I never quite thought of that as journalism per se.  So but it was at Cardozo that I first started thinking about writing and it wasn't until Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] that I really thought of journalism, 'cause I was an English major, so it was in journalism you can use English for that.
Story_ID: 482352
Speaker 1: There's journalism and there's sports and I loved sports.  My father [Ralph Williams]--
Speaker 2: How--
Speaker 1: --started us off, I loved sports, just loved watching them.  I wasn't a good player but I could be very satisfied, even to this day very satisfied watching, you know, ESPN 24/7.
Speaker 2: Now that, now that's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --that's unusual for most girls, I guess, to--
Speaker 1: Yes, and what I loved about--
Speaker 2: --really love sports that much.
Speaker 1: --my mother [Lena Adams Williams], my mother never discouraged any of her girls from, we never played, but we know more about football.  We would be sitting there with the guys watching football all the time.  And my mother, as tiny as she was, loved football, baseball.  My grandfather [John Adams] once again my maternal grandfather, I would watch all the games, baseball games with him.
Speaker 2: Now, now one of the features of Detroit [Michigan] is, I mean of, of, of D.C. [Washington, D.C.] sports is that the D.C. teams tried to remain white as long as possible.
Speaker 1: Oh, yes, it did.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: The Washington Redskins and the Washington Senators left here almost, the Senators, I think left lily white.  The Redskins were the last, Bobby Mitchell, I think, was the first.
Speaker 2: Yep.  Got him from Cleveland [Cleveland Browns] that broke our hearts (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yes.  And it took 'em all those years.  And now we look at Tony Dungy and there's Lovie Smith and we're all saying yes.  Doug Williams was the first black quarterback to win the Super Bowl and thank God he played for the Redskins but when it came to coaching why aren't the Redskins, and they had people that were there, the, the coach of the Cincinnati Bengals was a former assistant coach with the Redskins, everybody thought he was going to get the job.  So those are the things but I remembered sports because I just remembered that it always brought the family together.  Beyond Sidney Poitier and Lena Horne and Dorothy Dandridge and all these people that we saw, the few people we saw on the screen, they were few and far in between, you know, we had these sports figures that we could see and hear of, and there was such pride in it.  And it was the one place that I saw in the arena of sports where I saw people of different colors coming together, hugging each other, cheering on the home team.  And I liked sports because, because it was something that brought people together across race, gender, and geographic lines.  So it was at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] that I said, you know, I think, my mom, said you know what you should do, and my mother put this, planted that seed, she said you love to write, you're good in English but you don't wanna necessarily spend all your time in the classroom you like being, going about, you like talking to people, meeting people, and she said and you love sports, and you're good at it, she said why don't you be a sportswriter?  And she said there's Sports Illustrated, Sport magazine.  I said, "There are no women doing that."  She said, "Well, maybe that's why they need you."  And here was my little mother, you know, the only child, and I said, "Maybe so, Mama."  And she said, "Combine the things you love and you'll never be bored in life," and that's what I did.  I combined writing with sports.  I didn't spend my entire career covering sports but I combined those two things and I realize life was never boring--
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: --my professional life wasn't.
Speaker 2: So your mother made the suggestion (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) My mother was the one that planted, 'cause I would never put those two thoughts and ambitions together.  And that's how I became the first female sports editor of the Howard University newspaper, The Hilltop.
Story_ID: 482353
Speaker 1: Now let me go back--
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) to the 1960s.  I thought about this just now when I thought about the images of black women in sport and I thought of 1960 and this--
Speaker 2: Wilma?
Speaker 1: Wilma Rudolph, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Wilma Rudolph.
Speaker 1: Winning the--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Rome Olympics [1960 Summer Olympics, Rome, Italy], right?
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did, did, did you see that?
Speaker 2: I was--
Speaker 1: That was televised (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not, not only was it televised--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --I met Wilma Rudolph and we became good f- it was just, and she couldn't understand, and I said, "You don't understand do you?"  She said, "No, I meet so many people like you."  And I just, I remembered just touching her hand and saying, "Wilma," and I said, "Okay, now I'm the, I'm the sports reporter for The New York Times so I'm supposed to be objective and I would just but Wilma."  And she said, "All right, so we're gonna ask the questions."  And we just became, because afterwards I said, "Let's go across the street, I'm gonna take you to our favorite restaurant on The New York Times 'cause I got an expensive, you know, account [expense account]."  I just loved her and whenever I needed a quote about women in sports, why we're seeing more, behind the scenes, I would always call Wilma.  Just a, I just remembered, and to see your idol, someone that you've seen on TV and I was ten years old at that time, and, of course, you know, Jesse Owens, and you see these people and then they're sitting across from you, and they are just classy, beautiful human beings, 'cause we always sometimes put our idols up here and we say, oh, I hear they're not nice, they're arrogant, they're self-centered.  And then to meet someone that you've admired for those years and they're everything that you envisioned, so yes, going back to the 1960s, yes, I remembered seeing all of that.  And Jesse Owens and realizing, you know, 'cause I just tell people, I said, "There are certain things that I, I don't know whether I was more afraid of the South, the Jim Crow South or, or Germany because of what I saw, you know, during World War II [WWII]."  So you have this sense and when you realize what Jesse did and where he did it, you just say, "Oh, God, that's just so great to see."  I never, you know, she's she talked about the influence that he had on her life.  It was just, it's just a wonderful moment.
Speaker 1: I think that same year it was Rafer Johnson won the decathlon (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --which was a big deal too.
Speaker 2: Met him also, met him also.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Another, just, you know.  And you sometimes wonder, you know, why is it that we think that people may not be in person like we've envisioned them.  But I find that one thing about athletes because they have to use not just only mind but body and they themselves talk about having admired someone, and how much it meant to them when that person just said hello, of course, I'll sign your t-shirt or give you an autograph.  And I think that's why when you meet these people, they realize how important it is 'cause that maybe the only time (snaps) you have to meet that person and that impression is there forever.
Story_ID: 482354
Speaker 1: So back to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  Now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Ah, back to--
Speaker 1: --fast-forward to Howard.
Speaker 2: --the Bisons.
Speaker 1: Now, you're, you're at Howard now, you're--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: What was it like being a freshmen at, at Howard--
Speaker 2: Oh, scary.
Speaker 1: --in 19--
Speaker 2: You know, I mean just, 19--
Speaker 1: --sixty-eight [1968].
Speaker 2: --September of 1968.  And, of course, I lived at home, I didn't stay in the dorm I was still a mama's [Lena Adams Williams] girl, I did not wanna live in the dorm.  And didn't think I lost anything by it but went in, you know, you have your regular required courses that you take.  And I remembered I had Spanish that I was taking my first year and English, and we had philosophy and, you know, your usual social studies.  I was just overwhelmed because all of a sudden instead of having a very regimented, you go to school at 9:00, your first class starts, and you go to homeroom, first class starts at 9:30 and it's forty minutes and lunch comes at a certain time and it's every single day, there I am, I have classes Monday, Wednesday, and Friday from 11 to 1 and then another one at 3:30 and then Tuesdays and Thursdays it's starting at 5:40. I was totally overwhelmed.  I said, "Oh."  And, of course, you went from being, "Lena [HistoryMaker Lena Williams], you know, (snaps)."  "Oh, I'm sorry," you know, in high school [Francis L. Cardozo Senior High School; Francis L. Cardozo Education Campus, Washington, D.C.], it was, "Lena, (snaps) what are you doing?" to, "Miss Williams."  And you're going, "Oh, that's my mother.  The oh, you're talking to me?  Oh yes, professor."  It was jarring.  And Howard by that time, you know, there was president, was it Nabrit [sic.]?  Yeah, they had, well, all we knew was that they had taken over the administration building, changed the institution.  So we had this sort of amorphous way of studying, you know, this, university without walls.  I was totally overwhelmed and a bit intimidated.  But God did I love the people.  I walked in, women with hair like this, hair out here, beautiful earrings.  And I mean, you walk up and a stranger, Larry [Larry Crowe], look it, if you can imagine meeting you for the first time, you say, "How you doing my beautiful sister?"  And you're going, "Is his sister behind me?" and you're going, "Me?  And I'm fine, fine, I'm fine."  I mean people who looked at you would, "Sister, where you going?"  I said, "I can't find where, where's this particular hall? I'm look--."  "Come on, I'm walking that way."
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: "So what's your major?"  This embrace, this huge, and there, there was this embrace that was there.
Speaker 1: Yeah, those were the days and--
Speaker 2: Those were the days.
Speaker 1: --having lived through those myself, I mean, I don't think there's any feeling like that.  I mean, in the history of our people, I mean, it's not like that now.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: But did--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --did, everybody you saw, you know, considered himself a brother or a sister.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And you were beautiful.  My, you know, what was then my big lips, my dark skin, my beautiful black sister, you know.  What and, and, of course, we would say, "Well I think we should do this, now--."  It was just like the halls of [U.S.] Congress with, "My esteemed colleague from the great State of New York, my beautiful black sister, I have to, from D.C. [Washington, D.C.], I have to disagree."
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And I mean it was just so--I, I, I reached a point I would just go, when I wasn't in class I used to run home and be with mom and eat lunch then, then I would be at the Punchout [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], you know, our little campus, little cafeteria, I would be in the library.
Speaker 1: The Punchout indicating that for those who are not, are not aware that you--
Speaker 2: Are not studying (laughter).
Speaker 1: --you may not stay in school if you keep going over there, right, you may punch out from out school.
Speaker 2: Playing cards--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --you know, playing whatever, what was it (unclear) bid whist.
Speaker 1: Bid whist, right.  You may punch out (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I would just stay on campus because Stoke- Stokely's coming.  Stokely was the Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture].  H. Rap [H. Rap Brown; Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin], Miriam Makeba is here.  I mean, every person that was there, Thurgood, the Thurgood Marshall.  And, of course, that's how we, Thurgood Marshall, was, and I would say, "Isn't that Thur--?" "Oh yeah, you know, Miss, you know, Justice Marshall is always, he's, he was meeting with, you know, the president today."  I mean, this is what you, every black authority, black celebrity, every, of note was there.  And I'm just in there as a freshmen going--
Story_ID: 482355
Speaker 1: And then, of course, you know, they found out I was interested in sports, you need to write for The Hilltop.  And I was a little nervous about trying to, you know, depart, you know compartmentalize my time and budget my time, you know, effectively.  So I didn't write for the student newspaper that first year but Pearl, oh, Stewart [Pearl Stewart], first black female editor for The Hilltop who's now at Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California].  Pearl is, I saw Pearl not too long ago; she went with the Maynard program [Robert C. Maynard Institute for Journalism Education].  Pearl was the one, I mean, and can you imagine seeing a black woman, the editor of a university newspaper?  I was just so in awe.  I couldn't, I literally couldn't speak to Pearl, I told her for years I was intimidated by her.  But it was that next year she said, "You need to think about writing."  And by the time I got, I had met two women, Norma Thread-, Cheryl Traywick [ph.] and Norma Threadgill [ph.] both from Newark, New Jersey, became some of my best friends and they were in the dorm.  And we formed a little close-knit group that lasted for those four years.  It was, well, I can't think, Richard Douglas and his, his girlfriend and wife Cheryl Douglas, it was just a group of us.  I knew a lot of people because I ended up writing sports for The Hilltop and covering our first NCAA [National Collegiate Athletic Association] Division I championship when we got it in, in soccer in 1971--
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: --seventy-two [1972].  Writing a column called, Say Listen, from Curtis Mayfield's, 'If There's a Hell Below We're All Going to Go.'  The first thing he says in that song is, "Say, listen," and I just loved it, and so that was the name of my column.  But Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], as a freshman, by the time I got to my second semester, I was coming into my own.  The plays that were being held in Cramton Auditorium [Washington, D.C.], I would say every speaker, I, I made sure because my mother [Lena Adams Williams] encouraged me and the teachers they said, this is the best time of your life, it's free, you're paying for this while you're, you know, expose yourself to it.  Every musician that, and, you know, like I said, you know, Nina Simone, Miles Davis.  And not only were they there, they would stay behind, you know, I just remember when 'Shaft,' [HistoryMaker] Isaac Hayes, Isaac.  I remember with that voice of his, and Isaac said that, you know, "I gotta come to my city," he said, "How you doing Howard?"  I mean, I just, I said--and there is Isaac Hayes.  I mean, Isaac said, "I hear they gotta close Cramton. I'll pay 'em for the electricity," he said, "Let's finish partying."  And then we're going, "Oh, my God.  We just--."  That's the kind of stuff that you just had at Howard.  All kinds of dignitaries.
Story_ID: 482356
Speaker 1: --Let's talk about some of the teachers at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] that you had.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Because I know Howard has traditionally been full of these talented teachers, and who were some of your favorite teachers at Howard?
Speaker 2: Well, I remember one was a Dr. Holmes [Eugene Holmes] and it was interesting because, you know, back in that day, there was not a first name basis, so you remembered people by their last name.  Dr. Holmes was a professor of philosophy at Howard.  Became my favorite teacher because during our freshmen year, Dr. Holmes had been teaching for years and he just spoke extemporaneously off the top of his head, you know, no notes, no nothing.  He just started pontificating, you know, Plato and Socrates and all of these people.  We're going, "Wait a minute.  What are you talking about this logic, this reasoning and all?"  And, of course, he was out sick one day and the next thing we knew, the substitute comes in and she's gonna give us a test.  And we said, "Wait a minute, we don't know what the test would be on.  Dr. Holmes just sort of starts talking off the top of his head," and we were upset.  So we said we're not taking the test 'cause, you know, it's Howard.  The teacher didn't know what to do, she said, "Well I'm gonna let Dr. Holmes know that you guys are refusing."  We said, "Well fine."  Dr. Holmes comes back and he says, "Well what happened. I understand there was a little revolution here."  And everybody is quiet, and I don't know, my mother [Lena Adams Williams] told me after Garnet, because I didn't like Garnet-Patterson [Garnet-Patterson Junior High School, Washington, D.C.] and I was supposed to get some award for citizenship and I didn't get it because something I had done, literally talking back at a teacher, making my point, I didn't get it, and my mother said the, my mother talked to the teacher afterwards, I had never told her this, and she said, "You stand up for yourself."  She said, "If you think someone is wrong just because you're younger than they are, doesn't mean you can't tell them that."  She said, "You do it with respect."  So she said, "You speak up and I'm always there, if you, I've got a roof over my head and food on the table, you will always have a place to sleep and something to eat."  So I don't know what it, after my mom, I said, "Well, Dr. Holmes," I said, "you know, I respect you," I said, "and you are a very bright man, and I love philosophy." I said, you know, I said, "It's the age of, you know, just sitting outside philosophizing all the time," I said, "but you speak from the top of your head, sometimes you said something like fifteen minutes ago you said but we said but fifteen minutes ago you said that in Greek societies, the, and then you said, 'Well no I didn't,' but we've written it down but by not having notes--."  So afterwards he said, "Well."  I said, "We'd like to know what you're gonna test us on and we didn't know. It came from out of nowhere."  So he said, "Okay, well now we're gonna have structure."  So we started to have structure and he said, "Next week we're gonna have a test."  And we went there Monday, Wednesday, and Friday.  So I--that was Monday and that Wednesday I went to him and he said, "Miss Williams [HistoryMaker Lena Williams], I wanna see you after class."  And I go, "Oh, God."  And he went to me he said, "You know, one thing," he said, "I bet you weren't the only one that was concerned about this," he said, "but I appreciate your speaking up."  And I said, he said, I said, "Okay, thank you."  I said I am going to ace this, this test 'cause I don't want him to think now, you know, I did very well on the test.  Dr. Holmes, I became his student assistant teacher.  I mean, and we were like joined at the hips and when I used to tell people, they said, "You're taking Dr. Holmes?"  I said, "Oh, yes, yes."  I mean, I was like minoring in philosophy 'cause I loved him so.
Story_ID: 482357
Speaker 1: Dr. Johnson [ph.] was the English teacher and everything, and that's why you see Shakespeare [William Shakespeare] in the back.  I mean, it was just things that he would say and I said, "Who said that?"  And he said, "William Shakespeare."  And I said--like he said, one time I was saying something that I realized and we, you know, it was something that I was talking well, you know, "Black people this," and I knew we were wrong.  And Dr. Johnson said, "To thine own self be true" ['Hamlet,' William Shakespeare].  And I said, "Yeah?"  "Shakespeare said that."  Then I said you, and I said, you know, one thing and he, and we said, then I said, "That's in, which one is it?"  He said, "That's when Laertes is talking to his son [sic.]."  So we get there and everything he said he said, you know, one thing everything you need to learn about life is in that passage.  "Neither borrower nor lender be."  And we just started talking Shakespeare and I said, "But, Dr. Holmes [sic.], here's this old white British guy, what is that gonna have to do with my life?  I need to impact on these young--."  He said, you know, "You can," he said, "but sometimes like your parents used to say, 'What goes around comes around,' and 'A dog that'll carry a bone will bring a bone.'"  And my mother [Lena Adams Williams] used to say, "Every shut eye ain't sleep, and every goodbye ain't gone."  And he said, "You know how you speak in those little rhymes," he said, "Shakespeare spoke in those little vignettes and those rhymes and a lot of what you need to tell somebody, sometimes if you don't have it from mama, and your old grandmamma," he said, "just read this."  And I remembered some of the great, you know, writers, poets, I would never have been exposed too.  Here was this black professor who is telling me about all these great writers, Hemingway [Ernest Hemingway], I said, "Oh, please.  What am I gonna--me and Hemingway?" you know, Steinbeck [John Steinbeck], all of these great, great writers, 'The Grapes of Wrath' [John Steinbeck], I would never have read.  You know, I was, at that point, you know, it was all Richard Wright, it was James Baldwin, it was Zora Neale Hurston, you know, everything, anything about, about Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], of course.  And, of course, [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou, 'The Caged Bird Sings' ['I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings,' Maya Angelou], I mean, come on.  That's what we were going towards.  But he said, "There are those writers but there are other people that you can also read."  And he said, "You're growing up in America and while it's great to know your black history," he said, "you got that foundation of American history 'cause that's what we were just taught."  He said, "But if you're gonna be an English major and minoring in journalism, you're gonna have to call up on some of these great writers and not just American."  He said Mao Tse-tung, I mean, you know, come on.  He said, "Chairman Mao has some interesting things," he said, "like Confucius."  He said, "Chairman Mao got some interesting things to say."  I would never have thought about that had Dr. Johnson never told me that.  So I just remembered that seed that he planted.
Story_ID: 482358
Speaker 1: Dean Calhoun [Edna Calhoun] only because I worked in the admissions office and it was--she was the dean of admissions [at Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  And just things about life, I mean Dean Calhoun, we were putting people in different dorm rooms and who wanted to room together.  And Dean Calhoun, here was this woman, bright, she was about 5'10" or 5'11", and she was one of the first women that I had known that was that tall so I was always very impressed with her presence and she had this wonderful voice.  And she just talked to us about life.  She was never married and I said, "Dean Calhoun, I, I wanna get married, I wanna have kids."  She said, "Well good for you," she said, "I just never found someone to marry," and she said, "And you know, Dr. Height [HistoryMaker Dorothy Height] ain't never been married."  I said, "She certainly isn't, Dorothy Height," and, of course, here.  "Oh, yeah," I said, "yeah, but I still wanted to get married."  I never got married.  And I didn't feel that something was weird about it by that time because I was looking at these other women who had accomplished things and she gave me all of these women, black and white, who had not been married and what they had accomplished.  And I just remembered that conversation that I had with Dean Calhoun about that.  And she was hip, dressed, you know, fly.  And we could talk to her about anything.
Story_ID: 482359
Speaker 1: And, of course, it's funny, Cato Whitley was one of my first journalism professors.  Cato was a young man, worked in radio, went to Columbia University's grad school of journalism [Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism, New York, New York] and I remembered Cato 'cause he was the first person to plant that seed into my, my head.  And here was this young hip guy, dark glasses, big bush, 'cause, you know, Dr. Holmes [Eugene Holmes], gray hair, closely trimmed, Dr. Johnson [ph.], gray, closely trimmed.  Here was Cato, you know, dashiki, you know, smoked.  This was the first person who told us about journalism.  And Cato taught us journalism like Columbia University, you know.  When I went to Columbia, here was this kid coming from Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and here were these other kids coming from Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] and Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], you know, and Columbia and could I was just, I was, I was fierce.  I walked into New York [New York], now I was intimidated by New York but Columbia, I said. I used to long before Andy Young [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] called them smart-ass white boys, I would say, "Oh, these smart-ass white boys have nothing on me."  I just walked in with this sense of entitlement.  And Tony Brown [ph.] by coming into Howard, Phil [ph.] who was the general manager of WHUR [WHUR Radio, Washington, D.C.], first name was Phil, I can't think of his last, all of them, I mean we were just, and we were just Howard.  It was something about Howard that, and, you know, that movie ['Stir Crazy'] where Richard Pryor walks in with (laughter)--
Speaker 2: "We bad."
Speaker 1: --and, yeah, and he's walking, "Yeah, we bad."  Howard gave us that sense.  So with Cato it was like, "I wanna interview people, well, let me interview my neighbors."  He said, "That'll work but your neighbors reflect a certain part of Washington [D.C.] but they don't reflect the rest of Ward 6, you know, across the river here.  You gotta go over and talk to Wisconsin Avenue, you know, and go on Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.]."  "I can't do that, I can't walk up to some stranger."  "Just tell 'em who you are."  And, of course, by being a Howard student that's just starting with WHUR and just starting our journalism program, people were really receptive, very receptive.  Strangers on the street, you would go up, "I'm doing a story on--" and, of course, the Vietnam War, we would go anywhere.  We could walk into the Pentagon [Washington, D.C.] and I remembered doing that and they had some colonel that talked to us about it but it was, "Howard, Howard University students, journalisms majors, they wanna talk to you about the war."  And we went in and, of course, we were intimidated but we said, "Well, you know, come on, we, we're involved in a civil war here colonel. What--?"  And I'm thinking, you just asked this man this question, and he said, "Yeah, but it's a civil war that's about politics."  And I just remembered that Cato Whitley said we had the right to go to the Pentagon be with The Washington Post and ABC and the rest of the--and ask these questions.  So by the time I got to Columbia I was like, "Oh, this is nothing."  It was a little more intimidating doing it in New York but it was, that's what those professors did.
Story_ID: 482360
Speaker 1: And all of them that, that were just there.  Donald Byrd, I think it was who was a music professor.  Donald Byrd brought all of these great musicians, Roberta Flack.  She said, I mean, this is me, [HistoryMaker] Herbie Hancock, Richard Pryor.  And what they would do, we would go with our professors to the Fillmore East [ph.], Mr. Henry's [Mr. Henry's Capitol Hill Pub and Restaurant, Washington, D.C.].  And I remembered seeing Richard Pryor, you know, at Mr. Henry's and, and, and Herbie Hancock, an alumni.  So we're sitting there, and it was just things that I realize we did at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  Herbie Hancock had, one of his great songs, I can't think of it, but it was one of his first big hits, and, of course, this was a white audience and they didn't, and we were saying, "Herbie, they don't what's coming.  They don't know what's coming Herbie."  And afterwards, you know, we were just so vocal, we were.  They said, you know, "Herbie wants you guys.  Table one, come here. Herbie wants to see you guys backstage."  And we said, "Oh."  And he said, "Thank you."  We said, "What?"  He said, "I heard you guys."  We said, "Were we loud?"  He said, "No," he said, "you kept me going," he said, "'cause it's a quiet audience," he said.  And, you know, and, and that taught me sometimes that there's a proper time when to applaud and when not to applaud but I felt even when I went to Lincoln Center [Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts, New York, New York] to the Met [Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, New York] and to watch the ballet, I knew when to applaud and I also knew when to say my own bravo.  I didn't have to wait for the crowd.  And I realized here was this wonderful musician, this accomplished artist who said we hear that, and he said, "I heard you all," he said, I said, "We saw you respond but we thought well, the other white folks weren't saying anything."  And we said, "Hey, we Howard," you know. "If you wanna call us the ghetto kids fine but, we Howard, and we appreciate this music."  All of that, Donald Byrd was, was the type of person, he said--
Speaker 2: He was on campus, right (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He was on campus.  You know, "Listen to your ear."  And they exposed us to all kind, Rare, Rare Essence, here was this white group, you know, we liked their music.  By that time I was well into, you know, Bob Dylan, you know.  And who was it?  'A Brick on the Wall' [sic. 'Another Brick in the Wall'], I can't even think of, Pink Floyd, that's how we went, Pink Floyd and all that 'cause see then it was the revolution had come, it was all these other groups were saying, "We don't belong in Vietnam.  We need to fight for women's rights, equal rights."  So all of these white groups that were speaking what we were speaking. Carole King, singing those kinds of songs.
Story_ID: 482361
Speaker 1: We then, we were out there protesting.  Not just Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], it was Howard and American U [American University, Washington, D.C.] and Catholic U [The Catholic University of America, Washington, D.C.], we were down outside the Pentagon [Washington, D.C.] saying, "We need to leave Vietnam."  I could go to American U and Georgetown [Georgetown University, Washington, D.C.] and George Washington [George Washington University, Washington, D.C.] and see buttons, "Free Angela Davis," "Free the Chicago Seven," "Free all political prisoners."  Now I must say that by the time I got to my senior year, I had developed this antipathy as I call it now, towards white people.  And I was like, you know, of course, 'cause then it was the Panthers [Black Panther Party], and it was Ron Karenga [HistoryMaker Maulana Karenga].  And when I told my niece, she was doing a story on Kwanzaa, I said, "Well I, I know Ron Karenga, he came to Howard, you know, he was."  She said, "You do?"  I said, "That's what Kwanzaa came from, it's not like Christmas, it was some event that prompted it.  Ron Karenga started it as an alternative but I know the man who started Kwanzaa."  It's like saying you knew who created Christmas.  We do but and she was like in awe of that.  And by that time, you know, it was what happened in Chicago [Illinois] with the Panther Party and what was going on with [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis on the run.  And my good friend, Gayle Pollard [ph.] who was at Howard who looked very much like Angela.  I mean, there were times Gayle and I would be walking down the street and people would stop and it would be the cop and, you know, somebody would, some guy dressed up and stopped and, and said, "Do you have ID in D.C. [Washington, D.C.]?"  She said, "What do you mean do I have ID?"  And, of course, I was saying, "And who are you?"  And this is, of course, some FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] person and they whip out this badge, and they said, "You look like Angela Davis."  We said, "She ain't Angela Davis and if she were (laughter) we wouldn't be talking to you."  And, of course, by now I'm like, not liking white people very much and it just reached the point that I became very, very militant between my junior and senior year.  I mean, I had earrings down to here, bush out to here, and look out whitey, black power's gonna get your mama, you know, and they were honkeys and things.  That's the other thing that Howard did.  It matured me in a way that I realize all the things about my childhood that I now can sit here and say were wonderful that's, that wasn't right.  We had no right to get those little hand-me-down school books.  And how come, and I will never see the circus, and I don't want anybody else to go and so I had reached that point.  Now I can sit back and I'm calm and saying, you know, one little stupid clown kept me from going to the circus all those years.  But by '71 [1971], you know, it was like (makes black power fist), and, you know, you had [HistoryMaker] John Carlos and, and, you know, they're in the Olympics [1968 Summer Olympics, Mexico City, Mexico]--
Speaker 2: Tommie Smith, yeah (unclear).
Speaker 1: Yeah, Tommie, yeah, oh, yeah, right.  You know, we can represent your country and then you come back and you're gone call us a nigga.  I mean, by that time, Larry [Larry Crowe], I had become total militant.  And so it was something that, and it helped mature me in a way because it gave me the right to walk up to a white, and say, "Excuse me, what do you mean you didn't see, how could you not see me and my mother [Lena Adams Williams] standing here?  What color is this?"  And it, then he would, I would have money, and he would, "You don't know the color, it's green, and it's not counterfeit and I deserve the same rights and privileges and customer service as that woman there.  If you don't want it, there's a store across the street, let's go, mama."  And my little mom, I'd grab her and we'd walk, that's what Howard told me.  That if I went and ordered something and I asked for it well done and you brought it back medium rare, (snaps) "Excuse me" (laughter).  I mean, and I was so proud of myself that here is what Howard, now, of course, you don't act, there's a way you do it but by becoming militant, militant was, militant in that we needed equal rights but it also is a way of being assertive.  They taught me how to be assertive as a woman.  The brothers were the ones that were front and center.  We were, if the revolution comes we were supposed to hand them the guns but I said, "But still we need to know how to shoot the guns you guys 'cause if something happens to you, you know.  In the Civil War a lot of women had to fire."  So but that's what Howard did.  And it was interesting because that I didn't like, I said, I tell students now, I didn't like white people at all, I didn't speak to 'em.  I didn't wanna be around them, I cursed them, and it was just one of those things that I was somebody and you had done this to me and I really don't need you to exist on the planet Earth.  I said, and if I have to go into my own business, if I have to grow plants, if I have to become a farmer and sell it to somebody, I could but I had reached that point.  And in a way while people look and say oh, that was bad, it helped mature me in ways I hadn't imagined then.  'Cause there was King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and I admired him, you know, "Judging a person by the content of their, their character and not the color of their skin."  But I said no, no, no, I'm doing like King, I'm looking at the content of their character, I question their character, so, (air quotes) I'm good (laughter).  But it was interesting because Howard did so much for me.  And people have asked me if you had two years to relive what would they be?  They would be '68 [1968] my senior year at Cardozo [Francis L. Cardozo Senior High School; Francis L. Cardozo Education Campus, Washington, D.C.] and '71 [1971], '72 [1972] my senior year at Howard.  I've had great years in the past, but the person that I am beyond what my family has, has done, these were institutions that helped shaped me.  And the family is an institution but that was just so amazing.  I would never have thought that a school, a institution of, of education and higher learning could do that.  And I, I just, I love that school.  I don't go back as often now 'cause it seems so different.  I seem so much older than everybody but I love Howard.
Story_ID: 482362
Speaker 1: Now did you as a, choosing to cover sports now--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you're a black woman, even in 1968, choosing to cover sports that was some kind of new, right, really for--
Speaker 2: For, yeah.
Speaker 1: --for any woman, really--
Speaker 2: To do.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: To do.
Speaker 1: So how were you received in terms of doing it?
Speaker 2: Of course, on campus everybody said, go sister, you know, and, and by Pearl Stewart having been the first editor overall of The Hilltop, they were ready for a woman.  "Good for you."  And, of course, then it wasn't like going into locker rooms.  I had, you know, the Bisons if I needed the football team I'd run over, meet me under the goal post, I need a couple of quotes.  Basketball team, you know, wait outside the locker room, get some quotes.  They were so supportive, "Right on sister, I love your column."  And that's what I got, so that made me feel I could do it.  You know, I had this naive, it's going to all be like at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  And then I went to The Washington Post, I did a summer internship at The Washington Post between '72 [1972] and then at the summer of '72 [1972] before I went to Columbia [Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism, Washington, D.C.].  And I worked in the sports department.  And--
Speaker 1: Before I get you there--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --I wanted to ask you about that soccer team that--
Speaker 2: Oh, that soccer team.
Speaker 1: --national championship soccer team.  And soccer is a sport--
Speaker 2: Ah.
Speaker 1: --that I guarantee you didn't grow up watching.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: So you had to--
Speaker 2: No, Desmond Howard--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --I, I can almost remember, all of these young men who had come from Trinidad, Tobago, Jamaica, St. Thomas, St. Croix, Guyana, the first person I knew from Guyana was some, one of our soccer players.  And, of course, I knew nothing about soccer and the, the coach, God, his name escapes me but was also from the Caribbean.  Just one of these distinguished men, and he's, he started talking about soccer and I said yeah, but I'm a football fan.  But then I, one day I'm out there on, and I saw what they did with a ball because of course, we played kickball.  That was it, never soccer.  I saw them with this round ball this, I said, "How do you guys do that?"  They said, and they called me Lenes [ph.], "Lenes [HistoryMaker Lena Williams], come here, Lenes, we'll show you, we'll show you" (laughter).  And I, of course, I said, "Not with these big feet."  They said, "You got small feet."  I started the, I said, "I'm good before you get ahead of yourself."  And I just remembered I would wanna talk to them, they said, "Well, we can't talk to you now.  We're having some people you, you come, you come, you come to our apartment you come, nobody's gonna touch you, Lenes, nobody's gonna, just come to our apartment, we got some, we got some, we're gonna fix some lamb curry."  I said, "I don't want any lamb curry but," I said, "okay, I'll go."  The first time I had those kinds of dishes was with the soccer team.  They had, they had the little rotis and the lamb curry and the little beef patties.  Oh, my God, I started those, every time we would say, "You all having a party, are we having a party after the, the game?  We're not cooking, you all have to bring food."  By the time we got there, the, they would have the beans and the rice, turnips, they ate turnips, the way they cooked turnips was totally different.  Good food, good company, and the one thing is that they were the first to show me about intra-racial prejudice, in that here were men who looked like us, black males but because they spoke English with an accent because they weren't born in America, they faced a different kind of prejudice, and sometimes a different reception on Howard's campus.  "We don't understand, would you--?  What, what? I, I don't understand what you're--."  "The thing, you know, the, the thing we're talking about," you know, that's how they talked and people, "I don't understand it."  And they talked about how people said, "Well I don't, where, where is Trinidad, Tobago.  Was it, is it two islands or what?"  Well, you know, sometimes, "You know how Jamaicans are."  "Well, exactly how are Jamaicans?" they would say.  And it was, and so I started, I, that's when I first got reggae, I said, "And who? Bob Marley?" "Lenes, you don't, you don't know Bob?  Oh, my God, oh, my God."  I said, "Well, excuse me, (laughter) mea culpa" (crosses herself).  "You don't know Bob?  Don't worry, come to the house."  I said, "Are we gone have something to eat?"  "We're gonna have something to eat."  And they introduced me to Bob Marley and I mean, and I have felt, oh, my God.  I've fallen in love, they, "Oh, dear he married."  I said, "Oh, no, no don't tell me he's married."  Every woman at that point had fallen in love with Bob Marley.
Story_ID: 482363
Speaker 1: This is what they did for me, beyond the sport, they became my friends because I became so excited about it and what they were doing that through my columns I was introducing Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] to them.  I said, "You guys they're good.  The first championship we get may not be," I wrote a column, "may not be in basketball, may not be in football, it may be in soccer.  They're out there, they're practicing, let's go and see."  And a couple of columns that I wrote, people started coming out.  And because they gave some of the best parties in the world, people met them through that way.  And it was because of that then by the time we got to that, that champ- we kept winning and winning and then we played the great Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] in the NCAA [National Collegiate Athletic Association] championship.  I just remembered the world had come to, to Howard.  "How can you, Howard University [Washington, D.C.], think that you could compete against Harvard?"  And Shep Messing their, their, their great, you know, goalie, nobody could get anything past Shep.  We went to Miami, I think it was Miami [Florida], the Orange Bowl, and there we were, you know, "Oh, there are the Howard students, poor little things."  God, I remembered it, 'cause there I was, I didn't wanna be in the press box.  They got me on the field and there I was.  And when we won that championship, I remembered, you know what flashed in my mind, that man who went through, you know, the streets saying, "Joe Louis did it, he did it," because we, we didn't have cell phones and I was trying to let my mom [Lena Adams Williams] and them know, and I knew that the TV would have had it and I finally when I got back to the hotel room, the switchboard had said, "You got these calls" and my mama said, "They did it."  And I just remembered how happy we were.  It, it, the euphoria, it's like a child at Christmas you don't know how you feel inside, just the excitement of seeing them do it, and to this day that banner, NCAA champions.  And, and, of course, to this day, I watch soccer because of that team but, of course, you know, in this country it's just a quote, foreigners' sport, and people still didn't understand it, it's football, I said, "You guys it's their football."  But I, I love that team and I love, once again they broadened my horizons in other ways through music, through art, 'cause I did see the Haitian art, the colors are different, the figures are different, what they're showing you see.  And, of course, I've now been to the Caribbean several times but all of that, the cuisine, they introduced me to that, they were the first people I knew from the Caribbean.
Speaker 2: So you tried to bring the, the flavor of all that to the, the readers of your column?
Speaker 1: Yes, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So--
Speaker 1: And, and it worked, that's the one thing I'm proud of, it worked because by the time they said, "Oh, well we'll go, we'll go," and I kept saying, "You guys need to come out, you need to come out."  And then the football team, the athletes started supporting each other.  So the football players went and they took their girlfriends.  And the basketball players were there, and, of course, you know, the soccer team was very fine, so all of my girlfriends were going.  So at that point, we'd look up and we got, by that time, and all the militants were going because they realized this is important, all of these white camera crews are here because we are about to achieve something.  By that time, we had 'em.  And once we got 'em, we held 'em.  Long after I graduated, soccer was just it.
Story_ID: 482364
Speaker 1: Just one more thing before I, we get away from Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  Was there, what was the atmosphere like at Howard for women's sports?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was almost nonexistent; it was almost nonexistent.  We had a pretty good basketball team, not great, pretty good basketball.  We didn't really fill the volleyball team, I don't think we filled the volleyball team at all.  Softball we had a pretty good softball, excuse me, softball team, but it was nonexistent.  You know, Title IX is the, is a species of 1972 (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  So--
Speaker 2: So we would have seen the difference after I graduated but when I was there--
Speaker 1: So there were no scholarships hardly for anybody--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --in sports?
Speaker 2: No.  Music, all of the disciplines but not really for, track and field, now I have to say track and field, very good.  It was always the one area in sports that women could excel pre-Title IX.  But the other team sports, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So what, did, did Howard participate in the struggle for Title IX in any way?
Speaker 2: No, you know, you really, we really didn't.  And it was interesting because I always ask myself why.  We were so, and people said well you get involved in the women's movement.  I said you guys we were still fighting for our own equal.  I said although the Civil Rights Act [Civil Rights Act of 1964] was passed in '64 [1964], and, and the Voting Rights Act [Voting Rights Act of 1965] in '65 [1965], it was only three years later that we were entering, you know, these colleges.  And it was just, it's a three-year-old toddler, imagine those laws.  And there were people trying to find all the loopholes through it, the spook was set by the door.  I got one, you didn't say I had to have a whole lot, I got one, I got a token here.  We were still struggling for that.  We were still trying to get this, this country out of Vietnam because we saw our sons and brothers and boyfriends going at a disproportionate percentage than whites.  So we were trying to do that.  We, we felt we couldn't be distracted with now all of a sudden white women were having a problem because they wanted to get out of the kitchen and, and what, what was wrong with that, you know.  We couldn't quite identify with that movement.  And when it came, so the whole Title IX came under the women's movement more so than the Civil Rights Movement.  And we couldn't identify, we were willing to say yeah, and we were so concerned that if this nation had a choice between equal rights when it came to ERA [Equal Rights Amendment] for women and equal rights for blacks, those congressmen, those presidents, our, our leaders at that time could relate to the women, they were their daughters.
Story_ID: 482365
Speaker 1: How did you manage to decide to go to Columbia University [Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: As I mentioned Cato Whitley was one of my teachers, journalism professors, told us that if we should, since Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] did not have journalism as a major when we were there, it was a minor, but they didn't have enough courses to offer to make it to qualify for and be accredited as a major, they now have.  He suggested that I look at a graduate school of journalism because at that point I had decided that rather than teach English I wanted to be a journalist and a newspaper journalist, and preferably a sports reporter.  So he told me, he helped me get the internship at The Washington Post and he told me that if I wanted to stay in Washington [D.C.], American University had a master's [degree] program in journalism.  It was one year, went from September to August.  I could also think about Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] which was one of the top schools in the country, they--
Speaker 1: The Medill School [Medill School of Journalism; Medill School of Journalism, Media, Integrated Marketing Communications, Evanston, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: They had a--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --good journalist program he said but the best of the best is Columbia University in New York [New York].  He said, "Columbia is September to May so you get a two month jump on the other people in terms of your job search," and he says, "and it's not too far from home."  He said, "You know, the one good thing," he said, "of course, American, you're here."  And I really was thinking about American, because I didn't wanna leave home still.  But he kept saying, "Columbia, with Columbia that degree you could write your ticket."  He said, "And you, New York would just be good for you."  I said, "Yeah, but I don't know, I don't know."  So he said, "Well apply, apply at all three."
Story_ID: 482366
Speaker 1: Now I have to ask you this before we, we get you into Columbia [Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism, New York, New York].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Who was the sports writer at the Washington--I mean the African American [Washington Afro-American]?  Like I, I think he lived in Baltimore [Maryland] but it was a famous black sports writer who just died a couple of years ago?
Speaker 2: Hm.
Speaker 1: Did you know him or did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: --or, in fact, did you know any of the black sports writers?
Speaker 2: No, coming up--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --none, none.  Because you could count, the first time, when I first got to The New York Times I met Al Harvin, met Al.  Al was one of the few sports writers, black sports writers that I met at that time.  And he introduced me, Dick Edwards who was a columnist for, what's the black?  The Amsterdam News [New York Amsterdam News] in New York [New York].  Dick wrote sports and he wrote, you know, that he was a columnist for the Amsterdam News and I met him when I first went to New, 'cause after I left Columbia, I got a job at Black Sports.  But at that time they were the first and only two black sports writers that I knew of.  'Cause, of course, by then, you know, you saw blacks on TV, they had J.C. Hayward, they had Max Robinson.  I was just watching how CNN, oh, he just died, I was just watching it the other day on, reporters at work, but they had, you was beginning to see the faces but in terms of sports, wasn't there.  And I looked at Sports Illustrated, they had Sport magazine, the Afro-American--I can't think of the name but I know who you're talking about, but I can't think of his name.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was a famous guy there and I think it was Art Rust [Art Rust, Jr.] in New York and stuff like that (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --yes, in New York it was, um-hm.  And--
Speaker 1: And there was a few other guys, yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh, oh, it was another black--
Speaker 1: Oh it was--
Speaker 2: --guy on NBC, WRC [WRC-TV, Washington, D.C.] in, NBC in New York [sic.] that was a sports repor- I can't think of his name.  But they were few and far in between.
Story_ID: 482367
Speaker 1: But it was because of Cato [Cato Whitley] that he said, you know, "Apply there."  And I applied at, I decided Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] 'cause I, I didn't wanna really go out to the Midwest, I was just a little still concerned about that, too far.  New York [New York], we went to New York for our high school class trip so I knew a little bit about New York, I had friends that had gone there, I knew people there and I said, "It's only five hours by train away."  And my family we would drive up to New York, you know, a couple of times we went up there on vacations so we knew how to get there.  And I said it's either New York or American U [American University, Washington, D.C.].  I applied at both, got accepted at both, and then came the decision.  And my mother [Lena Adams Williams] said, "Well, you know, maybe if you go away it may be interesting because it's a big city and you never know what you'll see and you can get to me, go with God," and they prayed on it, so I went off to New York.  And what was interesting was that Robert Taylor who was the editor of The Hilltop my senior year [at Howard University, Washington, D.C.], the senior, the year that I was a sports editor, he was the overall editor of The Hilltop, had been accepted at Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York], and Gayle Pollard [ph.] who was also one of my good friends, also from Washington [D.C.], had been accepted at Columbia.  So my mother was very--I didn't know, and it was funny because I didn't know one person who had been accepted that same year at American U.  So having two very good friends from D.C. also being at Columbia, I think that sort of helped seal the deal for me and it helped me make my decision.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And as God would have it, I, I, you know, I don't know what would have happened if I had gone to American U but I still say I think going to Columbia [Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism, New York, New York] and being, being in New York was just, was the rest of my professional, it shaped the rest of my professional life.
Speaker 2: Who were some of the teachers that really influenced you at Columbia?
Speaker 1: Oh, please.  Luther Jackson, Luther Jackson, Professor Luther Jackson was the only, at that time, black professor at Columbia University, near and dear to our hearts.  Phil [ph.] what's her name, Phil, who became the subsequent dean, Phil, I can't think of Phil, she was, she, she was one of the visiting professors, but [HistoryMaker] Charlayne Hunter-Gault was an adjunct professor at Columbia 'cause she was working at The New York Times then as a reporter and she was on maternity leave.  So what she did while she was on maternity leave, she taught, helped them with, put out their student, our student newspaper.  And she lived right across the street from our dorm.  So Charlayne was there.  God, the critic, the great, isn't it awful, the great critic for New York Magazine.  Judith, Judith, oh, I can't think of her, I have to get her name, one of the great critics, woman that I just could not stand this, (laughter) this white woman, I could not stand Judith Crist, it's not Judith Crist, it's gonna come, I'm gonna get her name.  She was the great critic for New York Magazine.  And, of course, we're from Washington [D.C.], we don't know who she is, I wanna say it's Judith Crist, living on Riverside Drive and, of course, now we now all these places and what they are and where there.  And there she is.  I did not like this woman at all.  Became one of my just, one of the people in the world that I've always, that I really came to admire, tough, 'cause she was just tough and no nonsense.  So she was my, I think it is Judith Crist but I'm gonna look that up for you.  She was one of those that I remembered.  And I can't think of the gentleman's name, he was, towards the second semester we had to do our thesis and mine was sort of magazine and he was my advisor.  But it was Luther Jackson and Charlayne Hunter-Gault and Judith Crist, I'm sure it's Judith Crist, who were the people at, at Columbia that I remembered.  'Cause I said there were so many people came through, I mean, you know, the Dan Rathers of the world all, all of your journalists came through.  New York is the seat, you know, the capital of, of mass media so everybody that was anybody came through and talked to the class, you know, from all of the great newspapers, all the great magazines.  So but that was why I chose Columbia and those were the, those two, Luther and Charlayne more than anything, because they are people that to this day, you know, still have that impact on my life.
Story_ID: 482368
Speaker 1: That summer before you went to Columbia [Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism, New York, New York] you, you had a chance to work at The Washington Post for (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Washington Post.
Speaker 1: Yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But it, okay.  So at Columbia, you finished grad school in--
Speaker 2: May of '73 [1973].
Speaker 1: Seventy-three [1973]
Speaker 2: 'Cause it was a one year program, entered September of '72 [1972] and graduated in May of '73 [1973].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what project did you, you, you briefly mentioned a project you were working on, what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We had to write a master's thesis and me being a sports person I said okay, I wanna focus it on sports, combine my two loves, sports and writing.  And I decided to do something on, where the playground basketball, those who make it and those who don't.  But for some reason I was so concerned I wouldn't have enough to fill out a whole master's thesis, I forgot how many words they said it was supposed to be but I think they said it should be about twenty pages, it wasn't a lot, now that I look back on it, it wasn't a whole lot that we had to do but they, when, when, they said ten thousand words we went, oh, my God, and no computer back then, you're just typing it all.  But it was not that difficult.  So I decided to do that and to also look at New York [New York] as a market, what impact would playing in New York have on an athlete's life.  So I got to talk to Connie Hawkins and Walt Clyde Frazier [Walt Frazier].  It was Bob Wolff [sic.] who wrote a book about playground basketball, it was based in Boston [Massachusetts], such a wonderful human being, he talked to me by phone, he was always there as, as, as a great help.  Who were some of the other great basketball, because they had the Rucker's tournament [Rucker Park Tournament] during the summer?
Speaker 1: Yeah, was the, was The Goat playing then?  The guy they called The Goat (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't--
Speaker 1: Manigault [Earl Manigault]?
Speaker 2: I don't--
Speaker 1: They, they, they claim he was the greatest player--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --that never played the pros.
Speaker 2: And, and that was, I think that's the one that they had the drug, was got involved in drugs.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So it was him Connie, 'cause Connie Hawkins was one of the great, and got involved in drugs and they told me come to the Rucker's tournament.  And what, when I went there, Julius Erving and all these people were there.  And it was just one of those things once again, some of the problems that women covering sports had said they had, I didn't have as much of because I was around these black athletes.  Of course, you're using playground basketball, you're up in the South Bronx [Bronx, New York], you're up in Harlem [New York, New York].  You're talking to the brothers from the hood who go out there and play and can tell you all the great stories, and then the NBA [National Basketball Association] players who came.  So when I told them what I was doing, and I had my little Columbia University pass, they would give me, you know, if nothing more than ten or fifteen minutes, you know, well, you wanna walk, we're going over to Small's Paradise [New York, New York], you wanna come over and talk and I said yeah.  So I'd follow 'em up to Small's and they'd sit around, you know, drinking, smoking, whatever, I could get mine, there was always this receptivity because here was this young black woman doing something that they didn't see a lot of young black women doing, and they said you know your stuff, Sis.  I said, "Well, I'm trying."  They were very receptive.  And Walt Clyde Frazier, his twin sisters were at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], they were two years behind me and they were interested in journalism, I remembered talking to them about it.  And so I didn't know so I called his twin sisters and said do you think your brother would talk to me.  So they said we'll call him.  So they called him and he said, I said well, I don't have money to get to a game.  He said well you wanna have lunch and I said okay.  We met for lunch, he, of course, he picked up the tab 'cause I was a struggling student, talked and talked and talked and said you need to talk to such and such and he said I'm going to tell Willis [Willis Reed], and I said, "As in Reed (laughter)?"  "You need to talk to Willis about that."
Speaker 1: Now this may, that Knick [New York Knicks] team at that time was an all-star team (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All-star team.
Speaker 1: --with great players.
Speaker 2: Great players.
Speaker 1: Willis Reed, Dave Stallworth--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, Dave DeBusschere.
Speaker 1: Cazzie Russell.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Bill Bradley, just a great team.  And here was this man who, Walt opened up doors and talked to, you know, Connie used to play with such and such person, talk to this person, tell him Clyde told you to call and I said, you know, can I do that?  And Columbia would let you go and use their phones to make long distance calls.  I was amazed at the receptivity that I got and a lot of people said, "That's an interesting story."
Story_ID: 482369
Speaker 1: So I got a very good start for my master's thesis [at Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism, New York, New York].  And, of course, once again go and watch brothers playing basketball, having a good time and talking to the folk, and you say, "Yeah, but, you know, what happened?  You know, fast life, man, he was just out there, you know, that, you know, that heroin, so he was out there and he was hanging out with."  And it was this, this, this big time drug dealer, Nicky Barnes in, in New York [New York] that was just notorious, you know, wealthy man through drugs.  And, of course, I'm sitting here I know nothing about this, they say "Oh, there go Nicky."  And I say "Who's Nicky?" They say, "Ooh, Nicky Barnes, Nicky, Nicky is bad."  And, of course, later when I became a reporter for The New York Times I wrote a story on Nicky Barnes and I realized this man is a major drug dealer.  But there he was at these tournaments and these guys would say, yeah, yeah, he hanging out with Nicky that's how such and such got hooked on drugs.
Speaker 2: Now--
Speaker 1: So I was able to sort of weave all of this, it was like a story into, it told you, and what happened, and I have to find the name of my advisor because he said, "You've got a story here that talks about the times.  Heroin is all over New York City, it's just infiltrated certain parts of, of New York City, certain parts of our society.  Here is basketball, here is this man that they're looking up to, this is an entrepreneur, this man is driving a big car, there are women all over him, he's got tailor-made suits and what does he do for a living?  He's a drug dealer."  He said you got all of that, it's a sports story but you gotta weave all of that into it.  And I remembered just being overwhelmed but so excited about it 'cause he helped me, you know.  And he said, now you got this thing about New York but he said he showed me how I could make that transition from talking about that to those who did get past this.  And when they made it into the pro ranks, if you made it and you made it in New York, here's the difference then, the marketing, the advertising that came to you just because you were in New York verses being in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] or in Washington [D.C.].  So I wove all of that into a thesis and unlike some of my classmates I had mine together.  Our class unfortunately because they were very lax and it was still that, you know, university without walls and we were the militant types, black and white, live and let live, they didn't have structure.  And one person turned in a ten page master's thesis, you know, triple spaced.  And then they had more structure as a result of our class they talked to us and we said, you've got to have periodic checks, if someone's hitting the (unclear), tell them to give you a subject matter, you've got to be able to approve the subject matter and not, so we had that kind of conversation.  But I was pleased once again because here were folks that I knew from Howard who had contacts, who had put me on the right track, and through Charlayne, [HistoryMaker] Charlayne Hunter-Gault and her husband Ron Gault [HistoryMaker Ronald T. Gault], they had been in New York for so long they knew everybody in the black community, Dave Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins], you know, Carl McCall [HistoryMaker H. Carl McCall], you know.  Everybody that was anybody Charlayne knew because Charlayne was, her claim to history's fame was that she along with Hamilton Holmes, you know, helped desegregate the University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia].  So here was this woman who has her own place in history and was respected as a result, Charlayne opened doors, "Here's what you need to do. Who do you need to talk to?"  So I ended up just enjoying, for once, I never thought that a master's thesis you could actually enjoy writing one but it was the subject, the people that I interviewed, having good advisors and having people open the door so it wasn't that difficult like, "Oh, I wanna--."  One of my friends wanted to interview Barbara Jordan, Gayle [Gayle Pollard (ph.)] tried.  Barbara Jordan was hard to nail down.  She finally ended up going to Houston [Texas] and she got twenty minutes with Barbara Jordan, she was able to do enough through piecing it together but who would have thought that a woman who's trying to interview these high profile athletes would have had a better, an easier time doing her master's thesis than a woman who was trying to interview, you know, Barbara Jordan.
Story_ID: 482370
Speaker 1: But the story was on street basketball.
Speaker 2: Street basket--the playground basketball, yeah.
Speaker 1: Playground basketball, that's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, and I know I was a little slow when I first started hearing about how this is done but I finally figured it out.  If a guy can play basketball in the hood and here comes a guy, the biggest dope dealer, he's got money--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and what do people do when they see people compete, they bet on it.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And that's the, how people get in trouble.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  And they all hung out together, you know.  Nicky Barnes when he was there, you know, Nicky is coming up with this huge Cadillac.  Yeah, I think he was one of the first people people saw in Harlem [New York, New York] with this, a Mercedes [Mercedes-Benz].  So there he is, he's got a tailor-made suit, and these basketball players, and he's got this charisma, he goes to Small's Paradise [New York, New York], he goes to Sylvia's [Sylvia's Restaurant, New York, New York], he picks up the tab.  You know, along with picking up the tab, before you know it, we're going to party, and you party and I think some of these guys just felt that this was all party, you're macho so you can do this.  We think, who would put a needle into your arm and inject anything in it?  Unless you were a doctor, don't want them to do it.  But at that time, you're gonna have a trip.  "Man, you're gonna be tripping, you're gonna love it, trust me."  And they say, "Hey, I can handle it."  And before you knew it, they thought they could handle it but that's, and I couldn't understand how those two worlds intersected.  But once you saw them in the same place, you realize, yeah, there's a very thin line between what these guys are doing over here and what these guys are doing over here, the drug dealers and the basketball players.  And to this day you still have that problem in many instances with entertainers and their access to, to drugs.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the entourages that the entertainers, well, and ball players draw, you know--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --people they knew who knew them before they got any money.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So, so the, this is a twenty page thesis?
Speaker 2: No, by--
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: --mine ended up being, they said a minimum of twenty pages, mine went, mines went on and on (laughter).  I forgot how long my thesis was but it was, it was quite substantial.  Because I had a lot to say and I just kept writing and just the interviews alone, that's what my other advisor said, just write it.  He said, "These are people with stories to tell and just let them speak."  And by the time I finished listening to my tape and typing it out, I mean, there were just pages of, you know, Jimmy's story, you know.  And it was so interesting that what I learned in that world and subsequently when Janet Cooke wrote that piece for The Washington Post about 'Jimmy's World' [Janet Cooke] I had my own suspicion about the authenticity of it because I saw that world and I said, and all the people that I knew including the special prosecutors said, you know, "Drug dealers and drug addicts are very selfish; they don't just give drugs to ten year olds unless you're paying for it."  I mean, they'll, "Mama, you, you want it but you're gone give me something for it."  And so I always remembered that and they said and plus they, they wanna know that you can keep their secrets, these little ten years olds go off bragging, you know, "Hey man, I, I can get that if I want to, if I wanna buy anything at the candy store I can get it 'cause, you know, I got money."  "Well where you get all that money? Two hundred dollars for a ten year old, my man."  So they said they wouldn't sell it to too young kids because they tend to brag.  And it was interesting, what I learned in, in that time when I was covering that world and subsequently when I covered, you know, the police beat for The New York Times, led me to suspect that that's interesting, maybe it's different in Washington [D.C.], maybe they don't care in Washington but I know in New York [New York] a lot of these drug dealers up here are very, very selfish, they would never just give a ten year old drugs to hold or to sell.
Story_ID: 482371
Speaker 1: You went on.  You, you went from Columbia [Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism, New York, New York] to Black Sports magazine (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Black Sports magazine because--
Speaker 1: Now, how--
Speaker 2: --of course, everybody said, it, it was funny at Columbia all of my white, 'cause we were in the minority, I went from being a, in the majority at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] to being of, I think Columbia had about forty students, forty to fifty students in my class, ten of us, you know, I think we had maybe ten blacks, some East Indian, very diverse student class of, class of '72 [1972] was, and still is from my understanding.  But I went from being in that majority to being in the minority.  And everybody at Columbia said, "Oh, Lena [HistoryMaker Lena Williams], you're black, you're female, degree, master's degree from Columbia University you can write your ticket, just walk up to Sports Illustrated and said--they're gonna say, 'Where have you been all our lives?'"  So anywhere I wanted to go, there was no ESPN but Sports Illustrated was it, there was Sports Magazine [sic. Sport], a couple of sporting--
Speaker 1: Sporting News.
Speaker 2: Sporting News.  I thought about some of the teams, you know, working for the NFL [National Football League], the NBA [National Basketball Association].  Then I also thought, well, let me try The Washington Post.  So I tried The Washington Post.  I tried the Washington Star.  I tried Sports Illustrated and what they said, "You're bright, graduated from Howard with honors, we like--," of course, I was articulate, which is what they (unclear) that I was so proud of at that time (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Articulate, clean (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Clean-cut, you know, clean and everything.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: But you need more experience, you know, we're looking for people with at least three years' experience working out there in the field.  I didn't have that.  And I'm going from spot to spot and so I come back home and I said, "Mom [Lena Adams Williams], I'm thinking now is my time to take care of you," I said, "I wanna work in Washington [D.C.] but I've been told Washington Post, no, Washington Star, nothing, there is no NBA here."  I literally was working, had gone, the Washington Bullets [Washington Wizards], the basketball team had just moved to Landover [Maryland].  And I was one of the top three candidates to be the director of public relations.  It came down to the top two and the gentleman who took it, we became friends and he did that job for the last forty years of his life, he died of, I think he had colon cancer not too long ago, but we became the one, two and he got the job.  I tried to get a job in the government and they're saying, "You're overqualified, you just can't be a clerk typist."  And so here was Black Sports magazine saying, "We got a job for you as an associate editor, come up with stories.  Help us with the layout, you'll be writing stories.  It's not a lot of money but--."  And I told my mom, I said, "Mom, I gotta go back to New York [New York].  I got a place to stay with two, two women who went to Columbia, lived in the dorm where I lived, and they had got an apartment, they're gonna take me in."  And so I ended up back in New York working with Dick Edwards and Barron, what was his name?  James Barron [sic.], it's not James 'cause that's my--Allan, Allan Barron [Allan P. Barron] who was the publisher and editor of Black Sports magazine, A-L-L-A-N, Barron, B-A-R-R-O-N.  And Dick Edwards, bless his heart, was the editor in chief, and--
Speaker 1: How long had the, the magazine been in existence?
Speaker 2: The mag, by that time, that would have been '70 [1970], the magazine was only a year old at that time.  I left in March of '74 [1974], the magazine folded in '77 [1977].  So it lasted for a good maybe four to five years.
Story_ID: 482372
Speaker 1: And it was a wonderful experience because once again here I was, you know, I was getting these exclusives, once again primarily black athletes because they realize here was a black owned publication, an all-black staff and here was this young black woman.  I can't think of his name, it was a guy who played for the Dallas Cowboys and it's gonna come to me.  I can't think of the last name but he was, wide receiver, and he was having all kinds of problems with Tom Landry and he accused the Dallas Cowboys of racism.
Speaker 2: Michael Irvin?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: The year, this would have been, this would have been 1970, between '72 [1972] and '74 [1974].  And oh, it's gonna come to me because I can, I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, then Duane Thomas the running back.
Speaker 1: Duane Thomas, Duane Thomas.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was a running back, right, Duane Thomas.
Speaker 1: Duane Thomas was a running, Duane Thomas.  Duane wasn't talking to anybody, nobody, but he talked to Black Sports because he wanted to help us with what we were doing.  Spencer Haywood, Moses Malone, who at the time he was this young kid who was about to, they believed at that time gonna go straight from high school into the NBA [National Basketball Association], the first to do it.
Speaker 2: He disappeared too--
Speaker 1: He disappeared.
Speaker 2: --he skipped out.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: He was in Dayton playing pool, Dayton, Ohio.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: When they found him, yeah, when they finally contacted him, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's amazing.  But all of them, they knew Dick Edwards from his days at the Amsterdam News [New York Amsterdam News] in New York [New York].  And because Allan Barron [Allan P. Barron] had started this magazine, and we got a lot of good support initially, they thought it was gonna be the equivalent of Black Enterprise for the sports, you know, field.  And it was just that after a while the money started running out, we went from a monthly to every two months, and then there was a quarterly and then it eventually folded.  But what it taught me was all about layouts, so I was there helping them close the pages, laying out the pages, how to sort of, you know, work with production people.  And that was something I had never done.  You know, I did it at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] a little bit we would put The Hilltop out but this was different, working with advertisers.  So that's the one thing I learned there.  And going to, for the first time getting press credentials to go to the Knick [New York Knicks] game.  That's the first time I realized the difficulties women faced in covering sports.  'Cause when I was just talking one on one to a black athlete one thing, when I had a press credential around me and I'm for Black Sports magazine, I'm going down to the courtside to the press table, I'm being stopped, "Who are you?  What are you doing here?"  "I'm covering the game."  (Scoffs) And I, they wouldn't say, and these were black and white ushers, you know, and security guards at Madison Square Garden [New York, New York], saying (Scoffs). I said, "What do you mean?"  And then they would look at it, "Oh, you're with Black Sports.  Oh, okay."  So I would sit.  And a couple of times I would go with Dick Edwards, they knew Dick, "How you doing Mr. Edwards?"  And he said, "She's with me."  But for a while it was just, you know, always this look that.  There are no women covering sports, let alone no black women.  That was the first time that I really got exposed to what that was like.  When I went to Shea Stadium [Queens, New York] once, I was there with the Mets [New York Mets], and it was funny 'cause I got on to the field and there were a whole lot of people on the field and I just remembered I needed to talk to, I forgot who it was, one of their players.  I--all these names, they sort of skip you after a while, but he was in the dugout and I remembered going and just being grabbed and saying, "Who are you and what are you doing here?"  I said, "Trying to interview someone."  And that's the first time I realized, oh, Houston, this could be a problem, you know.  I don't, I've, I've dealt with this skin here, having to deal with that all of my life, now it's the gender thing.  'Cause I, they didn't see skin, it wasn't about skin 'cause there were black males all around me.  It was this woman.  Who is this woman going down here talking to these guys? "What are you doing here?"  That's when I realized this could be difficult.
Story_ID: 482373
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Stayed at Black Sports, learned a, a lot there but [HistoryMaker] Charlayne Hunter-Gault who was my mentor and friend and was at The Times at that time told me that The New York Times was looking for someone to work in their sports department, it would be a clerical, clerical position but you had the chance to write.  The woman who held the position before was moving on to another section and she wrote a column, Women in Sports, column.  So Charlayne said the minute she found out about this, she knew, women in sports, it was The New York Times, I love sports, Charlayne called me and said, "We have already told them about you, they want an interview."  And I'm like, you know, God, The New York Times, Charlayne, I don't know if I wanna do it, she said no, you have to do it.  So I went over to The New York Times, and interviewed and was told two weeks later that, you know, I had the job and on March 19, 1974 I walked into The New York Times to go into their sports department.  And Charlayne said this is good for you, she said, well, I said, well, you know, she said, it's a whole, she, she said just, just understand this, it's not all that it's cracked up to be, you know.  Just don't, you know, think that's it's all that.  You can fit in here.  You're smart, you belong here, work hard, and you can, you know, excel.  I said okay.  And I told her I said, "Do you ever think I could be a sports writer?"  And she said that's what you wanna be and I let them know that's your interest, and they said gee, this sounds interesting because she said they're looking for, you know, it was an area where they were looking for women, you're talking, you know, two years after Title IX.  Here we're covering this issue and we're doing some of the same things we're accusing these universities of doing, so she said I think that the media trying to be ahead of the curve as they did in the '60s [1960s], you know, when they were trying to get people to cover the quote riots in the black community, she said here is this black woman, you got a master's degree from Columbia [Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism, New York, New York], of course, you know, she said I would hire you.  So I went to work for The Times and basically, it was, there was a Sunday column that ran that called, called Women in Sports.  Of course, the women did it but I had no problems with that 'cause the locker rooms were closed to women.  Women could not go into locker rooms; women couldn't go into the press boxes.  It was still discrimination in that field.  And I wasn't ready for all of that, eventually they had to open up the press boxes and the locker rooms to women but covering women in sports I could do it by the phone, it wasn't like a team sport thing, it was basically women in tennis, women in track and field, women in golf, like Nancy Lopez.  There were a few women overseas who were doing some things, some, you know, the Olympians, the all, all, that was right up my alley.  So I did that along with clerical stuff, answering the phones, stripping the wires, taking, you know, they're calling in to rewrite, nobody's there? Lena [HistoryMaker Lena Williams] can take it.  So working your way up.  And I was one of those, I used to tell people who came years later well, you, you didn't have to do any of this, I said you guys, not only did I do that, I said with my master's degree (snaps), coffee time, the clerk got the coffee.  I said and I had it down to a science.  Within a few months, I knew that the editor liked his black, this person liked his light and sweet, this person liked his no sugar, regular.  I said, I did that, I was still going down stripping the wires, watching TV, learning all I could learn, writing my columns.  If I saw anything that was going on in the sports world I would call and say, "You know, I heard that there's this great high school player in Washington, D.C. that may be going to, you know, Canada to go pickup." "When you going home?" You know, "I could be going home this weekend."  "If you go home do a story, we'll pay you for the story.  We'll reimburse you your, your train fare."  "Fine."  Eager, I had Sundays and Mondays off, living in the big city, I worked from ten to six so I still had Saturday evenings with my friends, Sunday, Sunday and Monday I was working, good day because all the leagues were open, that's when you can, everything's dark, I, so I was eager.
Story_ID: 482374
Speaker 1: And some of my best mentors, and this was a woman, you know, I still tell people I still had that militancy in me 'cause you look at the Duane Thomases of the world and you realize what some of these athletes were still going through.  And I still had this chip on my shoulder, you know, that here are these white Americans still running things and still being arrogant and still treating our people this way and we had proven ourselves in so many ways.  What more do we have to do to prove ourselves?  So I was quiet, I did what I had to do and I went home.  I had my own friends.  And then there were people like Red Smith, the Red Smith, (laughter) you know.  "How you doing?" "Fine, Mr. Smith."  You know, they were Mr. Smith, you know, now they walk in, you know, "Hey, Lena [HistoryMaker Lena Williams]," you know, everybody's like first name basis.  When I started at The Times [The New York Times] they were Mr. and Mrs. or Mr. and Miss.  Dave Anderson, Pulitzer [Pulitzer Prize] prizewinning sports columnists for The New York Times, still writing, it was Mr. Anderson.  The sports editor a man named Jim Tuite [James Tuite].  There was a guy there who was sort of, ran the department, Jim Tuite, for the first time, here were these, and it was predominantly males, the only other woman there was the secretary, Fern Turkowitz, she was the only other woman in the department.  Here I was working in this department with all of these older white men going, "Oh, my God, how did I land here?"  But I did.  Those men not only became mentors and friends, they became, ah, need I say father figures?  To the point that Jim Tuite said when I tried to get my big time New York [New York] apartment with a doorman, it was just a, a studio, I wasn't making the kind of money I should at that point but I needed somebody to cosign and I'm sitting there so upset and Jim Tuite, said, I said "It's right on 34th Street, right down the street from Madison Square Garden [New York, New York], it's got a doorman, and it's a little garden apartment, and it's really nice but, you know, I don't have the money and I need a cosigner and all my cosigners are in Washington [D.C]."  He said, "I'll cosign for you, (unclear) I'll cosign."  Well, of course, you cosign you're a sports editor of The New York Times (snaps), I got that apartment.  Dave Anderson was out at the Rose Bowl '76 [1976], it was, no, it was '74 [1974], and he comes back and he says he sees these glasses, I lost the last one, they broke on my last move, little rose, just regular what they call it, glass tumblers or whatever they called them, but they had the Rose Bowl and a little symbol and he said they gave, it was six.  He said, "I don't need these across, I can't take this across country."  So he said, "Well, we'll mail 'em."  And he knew I had just gotten in to my apartment, he said, "I didn't need 'em. I was gonna say, I don't believe," and he said, "you know, Lena, could probably use these."  And so he brings, he said, "Oh, I shipped 'em to the office 'cause I forgot your address."  He said, "You want these?"  And I said, "Oh, my God, they came from the Rose Bowl, you got," and I said, "Thank you."  I kept them.  The last one literally broke, I think I have one left downstairs, but I kept them all of that time.  And here was this white man with, you were at the Rose Bowl and you're thinking about me and the fact that I may not have glassware and you get this for me.  For my birthday, Gerry Eskenazi [Gerald Eskenazi] another mentor, he got me these cards which I still have to this day, and on it, it was this women 'cause I love hats, and it was a person with a hat and little personal cards, and they put Lena on it.  I, so then all of that that I had been, that hatred that I had had towards whites, I said wait a minute, these were men who were like, they would say you're not eating, what's the matter, you're not feeling well?  I say, well, I'm, I'm, they say you're missing home, aren't you?  I said, um-hm.  Why don't you go home for the holidays?  I can't afford it.  Okay.  Do an extra story, just do some dictation for us and we'll give you, you'll twenty-five dollars for that, if you write something for this section, you'll get twenty-five dollars for that, this is what they did.  And if not, then I'd see something in my mailbox, forty dollars here, and I said who left this?  I don't know, who, finders, keepers, and then they'd smile.  I mean that, it was alien to me.  And I just remembered, and I told my colleagues when I left, I said how could I not mentor people based on the, I said these were white men.  This is what they did for me when I was sick, they would show up at my door, "What do you need?  Did you call your mother [Lena Adams Williams]?"
Story_ID: 482375
Speaker 1: Along with that teaching me everything, Red Smith is standing over me one day and I'm writing my little teeny story and Red looks at me, he said, "I think your lead is in that third paragraph."  And I said, "You think so, Mr. Smith?"  He said, (nods head) "Um-hm."  I said, "Okay."  (Laughter) And he's supposed to be--I tell people now Red Smith, you knew Red Smith.  And what was so interesting, the great Red Smith story was that I had to go to Shea Stadium [Queens, New York].  As the clerk, I had to deliver a package to Red it was in the press box.  I don't know protocol. I get upstairs, you go through, I see the press box.  I go through the press room, I go into the press box, I opened the door, I put my foot in there and all I felt was that I was moving backwards.  And I kept saying, "Red," and something was pulling me back.  And Red, who was smaller than me and I'm 5'3" and a half, this person it was this black security guard saying, "Who are you?  What are you doing?  Are you out of your mind?  You don't belong in there, you don't belong in there."  And I'm saying, "But I gotta give this to Mr. Smith."  And Red looks up, he says, "Lena [HistoryMaker Lena Williams]," and by now I'm, this guy is just pulling me, and Red said, the guy was about 6'2" or 6'3" now Red is like 5', he said, "You take your hands off of her, she's with me."  And he said, "She's with you, Mr. Smith?"  He said, "Yes, she most certainly is."  He said, "Come here."  By now, I'm shaking, I'm in the press box, he says, "Sit down."  I said, "All I want, they told me I was supposed to give this to you, I knew you were on deadline, I'm trying to get it to you."  And then I started crying, he said, "Get her something to drink" (laughter).  So now comes the, and I'm just saying, "I just wanted to give this to you, you got everything you need?"  And he said, "Yeah."  So, of course, they smoked, everybody smoked and all these other white guys who were in the, they were sitting there smoking with their hats on, and they're, here, "Kid, you've made history."  I said, "I have?"  They said, "You're the first woman that set foot in this press box."  I said, "Oh, my God, really?"  And I'm going, "Duh."  And this is a big deal.  So I said, "Okay."  He said, "Are you all right?"  I said, "Yes, Red, I'm, I'm fine, I'm fine."  He said, "Okay."  So then, of course, "Oh, Miss Williams we're so sorry.  How are you getting back?  Do you want a car to take you?"  I said, "No, I can take the subway."  "No, no, no way."  I said, "No I'll take the subway, I'm fine."  And it was at that point that I realized this could be a problem.  Had Red Smith not been there, God knows what would have happened but the first thing they saw, and it happened constantly, Sam Goldaper who was the basketball writer [for The New York Times], going down courtside, Madison Square Garden [New York, New York], same thing, "She's with me."  So it was one of those things, that's when I decided--.
Story_ID: 482376
Speaker 1: So you're saying that in the, with, with the basketball writing you had the same problem?
Speaker 2: Had the same problem at Madison Square Garden [New York, New York].  You know, I got my credentials and I'm doing something, just a, it was a color story on the Knicks [New York Knicks], and, and the fans and all of that and I had, you know, courtside.  I mean, you go down and you sit, you know, you sit courtside.  I'm going down and, I mean, and the, the guards at the Garden were not pleasant at all.  Oh, and they would say, "Who the hell are you?"  And I said, "I'm [HistoryMaker] Lena Williams with The New York Times."  "Ha."  Sam [Sam Goldaper] said, "Lena, what's the--?" I said, "Sam."  And he said, "Mr. Goldaper you know her?"  He said, "Yes, she's with The New York Times."  And their mouths just sort of dropped, and they said, oh.  And then afterwards, I remembered talking to one and they said, "Well, you know, a lot of groupies come in."  I said, "Do I look like a groupie?"  He said, "Well, you'd be surprised at what the groupies will do to get, get near the players."  I said, "Come to a game early with a press pass and all this and, and what just stand here and, what could they do?"  "Well, they slip their numbers to 'em, when they're sitting at the--."  I said, "Whatever."  And more and more I said, you know, and then what would happen, I became--Dean [Dean Meminger], between Walt Frazier and Willis Reed, Dean the Dream Meminger by that time was playing with them and, and Earl Monroe, once they saw this and Sam Goldaper was saying, you gotta help her out, she's gonna be a good sports writer, you know, and she wants to cover basketball.  What you need?  I started sort of, literally, I said, "Well, I can hang."  They said, "We're having, there's a big thing that's going on, there's a party for the Rucker's tournament [Rucker Park Tournament].  You need to come to that.  There's a press conference.  We're having this, that, and the other.  Why don't you come tell The Times you wanna cover that?"  Spencer Haywood and all.  So what happened was that, and I had found out, and I respected those NBA [National Basketball Association] players because of that, even, including Kareem Abdul-Jabbar.  They said, "There's this young black woman for The New York Times, this sister, that's writing sports."  And people said, "You are the first, that we, whatever you need, you let us know."  I was just amazed.  And I would call them up and say, you know, "We need some quotes from this, that, and the other.  You guys--."  Dean would say, "Let me call a few folks," (laughter) you know.  "Let's see who we can call, you need to hook up with this person."  The Milwaukee Bucks, 'cause Kareem was playing with Milwaukee and Dandridge [Bob Dandridge], I can't think of his first name.
Speaker 1: Bobby Dandridge, yeah.
Speaker 2: Bobby Dandridge, I got this wonderful picture of me interviewing Bobby and all the, and Dean the Dream and all of them would say, see, "Sister, you know your stuff, you stick with it."  And no matter what I needed, they started opening doors and so it went beyond the women.  Muhammad Ali, between Dick Edwards saying, "Champ," and, and, "you know, Muhammad," you know, "All right, sister," he said and, "I certainly will talk to you."  He said--and I, he was just so impressed to see this black woman (unclear) he said, "So you're with The New York Times?"  I said (nods head), "Yeah, Champ" (laughter).  He said, "Let me look at that credential," he said, "I don't if that's real or not."  I said, and they said, "Yes, it is, yes, it is, Champ, leave her alone."  He said, "All right you can come and talk to me."  He said, "Don't, don't hang out with them. Don't hang."  I mean, this is what they did.  And what I found was that these black athletes were there as a support system to say, "You can do it."
Story_ID: 482377
Speaker 1: But at that point The Times [The New York Times] had and, and rightfully so, and I realize their policy, their policy was when you come in very young like that, I was what they call a reporter trainee, an apprentice.  And I left sports and I went out to metro and I wrote for a section that's called, they called Brooklyn, Queens, or Long Island, they were regional sections for different boroughs, any kind of a feature story, I wrote that.  I did leg work.  If there was a demonstration, go out and interview people on the street.  Street fairs, go out and write a story that could appear in the metro section.
Speaker 2: Now you were doing this at the same time you were working in sports?
Speaker 1: Yes.  And so what, because they said, you know, Charlayne [HistoryMaker Charlayne Hunter-Gault] was a good mentor, she said, "Lena [HistoryMaker Lena Williams], they're not gonna let you come in here and just specialize in one area.  The Times believes that every reporter should be well-rounded, you're gonna have to cover a general assignment in metro in order to make staff."  "I don't wanna do this," I said, "I don't wanna do this."  And they said, "But you got to."  And Charlayne and Jim Tuite [James Tuite] and all of them, you know, Red Smith, it was so funny, 'cause all of them sat me down at Sardi's [New York, New York] (laughter) and they're saying, by then I could drink, I said, "I need a drink" (laughter).  He said, "Listen, we know you wanna work, you know, write sports, but Abe Rosenthal [A.M. Rosenthal], the executive editor, is about to promote three people from clerks, writing trainees, to reporter trainees."  And he said, "You're one."  And two of my other colleagues both white men, remain friends to, to this day.  And he said "You're not gonna tell Abe Rosenthal you wanna be a sports writer."  I said, "But that's what I wanna be."  "You're not gonna."  By now tears are just pouring into my screwdriver.  "But I wanna be a sports writer."  Now here are these white men saying, "Trust us on this.  They're looking for well-rounded reporters, you can always come back to it but in order to get there you gotta go through metro and that's what you're gonna tell him."  He said, "You read a lot of clips," he said, "We want you to read some of the best writers here at The New York Times 'cause who you're gonna emulate, okay?"  So I remember the day that they called me, I was in the sports department was one section of the, of The Times, and the metro and Abe's office was in another, and so I put on my smile and they said, "Whatever you do, give 'em that smile."  And I said, "Okay."  And so I said, "I'm off to see the wizard" (laughter).  And I went, came back and I said, "I'm a reporter trainee."  And they said, "We'll always be here for you."  That was in '76 [1976], August of '76 [1976], so I was literally in sports from March of '74 [1974] until August of 1976.  And in '76 [1976] I went to the metro staff and began doing general assignment on what they call the city desk.  Well, most people call it the city desk but we call it metro.
Story_ID: 482378
Speaker 1: And so I was, you know, of course, they throw all kinds of deadline things that you had to cover, night rewrite, you have to cover police beat, excuse me, the police beat, the board of education.  And it was during the police beat that I started doing these stories on Nicky Barnes 'cause at that point the feds had cracked down on Nicky Barnes and Nicky was eventually arrested and incarcerated.  I forgot what he ended up spending time in prison, but he was sent away to a federal penitentiary and I think he had since, he had started working with the police.  They did--The Times [The New York Times], The Times did a magazine piece on him.  But covering the police, covering the whole drug thing because what happened the Rockefeller Drug Laws were coming out at that time, very strict drug laws.  If you were caught with (snaps) an ounce of drugs, it would be better if they had three pounds of heroin because whether it was (snaps) an ounce, a pinch, or three pounds, fifteen years minimum.  It wiped out, it was, it cleaned the streets of New York [New York] of a drug problem (snaps) within a, a year and a half.  But what it did, they went to young kids, they started having young kids under the age of sixteen hold the drugs, the drug dealers, it was one of my, I got a Pulitzer [sic.], I got a Publishers Award for the story ['Thousands of Harlem Drug Runners, 9 to 16, Find the Rewards Are High, the Risks Low', Lena Williams] that I did, the young kids would hold the actual drugs.  So I would go to the drug dealer, I would go to Raymond [ph.] over here who was the drug dealer, I'd walk up to Raymond and say, "Raymond, you know, I need, you know, give me, twenty dollars' worth."  "Okay."  Well, Raymond, you know, I give Raymond twenty dollars.  And he'd say, "Go over there and see Tyrone [ph.], Tyrone got something for you."  Tyrone is ten years old.  Tyrone looks in that bag and pulls out my twenty dollars' worth of heroin.  But when the cops come up there's Raymond.  "I saw him give you money."  "Yeah."  "I know it's for--."  "I don't have any drugs on me, he gave me twenty dollars.  He owe me twenty dollars."  So then you go to Little Tyrone.  Tyrone has walked around (laughter) with, you know, three pounds of heroin, the cops arrest him.  What can they do?  He's ten.  Take him home to mama.  The drug dealers found a way to circumvent the law by getting what they called these holders to hold these drugs.  And the better they became at it, the more money they got.  So it reached a point, you had a whole generation coming up moving from holders to drug dealers.  And I wrote that story and it was something that was debated in the halls of Albany [New York], the state capital, and I got a Publishers Award for it.  But I realized I missed sports--
Speaker 2: And when was that, when was that award?
Speaker 1: That would have been in 1977.  I can find it for you, it would have been in '77 [1977].
Speaker 2: I'm trying to think of the, the movie that was based on that theme, there's a, a--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --very good movie--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --based on that theme.
Speaker 1: It certain, it certainly was.
Speaker 2: And I can't think of the name of it right now--
Speaker 1: It certainly was.
Speaker 2: --but I'll be thinking.
Speaker 1: But I ended up working with Sterling Johnson [HistoryMaker Sterling Johnson, Jr.] who was the New York state special narcotics prosecutor who told me, he said, "Look at what's going down."  And one kid, they had found one kid who was twelve years old, he had two thousand dollars on him and something like five pounds of heroin and they had to take him to his mother and there was nothing they could do.  And so they were trying to figure out how, because they couldn't get the kids to testify against these drug dealers 'cause they were threatening to hurt their families and that was the kid that I profiled.  They had threatened to hurt his family if he told the police who his, who the dealer, the money man was.
Story_ID: 482379
Speaker 1: All of that, I did that, I ended up covering, you have to go down to the court system, 'cause The Times [The New York Times] when they say well-rounded in that one year, board of education, police beat, night rewrite, criminal court.  You spend two months almost in each of these places.  Then they would send you to maybe the suburbs or put you on a national story.  So, I mean, I got to do a whole lot of stuff.  It was during that same time that I got to, when Gerald Ford [President Gerald Rudolph Ford, Jr.] was the lame duck, I got to follow him and, and Nelson Rockefeller during that time 'cause he had lost the presidency at that point.  I also got to do that.  When they put you on that staff, they make sure that you are a well-rounded reporter.  And by the time I got through my training session, I realized that sports was fine, the locker rooms had opened up, but there was a world out there that was intriguing and I could have more of an impact in that world than I would in sports.  So that's why when I went on that metro track.  I stayed in general assignment reporting and writing about politics and from there made staff.  It would have been in '78 [1978] I was transferred to their Westchester [Westchester County, New York] office.  And I was a suburban correspondent, so I went from being a general assignment reporter to a correspondent 'cause anybody who's not in the main office is a correspondent and I had, my mentors explained to me this was a good move and I was a correspondent now and not just a reporter and why that was good.  And once again moving into a place called White Plains, New York that I had never heard of, leaving Manhattan [New York], the big city and all of my friends, going to a place that had a population of, Westchester County, I think, had a population of something like eight hundred thousand.  Ritzy, ritzy, very, one of the wealthiest suburbs in the country.  And blacks were, they weren't even 10 percent and lily white.  And, I mean, I could walk in any place and be the only one.  And I, I said I have not come this far to be the only one.  I really started thinking about leaving The Times because I couldn't handle that.  I knew my friends at the office, but I would be thrown into social settings, public hearings, covering legislatures, you know, covering police stories, being in the court system where I was the only black in the room.  And I mean that was a little jarring for someone who at the time was twenty-eight years old.  But working through a very good group of fellow correspondents who were there with me.  One of my good friends, Ron Smothers [Ronald Smothers], who was also black happened to be assigned in Westchester at the same time I was.  And he was a mentor, a friend, who I had met when I was at Columbia [Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism, New York, New York].  And through him and my other three white male colleagues, I was the only woman there, but once again embracing me as a daughter, a sister, a colleague, you know.  What are you doing this weekend, we're having a cookout, we'll pick you up, come.  All of that because, you know, it's very important to have, I'm away from my family in Washington [D.C.] in this place called New York, and I'm dependent upon the kindness of acquaintances, friends, and strangers sometimes, and colleagues to make up that family.  And if you have that support network you do well in, in your profession.  And it's because of these men, and predominantly I was in a predominantly male situation, 'cause journalism was a field that was predominantly, you know, dominated by men, white men.  But once again there I was planted in this place called Westchester, blossomed.  Jeff Schmalz [Jeffrey Schmalz], a young white man, who came up with me became my editor and, and my Svengali and told me, "Here's what you're good at, you can do this."
Story_ID: 482380
Speaker 1: And through him [Williams' editor, Jeffrey Schmalz] I went from Westchester [Westchester County, New York] to Albany [New York] for two years in 1980 and 1981 to cover the state legislature.  And at the time Hugh Carey was the governor.  And another good experience 'cause it's all about politics and how bills work their way into law.  Just fascinating 'cause I was not a political, I'm not a political person, never was, and, and never like poli- and being in that setting made me even realize oh, politics could be a very dirty business.  But it helped me grow in ways that I just never imagined.  And how those two houses, of course, you learn it when you're growing up, and we're looking at [U.S.] Congress but on the state level because Washington [D.C.] was never a state so I never understood how state government worked.  I learned it in Albany, New York, and that helped me also grow in other ways.  And two years of that, went back to Westchester, in '81 [1981], '82 [1982], and remained there happy covering stories, landmark civil rights cases, when they, when the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice] filed a landmark civil rights case against the City of Yonkers [New York] for the first time linking school desegregation with housing desegregation, covered that.  Won a lot of awards and did a lot of speaking engagements just talking about that because I became the expert in that, and I realized how you could take a beat and become an expert in it; that helped.  Eighty-six [1986] was when I was transferred to Washington, D.C. to cover civil rights.  Abe Rosenthal [A.M. Rosenthal] who was still the executive editor there [The New York Times] then at the time under the Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] administration, decided that there was this perception and we tried to substantiate that there was a reality that under Reagan there was an assault on civil rights.  And Abe said, "Well, is that perception a reality?  Maybe we need someone in Washington covering civil rights, let's see what's happening."  And so he sent me, recommended by some other editors, to come to Washington to establish a civil rights beat and that would have been in 1986.  And I came here working under Bill Kovach and Howell Raines, two southern men.  Howell Raines came from Birmingham, Alabama.  Bill Kovach came from, I wanna say Tennessee, it was either Tennessee or Alabama.  I'm not sure but southern men who saw, came up through civil rights from the other perspective, those who marched, the whites who marched alongside us in the movement and who then went on to cover the movement.  So they had a sense and sensibility about civil rights that many other whites didn't have.  And so they were very much in my corner, pointed me in the right direction and under the Reagan administration that was very important because there was an assault.  And that's how I was working with Benjamin Hooks [HistoryMaker Reverend Benjamin Hooks], and Mary Frances Berry, who was the director of the [U.S.] Commission on Civil Rights, Ralph Neas who was the head of the Civil Rights Coalition [sic. Leadership Conference on Civil Rights].  All of these people, the, you know, NAACP Legal Defense Fund [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.].  All of those were the people that we were covering, Chris Edley [Christopher Edley, Jr.] and all those people at the time.
Story_ID: 482381
Speaker 1: And literally it was, it was a very interesting time to cover civil rights, because as I said, it was, there was a perception that we, that was reality, that the Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] administration, especially the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice] under Edwin Meese.  And I remembered all the names, Brad Reynolds [William Bradford Reynolds] who was the assistant attorney general in charge of civil rights.  Clarence Thomas was the head of the EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission].  And it's an interesting story, I have, I have to tell this story.  I wanna, I wanna put this story on the record, because perception and reality.  My mother [Lena Adams Williams] always taught me, she said, you know, "You judge a person by how they treat you."  And I think my story, the, the white people that I wouldn't speak to back in '71 [1971], '72 [1972], I mean, there are men, you know, and, and women, but at The New York Times, those men that I described to you in the sports department became quote, father figures for me.  I realized that, and, and I said and all these years later, I said, you know, King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was right.  But here was Clarence Thomas and Eleanor Holmes Norton who was, who is a good friend of [HistoryMaker] Charlayne Hunter-Gault, and I met Eleanor in New York through my friendship with Charlayne and met her daughter and her son and knew her husband [Edward Norton].  And, you know, you have those parties together and drinks together and you philosophize together.  So when I was coming down to establish this beat, of course, I reached out to Charlayne and, and to people like Eleanor.  And through them, they said, "You need to talk to Vernon Jordan [HistoryMaker Vernon E. Jordan, Jr.] and we can let such and such know that you're coming down."  Doors were just opened.  And so one of the first stories The Times asked me to do was to profile the new chair of the EEOC, Clarence Thomas.  We heard that, this is one of Reagan's, he was an anti-affirmative action person, die-hard black conservative, felt that some of the things that Eleanor did at EEOC he was going to change and la di da.  So let's do that as a first interview and I thought that was a good start.  And, of course, I talked to Eleanor, "What should I ask?  What do I need to know?"  So I go and I interview Clarence Thomas at EEOC and he's there with his press person and I ask typical questions, you know.  Where do you wanna take the EEOC?  You know, how do people, you know there are people, the people that you represent often are very leery of government, you know, like we didn't trust.  I said, "I'm a militant we didn't trust people over forty, let alone the government, and so how do you get those--?"  Typical journalist questions and he was very cordial.  And I said, "You know, I talked to your predecessor," and he said, "I heard," he said or "I figured" or something.  And I said, "Oh, well."  I said, "And she said here are some of the things that she did and here's what you tend to be doing."  And he said, "No, here's what I plan to do, when I came in here."  And he described some of the backlog, he's trying to get rid of that and the whole bit.  So I said thank you, and it was about an hour interview, I thanked him.  Went back, wrote the story, it wasn't a deadline, deadline, so I had a day to write it, got it in, and it appeared within, you know, a couple of days.  And I got this call when it was in, they said, and he said "Hi, is this [HistoryMaker] Lena Williams?"  And I said, "Yeah."  He said, "This is Clarence Thomas."  I said, "Hello, Mr. Thomas, everything all right?"  He said yes, he said, "I wanted to say thank you."  And I said, "What?"  And he said, "For writing a very fair story."  And I said, "Oh, I appreciate that."  He said, "All of my colleagues here and those in the administration told me not to talk to you."  And I said, "Well, why not?"  He said, "Well they said they heard The New York Times had sent this young reporter down, black female, to write about civil rights and we figured black female, Democrat." I said, "I'm an Independent."  I said, "I became an Independent because when I was in Westchester County [New York], it was predominantly white and the best candidates were people like Al DelBello [Alfred DelBello], and Mary DelVecchio [ph.] and Carl Vergari."  I said just a few names.  I said, "They were very good at what they did and I voted the candidate and not for the party or the race or the gender."  He said, "Well, that's good to hear," and he said but yeah, he said, "and then we knew that you were friends with Eleanor that's what the word is and so, we figured you had talked to her and you were just going to do a hatchet job."  I said, "I'm a journalist," I said, "but you know one thing?  Before I was a journalist my mother told me that you should be fair, you should listen to both sides of the story, I'm fair, not because I'm a journalist because that's how my mother raised me."  He said, "Well, I appreciate that," and he said, "If there's anything I can ever do for you let me know."  And I said, "Okay."  And I figured I'll never talk with this man again in life but in Washington [D.C.] strange bedfellows in politics and I mean, doors were just shut down, you know, the Reagan administration felt The Times was out after, was after them, and, you know, at that time the vice president was Bush [President George Herbert Walker Bush], and I mean there was just this clash of titans.
Story_ID: 482382
Speaker 1: And I found that there were a few stories that I had been given by members of the civil rights community that were either trying to push me in one direction, and one particular story that was going to be on page one, that was talking about, I think it was the Voting Rights Act [Voting Rights Act of 1965] or something.  And from what I had gotten from the civil rights side, it was one thing, and so I had to find out what the administration was doing.  The president isn't going to call me back.  Our White House correspondents couldn't help me and so I reached out to Clarence Thomas and I said, "I need to talk to Edwin [Edwin Meese], you know, somebody in Justice [U.S. Department of Justice], it's coming from Justice."  And I remembered at that time he said, "Let me get back to you."  I said, "I'm on deadline."  It must have been about three o'clock, by four o'clock he called me back and said, "You can write it if you want to but we will get a retraction."  I said, "What does that mean?"  He said, "I don't know who you got it from, but somebody's lying to you.  We don't plan to do that."  I said, "Come on," I said, "Who are you talking to? I need this from the top."  He said, "This is coming from the top."  I said, "Not Brad Reynolds [William Bradford Reynolds]," you know.  He said, "Trust me this is coming from the top.  Write it and you'll be sorry."  I said, "Okay."  And I told that to my editors, I said, "Let's just hold off."  And I held off.  And the next day the civil rights leadership was upset with me 'cause they said, you know, "Why didn't you print it?"  And I said, "Because we hear they're not doing that."  "Well, you print their lies."  See and, you know, it was like oh, that that fatal blow, you know, that that death by a thousand nicks as Dr. Poussaint [HistoryMaker Dr. Alvin Poussaint] likes to say, it was just that nick, that, you know, "Come on.  But I'm one of you all, you can't do this to the young woman who's trying to (unclear)."  And afterwards I found out that they didn't have it, they had heard it.  It was a trial balloon.  So they had heard something that he may be doing this and you know how they, and so they want The Times [The New York Times] to write that he's doing it.  And so I called Clarence Thomas back and I said, "I owe you."  He says, he said, "See," and then he said, "See all your friends over here in the civil rights community don't have your interest at heart."  And I said, "Well, yes, they do but," I said, "I owe you a drink."  He said, "I'm, I'm collecting."  And what happened was that I called him and I said, "Would you like to," months later, "would you like to have that drink?"  And he said, "Yeah."  We met without the PR [public relations] person at The Mayflower Hotel [Washington, D.C.] and I started talking to him and I realize that here was a dark-skinned black man, who grew up in the South, raised by his grandmother [Christine Hargrove Anderson], wanted to be a priest, went to a seminary school where they wrote nigger on his door.  I said, "At seminary?" I'm saying, "At seminary school?"  He said, "Yeah, among other things they did."  And he started talking about his life and I said but, and he was talking about raising his son [Jamal Thomas] and all of that.  And I said, you know, here was a man, and we, and we went through one round of drinks and I said, "You want?"  He said, "Next round."  We got to talking, he became a source and he then he became a drinking buddy.  And I knew then that Clarence Thomas, I would say "Clarence."  "Affirmative action, we don't need it."  And I said, "Oh, Clarence, Clarence, come on, you, you're where you are because of affirmative--."  We would have these wonderful arguments and by this time we'd go through three rounds of drinks, trying to persuade each other.
Story_ID: 482383
Speaker 1: But I found in him someone that was there for me as a, as a journalist, who was the first to tell me that, "I'm in line to become the next [U.S.] Supreme Court justice."  I said, "Don't tell me this over drinks."  That, he said, "You can't use it yet but--." I said--this was in 1988, he said, "If something happens to Thurgood [Thurgood Marshall] you know, the president," and this was Bush [President George Herbert Walker Bush] who said it, you know, "I wanna put somebody in that pipeline." I said, "You aren't even a, a judge."  He said, "I'm--they want me on to go on the district court in Washington [D.C.]."  I said, "Okay."  I said, "I gotta use this story, tell me when I can use it.  I want an exclusive."  He said, "You got it."  And I remembered telling The Times [The New York Times] when I got to New York [New York] after I left Washington [D.C.], after covering civil rights for two years I went back to New York and I told 'em I said by the way I got a, a nice little tidbit from Clarence Thomas.  Send a huge memo saying, he's next in line.  Heard nothing until the executive editor or the managing editor showed up at my desk one day in July or whenever it was, I think it was '89 [1989].  I'm thinking I'm in trouble, and they said, "We hear you know Clarence Thomas."  I said, "Oh yeah, we were drinking buddies."  Said he's in Kennebunkport [Maine].  I said, "Oh, no."  They said, "What do you think?"  I said, "He's going to be the next Supreme Court justice."  They said, "So you knew that," and I showed the memo.  But it was one of those things I explain to people that I realize here was a man who had been picked on by black Americans and I said, "Yeah, so he was probably called Blackie in his life, he was short, he's barrel, you know, he was from the South, he wasn't the best looking guy in the room and he's had his own," I said, "Clarence has gotten where he's gotten through affirmative action but he can't bring himself to say that.  So he, he feels that blacks haven't quite embraced him, the whites haven't embraced him and I said he's sort of like in between somewhere."  And I just always felt that, I said I think he's a God-fearing man.  And I just said--I remembered I wrote him a note 'cause (unclear) you know, "Now that you're on the court, I won't be talking to you again," I said, "but I hope that if you go through this process and if you are, you know, confirmed, that you, that God will be your guide."  Because my friends say when I told them that we were drinking buddies, I mean, I was all but cursed out.  And I said, "Excuse me," and then when I told them what you had done along the way for me and in, in turn The New York Times saving us and that wasn't the only story he saved us on 'cause he was then my only connection through the administration, I said, you know, "You may wanna hate him but all I can say is that he treated me fairly and with respect."  And it was interesting that way 'cause I did get a note from him that I kept so I could show my nieces and them that, you know, from the Supreme Court justice at the time appreciated what I had done--
Story_ID: 482384
Speaker 1: What I, over the years, all the things that I've covered, there are things that I learned, that militant person, the little girl who heard King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] in '63 [1963] say you should judge a person by the content of their character, not the color of their skin, who thought it was an ideal.  And the woman who walked into Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and said she's gonna change it, and the militant who didn't speak to white people, you know, for years between '71 [1971] and '74 [1974] I like to say, changed.  And then I realized that, you know, you have to look at the content of that person, you have to look at their character.  And what journalism has taught me over the years is that there is the human race, it sounds so corny but there is the human race, and there is fault, you know, as, as Shakespeare [William Shakespeare] would say, you know, (laughter) in 'Julius Caesar,' "The fault is not in the stars."  It's in us, we're the underlings.  That's what I learned that the fault is in ourselves.  And journalism has taught me that.  It's taught me how to walk up to anyone, be they an Academy Award [Oscar] winning movie star and I've interviewed Denzel Washington, I did a magazine piece when he was starring in 'Malcolm X,' to a former president of the United States in, in Gerald Ford [President Gerald Rudolph Ford, Jr.] and the Vice President Nelson Rockefeller, to a Supreme Court justice [Clarence Thomas], to, to the, to the man who is on the street and who's a drug addict, to the athlete be it Shaquille O'Neal or Abdul-Jabbar [Kareem Abdul-Jabbar].  It's taught me how we all are alike in many ways.  When you ask that question, "I don't want her to make me look stupid, I wanna make sure I got the right answer.  Does she have an agenda?  Who is this woman?  You're from D.C. [Washington, D.C.], I like D.C."  Sometimes you relate to a person just because you're from their hometown.  If you do your homework and you treat a person fairly, they'll respond in kind.  There are certain people that I don't talk to The New York Times, they don't like The New York Times.  It's a (air quotes) Jewish organization, they're anti-Israel.  You gotta get through that.  But I learned in each assignment they gave me, after I left Washington, I covered style for a while and it was about lifestyle and covering, that's when I learned about Americans and how we think.  And I wrote about everything from what we eat and why we eat it, to how we look and how we change our looks, to the programs that we watch and the music that we listen to and why, to the differences between blacks and whites, men and women, young and old, Ivy Leagues and public schools, private school, but all of that, I spent eight years doing that.  And then I finally went back to sports, you know, in, in, in 1998 but for ten years between '88 [1988], and, you know, like '98 [1998], I covered America and Americans and about our lifestyle and our likes and dislikes and our politics, and it shaped me, it gave me a perspective on my life and my fellow, my fellow citizens' life that I wouldn't have had otherwise.
Story_ID: 482385
Speaker 1: So you went back to sports in, in '98 [1998]?
Speaker 2: I went back to sports in '98 [1998], between '88 [1988] I was doing style and I did some stuff for the city weekly.  My, my story ['It's the Little Things,' Lena Williams] then led to the book ['It's the Little Things: Everyday Interactions That Anger, Annoy, and Divide the Races,' Lena Williams] was written while I was working for the city weekly which is a, a special section that's distributed in the Sunday section in the city.  And this was a particular editor, Dave Smith who says, you know, "You got great stories, you've lived an interesting life," which I had never thought of, you know.  When you're living it, you don't think your life is all that interesting.  And he would ask me about it, I did a story about church hats ['In Defense of the Church Hat,' Lena Williams], and why I used to wear 'em and then I didn't wear 'em, but now I'm wearing them again.  He said, he, he grew up in his, he's a, he's a white man who is married to a black woman and they live in Brooklyn [New York].  And he would always see these black churches, he said, "Sunday, Lena [HistoryMaker Lena Williams], they come out there with these beautiful hats, what's with that?"  And I said, "Oh, Dave, honey you," I said, "As my church member at 10th Street said, 'I'm trying to catch God's eye with this hat.'"  And he died, that was the lead for my story.  And I remembered in one of my churches, he said, "Write it from your voice.  I don't want you to go out and interview, you know, these millinery people, you can, talk about your experience, it tell us about why these black women wear these hats when they go to Sunday church," and I wrote a story about that.  And he was the one that started letting me use my voice, 'cause The Times [The New York Times] is very reticent about letting people tell things in first person.  And Dave Smith, this white male editor said, "Some of her best stories, she's an American, she's experienced in, we'll get other voices in but let her use her voice."  And on five occasions, I top, some of my top editors said, you know, some of your best stories are first person.  And that's how 'The Little Things' came out because over lunch Dave Smith, the man who's, white man who's married to this black woman said, "Lena, can I ask you a question?"  And I said, "Yeah."  He said, "Are there things that white people do that they may not mean to do it, but blacks find annoying or--?"  (Laughter) You know, I start laughing.  I said, "Dave, you got a couple of years?  It's gone take me longer than that but we can start maybe."  He said, "Well what do you mean?"  And I started telling him little things.  I said, "You know, you know," I said, "my brother-in-law and I were on the elevator at Macy's," I said, "and this white woman gets on, we get on the ground floor, she gets on third floor, whatever."  I said, "It's crowded.  It's like Grand Central Station in there."  I said, "There's maybe five inches between our face and her hair and she gets on and starts slinging hair, Dave."  And Dave is watching my body language as I'm telling this story.  I said, "Now I'm trying to be cool but my brother-in-law," I said, "a Korean War veteran, a man who I haven't heard curse."  I said, "I curse more than my brother-in-law."  I said, "He said, 'You know, if she does that one more time, if she slings that hair in my face one more time,'" I said, "Frank [ph.], Frank, let it go, let it go."  And she got off.  Dave said, "Well?"  I said, "All our lives hair has, white hair has been slung in our face.  It's a symbol."  And I started emitting all of this stuff.  He said, "I wouldn't have known that."  And then I told him about other little things that happened.  I said, "You, you heard this?"  So he said, "Well, I know about the cabs.  You all can't get cabs."  I said, "Yeah," I said, "my nephew shouldn't have to get on an elevator and there's this white woman with a purse that's on her shoulder and all of a sudden it comes from her shoulder to like it's her infant that's being--."  He said I had, so I explained little things, how, we say, "Oh, spring break, where are you all--?"  "We're going to Europe."  "Europe? I mean like across the Atlantic [Atlantic Ocean]?"  "Yes."  He said, I said, "You'd be surprised at how many white people are surprised when black Americans and their kids say, 'Oh, we're going to London [England] for spring break.'"  "You're not going to Jamaica?"  Or they--see, so I explained all these things to him, he said, "We gotta write about this."  I said, "Yeah, but we gotta write about it in, in two ways, we also have to say there are things that black folks do just to annoy white people 'cause we know we can, 'cause y'all know you don't have rhythm (laughter)."  And Dave said, "Well, I don't--."  I said, "But there are things that we do to you all," and so I said, "but we need to put it in perspective."  And so we had that conversation in like June or July of '97 [1997].  The story didn't appear until December after a couple of books had come out about it.  And when I wrote that, when I wrote that story, I figured in 1997, only what three years from the, the new millennium?  We were over at, The Times were so shocked at the hate mail they got, that they printed a whole page of just the letters they received.  "Go back to Africa."  "Only Jews would let a nigger write something like that."  Oh, I mean, it, it was vicious.  "Miss Williams needs to get over it, she's jealous of white women."  The reaction, and it was this editor, I would never have thought about writing something like that but he prodded me and each time he kept saying, "There's something else that you're holding back on."  I said, "No, there--."  He said, "Yes there is 'cause my wife, I told my wife and she said she's holding back on a few things."  And each time he said, "Write about it.  You need to talk about that."
Story_ID: 482386
Speaker 1: That became the book ['It's the Little Things: The Everyday Interactions That Get Under the Skin of Blacks and Whites,' Lena Williams].  So after I got the book contract in April of '98 [1998] I took a leave of absence and I was working for the union [Newspaper Guild of New York].  And between the two it was easier to be in sports than it was doing these stories that had me talking to Americans about politics and all of that.  Sports you go in, you cover the event, you write it, you're out of there.  You profile an athlete, you're out of there.  You don't have to do these, necessarily these investigative, in-depth, provocative pieces.  So that's how I ended up back in sports after I had my book leave.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So the book came out in 2001?
Speaker 1: Came out, in 2000.
Speaker 2: Two thousand [2000].
Speaker 1: I took a leave of absence between April of '98 [1998], went back in October of '98 [1998], finished the book on the weekends, submitted it in May of '99 [1999], it was accepted and it was released in October of 2000.
Speaker 2: Now what was the reception to the book?  I mean, how (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh--
Speaker 2: --how did people receive it?
Speaker 1: --it was, it, it got a lot of, because everybody remembered the story.  After I did that story I mean, CNN headline news, I mean, students from all over the country, 'cause The Times [The New York Times] is all over the world.  I had people from Australia calling me about that story.  And so as a result, because people didn't believe and people overseas didn't believe that these kind of subtle things were still going on.  And so as a result of that people said based on, it was based on the story ['It's the Little Things,' Lena Williams] that appeared in The New York Times, widely reviewed.  There were those that were saying, you know, "Black folks need to get over it."  "Miss Williams [HistoryMaker Lena Williams], has these people--."  One reviewer [Elizabeth Vargas] said she had black, white men cowering in, in corners or something.  So when '20/20' did the piece, I said, "What book did she read?"  It's a very provocative book.  And I talk about every little thing from what we eat to the word articulate.  And now people are realizing why blacks find that offensive.  Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell], we're still doing it, Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], hello, I mean, I've talked to ten year olds, they are the ones that are precocious and articulate.  "Well, you know, Miss Williams, the reason I don't watch the Disney Channel any more is because it's not nearly, as, as, as, you know, widespread, it doesn't have the programming that Nickelodeon has."  That's an articulate ten year old.  Colin Powell and Condoleezza Rice on the other hand, hello, they, wouldn't you think the secretaries of state, a U.S. senator.  I said, "I think that most students who are in college, they may be a little shy, they may speak with a Texas twang or a southern accent.  To get to any university in this country and anywhere in the world, you have to be well-spoken, okay.  That word should not be that, articulate can be used when you're talking about some little teenager, sixteen year old, who is worldly, expresses himself and is not shy about, maybe then."  Those are the kinds of things that, you know, we were talking about the book.  You know, they said, "Well, you know, isn't this, don't we know this by now?"  "No, we don't know it because you're still doing it."  And I talk about how we know these things about each other, whether or not that that black people don't use suntan lotion.  Ha, well, you may not but you're gone get sunburned, try it.  Maybe you've never been around black people but ask a dermatologist, if we were to go out and sit in the sun without anything, could we get sunburned?  They will tell you, yes, and you could get skin cancer.  That's what the book talks about.  So this woman is saying, "Oh, it's just, she's talked to these focus groups but it seems like it's rehashing old things."  I said, "The fact that we're still rooting for certain teams."  Who wasn't rooting for the Indianapolis Colts and, the, the beating of the Baltimore Ravens to win the AFC [American Football Conference] and the NFC [National Football Conference] playoffs?  We wanted a black coach to make it to the Super Bowl so that stigma would be lifted and plucked away.  These things are still happening and my book talks about that.  And there were people who said no.  And there were others who said these are the kinds of things that need to be talked about.  And they said, "She does it in a self-deprecating way, she talks about the militant that she herself was a little racist 'cause said she didn't speak to white folks for a while."  I learned from all of those editors, use you.  And I'm honest.  And when I go out to speak to students, I say, "Oh, yeah, I'm honest, you know."  I said, "There are certain things that I still do, I still have my prejudices, and I realize when I do, I try to say, I shouldn't have said that and move on.  But the book, I was very, because as I said, '20/20,' one of the producers there, one of my good friends had told her about the book, she read it, and they did a segment on it.  And I, it is still in publication, it went from a hardcover to paperback.  The paperback ['It's the Little Things: Everyday Interactions That Anger, Annoy, and Divide the Races,' Lena Williams] at Harcourt [Houghton Mifflin Harcourt], they changed the title, packaged it a little differently and it is a bestselling book.
Story_ID: 482387
Speaker 1: And I am pleased whenever I go to all these universities and it's there and they call me Miss Williams [HistoryMaker Lena Williams], because one of the subtle things is that, if you don't know me, you know, don't come to me and take the liberty and say, Lena.  To I said it's because our people were not given that privilege of a title, Mr. Whatever, Mr. Jones, Mr. Smith.  I said I saw little young white kids all of twelve and, and maybe sixteen going up to men old enough to be their great, and saying, "Hey, hey you, John."  I said I had to realize that they were talking to my [maternal] grandfather [John Adams], Mr. Adam [ph.], my granddaddy, Mr. Adams, (unclear) John, no, no, no, no, Mr. Adams.  And because we didn't get that it was something that even though Jim Crow was out and I had moved up and was working for the big time New York Times [The New York Times] and had my American Express card, I wanted my title.  People who didn't know me I prefer that you call me Miss first.  And I talked about that.  And the history behind something that subtle.  So it's, it's, so with all my students, whenever I go to these schools they say Miss Williams and by the end of it it's Lena (laughter).  So one of, one of the things I see is that they say that, you know, because of the way you talk about it and how you present it, it makes easier to talk about race, but they say once you're gone, then what, (unclear) in terms of leaving their institutions.  I said use my book to say on page twenty-nine she says this, you guys just did that.  And then see what I said the blacks do about, to the white folks.  On page 110, you all say, you know, "Such and such is really nice to be a white, I didn't think they were white.  He was so nice."  I said, "What?  Aren't there nice white people?"  And I've done it.  I said, you know, "Over the phone you can't tell, and I've asked Judy [ph.]," one of my good friends who's white, I said, "What color is Judy?"  They say, "Oh, Judy's white."  I say, "Oh, she's so nice."  And I realized, (laughter) well, why what did I think?  I mention all of these things that we do across racial lines.  I mean, come on, Justin Timberlake.  My niece likes Justin Timberlake, you know, she thinks he can dance, she thinks he's cute.  You know, that was to boot.  Years ago, well, yeah, but he's white, he's taking our music, he's taking our dance moves.  There are some that still say he is.  But he can dance, he has a nice voice, he has a little soul.  It's all right.  And we used to say before, oh, no, no, no, they don't.  We would deny that they had soul because we felt they had taken something from us.  So the book talks about all of that.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So what's the new title?
Speaker 1: 'It's the Little Things: The Everyday Actions that Anger, Annoy, and Divide the Races' [Lena Williams].
Speaker 2: Okay.  So there's a--
Speaker 1: 'The Everyday Interactions That Anger, Annoy, and Divide the Races.'
Speaker 2: So there's a longer, a more detailed subtitle?
Speaker 1: 'Cause the other ones, the everyday actions, wait, so what was the, the hardcover is 'The Everyday Interactions That Separate Blacks and Whites' [sic. 'It's the Little Things: The Everyday Interactions that Get Under the Skin of Blacks and Whites,' Lena Williams], it's almost the same but they felt (snaps) anger, annoy, and divide was catchier, that divide the races is, sounds like a sociology study versus that, it's catchier.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But it's basically the same length.
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And it's just the packaging is a little bit different.
Story_ID: 482388
Speaker 1: So we were talking about the book ['It's the Little Things: Everyday Interactions That Anger, Annoy, and Divide the Races,' Lena Williams] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: So from 2000, well, 2001, the book came out and--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --and you had like a grand tour of the book.
Speaker 1: Grand tour of the book--
Speaker 2: And, and you are still on--
Speaker 1: I'm still not only writing for The New York Times, my other very interesting history that showed me a lot about humankind was being with the union.  And once again one of my mentors, Barry Lipton, who is the president of the Newspaper Guild [Newspaper Guild of New York] and my mentor Tom Keenan [Thomas Keenan] who was the chairperson, you know, we're part of the Communications Workers of America.  Unions, when we think about the March on Washington, it was, you know, the Teamsters [International Brotherhood of Teamsters], and, and, and A. Philip Randolph and the unions were there also.
Speaker 2: Joseph Rowe [ph.] and his people, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes.  So I said you forgot that it was about, you know, labor and all of that.  So I said of all things, here I was, you know, they were trying to get more journalists involved in our union.  The Newspaper Guild represents journalists at The Times [The New York Times], advertising people, our clerical staff, and our sanitation and, you know, cafeteria staff.  And journalists we were too busy, we were traveling all over the country, we didn't really wanna negotiate contracts, but they showed me 'cause I was always this rabble rouser, and one of the first people, Al Levy [ph.] in the sports department another one of my white male mentors and surrogate dads, said, "Kid, you need to join the union, that's what you need to do.  They fought for us, they're gonna fight for you.  It's all about your pay, pay equity and all that."  And because of him, I joined the union and became a shop steward and then I ran on the slate.  But basically it was just being there if they needed people, you know, to sort of talk to other people about, if we need to strike, do you want this, what do you want in the next contract.  But in '97 [1997] the chairperson became very ill.  He, he had cancer.  He died in, in 2000, Tom Keenan, and I was the, the first vice chair and to me at that time it was just being the first vice chair, be there for contracts, be there for big meetings, but not really having to do the day to day stuff.  But once he died, and, and once he became ill, I ended up, this was in August of 1997, I had to step into his shoes.  And so as a result of that under our contract you literally spend half of your work day handling union matters for The New York Times, and the rest of your work day doing your job.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So you were, you were chair, officially chair of the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I was, I was the chair of the, of the, of the The New York Times newspaper what we call, chair of The New York Times news--Newspaper Guild.
Speaker 2: Newspaper Guild.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And it's a position that, you know, the entire membership, we have altogether fifteen hundred members at The New York Times, they vote on it.  And by, I automatically, the way, there was no vote because he was just, you know, temporarily displaced and I was just filling in.  And at that time we were renegotiating the contract.  So it, once again it teaches you all about labor, how to negotiate contracts, how to sit across from, you know, The Times lawyers and work on different things.  And so under our contract, as I said, you spend half your day, and it was too cumbersome to do half your day from 10:00 to 1:30 doing sports and having lunch and then 2:30 to 6:00 doing union.  So what we worked out with the top editors was that I would spend Monday, Tuesday, and half of Wednesday doing sports, nothing but sports.  The rest of Wednesday, all day Thursday, and all day Friday, doing union matters.  And sometimes they would overlap, but literally we handled everything from our code of ethics, I worked with The Times and with the members of the union.  We negotiated that code of ethics, our book policy, when you can take leaves, our contract, the contract that runs through 2011, I was one of the negotiators for that.  Any kind of a dispute, what happened with Jayson Blair, after they called Jayson, they called me and then we brought--so along with promoting the book ['It's the Little Things: Everyday Interactions That Anger, Annoy, and Divide the Races,' Lena Williams], writing about the WNBA [Women's National Basketball Association] which was my primary beat at that point 'cause that was the women's sport that I constantly covered, the WNBA, track and field, and doing some tennis, I was also doing union matters.  And it was overwhelming to say the least.  I don't regret it--
Story_ID: 482389
Speaker 1: But I retired in 2005, in November of 2005, and at the time I was fifty-five years old and we had a wonderful provision in our contract that if you had thirty years of service at least and were fifty-five, you could start collecting your pension benefits and get medical coverage.  And that was always my goal after a while 'cause I wanted to do other things.  And the book ['It's the Little Things: Everyday Interactions That Anger, Annoy, and Divide the Races,' Lena Williams] was doing so well, my speaking engagements were, you know, really taking off but I couldn't do all that I wanted to, because I had these other two jobs.  And I still wanna teach.  And I couldn't do four things.  So when the opportunity came with the buyout and to retire at fifty-five and still have a second life, I took it but part of it was that it was very hard juggling three things, the author and the speaker, the sports reporter, and the, the union chairperson.  And it was just times that, I mean, it was seven days a week and twelve hour days, and I just said, you know, it was very rewarding and I always felt I gave back, I could always look back and say I gave something back.
Speaker 2: You know, I must say though that it's rare that you read about reporters actually retiring.  Some of the ones in my hometown that were writing when I was a kid, I was surprised to come back and find are still writing now (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Are still writing.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Hal McCoy in Dayton [Ohio], I don't know if you know him, but he writes--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --about the Reds [Cincinnati Reds].  He's won some awards but he's, he was writing when I was ten.
Speaker 1: Isn't that amazing?
Speaker 2: And he's still writing, you know.
Speaker 1: There are people at The Times [The New York Times] that were there when I was, when I was there.  One of, one of my colleagues started in 1949, he said you probably weren't born, I said no, I wasn't.  Still is, seventy, eighty years old, still writing.  But, you know, it's, it's a--
Speaker 2: You know, Red Smith you talked about him, he was there a awful long time.
Speaker 1: Yeah, very long time.  It's just that things have changed so much in the industry, it's at an accelerated pace.  I've seen my industry go from, you know, the typewriters to, you know, the computers, the satellites.  You know, you're constantly having to be available by cell phone, by email, and it takes a toll.  And I think because I was doing three things at once, it took more of a toll on me than it did others.  And it is a very, and it's, it's, you know, it's a distinguished company, we're over a hundred fifty, you know, years old.
Story_ID: 482390
Speaker 1: We had filed suit and when I was there it was interesting 'cause one of the things I didn't say in 1977, the, the minorities at The Times [The New York Times], the blacks, filed a suit against The New York Times [The New York Times Company, New York, New York].  And we settled out of court but it was Rosario et al. versus The New York Times [Rosario v. New York Times Co., 1979].  And it came on the heels of a women's suit [Elizabeth Boylan et al v. The New York Times, 1974].  The women had settled their suit the year before and we just said that we looked around and there weren't blacks covering the White House; there weren't black foreign correspondents; there weren't blacks in the higher echelons of the editor, you know, editorships.  Women were saying the same thing.  And so on the heels of the women's suit, the blacks filed suit.  And the women, both, both groups settled out of court.  We ended up with a $1.8 million out of court settlement against The Times and a five year consent decree.  And I think it made the paper better.  It opened up opportunities, just the floodgates opened so it was like okay, you're there now and they're off.  And so at that point, you know, you, you did have these White House correspondents, and you had these women who were foreign correspondents, editors, you know, we ended up with one of our managing editors, Gerald Boyd [Gerald M. Boyd], who was one of the first, you know, black White House correspondents, went on to become the managing editor of The New York Times, opportunities were there as a result of all of that.  And I was there, I realize it, I saw a lot of changes.  I saw The Times go from becoming a predominantly white male institution to a diverse company.  I saw us in a position where we were having to write about race in a different way, interpret it for a whole different generation.  It wasn't just going out there talking to the blacks and the black community, it was going to talk to the Colin Powells and the Condoleezza Rices of the world, the Spike Lees, you know.  Who would ever think here's this major motion picture director and producer?  So we were covering race in different ways and The Times was very, very receptive to that.  It wasn't just about blacks who were going to jail, blacks who were selling drugs, the unwed mother, the welfare mother, the woe is I syndrome.  We were able to show this accomplished people and The Times was very receptive to that.  But I was there all along at each change that took place.  And I think because of that a lot of the blacks who started with me retired or left.  It, it, it, it's very rare in history that you can just point the, the, the hallmarks when you're seeing history being made.  There the first time, it was one of my stories for the first time when they used (air quotes) gay in a story, before they were homosexual men and homosexual women.  And I was so happy that there I was, it one of my stories that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Really that--?  Okay.
Speaker 1: --we used the term gay.
Speaker 2: How was that decision made?  I mean, how, how, how did you--
Speaker 1: Just able, afterwards they said--
Speaker 2: --did you decide yourself (unclear).
Speaker 1: No, unh-uh, it was just from the top levels.  At one point Abe Rosenthal [A.M. Rosenthal], said well, you know, they keep referring to 'em as gays, and gays and, you know, you had the, the, the--
Speaker 2: Was it allowing them to name themselves or--
Speaker 1: --the New York [New York], the gay, the Gay and Lesbian Task Force [National Gay and Lesbian Task Force], you know, they were pushing that movement.  And I don't think Lambda [Lambda Legal] was as big then but all of these people were saying come on.  The Daily News [New York Daily News], The Washington Post, the L.A. Times [Los Angeles Times], they're using gay, come on New York Times, you're the paper of record.  Finally, they're using it on, you know, CBS, CNN, come on New York Times.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: So, finally we said, okay, let's join the crowd.  But being there at all of those points in history, I think that I realize, you've done well, you've witnessed a lot.  You have a lot to tell, I don't have children, I never got married, but I have nieces and nephews and great-nieces and great-nephews and I can pass on these stories to them and say that I had that very privileged view of being there when these changes were taking place.
Story_ID: 482391
Speaker 1: It's changed my life in so many ways and now that I'm sitting at home and watching 'Oprah' ['The Oprah Winfrey Show'] and watching 'Dr. Phil' and not doing anything but being lazy and eating too many potato chips, I can say, you know, when you look back over the, the, one of the things that King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], they always talk about his speech in, in Washington [D.C.] and I did a speech last year up in Connecticut at one of the universities there talking about the speech, the speech that I remembered was his speech right before he was assassinated because it was a rainy night in Washington, I think a rainy night in Georgia.  It was a rainy night in Washington and we were watching TV, all my, my mom [Lena Adams Williams] was there, my dad [Ralph Williams] had long since died, but we were watching TV for some reason in her bedroom and it came on that he had been shot and killed.  And they showed his last speech in Memphis [Tennessee] and when he said, you know, he'd like to live a long life, longevity has its place.  And he talked about when he, when they sang at his funeral he wanted them to say not about his Nobel Prize [Nobel Peace Prize] and all the, but he was a drum major and only then would his living not be in vain.  And it was that speech, I was eighteen, even now I get full with it because I realize I'm looking at a man that had said, you know, if I'm gonna die, I'm gonna die but I hope that when you remember me, you'll look at the other things I did, the little things I've done.  And I was telling those, those students that day and I tell my nieces and nephew, I just wanna look back and say if you just touched somebody as that hymn says along the way, then your living will not be in vain.  And that's what I say, you know, no, no I, I didn't win the Pulitzer Prize, the top prize in our profession.  I wasn't on, you know, I've been on TV but, you know, I can walk down the street, nobody know, knows who I am.  But every time a student, black or white, comes up to me and they do after my speech, they said, thank you.  And they hug me.  I say, I always ask for a hug.  I say it's the best, the best emotion and, and physical gesture in the world.  So I said I require hugs.  And so they all come up and they hug me, black, white, male, female, and I said, and I get 'em, I go back, I sleep like a baby after all of my speeches, I can't spe- you know, sleep before.  But afterwards because it's that one student that says you changed my life, that's why I wanted, that if I can look back, all the journalists, all the people at The New York Times, who still say we miss you and thank you.  The publisher took me out and he just said thanks.  And I remembered the, the one time that I thought, I didn't cry when I was leaving The New York Times, it was when all the people said thank you.  And I said well, what did I do, what did I do you guys?  They said, no you'll just never know.  And I said okay.  That's my life.  And all along the way it was that thank you, that's all, I, I don't want anything else, just that thank you.
Story_ID: 482392
Speaker 1: Now, you just took our last question and answered it already so--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --but I still have some others (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's usually the last question we ask how would you like to be remembered and, you know, but now so we're done with that one now so--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --we'll go, go to, now are you gonna write another book, (unclear) is there another book coming on the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Every, everybody's been asking me that.  In fact, when I go to the schools, the students say you need to write another book.  One of the things, I would love to write about, I told my agent I said I already have the title, and another thing, the things being honest about race, the things you learn when you're honest about race.  I am amazed at what people tell me and confide.  It's like I'm a psychiatrist.  Miss Williams [HistoryMaker Lena Williams], I wanna ask you this, this happened to me, Hispanic woman, this happened to me Miss Williams, let me ask you this.  And I say well, I think what they, I thought so, I told my husband, I thought so that's what.  Arabic, Miss Williams, you know, in our, in our, in our culture, they come up, I say now I don't know a lot about it, I'm out of my league here but the same thing.  And they'll tell me here's what happened in my culture.  I mean, and what's so amazing is that I mean we all got a color problem here.  We got gender problems, we got age problems, and we got color, that's what I've learned.  And I tell this my editor he said you've gotta write this.  So I think once I give myself two years to sort of cleanse and relax, I've been keeping little vignettes and all the things that people have told me that my being honest about race has allowed them to tell me these things.  I think it's very important that I write about that, because if we are honest and people would say well, I didn't mean to say that to you, I was just upset about somebody.  One, one woman said, you know, she said well, I was walking and, (unclear) and these, these little, these blacks kids came up, these girls came up to me and said just called me, out of nowhere that little white B thinks she's this.  I was just walking through and see I had my, my PalmPilot, I didn't see 'em, I didn't see 'em, and, and--.  And I said well, you know, they may have a bad day.  I said, but she said and I just don't like being around black teenagers because of that.  I said because they probably had a bad day or saw you Miss Thing and I looked at her, I said there you are with that blonde hair (laughter) I said wearing your little, with your little bag, and your little Chanel suit, I said on your little PalmPilot.  Oh, don't we have the world on a string, and she started laughing.  I said that's what they may have seen.  They may have seen somebody, I'll never be her, they may not never be white and blonde, but they may have their PalmPilot and their Chanel suit.  And she said thank you.  And then afterwards, more, that's what happens.  And so if I do do a book, it's going to be about those little things that people have confided in me because I was honest about race.
Story_ID: 482393
Speaker 1: Now what are some of your hopes and concerns about the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Oh, Larry [Larry Crowe], that's, that's, oh, I'm concerned.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Let me start with my concerns.  I'm, I'm concerned, I think maybe because I'm back in Washington [D.C.], in New York [New York] we were a minority, minority, you know, New York is, it's a very ethnic area.  You're talking Jews, gentiles, Protestants, Catholics.  Blacks I think are literally, maybe 20, 30 percent of New York's population.  You've got a large Hispanic population.  Oh, you've got it, you know, when you're talking about Arabic, Asian, and so I didn't see it as much in New York as I am here.  Washington is still 60 percent, above 60 percent black.  It's the nation's capital.  And when I'm sitting here and I hear, in this wonderful neighborhood that I live in, that, you know, down the street somebody was robbed, and it, who was it?  It was a black woman.  Well, what did the robber?  A young black man.  When I'm turning on the news I'm looking at these two distinguished, you know, anchors now, all the anchors are black, there's [HistoryMaker] Maureen Bunyan and there's, you know, Leon Harris, and I'm watching these two, two distinguished black journalists and the first thing they tell us some black man has poured gasoline over his wife and set her, I'm, I'm going well, no, no, no this can't happen.  When I hear this, it's all about crime, death, and dying, black on black crime.  When I see young women who are proudly walking through Walmart [Wal-Mart Stores, Inc.] in hats be, pregnant, and, well there, and, and where's daddy?  There is no daddy, and this baby's daddy left, and I'm going, I'm not being the moral minority here but there's something wrong with that picture.  I still remember, I mean, the fact that I can, I love Old Spice and I keep it because it reminds me of my father [Ralph Williams] and he was there in that household.  I mean, come on.  You want that experience.  I am the way I am with men, because I had a daddy and because I had older brothers and I know that they can be afraid, that they can feel vulnerable.  I've seen them cry, and I know that women have done them wrong too.  I said you need that to understand the other gender.  I'm worried about that.  That we're getting a one-sided view of our race.  And every time I'm saying, you know, woe is I, then I do turn on the TV and I'm, I, I do see Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama].  You know, I do see some young poet who's got a, you know, who's reading at some theater somewhere.  I see an artist that's here.  You know, I was watching one of my favorite shows is '24' and, and, 'Prison Break' and every time I look at directed by Kevin Hooks, (snaps) I remember Kevin Hooks.  So every time I'm about to say, I then see somebody else that's coming up.  I see my little precocious, you know, great-nieces, you know, who are bilingual and I say, "Oh, my, you know, I need to ask this person something."  "I'll do it Aunt Lena [HistoryMaker Lena Williams]. Hola," (laughter) you know, and they're--and they're going for it.  And I say, okay.  So for every little teenage girl that I see that's out there and saying she's having unprotected sex, then I look at my niece and I say oh, and she's bilingual.  It's like but right now the, it's like the scales of justice.  You know, they're, they're not, they're equal, it shouldn't be the hopes and the concerns are at equal points.  The concerns should be down here, the hopes should be up there (demonstrates) in the 21st century and that's not what I'm seeing, it's like I'm concerned, yeah, but I'm hopeful.  And so it's like they've negated each other.  And that's what I'm concerned about--
Story_ID: 482394
Speaker 1: They don't know their history, any history.  And my niece who's now, God bless her soul, at Temple University [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and a mass com [mass communications] major, she calls me up and she says, "Aunt Lena [HistoryMaker Lena Williams], I need to write a story about, you know, they're saying about, you know, whether, you know, the Iranian nuclear program--." I said, "Well it's not a nuclear program."  She said, "Yeah, what's the word?"  I said, "They're enriching uranium."  Now they could be doing so for the purpose, let's talk.  Every time I, I see that I say okay.  She knows, and I said, and, you know, here's what going on in Iran you know where Iran is, like, I said yeah, it's kind of Middle East and we talk about all of that.  I want them to know not only about black history, world history.  We don't know about black history, that's my concern.  Who was it that died the other day?  Oh, not, I just read it, the actress, one, a black actress who I, and we were just, me and my sister were just talking about her who had died the other day.  Oh, it's in The Times [The New York Times] I'll have to get it, but all of, we, the people that we know, the people that they should know.  And I find that because my nieces and nephews came from a older generation like us, my family, and we told them about that history, whether it's [HistoryMaker] Smokey Robinson and what he did and why Aretha Franklin is an icon and an institution, because it's decades.  I said, "Re-Re [Aretha Franklin] was singing in the '60s [1960s], you all."  And they say, "My, God you're right, '70s [1970s], '80s [1980s], '90s [1990s] good gracious."  So you can appreciate that, that's hard for any artist to do.  We've taught them and they've been willing to listen.  My concern is that I've been trying to tell kids and they get bored, well, oh, 'American Idol' is on and that's, in my house, we, we may watch 'American Idol' but see I forgot the [U.S.] Supreme Court 'cause see I'll videotape, (laughter) I've got reporters at war, all the reporters that are dying, you know, over in Iraq or what's going on, more reporters have been killed in this conflict than, so I'm taping that so they're gonna sit here and watch this with Aunt Lena.  And what happens is that when they need a book report, they've got the book, they've got the video, and they've got us to tell 'em.  It's just that at least they're willing to listen, I'm just not seeing that.  And that's my concern.  You know, you remain hopeful but we struggled too hard to let it be just sort of wiped out in a New York minute.  And that's what it's, 'cause that's what history is, you know, it's a blip.  All of what I told you, you know, it's covered what five decades, (snaps) it's a blip in the moment of time.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's, that's still a big concern, that's the concern that we faced in the early '70s [1970s]--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --the same concern, culture and history and education, how do you teach.
Story_ID: 482395
Speaker 1: Tell me, when you look back on everything you've done to this point is there any major thing that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: I would have chi-, I would have had kids.  I, but see I always said, I told my mom [Lena Adams Williams] that that the, first you find a husband, then you have kids, that was the old-fashioned way.  And because I never found that special person and even though I wanted kids.  And I reached a point that I was, you know, with all of my friends, black and white were thinking about well, we're gonna do it, whether we have a man or not, excuse me, I just, you know, couldn't bring myself to do it because I was raised in, you know, a two parent household and I had a strong, when my dad [Ralph Williams] died I had another strong paternal figure there, my, my grandfather [John Adams].  And I knew what it was like to have a man around.  And while I wanted a child I said, you know, in your lifetime you can feel like a mother.  And at The New York Times I became a mentor and probably a mommy figure to a lot of different people.  So I, and my, I've become a mommy, you know, great-aunt, and Auntie Lena [HistoryMaker Lena Williams], and a mommy to a lot of different, so I've felt like a mother in my lifetime but I always wanted to have a child, to raise, and to pass on things to and just go through that whole maternal experience, but it didn't happen.  And I would not change and go back and have a child on my own because that was the one regret I had in life.  In terms of getting married I, even when I was growing up I told my mommy, I said, "I wanted to be a mommy," and she said, "Where's the husband?"  I said, "Oh, he'll, he'll come."  I always told her I said I never liked the idea of leaving my mother because as I got older and I realized she had seven young souls that she was now raising on her own, and I realize how, you know, difficult that was because at the time, she was fifty years old, you know, in 1913, 1963, my dad.  I said, "Oh, my God, you had seven kids, how hard that was."  And so I told her, I said, you know, I remembered I went to my first wedding when I was maybe eleven and I, it was in a church and I remembered those vows and how it was something about them that this was a contract between these two people and God.  And I said, oh, this is, I said, you know, you're putting your hand on the Bible. I said, "Mama, I'll never forsake you for anyone."  She said, "What's wrong?"  I said, "They say forsaking all others.  I'm not gonna do that."  And she said, "But you're gonna find--." I said, "No, I'm just not gonna do it, it's not gonna happen."  And I said, afterwards people changed their vows, but as long as my mother was alive I said oh, no, no, no.  I said now I probably would have said it but my husband would have known, I will not forsake you for, you know, my mom and for the most part, for my family.  But it was not something that I felt I had to do.  I believe in the institution of marriage, but it just never happened.  I never felt oh, my life is not fulfilled because I've never been married.  But having that child, I said, "Oh, if I had it to do over again I'd probably find (laughter) somebody to marry just to have that child."
Story_ID: 482396
Speaker 1: Once again when you look back at everything you've done, what, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Oh, let's see.  What would be my legacy?  That, that, that I reached the point that when you look back at Lena [HistoryMaker Lena Williams], you can say that Lena practiced what she preached.  That she listened to her mama [Lena Adams Williams] and she realized that there are not only two sides to every story there are really three sides to every story which is the other title of my book, 'Yours, Mine, and the Cold Hard Truth' [ph.].  But I learned to listen to both sides.  I learned how to judge people based on how they treated me, people around me, and those that I loved.  And that in my own ways, that sports writer, that little girl who in high school wanted to combine her loves that her mother told her combine 'em, was able to use those words whether they were Shakespeare's [William Shakespeare], or Zora Neale Hurston's or [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou or whoever, she was able to put those words together and to get other people to sit down in a very crowded time in their lives or a very hectic time in their lives, read something that she wrote, and understood it, appreciated it, and responded to it.  I think that's my, 'cause my legacy is going to be through the written word.  And through the written word I think that I've been able to have just a little, you know, just a little change.  You're not gonna change the world but at least somebody can look at by, 'cause that's how I (unclear) it, by Lena Williams and say, you know, no matter where they are in the world, they can access The New York Times and they can get my book ['It's the Little Things: Everyday Interactions That Anger, Annoy, and Divide the Races,' Lena Williams] through Harcourt [Houghton Mifflin Harcourt]. (Snaps) It'll be just a little blip and maybe if somebody just thinks about it, if it's the word articulate, if it's about slinging long hair, (snaps) that's, through those words, I was able to have some impact on somebody's life and that's all I want my legacy to be.  And me, I hope it's a positive impact, God knows I don't want it to be negative, but I hope it's a positive impact on somebody's life but a impact nevertheless.
Speaker 1: All right.  Well, thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Story_ID: 482397
Speaker 1: This is Mattie Adams, this is my maternal grandmother.  She died, my mother would have been five years old when she died, so my mother was born in 1913, so she died in 1918.  But she's wearing a swimming suit there and from what I understand she was a champion swimmer in her day.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: That's something.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Next.  I'm ready.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And this is my father, Ralph Williams.  My father died in 1963 at the age of forty-nine.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Okay.  I'm ready.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is my mother, Lena Marguerite Williams [Lena Adams Williams], born here in Washington, D.C., on April 15, 1913, died April 1, 1987.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  All right.  I'm ready.
Speaker 1: These are my surviving siblings.  I'm the youngest of seven.  And to my, I'm in the middle there, starting from the left of the camel--camera is Ronald Williams, and next to him is my sister, Ada Williams, I'm in the gray, my sister, Barbara Turner [Barbara Williams Turner], next to her is my sister Gloria Grinage [Gloria Williams Grinage], and next to her is my oldest brother, Ralph Williams.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  I'm ready.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me and my brother [John Williams].  My brother was killed in the line of duty, he was a firefighter in the D.C. fire department [District of Columbia Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department], killed on December 19, 1984 at the age of thirty-six.  And this is a picture of me and him at a restaurant, our favorite restaurant in New York City [New York, New York] called the Saloon [ph.].  It was taken I think around 1980.
Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: Okay.  There it is.  Okay.  Ready.
Speaker 2: This is John Quincy Adams [John Adams], my maternal grandfather.  He died in 1975 at the age of ninety and he had several, he was born in Maysville, Kentucky.
