Story_ID: 485641
Speaker 1: My name is Adrienne Jones and I'm the interviewer. Neculai Burghelea is the videographer, and there are no observers. Can I ask you to please state and spell your full name?
Speaker 2: I'm [HistoryMaker] Deborah Willis, D-E-B-O-R-A-H, W-I-L-L-I-S.
Speaker 1: Can you tell me your date of birth and the location of your birth?
Speaker 2: February 5th, 1948, Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: What is today's date?
Speaker 2: Oh, goodness. Is it June 27th (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It is June 27th, 2007.
Speaker 2: Two thousand and seven [2007].
Speaker 1: And if you could tell me the location of this interview, and your occupation.
Speaker 2: This interview is held at New York University Tisch School of the Arts, 721 Broadway, New York, New York. We are in the photo and imaging department, and I'm chair of the photo and imaging department.
Story_ID: 485643
Speaker 1: So, I'm gonna start out with the--my five People magazine-ish type questions, and you're just gonna answer with whatever comes to mind.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Wow, never thought about that (laughter). My favorite food; I cannot believe this. Okay, yeah--Italian food (laughter). Pasta is my favorite food.
Speaker 1: What is your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: I have two--black and white (laughter).
Speaker 1: What is your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Home.
Speaker 1: And home in New York [New York]?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Fantastic. And what is your favorite phrase or saying? Do you have one--a quip or a quote?
Speaker 2: Let's see--my favorite is, hey, girl.
Story_ID: 485645
Speaker 1: We're gonna start by talking about your family.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So I wanna start with your mom. If you could tell us her name, and spell it--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and tell us where she was born.
Speaker 2: Okay. My mom, Ruth Holman Willis, she is--she was born in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] in 1922, she, she grew up in the North most of her--she's the oldest of thirteen children, and my grandmother [Lillian Foreman Holman] was also from the North, so my whole life has been, (cough) excuse me, in Philadelphia, so my mom was a beautician; she started--she went to the Apex beauty school [Apex School of Beauty Culture] in the '50s [1950s] during the war years. She worked as a kind of Rosie the Riveter-type lady, and she worked in the--for the quote quartermasters or for the, for the [U.S.] Army making uniforms and other types of, of activity for women, for mom, and then later on, my mom and dad [Thomas Willis] had a grocery store as well as her beautician shop, so we spent a lot of time with community and church folks with--in and out of our store--in and outta her beauty shop.
Speaker 1: So, what about your mom's youth? Did she tell you any stories about what it was like for her when she was, when she was a youngster?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, it's, it's fascinating; I was just in Philly this weekend, and my mom is a serious collector because she grew up during the Depression [Great Depression], so she--before recycle became popular here, my mother is the ultimate recycler, and she could re-use everything, so my time with Mom is, is--she spends a lot of time talking about growing up in Philly, what happened to them in terms of recycling activities, but they also, because they were a lar- it was a large family, they spent a lot of time sharing stories; they were natural-born entertainers in terms of their experiences with the arts. So they spent a lot of time in the arts; they sang, they danced, they wrote, so my, my family is--and they cooked. So they always had--they constantly have stories about their experiences of, of cooking and cooking for the community, selling pies, apple pies during the Christmas, for the workers within the community, so it's a lot of stories about cooking, sewing, singing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Will you tell us one?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess the one that--
Speaker 1: Can you think of one?
Speaker 2: There's so many, but one that they talk about often is the year her grandmother [Catherine Foreman] decided to have a--make extra money and to make pies, peach and apple pies, for the men who were brick masons in the Philadelphia area. So, she spent a lot of time cooking, and so Mom had to--and her brothers and sisters had to stand on the corner to (laughter) to sell the pies, and so that they were kind of entrepreneurs in their young age selling pies. There're so many stories and they're so funny, I can't even think of them right now, but they are really good stories.
Story_ID: 485647
Speaker 1: So, you knew your [maternal] grandmother?
Speaker 2: My grandmother, she died in 1990 at the age of ninety-two, so I knew her all of my life and--
Speaker 1: What was her name, and where was she born and when, if you know?
Speaker 2: Right, my (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, if she was ninety-two, then you (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, my grandmother was born--she says 1902, but she was born in 1900 in Plainfield, New Jersey, which I find so fascinating because my son [Hank Willis Thomas] was born in Plainfield, New Jersey in 1976. But my mom--my grandmother, her name was Lillian Foreman Holman, and Foreman, F-O-R-E-M-A-N, H-O-L-M-A--M-A-N. I always found their names fascinating because the name Foreman with an E--a lot of people always say that you don't find names with Foreman. So my grandmother said that their--her father [Edward Foreman] was from North Carolina, but that they became--the name Foreman was basically the occupation name of my great-grandfather's father; he was the foreman of the farm, so they took on the name Foreman, and so I was really fascinated when she married my grandfather, who was Ernest Holman, and he was Holman, and so I was--I just found it fascinating, so I asked my grandfather, who died in '88 [1988], about it, and he said that it was a very similar situation when, after slavery, that they felt that they were whole men and they decided to take on the name of Holman. I don't know in terms of I've never, you know, like found out anything about it other than just talking to my, my grandfather about it.
Speaker 1: And in addition to those naming stories--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --do you know anything about the youth of the--first of all I want to also get your grandfather's name, but do you know--did they tell you any stories about their growing up--your grandmother and/or your grandfather, as children?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my grandmother, she grew up in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]; the reason she was born in, in Plainfield is my great-grandfather worked on the railroad, and so that was a place where they lived at the time and at the turn of the century, so they lived in Plainfield, which was called Queen City at the same time; it was kind of the suburb of, of New York City [New York, New York], it was a real fascinating place. But there was a large black community in Plainfield in the, in the 1900s I guess. So, Gram said that she lived--when she grew up in Philly, which is in North Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]; that's where they grew up. They, they were very religious, spiritual people--missionaries, and that they spent a lot of time developing churches, and so they founded a church called the--god, I can't believe it--Mount Sinai Tabernacle Baptist Church [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and so my great-grandmother [Catherine Foreman] was one of the founding members of that church. Gram just talked about her childhood as--my great-grandmother had, also, sixteen children, so there was a large, large family (laughter). And so they talked just a lot about working, raising children, taking care of other children, and so, so Gram's life was, was basically about work and family, and spirituality. My grandfather, his name is Ernest Holman, and he grew up in Baltimore [Maryland] and moved to Philadelphia. He, he was from Blackstone, Virginia, and he moved to Baltimore and then to Philadelphia where he met my grandmother who--my grandmother used to say that she really liked his friend (laughter). She said that, "You know, I had a crush on your grandfather's friend but something happened; I don't know what happened." So it's a funny story to listen--I think about that often. But he, he was a cook, and he worked on the railroad also, but he was a cook at--on the railroad, but he also cooked at big hotels in, in Philadelphia, so he was kind of--he was like the pastry chef of the big hotels, and he was always known for his biscuits, you know? So that was a time with them.
Story_ID: 485649
Speaker 1: How would you describe your mom?
Speaker 2: (Background noise) My mom--her name is Ruth [Ruth Holman Willis], R-U-T-H, and so--I find it funny and fascinating when people say someone is ruthless because Ruth is such a giving, spiritual person, and that's my mom, which it's amazing that my grandmother Lillian [Lillian Foreman Holman] would name her daughter Ruth, which has such a biblical--strong biblical support name in terms of the, the whole history of, of women in the Bible. But my mother is, you know, just a woman who continues to be supportive of people's--she's every day she gives praise, and every day she is serving the poor. She's eight-five, she's still feeding the homeless; people knock on the door, she gives dog food to people (laughter), she's constantly taking care of, of people and, and, ministering to not only the sick, but the people who just need comfort, and so she's well-loved within our communities and, and pretty peaceful lady, really happy.
Story_ID: 485650
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about your father.
Speaker 2: So, Dad, Thomas Meredith Willis [Thomas Willis]--he was also born in 1922; both of them are February babies, in 1922.
Speaker 1: And so are you.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right (laughter) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is everyone a February baby?
Speaker 2: Right, right. So that's fascinating. Dad was the second oldest son of nine children, and my dad was born in Orange County, Virginia; he died in 1990. He was just a fascinating, strong personality. He moved in the 1940s--1940, late '30s [1930s] to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]--to North Philly [North Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and he was one of the first to move north, and then, of course, he had a, a zoot suit when he moved north; when he moved north, he found out that it was out, out of fashion, so he sent it back to his brothers. So every year when a brother would move north, they would send the suit back, and my youngest uncle, my Uncle Jack [ph.], used to tell this story that when he arrived, you know, in the late '40s [1940s] to, to Philly, and he was wearing his zoot suit, he was laughed at by (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was it the same suit?
Speaker 2: It was the same suit (laughter)--laughed at by, by people because he was so out of fashion. So it's like he said he was never--he will never forgive my dad for not warning him about growing up--I mean wearing certain types of fashion out of style. But Dad was a--he--when he, he went to high school in Philly, he also--his--I never met his mother; her name was Effie White [ph.], which I found fascinating with the new movie with 'Dreamgirls,' and Effie White--that's my grandmother's name. But I never met her; she died in 1990--in 1940; my mom [Ruth Holman Willis] never met her, also. She was about to visit her and she had died in the hospital, and my father's father's name is Bird Willis [ph.], and they're all from Orange County, Virginia. So Dad, when he, he graduated from high school in Philly and he wanted to--he went to the Berean Institute [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], which was kind of a trade vocational school, after high school, and he was a tailor, so he studied tailoring really--you know, he was also in the war [World War II, WWII]. After the war, he took advantage of that and opened up a tailor shop in the late '40s [1940s]. So my father had these big strong hands--a real tough guy to make clothes; he could make clothes. It was just a fascinating experience to watch, you know, this tough guy. He also was a paper-hanger, so he had--he hung paper for a number of years, in terms of home decoration now. So that was Dad. And--but in the--in 1950, he decided to become a policeman in Philadelphia, so he was one of, you know early, you know, black cops in Philly, and so he was well-known, well-popular. And in the sixty- in like 1961 or '2 [1962], he opened up a grocery store across the street from our house, which serviced the junior high school and the whole neighborhood; it was a real--really popular store where they made, you know, from Philly, if you made hoagies and things like that, that was like the store to go to, and so, a little small grocery store there.
Speaker 1: You said your grandmother passed, but did you know your father's father?
Speaker 2: Yes, I--he, he died--my father's father, Bird Willis, died when I was six, and he--he had re-married probably when--earlier on, and I--he had--I had a step-grandmother, her name was Mama Lena [ph.]; I remember her strongly  because she lived a long- longer; she lived way into like the early '60s [1960s], and so, yeah, I knew him just, just passing. I remember that he was a real strong kind of strong figure, very strict figure, and there was a fear about him; that's, that's what I recall. My--I ask--I always ask my dad about growing up in Virginia, and the stories that, that he often told, you know, just in terms of a large family, that they all, you know, either worked later for government in either post office or for the naval defense, or one of those kinds of positions. But, but my dad never smoked cigarettes, and I always found that fascinating; I said, you know, you know, he never drank, he never smoked, and I said, "What?" You know, like, why did you--and he said when he was twelve or thirteen, he said that he was standing on a corner with some guys smoking a cigarette and his dad walked up and said, "Eat it." And it was a lit cigarette, and my father said he had to swallow a burnt cigarette (laughter). He said that cured him for the rest of his life. I just, I just said, goodness, gracious--
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: You know, what a strict (laughter) man.
Story_ID: 485651
Speaker 1: So, what's your earliest memory of growing up? What's your earliest memory that you can access?
Speaker 2: Um-hm. That's--that is--you know, I don't know if it's an early memory or it's an early memory of a photograph because that's--I, I think about it. My--one of my earliest memory is--was a traumatic thing of--I was like two or three years old. I swallowed a marble, you know; I was rushed to the hospital, and so I constantly see marbles and think about that--I, I remember that. Another early memory would--I guess trau- traumatic things; as you're asking a question, I've never thought about it, was another one when my father [Thomas Willis] was paper-hanging the living room and the, the light bulb fell on my leg and, and then one of my earliest photographic memory was sitting and posing for Christmas with, with my doll and, and it's just kind of--I just remember sitting on the sofa. My father had just paper hanged the living room and I'm smiling, you know, posing for the--with my new doll and I, I recall that.
Story_ID: 485652
Speaker 1: You said that--is it true that as a, as a kid, your mom [Ruth Holman Willis] was a beautician?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Was her shop at home?
Speaker 2: Her shop was up- was called the Upstairs Kitchen [ph.]. We had a corner house, and so my (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was that a brownstone?
Speaker 2: No, Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] was like a--
Speaker 1: Could you describe the house for us a little bit?
Speaker 2: It was brick, brick front house; the house was on the corner, the entrance was on a little street with--on 26th and Sergeant, so the entrance was on Sergeant Street, but we had a 26th Street address. So it was a corner house and when--I guess when my father [Thomas Willis] bought it when--my older sister was born in the house, my sister Yvonne [Yvonne Willis Brooks]; she was born in '46 [1946] in the house. My father was a avid pinochle player, card player, and he didn't believe my mother was in labor because it was two months early, and so my [maternal] great-grandmother [Catherine Foreman] was there and she helped deliver my, my sister at seven months. But there was an upstairs because, because my father was one of the first to move north and he purchased a house, he had an upstairs always that someone--we never had our house to ourselves because it was always someone in the family moving, coming north, getting settled, staying at our house for months, or sometimes years, before they moved on, and so we had an upstairs area.
Speaker 1: So, describe to me what the house was like. If, if you--if your family is living on the first floor--
Speaker 2: So, my father's living room--we had a living room when you walk in the house; to the right of the living was my, my parents' bedroom, then the dining room and the kitchen and the backyard. Upstairs was the front room, which was my sister and my room, then there was a small little kitchen area, and then a bathroom and another back bedroom. But the kitchen was never really a kitchen; it was really the beautician shop, so that's what it was renovated into, into a beauty shop.
Speaker 1: And in terms of siblings, it was yourself and your sister?
Speaker 2: I have two sisters; I'm the middle child, as I always say, the forgotten one (laughter), but it's a, it's a--kind of a inside family joke--middle, middle children stories. But I have a sister who's eighteen months older, and I have a younger sister who's seven- Leslie Willis [Leslie Willis Lowry] is seven years--eight years younger.
Story_ID: 485653
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit more about the street. So you've got the beautician shop upstairs; and are people coming constantly to get their hair done?
Speaker 2: Yeah. The--what, what was really important for, for me as a, as a girl growing up in Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] was that a lot of the women that my mother [Ruth Holman Willis]--that visited my mother's shop, some of them were domestics, but on Sundays they were the women of the church; they were--they're really important ladies of the day, that they were empowered in many ways. And then they--she also had women who worked at colleges and universities that--you know, something like Benedict College [Columbia, South Carolina] and A and T [Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina], a lot of the, the black colleges--the, the historically black colleges [HBCUs]; they were kind of the, the women who took care of the dorms or, I'm not sure what the--house mothers or something like that. So, many of them lived in our neighborhood, and during spring break or summer vacations they, they would visit Mom and they'd--some of them get the blue hair dyed; you know, that blue hair kind of dye in their hair? But many of them were, were domestic women, women who were domestic. Some were, you know, fancy ladies who were unemployed but husbands who were, you know, very wealthy and could--wealthy in terms of middle-class wealth, and they visited Mom's shop. Mom went to--when--I remember when she graduated from Apex [Apex School of Beauty Culture]; it was, it was in '57 [1957], and I--1957, and we all attended her graduation; it was like just a group of women who were opening their own businesses. They knew--the way that beauticians were trained then, they, they knew a lot about biology and healthcare, and things that I'm just amazed that--they had to take the state board exams and so it was constant--and so there was a sorority of women that their--her, her alum were really close, and still there are probably about thirty of them left, and they still have their annual meetings, and meet (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. And hung a shingle and had community members come and get their hair done.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now this was right across the street from your father's [Thomas Willis] store--
Speaker 2: From the store, right.
Speaker 1: --where everybody from the school, you said, is coming (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, the junior high school would--it might--the store opened at probably until like nine o'clock at night, opened at seven in the morning. So my mom would work during the day, and she hired a lady, a neighborhood ladies, to work in the store with her, and so if she had a, a, a client, or a customer as they called (laughter); if she had a customer, that she would walk over, do hair and, and then spend the day either doing hair or in the shop--in the grocery store.
Speaker 1: And was your father in the store?
Speaker 2: My father, because he was a cop--
Speaker 1: He was a cop. Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) you know, he gave up his tailoring job and he still paper-hanged, but because he was a cop, he constantly--he, he worked around the clock in terms of different hours, so whenever he was home, he was in the store.
Story_ID: 485654
Speaker 1: What was your family life like? I mean you're, you're telling me about the store, so that may be it (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, I guess I'm asking generally about family life; maybe what you did day-to-day, you and your sisters [Yvonne Willis Brooks and Leslie Willis Lowry]. And then what were holidays like?
Speaker 2: Well, holidays were really just an exciting time. My, my--as I said earlier, my father [Thomas Willis] had a number of brothers and sisters; a lot of them--I mean cards; they--a, a lot of them liked to pay either ga- board games or card games or--it was really social, and so one of my aunts was president of the bridge club and so they would go--we would visit there and watch the kids, so my cousin--I had fifty first cousins--
Speaker 1: Fifty?
Speaker 2: So--on both sides; so, we all had this kind of combination of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All of these fifty would show up, or a large portion?
Speaker 2: And they were all born in the '40s [1940s], early '50s [1950s], so all of us were really close. And so we spent a lot of time with family; we visited a lot, we shared a lot of stories--we played a lot. So, day-to-day was work, you know (laughter); like one thing that my family believed in is cleaning house before we--I was a movie buff, and I used to love to go to the neighborhood movie, which was about three blocks away, but before we had to--before we did anything, was to--we had to clean up, and that was our chores, so we spent a lot of time cleaning; like, "Who's doing it today?" (Laughter) But, but that was a lot for them, and I think that that was a sense of discipline for them, that they--that they followed the same kind of thing that they grew up with of, of, of training, and then we--they did the same thing with us and, and I spent a lot of time going to movies in my fantasy (laughter).
Story_ID: 485655
Speaker 1: So after you would clean, you would go to the movies (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We would go to the movies; we'd go to the park--
Speaker 1: Who were you seeing in the movies? Who did you enjoy?
Speaker 2: You know, it's really fascinating. I was talking about--like James Bond was like my first, my favorite kind of movie experience. One of my--the last movie that was at the local movie before it closed was a movie, I think it was 'Can-Can,' and I remember it because Nat King Cole was in it [sic.], and I, and I was real fascinated with--always the, the charisma and style of Nat King Cole, and so I was--movie for--to me was a travel journey; I'd learn to see how people lived, and what people did, so it was kind of that experience for me.
Speaker 1: How much did it cost for you to go to the movies?
Speaker 2: Twenty-five cents.
Speaker 1: And did you have segregated seating in your movies? How did that work (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no. It's--Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], I grew--as one of my, like cousins was a sister--was my, my mother--my mother's sister, my cousin, Malvena [ph.], we were really like the, the sister, so it was, you know, three of us would always go on with her brother, so the four of us were like kind of the crew that often traveled to the movies together. So it was kind of, you know, this kind of a fun event, and it was--the neighborhood at that time was mainly black; there was--then there were a few Jewish families still there and, and Polish families; not Polish Jews but Polish Catholics that were still in the neighborhood and, and so that was one of that late experiences.
Story_ID: 485666
Speaker 1: We were talking a little bit about your community through the guise of you attending the movies with your cousins and your sister (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and you were telling us a little bit about the makeup of your community.
Speaker 2: So, the makeup of the community, many of them were black families, many of them owned their own homes, and so that it was really a strong and close-knit community, Baptist churches nearby. Our, our family church was about--which when my father [Thomas Willis] married my mother [Ruth Holman Willis], my mother left her family church [Mount Sinai Tabernacle Baptist Church, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and we all attended the North Penn Baptist Church [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], which was about two blocks away. So, the community was just a really close-knit community, and many of the people my father knew from high school, from the [U.S.] Army days and, you know, from Berean Institute [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], so it's just kind of a fascinating close, close-knit community.
Speaker 1: And was your father patrolling in the same community?
Speaker 2: He patrolled--no, it's--he patrolled mainly in South Philly [South Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], the Italian neighborhood; he was really, the 9th Street Market area [South 9th Street Curb Market, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], so he was well-known and really popular down there. And he also patrolled on, on, on Ridge Avenue, which was kind of a real major commercial neighborhood in North Philly [North Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and we were--my father was such a popular policeman because we often got into the Uptown Theater [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] where, you know, we see all of like [HistoryMaker] Smokey Robinson and see all of the singers and, the R and B singers like you know, James Brown, and it was just so popular for us because, you know, Dad could get us in the back door, and so we--he knew like the other record shop owners, so everybody loved my father 'cause he was just a really charismatic, fun guy, but stern, you know; because, of course, you know, dating for me was just impossible, so--but, but at least I could go to, to the Uptown Theater and see all of the, the great musicians and singers (laughter).
Speaker 1: Did he have a projected date when you could date? Was it like, "You can't date 'til you're nineteen, or thirty-two," or something (laughter)?
Speaker 2: He did not believe--well, you know, we--I had a car when I was sixteen, so each of--he gave us a car when we turned sixteen, and I didn't wanna learn how to drive, but I was forced to by my father; it was such a traumatic--I hated it but, but ended up loving it. But if we had a date, I couldn't drive my date; I couldn't--he had to pick me up, and if he didn't have a car, we had to take the bus. I thought that was so unfair, you know; but you understand it now, but at sixteen and seventeen, it's like, "You can't do that, it's embarrassing." But--so yeah, he didn't want us to date 'til we were like eighteen, and--
Speaker 1: But it sounds like he wanted you to be empowered, I mean he's buying you a car at sixteen?
Speaker 2: At sixteen, yeah. You know, we had a car and could drive the high--you know, I was like the designated driver for all my girlfriends, you know, driving everyone home and I'm driving home by myself (laughter) at night for, you know, parties and things like that. He was really supportive. We'd drive to Atlantic City [New Jersey] often and, and just hear--you know, listen to singers and sit on the beach. So I had a little convertible, you know, a Falcon--a Ford Falcon (laughter), you know, back then.
Speaker 1: And did your sister have one, too? The one who's just ahead of you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She had a car; she had a '57 [1957] Chevy [Chevrolet]; my--Yvonne [Yvonne Willis Brooks] had a '57 [1957] Chevy. So, you know, we were like independent; he was like really forcing us, early on, to, to understand who we were as women and--but, of course, I didn't understand that then. But then I realized that so many of, of my friends didn't drive and didn't have cars, and so I was--liked that (laughter).
Story_ID: 485667
Speaker 1: Before we start to talk about your school experience, can you tell me what sights, sounds and smells trigger reminders of your growing up?
Speaker 2: Let's see--sights; just one of the--the most important aspect for me, and I, I think about it often, is people ask why I became interested in African American history, specifically visual history, was because of the, the beauty of the women in, in my neighborhood, but also in my school and in my church [North Penn Baptist Church, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]; that I grew up with women who understood femininity in a, in a powerful way, and I was fascinated with their--in terms of sight, I was fascinated with their sense of presence, and so at--in second grade, I had a, a second grade teacher, a black teacher, Miss Brown [ph.], and fourth grade I had Mr. Pool [ph.]; in sixth grade I had Miss Foster [ph.]. So they were the three black teachers that I had in elementary school [Rudolph S. Walton School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], but their understanding of--we had then Negro History Week [African American History Month]; their understanding of what it meant to know different figures from Langston Hughes to W.E.B. Du Bois to Frederick Douglass to Sojourner Truth. I learned early on, and they constantly told the story, and I was fascinated with that. So, food was--you know, the smell of chicken; I--
Speaker 1: Fried?
Speaker 2: Fried chicken was just what everyone had at church; you know, that was a, a nice way of bringing people together. And so one of my, you know, in terms of senses, is smelling, and still, you know, you know, understanding what it is to have fried chicken. Sound was, for me, was music; I grew up with Dakota Staton and [HistoryMaker] Gloria Lynne and Sarah Vaughan playing in the house often, and at the same time, I had aunts who rivaled Gloria Lynne, Dakota Staton, and they could sing like them, and so that was often music, often in the house. Just one of the things that I recall and think about often is, right before a holiday, how we would spend all night cooking, preparing foods and, and, and experiencing things like that.
Story_ID: 485668
Speaker 1: What elementary school did you attend?
Speaker 2: I attended the Walton elementary school [Rudolph S. Walton School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], which was on the corner of 27th and Huntington- Huntingdon Street [sic. 28th Street and Huntingdon Street]; I understand it's closed now. I drove by it yesterday and couldn't believe it's--this structure is closed. But I attended that, went to a local library, it was on the corner, it was the Widener Library [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. There, there were kind of rules that we grew up with that before we did--you know, we--cleaning was one. We, we had to have a book every week out of the library, and then, before we did our movie and, and our play, going to the park, play volleyball or anything like that, we had to have a book read, or at least out of the library (laughter), and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was there any requirement about what, what kind of book, what kind of book?
Speaker 2: No, no requirement. There was just, just a, a, a requirement that we had to read.
Speaker 1: Something.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what did you--what kind of things did you choose?
Speaker 2: I, I loved fairy tales; I was a fairy tale queen, so I spent a lot of time with Hans Christian Andersen, you know. Kind of living that kind of fantasy life, and so I spent a lot of time with that. And then I was also--as I, as I write about often, that I--one time I discovered the book by Langston Hughes and, and Roy DeCarava, 'The Sweet Flypaper Of Life,' and that turned me around in terms of what the visual experience was, going through a, a book with just photographs of black people. And so that was a, an eye-opening; it's, you know, excuse the pun, but that's something that happened.
Speaker 1: And what are the photographs in that book like? Do they illustrate the book, or are they--
Speaker 2: Right; they are--the words are by Langston Hughes, the photographs are by Roy DeCarava, and Roy DeCarava, I found out later, had a, a selection of photographs that he photographed in Harlem [New York, New York], and looking at families in Harlem--a woman who worked as a day worker who had a son named Rodney, and who had a kitchen that was really kind of dimly lit, and so it was kind of just about a family in Harlem. And we had family in Harlem that we'd visit often, and so I always can think about when I visited my great aunt, my, my great-grandfather's sister; she lived at 137th Street and Lenox [Lenox Avenue; Malcolm X Boulevard]. That was kind of that experience of going through the darkened hallway and looking at the--kind of the naked light bulb, and so that kind of experience when I looked at the photographs I--but I also found that there is love in the, the photographs; they were, they were embracing their women with sweaters on that, that--as I, as I said, I was just fascinated with the way--style of dress, and how things work with, with, with men and women during that time.
Speaker 1: What kind of student were you? You mentioned several of your black teachers that you had in elementary school. What kind of student were you while you were there? Were you--
Speaker 2: I was curious; I was really curious about history. I, I didn't realize how serious I was about history that--to the point where I was concerned that, you know, that it was kind of corny to be, you know, so interested in history that people would (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Even as a kid, even a little kid?
Speaker 2: As a kid, as a little kid, people would just kind of make fun of you because, you know, you didn't wanna play, but I was just fascinated with, with history stories. So I, I found a book that was called 'Men of Mark' ['Men of Mark: Eminent, Progressive and Rising,' William J. Simmons and Henry McNeal Turner], that was--can't, can't remember the name of the author, but it was in my family house and, and I just looked at different names and what people contributed--different people contributed to history, you know? And so that was kind of my, my interest of looking at history in that way. But I played a lot, too, so (laughter) I spent a lot of time in the park playing and, you know, so I had a lot of fun; I--you know, I was not a double--my niece did a film called 'Double Handed' [ph.], and I didn't know that was the word that when you couldn't turn rope that you, you weren't a great double-dutch turner, that you were called double-handed, and--but that was--I told her, I said, "That's me." But I was not a great double-dutch jumper because I was afraid that the, the rope would hit me, so I would just--I just single rope. But my sister and my cousin they were, like they could dance, twist, turn, and do all of it right (laughter); just have a great time doing it 'cause we--you know, I did hop scotch and things like that, so I was like kind of the safe, no-pain play, you know; didn't like--I played volleyball but I didn't like it too much but, you know, I just did that kind of thing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Volleyball's a little painful (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) It's--I was always hit; I was always hit (laughter) yeah.
Story_ID: 485669
Speaker 1: So what about junior high school? Where did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, junior high school--well, I--
Speaker 1: Was it all the same?
Speaker 2: I grew up in North Philly [North Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and then I knew I wanted to have another experience; I didn't wanna go to the same junior high school, which was across the street from the house, where my sister [Yvonne Willis Brooks] went, so I wanted to go to Germantown [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] which was, you know, about a forty minute bus ride away, and I went to the Roosevelt Junior High School [Theodore Roosevelt Junior High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and my cousin and I went there together; it was like a lot of fun. But, but junior high school was, was difficult; I think that that's where people kind of like try to balance out who they are, and try to find out who--names of--you know, it was like a--it was a crazy time for me. And so I went to, to Roosevelt and I, you know, I found friends; it was, it was difficult because I was not part of the group that went from the elementary to the junior high, and--
Speaker 1: How and why did you know that you wanted to have a separate experience from your sister?
Speaker 2: I didn't--I knew I didn't wanna go to, to--across the street; I wanted to meet different people. I have no idea why I did this, but my father [Thomas Willis] said it was okay, so we went--I decided to do it and--I, I think I just wanted to have a--just meet a broader range of pe- I think about it often like, how did I know I wanted to do this? But, but the same kind of, you know, like sad kinds of things happen. There is--I'll never forget--it was Barbara Samuels [ph.], you know; a girl said, "Meet me at three o'clock at the corner of Tulpehocken [Street] and Musgrave [Street]." I'm like--I still remember that moment, you know? And I'm like, "Why? Why does she wanna fight me?" And (laughter), 'cause I'm not a fighter. And I think about that, and my cousin was, was always, you know, getting into--'cause people always wanted to have battles. I have no idea why girls are--you know, the violence in junior high school is so prevalent, but (laughter) I remember that and, and it was all because, you know, cliques, if you hang around--so then, of course, my cousin said, "You have to show up." So I'm like, "Oh, god, I gotta show up." So, I showed up and she said, "Just wanted to see if you were gonna be there." So, that was it, and then we became friends. Who knew? Well, I didn't become friends but we became friendly--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But it was just, just fascinating. But junior high school, there were people there who had--they were--they dreamed about, you know, going to college and going to medical school, so I listened to people and their, their ideas about dreaming and, and so I decided to, you know--went there. And then in high school, I went to West Philadelphia High School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. I didn't go to Germantown High School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], which would have been the logical---or Girls High [Philadelphia High School for Girls, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], where a lot of my friends had gone to Girls High or, or Germantown; I went to West Philly, that's where my sister [Yvonne Willis Brooks] went to high school. So, so here I'm all over the city now, so I'm going all the way out to West Philly to high school.
Speaker 1: And what kind of student were you in junior high and high school?
Speaker 2: I was really quiet student; did, did the work. Didn't think I was that exciting in terms of, you know, my interests; didn't know what I wanted to do, but there were, there were choices that were made that you could actually go to commercial academic or commercial B, like business, so that--but I really thought it was a really bad idea; they had junior high school people making their own decisions about what they wanted to do in seventh grade. So, of course, I followed the crowd of going to commercial B because I could learn to type, as opposed to doing the academic thing. I have no idea why, 'cause I wanted to--you know, I was working at sixteen at the local shoe store. And so it's just a fascinating experience when I think about it, but when I attended high school, I decided to--you know, I don't--I decide, "Okay, I'm going to go to business school and become secretary and work in that, in that way." So, working as a high school student; I worked at home in the, in the family business, but I also worked at the Shapiro shoe store [Shapiro's Shoes], and I was their bookkeeper, and I think it--that's why I'm fascinated with shoes today, but--so I, I did that, and as a result of that, I really learned about organization and I, you know, I had great teachers and, and they were young teachers in, in high school that were just out of college; they all went to Cheyney State University [sic. Cheyney University of Pennsylvania, Cheyney, Pennsylvania]--or Cheyney State College then, and they were teaching history and, and literature, and, and all that--
Story_ID: 485670
Speaker 1: So you said you worked in your family businesses.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, after, after (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What kind of duties did you have there?
Speaker 2: I was the, the cashier--register person.
Speaker 1: At the store?
Speaker 2: Yeah, at the store, right. So I just collected the money, organized that.
Speaker 1: And then, then would you leave there and go to the shoe store [Shapiro's Shoes] and do books?
Speaker 2: No, the shoe store was--I worked every day from--right after school, from 3:00 to 5:00--
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: --and then when I headed home, that's when I closed up the, the, the grocery store.
Speaker 1: And just for my own interest, you, you keep saying that you and your sister [Yvonne Willis Brooks] had the cleaning duties.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What exactly were you doing? You're making beds, you're--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, washing the--well, my sister will say that I always got out of it, you know, and she's really--she's Cancer, she's--sign--she's very sensitive, so (laugher), so we would have to clean and wipe the wood--wipe the windows and, you know, just kind of that kind of work. But I was like (gesture)--and then head out, you know? She'd make drama at it and she, she, she was a feisty one and she would say to my dad [Thomas Willis], "Oh, you just had us because you wanted slaves; you had us because you wanted slaves." And, and then, of course, she got in trouble, you know, because, you know, saying that, you know, and I said, "Why would you--?" And I still, I recall that moment of, of--and--'cause we were punished for--I was doubly punished because she's the one who said it and--but (laughter) it's funny.
Story_ID: 485671
Speaker 1: When did you start coming into contact with photography?
Speaker 2: Well, it started with DeCarava [Roy DeCarava]--that photograph--that book ['The Sweet Flypaper of Life,' Roy DeCarava and Langston Hughes], and that started--and my father [Thomas Willis] also is the--kind of the family photographer of--you know, I would always organize the pictures in the family album and then my, my father's cousin, his name is Alphonso Willis [ph.], he has a studio nearby, and so he had a--he was a studio photographer, and professional everything. And I was constant--we were constantly posed, but we also were constantly photographed with my father's--he had a Rolo- he had a Rolleiflex, and so that was my entrance, and I became interested in documenting my aunts, when I could use the camera, photographing them and, and just different family events I would photograph.
Story_ID: 485672
Speaker 1: So, when you're in high school [West Philadelphia High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and you're reaching--nearing the end, what is your thought about what you're gonna do? Where are you?
Speaker 2: Th- that time (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Having made many decisions.
Speaker 2: Right. At that time, VISTA [Volunteers in Service to America; AmeriCorps VISTA] and Peace Corps were really popular, and this was '65 [1965] when I was graduating, and I wanted to go in the Peace Corps and, and one of my classmates laughed and said, "You probably--you know, probably call you and you probably do something like that 'cause you have strange ideas about the world." And--but I wanted to leave Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], I knew that, and I wanted to move to New York [New York], I wanted to go in the VISTA or the Peace Corps, but I didn't know how because there were no real role models to kind of find out how to navigate what's next other than you get a job, you have children, you marry and you move to Germantown [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]; that's the--that, that's the, the formula for most of us in Philly, and I, I decided to--I applied for--my sister [Yvonne Willis Brooks] had gone to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and--which I kind of fantasized about.
Speaker 1: What was your sister studying?
Speaker 2: She was just liberal arts, that's it, and so I would--we would visit her and pretend to be a college student, you know, loving going to D.C. [Washington, D.C.], but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you drive there?
Speaker 2: Drive there with my cousin and we just had a ball, you know, just going there. But then, I went to, I went to Peirce Junior College [Peirce College, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]--I went to a junior college, which was a business college, to get an associate degree, and that's where I really learned all the stuff about business. But across the street was the Philadelphia College of Art [The University of the Arts, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] where I really wanted to attend, and I would just walk by there every day and, and try to figure out a way to get into that school to study photography.
Story_ID: 485673
Speaker 1: But I ended up going to--I finished the junior college [Peirce Junior College; Peirce College, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and then got a job at Temple University [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and start taking classes there, and there was a center for community studies there that also trained VISTA volunteers, and I worked as the, the secretary for that department and was really interested in--this is 1968, and I, I started working with them in '67 [1967], '68 [1968], and then started going to Huntington, West Virginia to train VISTA volunteers and become involved with, with that activity. So in my--so I wanted to become a VISTA volunteer then, and then--
Speaker 2: Can you tell us a little bit more about VISTA? It's a little bit less of a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) VISTA--right, VISTA was Volunteers in Service to America [AmeriCorps VISTA], and it was the local--it was kind of the regional or Americanized Peace Corps where young students or people would go and work in, in communities, and West Virginia was working in the holler, working in, in Appalachia, some people worked in communities in Washington, D.C. They worked throughout the, the states. And so my training was--that's the first time of grassroots training and all of that stuff. We worked with the training community organizations of how to organize files, how to organize themselves to create advocacy, and that's something that I was doing with, with the, the big guys there--the, the, the honchos who were the counsellors and the, the idea people. That really interested me, but at the same time we were, we were there, and as black workers--and I was young as--just as a, a young person working with them, stoned; I was stoned by some of the people who didn't want, you know, black people in that area.
Speaker 2: Can you explain what you mean by stoned?
Speaker 1: They threw stones; they--some of the white kids--the white boys, let's say teenage boys, would just, you know, like, "N-word, go home." And just kind of show us that they didn't--that we weren't welcome, and I found out directly that we weren't welcome when we were given bedding. We were in a kind of a cabin, and the bedding we were given were full of bed bugs, which I found out when I broke out with, you know, hives and body bites with, with bed bugs, and--
Speaker 2: And this is in West Virginia?
Speaker 1: This is in Huntington, West Virginia.
Speaker 2: Appalachia?
Speaker 1: Appalachia, right. And so when--you know, went to the doctor's, when I got back home in--but, we were working with--I worked with a man name Jim Shelton [ph.], and Bob Upsure [ph.], and Linda Clark [ph.]. These were the people who were really community activists early on--Lee Montgomery [ph.]. This is--was a great experience for someone who was like basically nineteen, dreamer, but then the shock of, of getting--you know, having stones thrown at you and things like that.
Story_ID: 485674
Speaker 1: Are these people--the people who are giving you this bedding and the people who are throwing these stones--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --these are people who are--you are in service to (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There to help, right--there to--we were in service to help, to help develop some of the people--some of these people were, some of the people were, you know, coal mine--coal miners' children, some of--there were workers, but there were ways--we're just kind of looking for ways to, you know, help educate and, and I was, I was there as, as a service worker to just help support in, in that way.
Speaker 1: And what were their conditions like?
Speaker 2: A lot of the homes were really hard to, to experience, to live in, you know, you know; no plumbing, and so it was really hard. But a lot of the VISTA [Volunteers in Service to America; AmeriCorps VISTA] volunteers who were there as workers were really helping to build homes, helping to educate, teaching, you know, the ABCs and, and, you know, all things like that. So, it was--you know, setting up--I was really fascinated, early on they were setting up unions for banking and, and all of those early kinds of activism that we see today, it was happening back in the '60s [1960s] with, with centers like that. So I was there for--I worked there for about a year--two years, and back and forth because I would travel with the staff to the, to West Virginia and, and then I decided I wanted to apply--I wanted to move on and apply to Philadelphia College of Art [The University of the Arts, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] with a portfolio. I didn't take photographs down there, I wish I had, in West Virginia, but I didn't take photographs down there. It was--I was really frightened with the, the hostility when were outside, but when we were in areas of--with, with the VISTA volunteer workers and with the staff and some of the community and the children, we were fine. But then I decided to apply to a photography school here in New York City [New York, New York] in 1968, to the Germain School of Photography, which is down at 225 Broadway, and I wanted to develop a, an opportunity to--a portfolio.
Speaker 1: Did you go there and do that?
Speaker 2: I went there for a year and I studied commercial photography, medical photography, studio photography; it was a great experience--developed my portfolio and back to Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] (laughter), you know. I lived down here on the Lower East Side [New York, New York], I worked during the summer at the Neighborhood Youth Corps in Ocean Hill-Brownsville [Brooklyn, New York] and, and then I pres- presented my portfolio.
Story_ID: 485696
Speaker 1: I just wanna delineate this s- this period now, when you're building your portfolio. You come to New York [New York], you're going to school, and you're in Brownsville area of Brooklyn [New York] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: How, you know, what kind of photos are you taking in Brooklyn? What are you doing there?
Speaker 2: I--in, in 1968, I made a decision to, to move to New York, and I called my cousin up and said, "I'm moving to New York," and she said, "No, wait for me, wait 'til I finish school." And so I said, "Okay, I'll wait." But she was out in, in the, in the end, at the end of December semester, and I decided to move to New York; told my father [Thomas Willis], my parents--they were okay about it, they were kind of excited. My father bought me a camera and--so I could--a 35mm Minolta (laughter), and so I moved to, moved to New York and--
Speaker 1: Did you drive?
Speaker 2: We drove my--we had a--an uncle drove us up and we had a, a kind of a temporary apartment in Brooklyn, and we stayed there a couple of months, but then I took my classes at the Germain School of Photography [New York, New York]. I started studying photography, learned a lot in the dark room, learned studio; it was really an important time for me. But at the same time, they allowed us to use--we had large 4 x 5 [inch] cameras, and we could take them out of the--out into the community and photograph, so I would often take it back to Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] to photograph my family or, you know, my mom [Ruth Holman Willis] at work, or something like that; and, and then with my 35mm Minolta, I'd photograph in Brooklyn. I traveled in--I needed a job, of course, and I got a job at Neighborhood Youth Corps, which was to teach photography to the neighborhood kids.
Speaker 1: How old?
Speaker 2: They were probably like between nine to pre-teen or early teen--into that range; also just--and doing other things with the, the younger kids. So, there were a number of college students I met during that time that a lot of them attended Fordham [Fordham University, New York, New York], and so I had an opportunity to work with the students. What I learned from working with the students is that they would--they always wanted to be photographed, and like, "Hey Miss, take my picture," kind of--yeah; they posed, they had a--they had--they enjoyed posing for the camera. And this was a time when Sonny Carson [Robert "Sonny" Carson] was in Brooklyn and they were changing the school board, so it was a decentralization of the school, of the--so it was really active and--active--an active time. I was twenty years old, I was, you know, like really feeling like I wanted to be a part of this movement, but I just really focused on the arts, and it's something that--I knew my area and I knew my limitations of what I could do, so I focused on the arts and taught photography there; gave them assignments to photograph their homes, photograph their--and a lot of, a lot of the kids photographed their younger siblings or their grandmothers, so there were the extremes. None of--many--none of them photographed their actual parents, so--and some of the parents were concerned about what, what, what we were doing as college students, documenting their communities because they were afraid that we would only have a negative view of, of Brooklyn, which was always about crime, which was in the newspapers. And so we had to meet at community meetings to inform them that we really wanted to encourage the children to photograph what they knew about their lives, and that's something that we really worked on.
Speaker 1: And did you share the photographs with them? Were they--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they learned how to use a dark room, they photographed, and they took the photographs home with them.  So I worked there for a significant time during the summer--after-school program, and then in the later part of the year I, I worked at--I was assigned to work at Fashion High School [High School of Fashion Industries, New York, New York], which was like on twenty- in the 20s in the Fashion District [Garment District, New York, New York] and, and taught photography there, which was, you know, a great--a wonderful experience. I met, you know, really great young women and men who were interested in fashion, really dreaming about working in the field, but also interested in photography. So it's something that I was just interested in documenting and, and putting that together. And then I, I got sick 'cause I was just probably doing a lot of things and not taking care of myself, and not eating properly, and went back to Philadelphia, and I was really sick and I had to like stay in bed. They couldn't figure out what was wrong with me, but it was--I was, you know, anemic, and they were really concerned so I moved back to Philly, had a job back at Philly after I stayed in bed for a month, and then by, you know, by, by mid-March, I was, you know, back to work at Temple [Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and I had my portfolio and I applied for college, and I applied for the school I wanted to go to [Philadelphia College of Art; The University of the Arts, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], as well as the Moore College of Art [Moore College of Art and Design, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, Pennsylvania], which was a women's art college in, in Philadelphia.
Story_ID: 485697
Speaker 1: So, the school you wanted to go to was the Philly College of Art (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Was Philadelphia--it was the Philadelphia College of Art [The University of the Arts, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], right.
Speaker 1: And you also applied to--
Speaker 2: Moore College of Art [Moore College of Art and Design], which was also in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. So, I took my portfolio there and, and it was a counsellor there that was really interested in, in, in getting more black students into the art school, and he showed my portfolio to the photography department, and I was, I was accepted, you know, based on my transcript from, from my Temple University [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] days, as well as the community college [Peirce Junior College; Peirce College, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] across the street, so I--you know, took, you know, regular liberal art classes at, at, at Temple and, you know, history of religion, French, you know, all those liberal art classes--English, and things like that. So, they were transferred, I was accepted at both schools; had a better scholarship at Philadelphia College of Art, and just--I immersed myself in, in the arts, and it was the best experience as, a student could have to work in and attend a art school that allowed you just to kind of feel free and, and to dream about ideas, and I spent a lot of time there.
Speaker 1: What idea--what did you dream about?
Speaker 2: I dream--I dreamt about, you know, how do we change the image of black people? How do we change this historical negative image of only seeing, you know--we, we all know that we have poverty, but there is dignity in poverty, and so I knew that and I felt that, and I--really curious about, you know, identifying ways of, of photographing in, in, in different communities that way.
Speaker 1: And what was the playing field, such that you felt that the energy of black people needed to be changed or added to?
Speaker 2: Well, the--well, I, I studied the history of photography at that time, and all of the images that I saw were not of images that I--that represented my community; they were representative of, of parts--of aspects of, of black life, but it was always images that were difficult for--to see how anyone could rise above, or rise--or live within this kind of system of, of under-educated, poverty and, and, and single, single life of single mothers. And I wanted to show that there was, there is life with women who were on welfare that raised children, who contributed to life in a different way.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: So, so I wanted to experience--I wanted to document that with my camera, but also, I started looking at the history. I had a history teacher there, her name was Anne Tucker [Anne Wilkes Tucker]; she taught history of photography and, and I said, "You know, like I wanna do a project on black photographers." So she said, "Oh, great, you know, do it." And, and I said, "Because we're not talking about black photographers; the only black photographer that we talked about was James Van Der Zee," which I had the opportunity to see his work in a show that was at the Metropolitan Museum of Art [New York, New York], called 'Harlem on my Mind,' and I just had the whole experience of looking at Harlem [New York, New York] through James Van Der Zee's eyes when I lived in New York [New York]. So, I decided to do a historical project of, of researching black photographers. I was basically twenty-one years old, studying photography, and trying--and was not a writer, and did not think I could write, but wanted to create a project about it--about black photographers, to enhance the research, and so she was really encouraging. And my photography teacher was Ray Metzker, who was a well-known photographer who photographed in Chicago [Illinois] and knew, knew how to look at light and, and, and pattern with people; just a wonderful exchange I had with two major figures in my life as photography instructors. So I've continued making photographs, and on the other side, continue to, to research. And my research--because I was not a traditional historian, I actually would just go to the library and go to Crisis magazine [The Crisis], look at the black newspapers, and turn pages and look for photographs--look for ads of black photographers and, and I developed names in that way.
Speaker 1: So, so you're looking to see who the photographers were?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And what is The Crisis magazine?
Speaker 2: Crisis magazine was a magazine that was started through the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and, at the time, in 1911 and '13 [1913], beginning of Crisis, they used a lot of photography on the covers, and W.E.B. Du Bois was the Crisis editor at the time, and he understood photography. I didn't know it then, but he understood that, you know, having photographs on the cover is really an important draw for people to purchase the magazine. And I decided to kind of look at--look at the names of the photographers, write them down, look at the cities they lived in, and then look for images; calling, then writing the historical societies and the libraries. So I created a paper that was--this has been my life-long project; I didn't think it would last another thirty some-odd years, but it's still going on.
Story_ID: 485698
Speaker 1: So, what did you do after you graduated from the Philadelphia College of Art [The University of the Arts, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) After I had married mid--in, in my years--
Speaker 1: Oh, tell us about that.
Speaker 2: Right. I, I--
Speaker 1: How did you meet your husband?
Speaker 2: Well, we--he, he--his name--
Speaker 1: What's his name?
Speaker 2: His name is Hank Thomas--Henry Thomas; he had moved back to New York [New York]--well, he was at Temple University [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. I met him--I met Hank Thomas at Temple University, and he was a--he was a physics major, and we both were on work study, and at the time we were assigned to work with the resident advisory boards. We worked with--within public housing, and the public housing had a--an advocacy group which was called the Resident Advisory Board, and the woman we worked for, her name was Rose Wylie, and she was a feisty lady who demanded respect for women who were--many of them were single, but people and families who lived in public housing, how they were treated, if they could own property in terms of a car 'cause they had to get to work. So she worked--and, and I worked in that office, and Hank's father worked in their office--I mean Hank Thomas worked in the office. And, so we met and--it was funny; he walked in with a ascot and a dashiki and a beret and a saxophone, and I'm like--and combat boots. I said, "What is this? Who is this guy?" And we met; he also was a Panther, he worked with the Black Panther Party in Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]; and we met, talked, and we started dating, and that--was fascinated to meet someone who had just arrived from Paris [France], you know, a few months ago, but still walking around with a beret and a, and a dashiki and a (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Ascot.
Speaker 2: Ascot and, and walking with a saxophone--and a musician and, and a physicist. So it was fascinating, so we, we dated and then we, we just start going out more and more, and then about months later--maybe about almost a year or so later, he asked my father [Thomas Willis] if he could marry me and, and so it was like a real crazy experience of, you know, watching this happen; you know, the men go to talk, and--so we had fun; that was like a really great time for us. And, and he finished his physics studies, and he had left the [U.S.] Army and moved--and, and wanted to finish college at, at Philly, and he was a--really well-known, working in physics. And he was accepted in a number of graduate programs in physics, but ended--and decided to go to Columbia because Bell Labs [Nokia Bell Labs] in New York--in, in Mountainside, New Jersey [sic. Murray Hill, New Jersey], offered him a, a major fellowship, and so he decided to work at Bell Labs and, and go to grad school at, at Columbia. So he was at Columbia Grad School [Columbia Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, New York, New York], and I was finishing up my last year at, at, at the college, Philadelphia College of Art, and we moved--and then after he finished his studies at Columbia, we moved to Plainfield, New Jersey. So I was commuting back to Philly and he was in Plainfield, and so that's how we, you know, purchased a house in Plainfield.
Speaker 1: And that's how you ended up having your son [Hank Willis Thomas] there in 1976 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, a year--in '76 [1976].
Speaker 1: What year did you get married?
Speaker 2: In '74 [1974]? Seventy-four [1974], yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, what's your son's--
Speaker 2: No, '70 [1970]--no, no, no--'72 [1972], yeah.
Speaker 1: Got married in '72 [1972].
Speaker 2: Seventy-two [1972], right, right.
Speaker 1: And then your son's born in the same town--
Speaker 2: Seventy-six [1976], yeah--
Speaker 1: --as your [maternal] grandmother [Lillian Foreman Holman]--
Speaker 2: --and my grandmother, right.
Speaker 1: --in Plainfield.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 485699
Speaker 1: Once you graduate from the Philadelphia College of Art [The University of the Arts, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and you do this--you finish up and you relocate to New Jersey, what do you--what job do you take on in New York [New York]?
Speaker 2: Well, I really wanted to become a photographer (laughter), and I believed after I graduated from, you know, the wonderful Philadelphia College of Art, that I could just go to Newsweek and show my portfolio and, and have a position at some magazine just as soon as I graduated. Reality check--didn't happen; and what I learned from taking my portfolio around, they said, "Come back in three months." When I come back in three months, you know, "Just show me some more work; keep photographing." And I, I did it, and then I, I had a job working at the Plainfield [New Jersey]--the, the black press of the Plainfield newspaper; I can't remember the name of it, but it was--Blackshear was the name of the editor--William Blackshear or Mark Blackshear--William Blackshear [ph.]. Anyway, I worked for the local newspaper in Plainfield, and I photographed different projects for them and, and then decided--then I, then I got pregnant and, and then had my son the next year. It was a real strange time for me because women studying photography--not a lot of women studied photography at the Philadelphia College of Art, so there were three of us in the class, and a lot guys. And one of my teachers then said, "You're just wasting--you're taking up a man's space in this class, so it's, you know, really unfortunate you're studying photography because you're never gonna do anything with photography." And he said, "As soon as you graduate, you're gonna get pregnant." So, I internalized that, and I was embarrassed that I got pregnant after graduating from high school [sic.] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) After graduating (laughter).
Speaker 2: After graduating from, from college; and I internalized that. And meanwhile, I had been trying to get pregnant for longer than that, and never did, so it was just really crazy. So, I was embarrassed to go back to school, to go back to Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], to be seen pregnant--I mean to have people see it. So it's amazing how one can internalize someone else's, you know, kind of view of what it meant to be a woman. And so I, I got over it, you know; like it took a while but I was like, "Wow, I'm not gonna, I'm not gonna be a photographer; I'm just gonna have this kid and--." And so, so I was determined to prove him wrong, you know, and who knows why I spent time thinking about that--had this great kid, you know (laughter), and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What's your son's name?
Speaker 2: My son, his name's Hank, Hank Sloan Thomas, also known as Hank Willis Thomas. And so, I had, I had my son in March and I, you know, hung out in Plainfield and after three months of goo-goo, ga-ga, you know, talking to the kid and having this great experience of being a mother, I said, "I gotta do my photography again." So I started making photographs, and decided to apply to Pratt Institute [New York, New York] for grad school, and I applied at, at Pratt 'cause I had wanted to get a master's [degree] in fine arts anyway, and I applied at Pratt and had a really difficult time as a grad student because I was the only black student in my department, and I had a professor who really didn't believe that I should have been there, so it was kind of--I had a great undergraduate experience 'cause I had a balance of professors who were encouraging, and then some who discourage, but I didn't pay attention to it. And then, you know, I have my kid, I go, go back to grad school, and then I had a professor who was the master, as he called himself, of the class (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He called himself?
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter), yeah, so he says, "I'm the teacher, I'm the master; you're in a master's program and I'm the master." So I, I continued to keep working, and I've worked a lot, but he decided that I needed to go back to take Photo 101 [Photography 101] because my--he didn't feel my photography was as strong as it should have been. It was the best experience for me 'cause I had a--I, I studied with a woman by the name of Jean Loesea [ph.], and she--we worked together, we, we talked about foreground, middle ground, background; we, we--she sent me on assignments that I worked with and I had a great time studying photography with her as an independent student, and then taking--and then also with the grads, so I had the balance.
Story_ID: 485700
Speaker 1: So was this at Pratt [Pratt Institute, New York, New York], you're (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At Pratt.
Speaker 1: --you're going to the college now--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and you're taking 101 [Photography 101].
Speaker 2: Yeah. So I'm doing, I'm doing both; I'm in grad school, and I'm taking on the side a class with a, with a professor [Jean Loesea (ph.)]. And so I had a, a great experience with that, even though--I learned to fight in battle, and to believe in my work, from that experience. And I just recently received an honorary doctorate from Pratt and had a--gave a lecture; I gave a talk there about my Pratt experience and what we can learn from it. Pratt was, was great for me as, as a community of young artists that I met, and so I met a, a wonderful group of artists that encouraged--we encouraged each other. I also worked at the Brooklyn Museum [New York, New York] at the time, as an intern; they had an exhibition on, on Haitian--on the Haitian art exhibit, and I was an intern for Karen Brown, who was an anthropologist, anthropologist for the exhibition. So, I was growing a lot. I had a great babysitter (laughter), you know, you know; Hank [Willis' first husband, Hank Thomas] was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was that person's name (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Oh, Mrs. Wallace [ph.]; I, I praise her to this day. 'Cause everyone, "Oh, did you do this?" And I was like, "Mrs. Wallace did that." (Laughter) So, I, I had a great babysitter, so I could, you know, do--believe in my art, work with my art. Hank was working at his physics and, and then we--you know, I was constantly growing at the same time as, as, as my art was growing. I finished two years at, at, at Pratt and, and decided I really was ready to take on my project on, on working and studying on black photographers. Unfortunately, at the same time, my marriage was ending and I didn't realize it, I guess, because I was, you know, just so into my work; I didn't realize what was going on, but I was--have--I had a great marriage, I thought, and then, you know, it ended, and I, I had a--found a job at the Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture [New York, New York]; it was part of the New York Public Library. And I was hired by Ruth Ann Stewart, who was then the deputy director; Jean Blackwell Hutson was the director. It was a great experience for a person like me who was--who had gone to the Schomburg in the '70s [1970s] to research black photographers, and to be hired to, to catalog their photography collection, it was, it was the highlight of my work experience--to have my first job there.
Story_ID: 485701
Speaker 1: Just, sort of as an aside, did you find pictures by many of the photograph--the photographers that you had researched?
Speaker 2: I found what, what I had as--working at the Schomburg Center [Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York], I had, I had moved back to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], so my family (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you're commuting?
Speaker 2: I was commuting. My family helped me with my two and a half year old son [Hank Willis Thomas], and I was taking--my father [Thomas Willis] would drop me of at 7:00 to take the train to New York [New York], and so I commuted--the 7:00 train to the Schomburg Center. So, I was in this wonderful environment of protection from my parents; they were protecting my kid, and my father dropped me off and he picked me up at 7:00, so it was really wonderful. And then at Schomburg, it was like fantastic; my first job, I was making ten-eight, ten thousand eight hundred dollars.
Speaker 1: What year is that?
Speaker 2: You know, this is 1980 (laughter). And just, just graduated from, from school, found the job purely by accident, by walking past--there was a, a sign on the bulletin board at, at Pratt [Pratt Institute, New York, New York]; never, ever read the bulletin board, but just--there's my job (laughter) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) There's my job.
Speaker 2: That's exactly what I felt. But that--I had the names of all the photographers, so I was able to create a different kind of file; I was not a librarian, but I began to think about let's have access by subject, but also by photographer, and so I devi- I designed a, you know, a file that just kind of enhanced the collection in many ways.
Speaker 1: And are these hard copies? Like how (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They were hard copies--
Speaker 1: --were you able to have things in more than one place?
Speaker 2: They were hard copies--
Speaker 1: More than one copy?
Speaker 2: No, they were hard copies but then there was also the card catalog at the time--
Speaker 1: Got it.
Speaker 2: --so that if you wanted to see C.M. Battey, you can go to Tuskegee [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] so, so that's how I--I, I worked at a--as a researcher, as a--how would I access this material as a researcher? And so that--you know, there were great librarians there, but it--photography was not, you know, paper and book; they were not an, an interest, and I had great support. They--the staff really believed in my work, and it was just a fun experience for me, and then I commuted for about a year--nine months or so and, and I said, "I guess I better grow up and get an apartment in New York," and so that's what I did; I moved--my son and I, we moved to New York and--
Speaker 1: Where did you move to?
Speaker 2: 92nd [Street] and Amsterdam [Avenue], and--basement apartment (laughter), you know, so--you know, could see just the kind of, you know, wheels of the car, tires, feet walking by, but it was called the garden apartment. And my son was at West Side Montessori [West Side Montessori School, New York, New York], you know; he was, he was cool, and so it was a community of women and men in the areas that were raising their children--men--single men, single women and, and so the kids bonded, and so that's how we worked together--like that.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: So I was at Schomburg for twelve years.
Story_ID: 485702
Speaker 1: So you're at the Schomburg [Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York] for twelve years--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and how do you decide that you're gonna leave that wonderful environment? Or how do you promote that change (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was really--it--well, you know, in, in 1982 or '84 [1984] or so, a wonderful man that I still consider my mentor, his name is Richard Newman, he was working for a publishing company, Garland Publishing [Garland Publishing, Inc.], at the time, and he called up and said, "Deb [HistoryMaker Deborah Willis], how would you like to do a book on black photographers?" And I said, "Wow, I have one," you know, I said, "it's in undergraduate language, you know." He said, "Well, send it to me, let me read it." And so we decided to look at it as a bio-bibliography of black photographers; I would write an, an essay to introduce it, and then kind of--all of sources, and then the photographs. So we published this book ['Black Photographers, 1840-1940: An Illustrated Bio-Bibliography,' Deborah Willis], and it was just the highlight; just another highlight of--there're highlights in working at Schomburg, and then a highlight of getting this book published. And then he asked if I'd like to do another one to--it was 1840 to 1940, and the second book ['An Illustrated Bio-Bibliography of Black Photographers, 1940-1988,' Deborah Willis] was 1940 to 1988. And so I spent a lot of time researching and finding photographers and, and doing that, and curating shows and a lot of people took notice to my work and asked me to write about photographers or research and work on different projects.
Speaker 1: In the shows that you're curating, are you in--you're including your own photography (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, at the time, I, I really felt conflicted about that, and I wish I hadn't, but just in terms of honoring the, the works that I'm doing, I had to step away from my own photography and continue photographing, but step away and not include my photographs in my, in my own work--in my writing because it would look like self-promotion.
Story_ID: 485704
Speaker 1: You've published your first two books--the groundbreaking bio-bibliographies of photographers that, I think, will be useful forever. Can you tell me a little bit about the shows that you're curating, and where you're curating them, and why you aren't including your own photography?
Speaker 2: Well, the shows--I started curating shows at the Schomburg Center [Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York], and then I was invited by [HistoryMaker] Mary Schmidt Campbell--she was then director of the Studio Museum in Harlem [New York, New York]; she's now the dean of the Tisch School of the Arts [Tisch School of the Arts, New York University, New York, New York]. But, I started--she asked if I was interested in different shows or different curating shows, and so I curated a show ['Harlem Heyday: The Photography of James Van Der Zee'] for her on Van- on, on James Van Der Zee, the works of James Van Der Zee and, and other photographers. But also, at the time, I was--at the time that I was interested in documenting Harlem [New York, New York] photographers, there were two--there were twin brother photographers, Morgan and Marvin Smith [Morgan Smith and Marvin Smith]; I met them in the paper, in looking at old magazines, that they were photographers, and then one day in 1981, they walked into the Schomburg Center, and I'm like, these are these guys that I'm seeing in the news in the '70s [1970s] and the '60s [1960s] when I was researching in the '70s [1970s]. But I knew their faces because they were, because they were twin brothers, that they, they were, they were beautiful men, and they were often photographed for ads. So, they walked in and I said, "You know, I've been looking for you all my life," (laughter) and they, and they--we kind of adopted each other, you know, as a family, really supportive of my work, and so I started including their work in shows. And then Moneta Sleet, Jr., who was an Ebony photographer, another person I just, just--I just fell in love with his work, cared about what he was doing, and had a chance to meet him and spent a lifetime, the rest of his life, working with him. And all of these older guys--Bert Andrews, who was a theater photographer, he, he had--he did a book called 'In the Shadow of the Great White Way' ['In the Shadow of the Great White Way: Images from the Black Theatre,' Bert Andrews], and his was about black theater--his photographs were about black theater, curated a show about his work ['Scenes from the 20th Century Stage: Black Theatre in Photographs']. So--and then I decided to kind of look at--my mission was to, you know, capture all of these guys and--who all adopted me, you know as, as either, you know, like this person is gonna just care about their work and keep working with them, and I continued--we'd often meet on dinner, lunch, breakfast; and then I met Ellis Haizlip, and Ellis Haizlip had a TV show called 'Soul!'. I remembered meeting Ellis and just said, "You're the person who introduced me to all of these people on television." So then Ellis became a mentor. So I had these great mentors that helped shape my visual interest and to encourage me to keep pushing to get these projects done, which I didn't get any grants; I didn't have any major grants for any of the projects that I worked on. I--there was one photographer that--I was really interested in doing a book, it was called J.P.--his name was J- James Presley Ball, and he was a daguerreotypist, working in the 1840s, died in 1905 [sic.] in, in Hawaii; he started in Cincinnati [Ohio] and so he traveled out west.
Speaker 1: Can I get you just to say that word again?
Speaker 2: James Presley Ball; he was a daguerreotypist.
Speaker 1: And what's a daguerreotype?
Speaker 2: It was one--it was the first photography; it was the first visual image in terms of the first photograph, but it was on a plate, and James Presley Ball was one of the early daguerreotypists.
Story_ID: 485705
Speaker 1: I worked at the New York Library [New York Public Library, New York, New York] then, and Dick Newman [Richard Newman] was working at the library then, he left the publishing world and he encouraged me to write a grant with the library to, to research, and I had a chance to do that, so I compiled a book ['J.P. Ball, Daguerrean and Studio Photographer,' Deborah Willis] on Ball's [James Presley Ball] work, and so the book started just developing as a result of projects related, related projects to my, my past history. And then the contemporary photographers said, "Well, Deb [HistoryMaker Deborah Willis], when are you gonna do--you gonna do a show about contemporary photography?" And I started thinking about that; I curated a show called 'Black Photographers Bear Witness' ['Black Photographers Bear Witness: 100 Years of Social Protest'] for Williams College of--Williams College Museum of Art [Williamstown, Massachusetts] and, and I, I, I looked at the early photographers and then contemporary photographers like [HistoryMaker] Carrie Mae Weems and, you know, just have a show about--relating themes about how black photographers bear witness, from civil rights to early issues, to women's rights and, and issues about women. And so the, the, the shows just kept developing as a result of that.
Speaker 2: And did you feel that there was a black aesthetic in the--in black photography?
Speaker 1: I, I didn't, I don't, I don't think that there's a black aesthetic in photography; I think there is a--it is a trend and there's an interest in certain time frames, but what I was interested, is looking at how to kind of link ideas that black photographers had, mainly about political rights, about activism, and so that's how I kind of thought about it because there were a number of, of, of white photographers who were documenting black culture, that were, that was, that were kind of beautiful and representative, and so there were--like Eudora Welty's photograph of some--of, of women just kind of walking down the street in, in Mississippi; they were just beautiful ladies on a Saturday stroll. And Bruce Davidson's photograph of women wearing--you know, at a cotillion ball; so they're kind of ranging--that, that's my range of, of kind of thinking about areas--how do we tell stories about black life? But my, my, my aim was to kind of photograph--keep--I'm still photographing as--I'm making my own photographs, but also my aim was to look at black life through other photographers.
Story_ID: 485706
Speaker 1: What are you taking pictures of during this period?
Speaker 2: I started taking pictures of, of beauty shops, women in beauty shops, and my mom [Ruth Holman Willis] and, and her friends were in their seventies and eighties at the time, and they were still working, and I just couldn't believe that these ladies were still, you know, you know, girls, you know, doing their girl work and, and--in--and their customers and their clients were older ladies, too, and they were, you know, getting their hair (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Trying to get their hair done.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were getting their hair--but they were actually being taken care of; they were--someone to--they were caregivers, and here is a reversal that they were actually having their hair washed and combed, and someone was listening to them. So my work was, you know, developing in that way. And then I, I had a chance to photograph a bodybuilder, a black female bodybuilder, so I was interested in women at the time, and women's work, and I started looking at quilting and making photographs with quilts, and so I was trying to find ways of working in that way.
Speaker 1: The quilts are so exciting--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --but let's start with the bodybuilder.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What made you interested in the bodybuilder? I've seen some of those photos. What, what about the bodybuilding?
Speaker 2: Well, there is a, there was a show called 'Picturing the Modern Amazon' that the New Museum [New York, New York] had organized and curated; they were working with curators as--who were bodybuilders and, and art curators, and they asked if I would write about the bodybuilder. And I said, "No, I would rather photograph." I said, "I could recommend a writer, but I really would prefer to photograph." And they said, "Oh, wow, you're really interested." And I said, "Yeah." So, they opened the door for me to Ms. Olympia [Joe Weider's Olympia Fitness and Performance Weekend]; I went to Ms. Olympia contests for a couple of--it was a--pageants or whatever they, they are called--expositions, expositions--at the Beacon Theatre [New York, New York], and at local places, and so they're basically shows.
Speaker 1: So, this is in New York [New York]?
Speaker 2: It's in New York. And so I hired my son [Hank Willis Thomas] as assistant. My son was, at the time, a photography student.
Speaker 1: How old is he?
Speaker 2: He--at (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) At that time?
Speaker 2: My son at that time, he was nineteen, twenty; he was nineteen or twenty years old. And I started just finding ways of, how do I introduce this world of body-building into my work? And, and then I photographed them; they let me in the door. I found this community of women and men who celebrated their bodies very differently than we outside of the bodybuilding community, because they found their body as a, as a work of art, and that they shaped and molded their bodies in, in a way that, that they found as, as, as a, as a sculptural piece. And I--but on the outside of it, you know, you see it as a competition, and it was competitive in terms of how they, you know, shape their bodies because--that they had to--from one--there is a contest from one to ten--who was the first and who was, who, who ranked tenth. So I found them; they were in the community of--in the audience they were, "Yo- Yolanda [ph.], you just keep moving girl, do this." And so I found this and went, "Wow, this is a different world where they're competing against each other, but they're also supporting each other." So I found that really--and it's kind of a dichotomy that's strange, but embracing. And so I photographed the kind of--the way that they celebrated each other, and then I had an opportunity to photograph one bodybuilder and her name is Nancy Lewis, and she ranked ninth in, in the competition that year. And so I continued to, you know, think about how to look at bodies in that way.
Story_ID: 485707
Speaker 1: How did you start putting photographs on quilts?
Speaker 2: I--my great aunt, Cora, was my father's [Thomas Willis] aunt, and she was a quilter. And in the '80s [1980s], she died and left all of these patches of unfinished quilts, and my grandmother [Lillian Foreman Holman] on my mother's side was a quilter but not--she didn't see herself as an artist, as my Great Aunt Cora did; my Great Aunt Cora lived in Virginia, she called herself an artist, she was a caner, she also made ceramic pieces, she painted, she collected art and she made art. My grandmother was a quilter by fabric; from using things to keep things warm, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Making blankets (laughter).
Speaker 2: She didn't have straight lines of--you know; her stitches weren't the great stitches that we would find today, so I had both sides of thinking of ways of, you know, keeping myself active, dealing with the grief of losing my grandmother and then--and Great Aunt Cora had all of these patches, so I had photographs and I said, "You know, I really wanna, you know, think about working on some of the old--finishing some of the quilts that, that my Aunt Cora had." And I found this fabric, this photo-sensitive fabric, and it was called luminous; it was photosensitized on linen, and I printed these photographs. And it was--as a result of my father's death--my father died in '90 [1990]; he had prostate cancer, and so he died. It took three years of really a lot of suffering, and it was really difficult. But we had given my father ties from day one, whenever--Father's Day, birthdays; every gift, it was always a tie and it was our choice, and Daddy wore 'em (laughter), you know. And so I--we had hundreds of ties, and I decided, with my mom [Ruth Holman Willis] and my sisters [Yvonne Willis Brooks and Leslie Willis Lowry], to create a piece called 'Daddy's Ties,' and creating that quilt, I found old photographs of my father and placed them on the quilt, and there's this swish of, of ties of, of, of his work--of him as a cop, of him on the beach, him as a, as a, a soldier, but then having the ties. And my father also was a singer; he was in a choral at the--what, what was it called? In Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] it was called--it'll come back to me--Heritage Society [ph.], and so he--we often traveled with his group on Sundays during their spring season and--when he sang. And so, you know, I forgot about some of that. When--you know, teenage years, you know, got away from it, but when I was younger we would travel, and I saw some of the awards he received as, as a singer, and plaques and things like that. It made--kind of made a quilt with all of these objects on it with the ties, and I was thinking about his ties to the community, his ties to us as, as daughters and, and as a wife, but as also ties to his artistry, and that's something that made me interested in creating these fabric quilts and tie quilts.
Story_ID: 485708
Speaker 1: Let's go back to sort of a timeline approach. So, you're curating shows and you start focusing on more contemporary photographers--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And then what do you--do, do you get that grant that you applied to for the New York Library [New York Public Library, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: For the J.P. Ball [James Presley Ball] book--
Speaker 1: Got it (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So I, I, I received the grant for the J.P. Ball book ['J.P. Ball, Daguerrean and Studio Photographer,' Deborah Willis], and then in '92 [1992], I was offered a position at the Smithsonian [Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.] to help develop an African American museum on the Mall [National Mall, Washington, D.C.]. Claudine Brown [Claudine K. Brown] was working at the Smithsonian at the time; I had met Claudine years ago when she was at the Brooklyn Museum [New York, New York], and she asked if I would--if I was interested in working with her and helping to develop an African American museum on the Mall.
Speaker 1: But was there any African American museum in the Smithsonian system?
Speaker 2: There--the only--there was one, it was the Anacostia Museum [Anacostia Museum and Center for African American History and Culture; Anacostia Community Museum, Washington, D.C.], it was a neighborhood museum; and what Claudine and others wanted to do was to have a national African American museum that would collect nationally, and to focus on African American history and culture. I--at the same time, on my other side, a lot of my artist friends would say, "Deb [HistoryMaker Deborah Willis], you need to start showing your work, start getting your work out there; I'm gonna--," (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's been ten, fifteen years.
Speaker 2: "I'm gonna submit your work to a show." So then--the National Black Arts Festival is really popular in, in, in supporting artists and showing art work, and so I had a show at, at the '92 [1992] National's- National Black Arts Festival, and I showed a lot of the quilts, and it was Young Hughley--he had a gallery there [Young Hughley Gallery, Atlanta, Georgia], and Jane Jackson Gallery [Jackson Fine Art, Atlanta, Georgia]; so I showed my work at two galleries during this time, and so a lot of people had a chance to see my work on the other side, you know; not just the books, but now here's Deb's visual images are coming out. So, I started continuing working with my, my work as an artist. A lot of the work was sold at--there, so it was really encouraging. And, and then I moved to Washington [D.C.]. I--you know, it was really hard to leave Schomburg [Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York] and leave New York [New York] and--but I had another opportunity, and it just happened that way, and--
Speaker 1: Where did you move to?
Speaker 2: I moved to Washington to Southwest [Washington, D.C.], to the area near the water on G Street; is 277 G Street, Southwest. It was a great experience to, to have a different kind of local, walking to work and having to help develop a, a museum. And so--at the time, it was--Claudine hired--she hired me to work with collections, and another young woman, Jane Lusaka, to work with the publishing aspect of it. So, it just--worked as a small group, we--it was--we were very cautious, we shared a desk (laughter), we--you know, we worked together, and I traveled around the country looking at collections, and a lot of--a number of people believed in this idea of having an African American museum. We didn't pass through [U.S.] Congress one year, then Jesse Helms held it up another year, but we continued to work. And as a way to create a visibility, I worked with Claudine in, in developing a, a gallery in the Arts and Industry Building [Arts and Industries Building, Washington, D.C.] at the Smithsonian to create exhibitions, and one of the exhibitions that I created, one of the first exhibition was--it call--it was called--entitled 'Imagining Families: Images and Voices.' So, that was a way, I felt, with involve--bring people into the museum, into a museum space, and understanding how to collect--how to collect family images and what artists will do with family images, what we can do in terms of preserving the history. So it was a, a story about that, and so then I curated other shows for them, and just continued working at--another show was called 'Harlem and D.C. in the Thirties and Forties' ['Visual Journal: Harlem and D.C. in the Thirties and Forties'] and looking at [HistoryMaker] Gordon Parks and Morgan and Marvin Smith [Morgan Smith and Marvin Smith], and then a D.C. photographer, Robert MacNeil and the Scurlock Studios [sic. Scurlock Studio, Washington, D.C.]. So, looking at how important photography, photography studios were for, for two significant communities in, in America.
Story_ID: 485709
Speaker 1: And then, finally, my last show there [Center for African American History and Culture, Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.] was the 'Reflections in Black: A History of Black Photographers,' 'cause in the late--
Speaker 2: What year is that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That was '92 [1992] I mean, not '92 [1992], 2000, in 2000, and in the late '90s [1990s], there was a publisher, W.W. Norton [W. W. Norton and Company], Bob Weil [Robert Weil], an editor, and Faith Childs, called and asked if I was interested in doing a book on black photographers that was just kind of the comprehensive book, and I thought about it and said, "Well, we can just compile all of the ideas that I've worked on over the years, and find new photographers," and so created a book called 'Reflections in Black: A History of Black Photographers, 1840 to the Present' [Deborah Willis], and just five hundred photographs, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And what--which contemporary photographers did you choose for that book?
Speaker 1: Well, there were a number of contemporary photographers, but Lorna Simpson--
Speaker 2: Just a couple for--
Speaker 1: Yeah, right; Lorna Simpson is one; there is Christian Walk- Christian Walker; another, Carla Williams, and (unclear), (unclear)  as a, as another one; John Pendergoose [ph.]; so there were a number of, of them, and they were all over the country. Very supportive, didn't have a grant for that, but everyone wanted to be a part of it, knew it, and I said to the publisher that they at least should get a copy of the book for, for the use of their photographs, and it was a way of promoting their work in that way. Some decided they didn't want to be a part of it, you know, because there is--at the time, 'The Black Photographers Annual' was--in the '70s [1970s], there was a, a, a number--a book I, I didn't mention earlier, but there was a, a, a four-part--a four-series called 'The Black Photographers Annual,' and Joe Crawford was the guy who edited and it was a--was interested in photography, interested in supporting photographers, and Joe Crawford also mentored me in terms of supporting my ideas about photography and, and helping to create a kind of a history of photography; and following his example, he helped me think about how to include and understand that some photographers would not like to be in the book; it's okay (laughter), some will, and you wanna tell their story. And then--so I decided to write about the photographers, the ones who didn't want to be in the book and the others; I--I included both.
Speaker 2: What kind of reasons did photographers give for not wanting to be in the book (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, a, a lot of people think that there's money in publishing and, and believe that, that they're gonna make money out of--that I'm gonna make money out of it; I still haven't received royalties from the book yet--just for the record (laughter), but, but--so a lot of people really misunderstand what publishing means within the art market, you know, and that's something (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What does publishing mean within the art market?
Speaker 1: It, it's really about exposure and it's about--for me, it's, it's understanding that there's a record that we existed, that our photographs existed, that our--we, we've had a presence in the, in this photography field, but in terms of making money out of publishing, didn't happen. And so a lot of photographers feel that--not a lot, but it was five--they're the ones I remember (laughter), wrote me the letters (laughter) that were difficult, you know.
Speaker 2: But you said you included them through writing.
Speaker 1: I included them because I felt it was really important that their--because they were important to photography (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They be mentioned; got it.
Speaker 1: --and they really were important to photography and they should be mentioned.
Story_ID: 485710
Speaker 1: So, around this time, do you start to get some fellowship or grant support?
Speaker 2: Well, that year--I had a difficult year, 2000; my--I was organizing the show ['Reflections in Black: A History of Black Photographers'], it was about to open, and my nephew, my younger sister's son who was also my son's [Hank Willis Thomas] roommate, was on his way to visit me and he got stuck in Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]; it was a snow storm and, and he called and said, "Aunt Deb [HistoryMaker Deborah Willis], you know," he says, "it's Sunday, you know, I'll come down and help you." I'm, like, "Oh, no, just come on Tuesday." And he was killed that--the day before the opening, and it was just an experience that we'll never, ever forget. He was one of the greatest kids that you can imagine, and he was twenty-seven; his name was Songha Thomas Willis. Songha, named after the Songhai Empire, and Thomas after my father [Thomas Willis]. But he ran into a friend who he went to junior high school with, begged him to go out with him that night, and he said, "Oh, no, I'm gonna stay with my grandmother [Ruth Holman Willis]." He said, "Oh, man, come on and go and hang out with us." And he didn't know Philly, you know? And he was in a neighborhood that was really a changing area where a lot of clubs were; the area was changing, so unfortunately, the guys robbed the guys with Songha, and Songha didn't run, and these young kids, you know, killed him, and it was, it was, oh, just an amazing experience for us that he died--he was the first of the grandchildren, so he was the first born, and just a special kid. He went to Catholic University [The Catholic University of America, Washington, D.C.], but he also went to a high school called Episcopal High School in Virginia [Episcopal High School, Alexandria, Virginia], and they--he was, he was like the multi-culti kid of the, of the school; he was the voice of the school, so a lot of kids loved him, created space for him, and he introduced a lot of, a lot of experiences to, to young kids who attended that school. And so his death affected a number of people and they all attended his funeral and just really shared their--how Songha made it easy for them to attend school. He was a basketball player; he was a great kid. So, that year was just unbelievable, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, what do you physically do with the opening when you learn that your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, my son and my--you know, I, I--you know, the, the worst call that every--any mother wants to have a phone ring at 3:30 in the morning, and my sister [Yvonne Willis Brooks] called me and that wail I will never forget. I called work to say that the opening--the major opening is happening; I just drove straight to Philly and everyone just--the Smithsonian [Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.] community just, was just fantastic; they were very supportive. And everyone told me about the opening; I still hear stories about how wonderful it was because that, that was a major show. And one of the experience about having a show at the Smithsonian, you have European visitors, you have visitors from all over America--black, white, Asian and, and, and Latina and Latino. But here, they have an opportunity to see black people that they've never experienced visually and in exhibition. And what happened as a result of the exhibition, I asked the--I wanted to have a comment book, a book that people could comment about what they thought about the exhibition, and in the book, people wrote, "I didn't know we looked like that," you know, "I didn't have a history of black people." "I'm from Europe, I only know black people from movies," you know. This, "Thank you for this exhibition." It was just amazing.
Story_ID: 485711
Speaker 1: The exhibition, 'Reflections in Black' ['Reflections in Black: A History of Black Photographers'], was at the Smithsonian [Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.] and here--it opened in 2000, and in February. It was just a wonderful exchange of ideas of how to think about--there were like a hundred photographers with different views about America--about black America, from personal to studio photographers, and I wanted to have a comment book, a, a book that was a--people could respond to about their exhibition experience. And some people in education feel that books that like that aren't, aren't, you know, kind of books that are honest, or that people--that's not qualitative in, in a sense that you can't tell, really tell what people are really thinking. But I really believe that people just wanna write down what, what they're thinking at the moment, and they'll just write it down and just say what, what it means to them to walk through the show. It was, it was a large exhibit; it had over three hundred images in the show, and exhausting sometimes, and if you wanted to walk through it--but you had to stop at some of the images. And some of the viewers--some were--is--as the Smithsonian has viewers from--that are international viewers, some from this country, and many European--many white Europeans that, that visited the exhibition said that they only knew black culture through the movies, and never imagined that black people looked like that. And then, within African American responses, they--some of the responses were, "I'm an African American, I didn't know we looked like that. Thank you." And some of the responses were a lot of thank yous and a lot of stories that people wrote, that I found just fascinating.
Speaker 2: And what are the people in the photographs looking like, such that people are coming with these responses of not having seen, or being grateful (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, right. Many of the photographs had people who were showing their graduation, 1911, graduating from high school. There was a photograph by a D.C. [Washington, D.C.] photographer, Daniel Freeman; he had a photograph. There were some who were wearing, you know, beautiful hats and dressed a certain way, there were some musicians in there, and there were some babies in strollers in the turn of the century. And then, all the way to some images that were kind of reflective or constructed images where a, a photographer like Renee Cox created a, a Superwoman, a Raje figure, where she is wearing a Superwoman, who is there to--a Superwoman outfit to, to save America, to save, you know, to save difficulties of women who are having difficulty times. So there, there was the playful as- aspect of it, there was a serious, there was a reflective, and that's something that, that happened in curating the show.
Story_ID: 485712
Speaker 1: That same year, I received a call from the McArthur Foundation [John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation, Chicago, Illinois], which was maybe four months later. I was in my office rushing to finish another project and, you know, still grieving my nephew [Songha Thomas Willis], and I--the, the person called--Daniel Socolow called; I answered the phone, he said, "This is Daniel--Dan Socolow from the McArthur Foundation." I, I said, "Oh, my goodness," I said, "did I forget to write a reference?" I said, "You know, I'm just so--I'm so sorry, it's just been a crazy year; please forgive me if it's a--." So he said, "No, I'm calling to tell you that you've, you know, received the MacArthur." And I'm like--I said, "Who is this?" You know? I never will forget that moment. He said--I said--he said--I said, "Who is this?" I said--he says, "Well, you can call me back if--and--but I'm in the office now with my staff, and we're, you know, making our calls." And I said, "No, don't hang up (laughter)." So, he said, "I know you're planning to be in New York [New York] this weekend. Please, you know, cancel your New York engagement that--we need to have you in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] because we're gonna have film crew, and it's a lot of press going on this weekend, but you can't tell anybody that you received the--." So I said, "Can I tell my mom [Ruth Holman Willis]?" (Laughter) He said, "How old are you?" (Laughter) And I said, "Well," I said, "you know, we had a pretty rough year, and be great to have some good news." And I'm like, you know, he called to say that, you know, that there are a number of people who wrote, you know, really positive things about you and your work. And I said, wow, I just never knew that anybody was looking, and I didn't really--you know, it was like--it was such, it was such a surprise, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Do you know about any of the people who wrote, or what was written?
Speaker 1: No, never.
Speaker 2: Just good stuff.
Speaker 1: It's--well, all I know that it's still anonymous, and it stays--it remains anonymous, and it was just--it was, it was just a wonderful blessing that, that experience. And so with that, you know, you, you think, okay, maybe I can now work on my art and work on this, and I was at the same time working on a book with Carla Williams, 'Black Female Body in Photography' [sic. 'The Black Female Body: A Photographic History,' Deborah Willis and Carla Williams], for Temple University Press [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. So I was thinking about, oh, I can take off and work on that. And I was invited to, to teach at, at Duke University [Durham, North Carolina] and--that year, so it was happening and, and I said, "Oh, I'd love to teach at Duke," and the Center for Documentary Studies invited me there, as well as the University of North Carolina Chapel Hill [University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina]. So I had these two opportunities, I was still--I was working at the Smithsonian [Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.], I was working on shows, and I had to make a decision; do I leave Washington or do I just commute?
Story_ID: 485713
Speaker 1: So I decided to try to keep my job and teach--travel two days a week to teach at North Carolina [University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina]; it was impossible. And I decided to leave the Smithsonian [Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.] and go to D.C.--I mean go to teach down in North Carolina, which just, just--that, that experience I had--I taught American studies and I taught documentary studies there at the, at the center [Center for Documentary Studies], and I had students that just helped me grow; just thinking about photography in different ways, and the students were just great students there and, and to, to teach on the Duke University [Durham, North Carolina] campus was just another kind of highlight of my life. And so I, I had that; I taught for a year, May turned around, the anniversary of my, my nephew's [Songha Thomas Willis] birthday, and I'm, I'm ready to relax and I'm, I just had accepted a job at, at New York University [New York, New York], I had, you know, apply--you know, I interviewed for New University [sic.] in, in April, and it was just great. I'm like, life--what--best thing happened, you know; I was just happy. And then I was diagnosed with breast cancer. I said--I got a call that said--it was--I had just finished teaching, they said--and I was gonna spend the day hanging out with a girlfriend, and I got a call and they said, "You," from the hospital, it said, "you, you ha- you need to come back for another review of your mammogram." And I said, "I just had it last week." And they said, "Oh, well, you need to come back." And I said, "Well, I have this to do, this to do," and they said, "Well, you should come here first." And I said, "Okay." And I'm like--not thinking about it, so I go to the dentist first, and then I go; I get there at nine o'clock at the George Washington University Hospital [Washington, D.C.]. So, I'm thinking about my day 'cause I had a play date that was just gonna be fantastic, you know, after commuting and running and, and so I'm reading the paper; I'm reading The New York Times with the arts thingy, and getting ready to move to New York [New York], and I'm having a lot of fun thinking about it. And there was a lady, a older lady, sitting in the same room after I had the second mammogram, and she was looking at me and like--and I didn't realize it at the time; and this was like the holding room, or the room that they tell you (laughter). And so the woman said (laughter) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You're in the room (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right. So the woman said to me--so, they came back and said, "We're gonna have to do a sonogram." So then it's like--I was shocked, and then the, the older lady said to me, "Bet you can't read anymore." And I said, "Wow." So I perceived that she probably thought I was insensitive to whatever she was going through because I really--I saw her but I didn't see her, you know; you're in the--you're just in a room, and I'm, I'm thinking about--relaxed year, and I can just get a chance to play today. And then I looked at her and I said, "Yeah." And then I said, "You're okay?" And then, then I just started talking to her because I didn't know what to say after that, you know; I said, "Bet you can't read anymore." And then they did another--they did a sonogram and then they said, "Well, we're gonna have to do a biopsy." And I said, "Well, do it now." She said, "Oh, we have to have your doctor's permission." I said, "Well, call upstairs, get the doctor (laughter)." I said, "I'm moving to New York in August." And I said, "I have a new job; I don't have time to have cancer," (laughter) you know. And then, I--then it hit (makes sounds). I just, just broke down, and I had the biopsy and they said, "Well, you need to call--contact your surgeon." Who has a surgeon? And--but what I loved about that hospital, that experience, is that the--there is a group of--I, I--it was like kind of--I was like in a girl power, girl culture, for a second. There were young doctors who understood my dream of, I'm back--I'm moving back to New York, I'm teaching at my dream school, New York University; this is something I always wanted to do. Boom. I'm gonna help this lady get through this. And so the, the radiologist and their two doctors, "You can call these two--these two surgeons, you know, man, woman, whichever one you want." So I called both; the first person who, who answered, who called back, was the, the woman doctor, and Dr. Shawnee [ph.] was fantastic. She said, "Well, I'm, I'm--come tomorrow," it was Friday, "come Monday, we'll make an appointment." So, we did this. She said, "Well," I said, "But I just accepted a job, I can't have cancer." And she said, "Well, just--let me just look at the schedule; I'm gonna change my vacation for you, and we'll have surgery, and then you'll start radiation. You may not need to do chemo [chemotherapy]." But, unfortunately, I had to do chemo. So we had that. I wasn't gonna tell anybody at NYU [New York University]; you know, I didn't wanna do--start my job and then have the illness. There's a, there's a sense of what happened with women with breast cancer; there's a sense of, you know, vulnerability and, and, you know, so then I called the dean and I told her, and she said, "Well, you know, you don't have to teach right away; you can make it easy," and I said, "No--teaching," you know. And then I told the chair of the department, "I'm teaching, you know, count me in, you know, I'm--you know, I'm still gonna be there."
Story_ID: 485714
Speaker 1: And then three weeks into chemo [chemotherapy], I lost my hair, and I had just finished this project in North Carolina in the beauty shop, and I was photographing all these different hairstyles and these women and, you know, and, and they were looking at me with, with, with my sister locks, you know, thinking, well, how are you gonna make us look, you know--you gonna do a before and after (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) With the ethnic hairstyle (laughter).
Speaker 1: With, with--yeah, with that kind of hair you have. And then I realized when I was going through chemo and--that--I didn't wear a wig and I didn't wear a hat, I didn't wear a scarf--that people were really uncomfortable with me, and they asked the people to, "Why don't you put her in the room in the back?" Because they didn't wanna be reminded. I didn't realize this--that, that my hair just, (makes sound) you know, would just--seeing a bald-head woman, no eyebrows, no eyelashes, that it just really upset them. So then, I started this project called Beauty Matters--that beauty, even in illness, you know, mattered to people. And so I started photographing myself bald, you know, looking miserable, going through chemo; and, you know, different people would come and sit with me. My husband at the time did, and my son [Hank Willis Thomas], my nieces, friends; just to sit with me for two hours or three hours, whatever, and--but I kept moving; it was, it was pretty miserable. And so I survived it. But then, I was thinking, what is going on in my life where I have these highs and lows, you know, with, with--you know, you start questioning everything that you're doing now, and it's like tip-toe now. And so I started--I came here, and 9/11 [September 11, 2001] happened the first day of my radiation, and I had to walk home from 70-something Street to down here. So, it was like exhausting, you know, for me to, you know, consider. So, I was like exhausted. And I had to go through all of my treatment; got through that and, and then continued working, and that's something that, that I realize that--who knows how long, you know? You--they give you five years if you, you do this, this, that and that, and so I just did my five years and, and still cancer-free. And so I'm still working and continuing my work and, and creating new projects (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Congratulations.
Speaker 1: --you know.
Story_ID: 485715
Speaker 1: One of the projects that I decided to teach was a, a class called Beauty Matters. And I wanted to teach it because I wanted to think about beauty within the culture of--within American culture in, in, in terms of internationally also. I wanted to look at beauty within art, beauty with advertising--because we are bombarded with images and, and, and who's desired. And that's something that I wanted to, to work with. And my students just took it a, a step further. I was invited to teach at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]; Skip Gates, Henry Louis Gates [HistoryMaker Henry Louis "Skip" Gates, Jr.], invited me to teach at Harvard, any class I wanted to teach, so I taught this combined class of Beauty Matters and the Body and the Lens--the Black Body and the Lens. And projects just developed and--
Speaker 2: How did your students take it a step further? I mean what did you have in mind, and then how did it sort of blossom?
Speaker 1: I took it as looking at photography in a way of asking questions about how black bodies are perceived in photography today, and the ramifications from the historical images. The students at Harvard decided to look at Buffie the Body [Buffie Carruth] on--of a video model, ask questions about her body, and asked her to think about what--how her body is perceived on the video and, and what she's saying about it, and how her body is commodified by (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Buffie the Body?
Speaker 1: Buffie the Body. Look at--
Speaker 2: Who's that?
Speaker 1: She's a video model. Look at it; when you see it, you'll see what I mean (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, one of my students did a paper about Buffie the Body; she contacted Buffie and interviewed her. Well-known in King magazine and a lot of the male magazines, known because of the large buttocks and extreme style, in terms of dress, with many of the video models. Then, some of them talked about color within African American communities--the, the complexity of, of skin color; some about hair, then--and then some of the guys in the class started thinking about what it means to--when you're studying at Harvard if you wear baggy pants and you're from a middle-class family; what happens, how you're perceived if you're wearing a doo rag or if you wear a suit and tie to class. And so, so the students--that's what I mean; they, they decided to create stories about hip-hop culture and expand the idea about hip-hop culture, which I was not thinking about, about what happens with, with, with beauty within, within hip-hop culture and who's desired, you know, who's desired within the video models; and so that's what happened in that class. And then this year, I taught the class, and I taught the class--it was a, it was a mixed--real combination of, of Asian American students, Latina students, white students, black students from Africa, from America, and from the islands--from West Indies; some of them were Caribbean. They, all of them, had different experiences about how to see the body--still in touch with me about their classes and, and what they wrote about, about cosmetic surgery, about shoes, about tattooing, and what, what--how beauty, how beauty affects them. And so, that's something that--as a teacher, I, I'm enjoying learning from the students in, in terms of the reversal aspect of how they are, you know, helping me see things that I missed in--and then--so there are marginal ways that we can grow, and then we expand in, in, in many ways, by looking at visual images. And the believability of some of the stereotype images of, of black memorabilia that people believe about black people, that they see that these are how black people are and lived and should be--that they're not, but people believe it. And so that's something--that's some of the questions that, that I'm asking within photography.
Story_ID: 485716
Speaker 1: I was asked to curate a show for the new African American museum on the Mall [National Museum of African American History and Culture] at the Smithsonian [Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.], and so I curated a show, and it's called 'Let your Motto Be Resistance' ['Let Your Motto Be Resistance: African American Portraits'], and it's looking at African American portraits from the National Portrait Gallery collection [Washington, D.C.]. And their collection of photographs are focused on famous and well-known people, and so the photographs are of significant people within--who contributed in, in sports, in, in history, in politics, and in music, and so their photographs are in the exhibition at the International Center of Photography [New York, New York].
Speaker 2: When did the National African American Museum arrive on the Mall [National Mall, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 1: It hasn't arrived yet; it's expected to arrive within the next ten to twelve years, but it was--[U.S.] Congress passed the bill, and that happened in this year, in 2007. Well, no, it happened in 2006. [HistoryMaker] Lonnie Bunch is the director of the new museum, and he is the person who asked me to curate a show that would just kind of give a visibility to the museum, and to think about ways of collecting and getting visitors to see ideas that the museum is considering in collection areas, as well as in education-building areas.
Story_ID: 485717
Speaker 1: I wanna ask a question about your photography. It seems like you generally use black and white--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, I'd like to know why that choice. And then, I saw some photographs of your shotgun houses?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Which I'd like you to talk about a little bit--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and they're in color.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Why did you choose color for those?
Speaker 2: I'm, I'm shooting both in black and white and color.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The beauty shop images, my mom's [Ruth Holman Willis] beauty shop Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]--the Philadelphia images that I'm making in the beauty shops are in black and white, and I love black and white; I love printing black and white. I love the nostalgia feeling of black and white; tones are just beautiful, and I wanted to photograph the women and men who are in the shops waiting for their wives, or waiting to get their haircuts, and so I think there is a moment that I like to share with that. And in the late '90s [1990s], I started photographing shotgun houses and--in color, and mainly because I found beauty in the, in the shotgun houses that I wouldn't find--I couldn't find in black and white. And the shotgun houses are historically images that I romanticize about--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --that people who lived in shotgun houses said to me, "You're romanticizing. There's no privacy, there's--you know--I don't know why you're photographing in here." They, they put me in my place, but they understood that I was interest- why I was interested i- in it. And then, this, this--the history of the shotgun houses--some of them were built for free blacks, some of them were built for working--for the, the working blacks that lived--migrant workers who lived on plantations or in farms in, in the back of the house, some of the houses in South Carolina were, were brick and not wood, which were known for the brick, but what I loved about them is memory, and thinking about--there is a, a project called Project Row Houses, that's in--Rick Lowe, that organized in Houston, Texas, and so that he has a row of, of a number of houses that artists can actually have shows in some of the places to create houses, or create installations. And I had a show there ['Fabricated Memories'], and I wanted to just kind of show the memory of the shotgun houses, and what it meant to have that--to live in that environment. And then I photographed in New Orleans [Louisiana], before Katrina [Hurricane Katrina], with two photographers, Keith Calhoun and Chandra McCormick. They introduced me to some of the shotgun houses in that, in that community; they knew I was interested and they drove me around the city, and I was documenting some of the houses there, and they also wanted me to work on a project with them, with Aaron Neville, on looking at Angola [Louisiana State Penitentiary, West Feliciana Parish], the experience of young men in Angola. Aaron Neville was concerned that so many young men were singing 'Angola Bound' as if it was an anthem, something to be proud of, and he wanted to get young men and women to think about prison life in a different way, and so he--they wanted me to work with him on a book project and photography project about Angola, and so I was photographing in New Orleans. I photographed Aaron Neville in his home with his wife [Joel Roux-Neville] prior to Katrina, and just interviewed him and we had a great exchange, and then Katrina happened three weeks later and, you know, his house was lost. Unfortunately, he recently lost his wife because they moved to Memphis [Tennessee] and she was ill at the time. The two photographers that I was working with, they lost everything; some of the photograph- some of the photography that they maintained were--just happened to be in some of the shows. I had curated a show called 'Saturday Night/Sunday Morning,' and that show is traveling, and some of their work is still in that show, so luckily, we had some of their work. So that year, the year of Katrina, was a difficult year for, for a number of people, mainly, who were losing not only their homes and their lives, but also collections, large collections of, of the history of, of New Orleans, and some of--that--some of my work was a lot about that, and so I have a number of photographs of, of New Orleans prior to Katrina. And then I went back six months later, after Katrina, and photographed there, at the time, some of the same houses. Tried to find--found a few, and photographed them.
Story_ID: 485718
Speaker 1: And, with the houses--I don't know if you did this with your New Orleans [Louisiana] pictures, but how did you come to write some small information about who lived in the homes?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Was that like a quilting kind of a project (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I wanted--the photographs--the ca- the South Carolina houses, houses in Orangeburg, South Carolina, were houses that I wanted to just kind of imagine who lived in there, and so I gave them names, and I wrote on the door--the door frame, because the door frames were--you could see straight through the houses. And I wrote the history of the shotgun houses on one, I was learning Photoshop, and wanted to figure out a way to, to make the photographs come alive, and so I wrote in the door frame the person who lived in the house, she cooked certain kinds of food, or she did hair on one day, or--so I, I, I wanted the houses to feel like cottage industries for women, so I just imagined their lives. I gave them all my aunts' names and my mom's name [Ruth Holman Willis] because they were like sisters within the homes. The same kinds of houses that I found in South Carolina in terms of color, they were orange and red and just brown, yellow. I found in Sou- in South Africa. I had visited in Johannesburg [South Africa] and I photographed there, and I felt that some of the houses were very similar in terms of making beauty within these difficult township homes, and the same kind of things would happen in some of the, the shotgun houses, and so I felt that they were really good, you know; it was telling stories in that way.
Story_ID: 485729
Speaker 1: So, how do you feel your work is perceived--the work, the work you've done in the past? And what do you think the future holds for [HistoryMaker] Deborah Willis?
Speaker 2: Hm. I think my work is really about reflecting on the histories--many histories. I, I, I use reflection a lot and as--we see it as a metaphor for photography, as, as, as a historical, but also as an emotional, sensitive experience of, of--a sensual experience for people who are thinking about the past. And, and I think the past is really significant for the future, as I teach young people. I'm really interested in young people understanding ramifications of what they're doing now, and why, why I think images are important. Some people don't know that there is a, a, a, a visual history that, that people are using today, to reference how they respect men and women, or how they perceive men and women and, and some people don't feel that they should have a responsibility. So I, I would just like to have that exchange of, of why--like, I'd love to--the, the young men who killed my nephew [Songha Thomas Willis]. I--first thing I said, "Who didn't love them?" You know? And that's something that I, I question every day. I think, also--my new book project, it's, it's entitled 'Posing Beauty' ['Posing Beauty: African American Images from the 1890s to the Present,' Deborah Willis], and what I want to think about is how people, such as photographers, thought about beauty--photographers across the board, across the spectrum, from the 1800s to now, from European photographers to white American photographers, to black American photographers, to African photographers, just to think about how do we think about photography and what stories we wanna talk about as we look at that lens to think that, you know, beauty, you know. I think beauty is important because when we don't, there is--you know, we see environmental hazards, we see very--we see very difficult things happening. So I--that--so that's one of the--my projects that I'm working on now, and the book is scheduled for 2009, and I'm in the midst of tons of research, you know, going through--there were beauty contests in the 1890s organized by the black press, and there were debates in The Crisis magazine of how do you define black beauty, and so the debate is still going on today. And so I think that this kind of arc that I have in, in my history of working with visual images is to question, you know, to question what we think we know about this history of, of working in photography, or living with visual images, and as I, as I think about that, we are all seduced by images; we're seduced by the commercialization of, of advertising, and my son is working on--my son Hank [Hank Willis Thomas] is working on a project called 'Branded,' and he is looking at images of--Nike [Nike, Inc.] images of how many people who wear Nike and that, that--he has a swoosh of the Nike on--branded on someone's head that he super-imposed, so he's looking at, at branded and unbranded images; he is kind of asking questions about images in that way, and so it's, it's really amazing to have a photographer, you know, the--to raise a, a, a young man who becomes a photographer, who said that he would never become a photographer. He said, "Mom, all your friends are broke," you know, and I'd say, "Well, they're all happy, you know; we're all like happy, and we're, we're loving what we're doing," and then to know that he is making art and surviving with his art, and asking the same questions. Like he's now doing work about gun violence, he's doing work about mourning, about mourning and what it means to mourn a, a black man's death; he's also, you know, looking at images of families and documenting, you know, a range of families and, and young people. So all of my work, I think, is, is about looking at the past and then, and creating this kind of major history of, of the visual images and--of visual images, and looking at visual culture and asking professors who I had in the past to, to re-think what they're teaching, to encourage professors now, to encourage teachers now to, to help other people think about--it's not just for, for black subjects, but also for subjects who are, who are white, who are Asian, who are Latina; just a--kind of increase the history--encourage people to think differently about images.
Story_ID: 485730
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my sister and I; my sister is Yvonne Willis [Yvonne Willis Brooks], and I'm seated on camera left, holding the black doll; my father made this photograph, 1955, Christmas, and also there is--in the living room in North Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay.
Speaker 1: --Put it on Myspace (laughter)--called Grandma Hands [ph.]; he is so funny. This is a photograph of my mother, Ruth Willis [Ruth Holman Willis], a photograph that was taken in 1942; it was sent to my father who also wrote on the photograph, "My Wife, Ruth Willis."
Speaker 2: This is a World War II [WWII] photograph of my father, Thomas Meredith Willis, made in 1942, in full gear.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Where was he stationed? Do you remember that?
Speaker 2: He was stationed in Germany, in Stuttgart [Germany].
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of my great uncle, Herbert Willis [ph.], his World War I [WWI] uniform. This is a studio portrait that was taken in Virginia where he lived.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Thank you.
Speaker 1: This is a photograph taken in the, '57 [1957]; this is a image outside of my grandmother's home with my cousins, and I'm on camera right, second--second in, standing next to my cousin DeWayne [ph.].
Speaker 2: This is a photograph of my son, Hank [Hank Willis Thomas], and my father, Thomas Willis, and it's also a photograph in the background of, of Hank--of my father exhibited at the 369th Armory [369th Regiment Armory, New York, New York] exhibit on World War II soldiers. This is an exhibition opening, about 1984.
Speaker 1: This is a group photograph. This is a photograph of my mother's sisters. On far camera left is my aunt--is Mary Smith [Mary Holman Smith], my mother's sister; my grandmother Lillian Holman [Lillian Foreman Holman]; then the next image is my mother, Ruth Willis, her sister Theresa [Theresa Holman Chambers], her sister Gloria [Gloria Holman], and her sister Eileen [Eileen Holman Hall].
Speaker 2: This is a quilt I made using my Aunt Cora's yo-yo quilt pattern, and it includes photographs, photo-linen images of television sets that I used from family photographs.
Speaker 1: This is a photograph in my office at the New York Public Library Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture [New York, New York], taken in 1989.
Speaker 2: This is a photograph with Jeanne--I'm with [HistoryMaker] Jeanne Moutoussamy-Ashe, photographer, in her apartment; it was taken about 1986. It's so funny, she just sent me the video of that day.
Speaker 1: This is a photograph at the Schomburg Center in the entry hall, taken in 1984, and it was an exhibit that I organized on Count Basie.
Speaker 2: This is a photograph in the park; this is a photograph--1969 at Neighborhood Youth Corps when I worked for Neighborhood Youth Corps.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Thank you.
Speaker 2: Group photograph with photographers from the exhibition I curated at the Studio Museum in Harlem [New York, New York]. From camera-left, I mean with--I don't know all the people, so I'll just say that within the photograph, there is--I'm standing between Moneta Sleet, Jr. and [HistoryMaker] Gordon Parks, and the photographer on the far right.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay. This is a photographer, photographer [HistoryMaker] Dawoud Bey, Bobby Sengstacke [HistoryMaker Robert Sengstacke], Kareem Simpson [ph.], and this is--I think his last name is Muhammad; I can't think of it--[HistoryMaker] Ozier Muhammad with his son [HistoryMaker Khalil Gibran Muhammad], Moneta Sleet, moi, Gordon Parks, and Albert Chung [ph.].
Speaker 1: This is a photograph taken in Atlanta, Georgia in 2006, and this is a opening reception for the exhibition, 'Saturday Night/Sunday Morning.'
Speaker 2: This is a photograph taken on--at Broadway in City Hall Park [New York, New York], and this is a photograph of me in 1969 with one of my fellow photography students at the Germain School of Photography [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Thank you.
Speaker 2: This is a photograph taken outside of the Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, and this was taken in 1987.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay. This is the first book I published, 'Black Photographers, 1840 to 1940: Bio-bibliography' ['Black Photographers, 1840-1940: An Illustrated Bio-Bibliography,' Deborah Willis].
Speaker 1: This is a photograph I made--I took in photography. I'm sorry, this is a photograph in a beauty shop in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], Mrs. Brown's [ph.] shop, taken in 1999.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is a book, 'Visual Journal: Harlem and D.C. in the Thirties and Forties' [ed. Deborah Willis and Jane Lusaka].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of--book jacket from 'Reflections in Black: A History of Black Photographers' ['Reflections in Black: A History of Black Photographers, 1840 to the Present,' Deborah Willis].
Story_ID: 485731
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of [HistoryMaker] Gordon Parks, taken--a photograph taken in his apartment by his nephew--by his grandson [sic.], David [David Parks].
Speaker 2: Oh, this photograph is a kiosk of--showing my son, Hank Willis Thomas' photographs; it has the brand--it's from the 'Branded' series, with the NBA [National Basketball Association] and the Nike [Nike, Inc.] sign.
Speaker 1: This is a book jacket from Van Der Zee, 'James Van Der Zee: Photographer' ['Van Der Zee: Photographer, 1886-1983,' Deborah Willis]; this was a exhibition catalog and publication.
Speaker 2: This is a photograph taken by Jamot- photographer Jamel Shabazz, taken in 2006 under the Brooklyn Bridge [New York, New York], and this is from my class, Beauty Matters. I'm seated in the center, first row--first row, center.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is a photograph of the shotgun hou- one of the shotgun houses from the Orangeburg [South Carolina] series.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is a photograph of the book jacket from the book, 'The Black Female Body' ['The Black Female Body: A Photographic History'], with Carla Williams, and my cousin and I--this--Bill Lathan [ph.] did that.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is a photograph--'Family History Memory' ['Family History Memory: Recording African American Life,' Deborah Willis] book jacket; this is the book--a collection of my photographs, as well as a collection of essays. The book jacket also includes photographs of myself and my cousin, from 1969.
Speaker 1: This is a poster for the 'Reflections in Black' exhibition ['Reflections in Black: A History of Black Photographers, 1840 to the Present'] when it traveled to the Detroit Institute of the Arts [Detroit Institute of Arts, Detroit, Michigan] from the Smithsonian [Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.], and the cover photograph has a Moneta Sleet [Moneta Sleet, Jr.] photograph of Mrs. Coretta Scott King, Robert Hagans' [sic. Bob Gomel] photograph of Muhammad Ali and Malcolm X, and Herbert Collins' photograph--yeah. Herbert Collins' photograph is Mrs., 'Mrs. Tell's Daughter' [sic. 'Mrs. Tell's Daughters'].
