Story_ID: 606703
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please spell your--state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is Carlton A. West [HistoryMaker Dr. Carlton A. West].  Carlton is spelled C-A-R-L-T-O-N, last name is West, W-E-S-T.
Speaker 1: All right and now what does the A stand for?
Speaker 2: Alfonso.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  You usually don't--.  Okay, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born December 12, 1943, in Montezuma, Georgia, USA.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now where is Montezuma located?
Speaker 2: Montezuma is located in the central part of the State of Georgia.  I guess the best way to tell you where Montezuma is is by referencing President Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.].  For those of you who remember President Carter, that President Carter is from Plains, Georgia.  Before pres- President Carter became president, Plains, Georgia was twenty miles from Montezuma.  After he became president, Montezuma became twenty miles from Plains.
Speaker 1: Okay, so there's a difference in proportion and--
Speaker 2: Oh, it had a different reference point (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) emphasis, yeah, right.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Plains--
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's right.
Speaker 2: --became famous.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm an orthopedic surgeon.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is July 18, 2008 [sic. July 17, 2008].
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are in the central offices of HistoryMakers in Chicago [Illinois].
Story_ID: 606704
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight, People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask of everyone.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: And they only require a short answer.  First question is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: I have a favorite snack food, and believe it or not, something very simple, hot dog with all the trimmings.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I favor green because it sort of represents life and the green plants.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Springtime.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I enjoy the southwest area of the United States for vacations.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I don't know if I have a favorite phrase or saying, but I probably--persons in the past who asked me that, I'd say, winners make things happen.  Losers let things happen.
Story_ID: 606705
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask you about your family history.  And I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Rufus West] side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But we'll start with your mother's side first.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name was Estella, E-S-T-E-L-L-A, Fleming, F-L-E-M-I-N-G, West, W-E-S-T [Estella Fleming West].
Speaker 1: And what was her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her date of birth was November 2nd, 1907.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Georgia also, in Houston County, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That sort of implies it--it's sort of in the country in--Houston is in the country part (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, in the rural area--
Speaker 1: Rural area, okay.
Speaker 2: --of Houston County, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now what do you know about your mother's side of the family.  I mean, is there, are there stories handed down about, you know, what they were doing, you know, in the 19th century or during Reconstruction or?
Speaker 2: Nothing that's particularly outstanding.  She grew up at a tough time in U.S. history, in midst of segregation and that compounded with the big Depression [Great Depression].  And so she came through a very hard time.  And I remember her once saying things were so difficult in Houston County as far as race relations were concerned that one of her cousins were able to by a car, and white people came together and made them not use their car during the week day because they didn't have a car.  And they could only drive their car during the, on a Sunday.  My mother's mother [Lessie Fleming] was initially, was a schoolteacher before she became a housewife.  And so, even back there, education was an important part of the family.
Speaker 1: I just want to go back to that one a minute.  The, the ca- they actually got together and told--is there a story about how, who delivered the message to your family that they couldn't drive the car?
Speaker 2: Well, it was just a vigilante of white people who came to their house, she told us, and said to them that if they couldn't have a car, then we, the, that her family should not drive their car except on Sundays.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now are there any stories--I want to get to your mother's story, but are there any stories about her ancestors on that side, there any stories about slavery, or Reconstruction, or, or how they came to Houston County, or were they always there as far as you know?
Speaker 2: I don't recall many other stories.  Early on, most of my mother's family migrated from Georgia, and so I didn't get to be very close to most of her sisters and brothers.  They were in other areas of the--and so I knew a lot more about my father's family than I do about my mother's family.
Story_ID: 606706
Speaker 1: Okay, but she said--your mother [Estella Fleming West], she grew up in tough times, and she had a chance to go to school, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she had a chance to go to school but could only go as far as the schools that were available.  And at that time, even high school, most of the blacks in that area had to go to boarding school.  There were only a few high schools around, and from my understanding, the closest high school would have been in Americus, Georgia, but the family couldn't afford to, to send the children, so she had a sixth grade edu- she was able to get a sixth grade education.  But in spite of that, she was very motivated, and for the most part, taught herself how to read, and later on, as we were growing up, became an avid reader.  And she is one among the few people of her era that I know were able to read the Bible from cover to cover more than once and really understood it.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Now did you know your grandparents on your mother's side?
Speaker 1: I knew my grandmother, but my grandfather had passed away before I was born.
Speaker 2: Do--can you give us their names?
Speaker 1: My grandmother was Lessie Brown Kendri- Lessie Brown Fleming Kendrick [Lessie Fleming].  She was married twice, first to a Fleming and then second time to a Kendrick [ph.].  And my grandfather was Tommie Fleming.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now they were born in the 19th century, and--okay.
Story_ID: 606707
Speaker 1: Now let me go to your father's side of the family.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father's full name was Rufus, R-U-F-U-S, West [Rufus West].
Speaker 1: All right, and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: He was born December 18, 1892.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where was he born?
Speaker 2: He was born in Macon County, rural Macon County, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side?
Speaker 2: I know a little more about the ancestors on my father's side.  My brother has done, did a little research on that side and, and was able to retrieve some information.  I can--he was able to trace back to my great-grandfather who was, whose name was Robert West [ph.].  And Robert West was actually a slave and, but who fortunately was freed.  And my brother was able to, to actually trace back to who the slave owner was.  And from my understanding, the slave owner's name was William West [ph.].  And so our name was a name given to us from that slave master.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  That's true in a lot of cases I would guess (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So your, your great-grandfather, Robert West, he was, he had been a slave.  So he was a slave before the slaves were free, you know, I guess.  You know, he was a slave, so he was born somewhere before 1865?
Speaker 2: I would imagine--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --it was in the early 1800s when he was born--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --because my father, who would have been his grandson, was born in 1892.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So are there any stories about slavery that are passed down in the family?
Speaker 2: Didn't know much about Robert.  We--he was called Pappy.  For some reason, slaves and, and even during the segregation era, sometimes the women were called Mammy, and, and, and the father was called Pappy to distinguish them from, from whites.  But my grandfather, who is Robert's son, John Clark West [John C. West], was really the, the one who pioneered and set our family aside, so to speak.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was able to acquire land, and became a, a farmer, and did it very successfully.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so he had his own farm.  And how, how, how many acres did he have?  Do you know?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he had his own farm.  He was able to acquire a large parcel of land, which was considered to be undesirable land and--with a lot of forest and trees.  And he cleared those trees out and made farmland, and as a result, was able to be a very independent farmer.  There was about, I believe, 224 acres of land, and of that 124 acres are still in our family.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, did you know John Clark West?  Did you ever meet him?
Speaker 2: No.  My grandfather passed away before I was born, so I never knew him but just heard a lot of good stories about him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 606708
Speaker 1: Did your father tell you stories about how he grew up?  Or, what did he tell you about growing up at all?
Speaker 2: Well, there were just two children born to my grandfather [John C. West], and that was my father, Rufus West, and his brother, Will West.  He told us that they were raised very independently.  The farm was self supporting and self-sufficient.  My grandfather built a large house when it was unheard of that blacks could build those types of homes.  And he had what was the equivalent of a, of a plantation.  There were a lot of other people who lived on that plantation who worked for my, for my grandfather.  And he was highly respected in the community.  We had a windmill and running water long before that was a very common thing.  He was able to acquire cars.  And he wanted his grandchildren--although he couldn't educate his own children, he wanted his grandchildren to be educated.  Somehow he had heard about Booker T. Washington and Tuskegee Institute [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama].  And it was his desire that he get some of his grandchildren into that school.  And so as a result, my--his oldest and first grandchild was educated by my grandfather at Tuskegee.
Speaker 1: Okay, and who, who was that grandchild?
Speaker 2: That grandchild was Robert West--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --who is my first cousin.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now were you--is this in the '40s [1940s] as well?  Or is it in the ear- the '30s [1930s] or '40s [1940s]?
Speaker 2: I--more like about in the th-
Speaker 1: Late '30s [1930s]?
Speaker 2: --late '20s [1920s], early '30s [1930s].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, late '20s [1920s] or earl- late '20s [1920s], more like late '20s [1920s].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, when he went to Tuskegee.
Speaker 1: All right, now was he the first member of your family that you know of that attended college?
Speaker 2: Yes, he was the first that I knew of.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 606709
Speaker 1: Did your father [Rufus West] go to college?
Speaker 2: No, my father never went to college, neither did his, his, his brother [Will West].  But the stories that I've heard, my father was a very bright student and went as far as the local schools allowed.  And the local schools ended at grade six.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So really to, to be able to get a high school education you had to send your child to boarding school--
Speaker 2: That is correct.
Speaker 1: --a place like--
Speaker 2: And from my understanding, the er- the closest boarding school would have been in Americus, Georgia, which is about fifteen or sixteen miles from Montezuma [Georgia].  And in, in, in the year 2008 we don't think much of fifteen miles as being anything.  But when you're going through a wilderness and dirt roads and paths to try to get to Americus, that's a, a day's journey.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.  So, yeah, so, so the school in Americus is similar to Piney Woods [Piney Woods Country Life School, Piney Woods, Mississippi] or maybe Tuskegee High School [Tuskegee, Alabama] or some of the other boarding school situations that people could--?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It, it really wasn't that kind of, of boarding school where you had dormitories.  Those were more sophisticated boarding schools that you're talking about.  But the boarding schools in that ar- the high schools in that area didn't have boarding facilities.  You would have to arrange for your child to live in someone else's home--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --from the understanding that I have.
Speaker 1: Okay, I presumed it would be part of the school, you know, but, but you're saying that you'd have to arrange a boarding situation with a family--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --or somebody that lived in that area to be--
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: --able to take advantage of that school.
Speaker 2: To take advantage of the schooling there, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, that's, yeah.  But all the while, black people are still paying taxes to the State of Georgia, right?  And have a school that takes (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But you couldn't get--
Speaker 1: --them to six grade.
Speaker 2: --the benefit of the taxes, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, now what did your father--now he went to sixth grade, but what did he do for a career?  Was he--did he continue farming?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  After my grandfather [John C. West] passed, passed away, then my father and his brother managed the farm and continued to farm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, well he had some advantage 'cause he didn't have to buy the land 'cause it was already there.
Speaker 2: That's correct.  He, yeah, he had inherited that.
Story_ID: 606710
Speaker 1: Now is there a story about how your mother [Estella Fleming West] and father [Rufus West] met that they've told you?
Speaker 2: I don't know if there's a real story behind it.  My father had been previously married, and unfortunately his first wife had passed away.  And with his first marriage there were three children, and she had passed away while they, they were relatively young.  And so he was looking for someone as a wife, and to be a mother for his children as well.  And from my understanding somebody told him that there was a family down in Houston County [Georgia] or Dooly County [Georgia] that was a nice looking, progressive young lady, and he should go down there and see her.  And from what I understand, he did make a trip down there.  And my mother said that she was totally surprised that the Wests, as being landowners were considered, in a relative sense, a bit well, more well off than others, and that she was busy under the house--sweeping from under the house when he popped up.  And, but that was the beginning of, of their relationship and a lifelong relationship. Okay.  But he was, he was older than her, I guess by about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, he was older than my mother by--
Speaker 2: --about fifteen years, yeah, fifteen?
Speaker 1: It should be sixteen years.
Speaker 2: Sixteen, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: All right, all right, but that was not unusual in those days, and it's not unusual now necessarily.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But, okay.  So he was pretty much established in--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, he was pretty much established.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And how old was your mother when they got married?
Speaker 1: You know, I am not certain, but I believe she was about twenty or twenty-one at the most.  And she--they got married, and she, you know, took over the management of the household.
Story_ID: 606711
Speaker 1: So he already had some children.  I mean--
Speaker 2: He had three children (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) you said three, three already, okay.
Speaker 2: --my oldest sister and my two oldest brothers.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And now, so are, do you come next in the order?
Speaker 2: No.  I'm number seven out of nine.  And it, it was a good match because my mother [Estella Fleming West] was very adamant about education also.  There was a, there's a funny story that there was one time when she actually challenged and confronted my father [Rufus West].  One of the--my older brothers was--my father wanted to keep him out to plow the farm [in Flint River Farms, Macon County, Georgia].  And she intervened and said that under no circumstances would he stay out of school, that if it was necessary, she would plow the mule, and he would go to school.  And so the result is that he went on to school.  He later became a teacher himself and actually retired from the board of education here in Chicago [Chicago Board of Education].
Speaker 1: Okay, so she was staunchly in favor of education.
Speaker 2: Very much so.
Speaker 1: Willing to work herself to make sure her--
Speaker 2: That they went to school.  And pretty much they were sort of, the older brothers and sisters were the role models for the rest of us and really were the ones who insisted that we also follow their footsteps and get an education as well.  My older sister was able to go to college and later got a master's degree from Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama].  The third brother of my, the, the third child, rather, of my father's first marriage also finished high school, went to the [U.S.] Army, and then became a businessman here in Chicago [Illinois].
Story_ID: 606712
Speaker 1: When you, I guess, think about the personalities of your parents, their talents, their gifts, their dispositions, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Well, probably a little of both, some of both.  My mother [Estella Fleming West] was a very industrious woman.  And she was a great manager of the household.  She--house stayed immaculately clean.  She washed; she sewed; she made quilts; she canned vegetables during the summer, fruit, such as peaches during the summer.  Later on when we got a freezer, she would freeze vegetables.  And we never really were ever hungry or ever suffered or thought about food and same thing about clothing.  And the truth of the matter is, even though we were dirt farmers, I didn't realize that we were considered poor by other people's standards until I was a grown man.  I thought we were well off.  My father [Rufus West] was a great manager of money.  The money that we made from the farm [in Flint River Farms, Macon County, Georgia] he had a unique way of managing the household bills in his own way.  And I really didn't understand it until I was a grown man.  We used to do a lot of sharecropping, such as raising okra, raising cucumbers, and other things.  And as we we'll take it to market, whenever you take any of that to market, they didn't pay you in cash.  They paid him in a, a check, and so he would save those checks.  And he had a little strong box.  He would have his check marked--a bunch of checks marked September, another bunch of checks marked October, another bunch of checks marked December, all the way into the next year.  And what it was, he wouldn't cash those checks until those months rolled around.  And so that way he would make sure that he had money to pay for utilities and other things until we were able to have harvest from the crops the next year.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, so, he wasn't afraid that the account that the check was drawn on would dry up before he cashed it, or?
Speaker 2: Well, no, I guess not, I guess not.  In a small community everybody knows each other, and you know the banker and everybody else.  And so everybody pretty much knew what his habits were and what other people's habits were.  And to my knowledge, he never had any problem cashing the checks, you know, as far as the checks getting stale.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  It seems like a risk during Depression [Great Depression] days, but I, I don't know.  But that's--
Speaker 2: Well--(laughter) I guess so.
Speaker 1: He--
Speaker 2: But--
Speaker 1: --he knew what he was doing apparently though, so.
Speaker 2: He knew what he was doing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, and on the other hand, like I said, it didn't take a lot of money to maintain us because we raised pretty much everything that we needed on the farm.  We raised vegetables; we had cows for milk; we had pigs; we had chickens; other times we'd go hunting and get wild game.  And so, you know, everybody made it at that time on, on, on, on, on tight budgets.
Story_ID: 606713
Speaker 1: Dr. West [HistoryMaker Dr. Carlton A. West], do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I can remember a lot of things about my early childhood.  I, we started working very early and I, as far as--I considered myself almost independent financially since we were about fourteen.
Speaker 1: Okay, I was, I was trying to get an earliest, early--the first memory of your family, you know, or is there an early-early first memory of your family that you remember when you were, I guess, what, two or three years old?
Speaker 2: Nothing that, that stands out, nothing that, nothing particularly that stands out.  I just remember other little incidents that took place during my childhood.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, we'll get to those.  I just wanted to know if there was an earliest one.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you grew up in a household with, you had a lot of older brothers and sisters, I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes, we did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What were--now, you're out in the country, right, at, in Montezuma?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We're about, we're out about seven miles east of Montezuma, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we were in the area that was called the Flint River Farms community [Macon County, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that was an area where the government [U.S. Department of Agriculture] had done somewhat of an experiment.  They had come through and bought up a lot of the plantations and then parceled them into small farms and gave families everything that they needed to run that farm and thirty years to pay for it, the horse, a house barn, the, the well, everything.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: And then they also built a school.
Speaker 1: Now, now this is--I don't want to interrupt you, but this, this is a different situation for your father [Rufus West], right, 'cause he had inherited land.  So he moved from the land he inherited to this situation?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Well, what was the--
Speaker 2: This was the surrounding area.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Earlier on, the surrounding area was large plantations that were owned by whites.  And there were sharecroppers, blacks, for the most part, sharecroppers.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But after they bought up the plantations, it allowed a lot of the blacks in that area to become independent.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now, but is this, is this how his grandfather [Robert West (ph.)] got the land, or is that--
Speaker 2: No, no, it's not.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This came--
Speaker 1: I'm getting them mixed up.
Speaker 2: --many years afterwards.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's, that's what I thought.
Speaker 2: Many years after.
Speaker 1: So, so he, did he, he wasn't on his origi- the, the family's original land then when he moved to Montezuma or outside of Montezuma.  Is that what you're saying?
Speaker 2: No, nobody every moved.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the land he was originally on is the land we're talking about, or?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I was just mentioning--you asked me some early childhood memories, and I was simply mentioning what went on in the surrounding area.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  I was, I was, I was trying figure out what was going on.  Yeah, okay, so it's not, didn't have anything to do with his land, but that was--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --the rest, the rest of the area.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It sounds like something they, they promised to do during Reconstruction--
Speaker 2: I guess it was--
Speaker 1: --that the government promised, you know?
Speaker 2: Right, it was something similar to that.
Speaker 1: Breaking up those plantations and giving black people a share.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: But they didn't do it then, and, but they started doing it in the, when you were coming up.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They started doing--and they also built a school [Flint River Farms School, Macon County, Georgia], and so we were very proud of that, built a high school that was very close to our house.  And so we had a high school that was out there in the farm, farming community.
Speaker 1: Now, do you get the sense that that was a federal initiative or something that the State of Georgia did?
Speaker 2: Oh, definitely the federal.  The State of Georgia would never have done anything for blacks.
Speaker 1: So this is Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] administration--
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: --policy?
Speaker 2: That exactly--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay.
Story_ID: 606714
Speaker 1: You said your family had a fairly large house, or your, your father [Rufus West] had in, inherited a fairly large house from his dad [John C. West] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.  Right.
Speaker 1: By comparison.  Give us some exam- how many rooms did it have?
Speaker 2: It was a real tall house with a lot of dead space.  And it was one, two, three, four, six rooms with a big hallway in the center of it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was a, the style was called the W house [ph.], which was a common style of houses built in that area around that time.
Speaker 1: A W house, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  I know a lot of--the average person in those days, probably would have had that two room shotgun house, they call it, with the--from, what I--
Speaker 2: That was the common house around the area--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --was the two room shotgun house.
Speaker 1: But they had a W house, okay.
Story_ID: 606715
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sound and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Nature, the smell of chickens, the, of the flowers, the freshly tilled turned soil in the spring of the year, the early crops, the smell of fertilizer and dusting of the crops, the pleasant smell of fresh vegetables and things being prepared in the kitchen.  Those were some of the good experiences that we had.  Food was plentiful.  I remem- watermelons, we had watermelons galore, and to the point where we never ate the whole watermelon, just bust the watermelon and eat the heart, the center part of the watermelon and throw the rest away or give it to our hogs.  I also remember how pleasant Sundays would be.  Sundays was always a day of relaxation at the house or going to church [New Hope Baptist Church, Montezuma, Georgia].  My mother [Estella Fleming West] would always cook a Sunday dinner, which was distinctly different from our everyday dinner.  And she would dress up the table with a tablecloth, and, and we'd have our formal sit down dinner.  I remember an incident that I relate to.  We were sitting on the front porch, which is what we'd always do in the evenings on Sundays.  And there was a white man who had a farm next to us.  And so he drove up in the yard and addressed my father as Rufus [Rufus West].  And we had no idea what he had come there for.  He said, "I just heard from the sheriff that somebody broke away from the chain gang, and they think he might be coming this way."  And my father said, "Oh, okay, Mr. Tate [ph.]."  And he said, "You know what to do if you see him, you know, you notify the sheriff."  And so, "Okay, Mr. Tate," and so Mr. Tate drove away.  And then my father told us, say, "If he comes through here, I'm going to give him something to eat, and give some clothes, and tell him to keep hocking 'cause chances are, they got him in there for something he didn't do in the first place," (laughter).  And we thought that was horrible that Dad would aid a criminal like that.  But it was only later on that I understood, you know, where my father was coming from, because in his lifetime he had seen a lot of that, of people being persecuted for things that they did not do.
Story_ID: 606716
Speaker 1: Did your parents [Estella Fleming West and Rufus West] or your [paternal] grandfather [John C. West] give you rules for conduct, or did you have to learn rules for conduct for dealing with white people in those days?
Speaker 2: Never sat down formerly.  It was just sort of engrained in you.  And I remember my grandmother [Lessie Fleming] on my mother's side, used to say, "Well, this is just the way it is."  And she would often say that, "This is just the way it is."  And so somehow or the other we thought that when I was growing up that this is the way God had planned it.  And just as--and that this is the way the world is supposed to be, and, and so we have to respect these rules because this is handed down from God, so to speak.  Until I got a little older and began to question, you know, why we have to walk to school, and they have a bus that goes to school; why do we have to use secondhand books at our school, and they get all of the new books; why they had hot lunches at their school, and, and we had to bring, you know, sandwiches to our school.  And, and then, you know, that, as you got older, you began to, begin--rather than accept things, begin to think for yourself and, and wonder, you know, why is it this way and see- and begin to try to seek some, some answers to those things.
Story_ID: 606717
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest memory of school?
Speaker 2: Yes, I do.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember the first day going to school as a kid.  And just like kids are now, you know, if you got older brothers and sisters in school, and they go to school every morning and leave you home, you're just anxious, anxious, anxious to go to school.  And so I remember entering school in 1950, and--
Speaker 1: Now, what was the name of your school?
Speaker 2: Flint River Farms School [Macon County, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Flint--
Speaker 2: And I went to school--
Speaker 1: --River Farms.
Speaker 2: --for one month before I was asked to go home, and that just broke my heart.  And it's things like that you--stand out, and you never forget them.  And the reason was that I was born December 12, and the cutoff date was December 1st for first grade students.  And so the first grade teacher after one month told me I couldn't come back to school until the next year.  And so I had to wait it out and then start school the next year in 1951.
Speaker 1: Now did you learn how to read at home before you went to school, or was it--or did you--?
Speaker 2: I don't think I could read at home.  But my older brothers and sisters had books around, and so, we'd tried to imitate them.  But like older kids are today, and teenagers, they didn't really want to spend a lot of time with (laughter), with us, the young ones, teaching us about it.  But we would try to imitate everything that they did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so we were eager to go to school to be able to read like my older brothers and sisters read.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you wanted to go to school bad.  And so when--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --when you went, you went to school in '51 [1951], did you like it, and were you successful?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I went to school in 1951 and, and loved it.  And I made good--decent grades, but never was a time when I did not want to go to school or none of us that I can remember who would beg not to go to school.  Everybody enjoyed going to school.
Speaker 1: Now, now could you attend a regular school calendar year?  'Cause I've heard in some rural areas they only let the children go to school during the months when there wasn't any heavy agricultural work.
Speaker 2: Right.  Well, in our area, that didn't happen, because after--I told you the Flint River Farms project [Macon County, Georgia] took place.  Most of the people in that surrounding area had their own farms.  And some of the kids would miss a day here and there, but it wasn't like it was when most of the farmers were sharecroppers, where the, the boss or the owner of the farm would make them keep their children out to gather crops and you know, for manpower on the farms.  So we came through--that did go on, but we were lucky and fortunate that at Flint River that didn't happen too often.
Story_ID: 606718
Speaker 1: Do you remember your first grade teacher?
Speaker 2: I do, very much so, Ms. Haugabook [Victoria Haugabook].  And--
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?  Now wait a minute.  You got us on that one.
Speaker 2: H-A-U-G-A-B-O-O-K.
Speaker 1: Haugabook.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And that's a--I've heard that name before.  It's, yeah, it's, it's an odd to name, but I have heard it before.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So was, was she a black teacher, or--
Speaker 2: She was black.  All of our--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --teachers were black--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --at that time.  You know, there was--and this was strict, during the era of strict segregation in the South, in the early '50s [1950s].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But she was a very avid, high energy teacher to deal with about fifty of us in her class (laughter), 'cause there was only one teacher for each grade level.  And, but in spite of that, she eagerly, eagerly taught us.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that is a pretty big school then if she had fifty first graders--
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: --right, you're saying?  And then--
Speaker 2: But I would--I'd say maybe a little less than that, maybe forty, maybe about forty.
Speaker 1: That's a pretty good size--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know.  That's a, that's about as many as most--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --city schools have in them--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: --or more.
Speaker 2: And, but as the years went up, it became less and less and people dropping out.  And so, it was, there were twelve grades at the school, and I would think the average senior class would have been about twenty or twenty-five.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But, now did you have a proper school building?  The government built, built a new school, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the government built a school.  It was a unique little school because it was actually a campus.  There were about four or five buildings that comprised the campus.  There was the main school building.  There was an auditorium.  There was the principal's house.  Housing was provided for the principal, but during the time that I was there the principal never stayed there.  But I understand when the school was first built, the principal stayed on the premises.  And then we had another building that was called the clinic where the county nurse would come and do things, vaccinations, exams, and that kind of thing once a week.  And then we had another building which functioned as a lunchroom in the early years.  But by the time I was a student there the lunchroom was not functioning anymore.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, the school would take you all the way through high school, right?  If you--
Speaker 2: That particular school, at that time, took you all the way through high school.  So I had older brothers and sisters who finished Flint River [Flint River Farms School, Macon County, Georgia], and then went on to college.  When I got to eighth grade, there was a consolidation of all of the high schools in the county to one high school in Montezuma [Georgia].  And so the school was then reduced to--to an elementary school.  And so at the end of my eighth grade year, I left Flint River and went to Douglass High School [D.F. Douglass High School] for, for high school, starting in the ninth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay, but that's, that's in another--was that close by?  I mean--
Speaker 2: Well, that's in, in the, in the town--
Speaker 1: In the same, same town (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) of Montezuma.
Speaker 1: Okay, of Montezuma.
Speaker 2: Flint River resided in the rural area--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --of Montezuma.
Speaker 1: So it's about seven miles away or something?
Speaker 2: About seven miles, right.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 606719
Speaker 1: Now did you have any other favorite teachers in elementary school before we--?  Was there anybody that really (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I don't know if I had any favorite teachers.  I got along with all of the teachers.
Speaker 1: But they're pretty--you think they're pretty good teachers?
Speaker 2: They were excellent teachers.  They were absolutely excellent teachers.  They really took what they were doing very seriously and, and went beyond, beyond the call with many of the projects and things that they involved us in.  At Flint River [Flint River Farms School, Macon County, Georgia], we were the first school, black or white, in the county [Macon County, Georgia] to have a band.  And that was beyond the call of duty for one of the teachers who happened to know music and who happened to have had some experience in being a band director.  And so he encouraged parents to buy instruments.  They had fundraising events to buy instruments that were owned by the school that students would play and then other instruments that families bought for their children.  And so we had the first band of any school.  There were--even the white schools did not have a band.  Another teacher, Ms. Felton [Mercedes Felton] went beyond the call to teach typing.  And we had no typewriters.  She supplied her own typewriters that she had and taught students the basics of typing.  And even the white schools didn't have that.  In the home economics department and the agricultural department, that was a husband and wife team, Mr. and Mrs. Ladd.  They went far beyond what was required of them and had adult class night once, one night every week.  They invited parents to come in for classes.  The women would go with Mrs. Ladd [Pauline Ladd], and the men would go with Mr. Ladd [Henry James Ladd, Sr.].  Mr. Ladd would give them instructions on how to rotate crops on your farm, how to select fertilizer for different plants or vegetables that you were growing and things like that.  And in the home economics department, she would teach the ladies, you know, how to budget for their house, to shop for their house, how to cook certain dishes and by recipe, 'cause most of us--a lot of people, older parents, were illiterate.  But she taught them how to read recipes.  She taught them how to take patterns and take cloth and make clothes.  My mother [Estella Fleming West] learned a lot from that class night.  Every Tuesday night they would have class night.  And this was something that was not required by the board of education.  This was something that Mr. and Mrs. Ladd, the two teachers, wanted to do for the community.
Story_ID: 606720
Speaker 1: Was there anything that happened I guess in grade school [Flint River Farms School, Macon County, Georgia] that would--that piqued your interest about medicine at all?
Speaker 2: Not really, because if you haven't experienced anything, you never saw anything, then sometimes you can't have a vision for that.  And so I'd never seen a black doctor.  We had never done any animal dissections or anything of that sort.  The only experience that I'd had with a doctor was going into the doctor's office, and sometimes that wasn't always a pleasant experience because it was a segregated situation.  We'd have to go in the back side and sit there half a day sometimes waiting and 'cause blacks would get waited on last, when they happened to have a slot.  And so that wasn't anything you aspired for because you just assumed that those slots were reserved for whites.  That's the extent of your experience.  And so it was much later on that my horizon had broadened, that I could think that being able to go into medicine was a possibility.  But, no, it wasn't.  The role models at that time, at that level, were people who I perceived as successful black people, and those were the, some of the farmers who owned their farms and who did well on their farms, teachers, my older brothers and some of my older cousins who had finished college and were teachers and you know, and, and, and, and seemed to have to been able to live a better life than most other people, preachers.  Those were things that one saw that you felt were possible for you (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you have a funeral director?
Speaker 2: Yeah, a funeral, funeral director also, because my cousin wa- the one that went to Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] that I mentioned, the oldest grandchild, Robert [Robert West], he had come back and, and he had opened the funeral home.  So we had a funeral home that was called West Mortuary [West's Mortuary, Inc., Americus, Georgia], which is still in existence.
Story_ID: 606721
Speaker 1: Tell me about your earliest experience with religion.
Speaker 2: The earliest experience with religion was at our church, New Hope Baptist Church [Montezuma, Georgia].  My entire family was very religious oriented and was faithful members of the New Hope Baptist Church.  The land on which that church sat was given to the church by my [paternal] grandfather [John C. West].  He--at the very end of his property, he cut off about two acres of the--maybe a little bit more than that, to give and to start the church.  And it was started with what they called a bush arbor.  They just had bushes over a top to keep, you know, the sun off, and worshipped under that, and later on was able to build a church.  And I attended that church during my childhood.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, was church a major part of growing up?  I mean, did you have to--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --go there a lot?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  My mother [Estella Fleming West] insisted that we not only go to church, we had to go to Sunday school every Sunday without ever missing.  And so every Sunday morning we went to Sunday school.  And our church was a once a month service church, and that was the first Sunday of the, of the month.  I joined the church very early, about age six or seven.  And the reason I joined early was because one of my peers, my best friend, without telling me and, and with a total surprise during revival, joined the church.  And I guess I couldn't stand it, I couldn't (laughter)--.  And so I insisted the next day, next revival, I had to catch up; I had to join the church too.  And so I joined the church at a early age--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --seven.
Story_ID: 606722
Speaker 1: Okay so would you say you got most of your moral training from church [New Hope Baptist Church, Montezuma, Georgia], or did you get it from home, or?
Speaker 2: I think a combination, but more probably from home, because at church, you really didn't--as a child, didn't understand what was really going on.  I mean, he would preach, and people would sing, and we would just sometimes be bored to death and fall asleep and that kind of thing, so.  But I think the ritual of going to church and having to dress up on those days to go to church was very important in our, in forming, you know, formative years of, of my life and forming the spiritual part of my soul.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now were you invested in responsibilities as a youth in church?  They have organizations that you could take leadership in or at times when you could stand up before the congregate--congregation and speak or something?
Speaker 2: No.  When I came along there wasn't much that they allowed the children to do in church.  My mother [Estella Fleming West] bef- early on was in charge of the junior usher board.  But that was comprised mostly of, of girls on the junior usher board.  We were, I guess, in Sunday school because that met every Sunday.  We were probably more involved in the Sunday school activities than in the formal church activities.  We would have our Sunday school programs, especially our Easter program, where all of us would participate with our speeches and, and that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, that's pretty much what--did they write your speeches for you, or did you have to write them yourself, or?
Speaker 2: Somebody had to write them for us.  We were just youngsters, and they would--we, we were able to select our speech from the ones that they would give us.  And we'd pass them down, and the next year the people behind us would use those same speeches.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 606723
Speaker 1: Who were your friends in, in grade school?  I mean when, when you were thirteen, who, who were your best friends?
Speaker 2: Well, pretty much everybody in my class [at Flint River Farms School, Macon County, Georgia].  I got along very well with everybody.  And it was rare, rare that we ever had any fights like kids have now.  And I had one kid I--is, is, still is my, a good friend, Stanley Brown [ph.].  We were classmates and cousins.  And, and he was the one who joined the church [New Hope Baptist Church, Montezuma, Georgia] ahead of me and making me want to catch up with him.  And then there's another cousin, Julius Byrom [ph.].  That was my cousin.  We were pretty close and enjoyed playing together growing up.  Things were a little bit different growing up on the farm [Flint River Farms, Macon County, Georgia] because you were--it was no house close to yours.  You know, you was sitting on 124 acres, and it was a, a distance to get to somebody else's house.  And on the farm everybody worked, children as well.  And so it wasn't a lot of playtime, except on, on Sundays maybe.  By the time you were twelve or thirteen, you had assigned chores to do in the evenings, such as feeding the hogs, feeding chickens, or something you were assigned to do.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so it was plenty to do in--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's plenty to do--
Speaker 1: Did you have a--
Speaker 2: --on the farm.
Speaker 1: Did you have radio out there?  Did you have a radio out there?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, we had, we had a radio.  I--and that, that's sort of intriguing.  There are so many things now that people take for granted, that I remember when we had our first experience with all of those things, and those were major milestones, so to speak, in our lives.  I can remember when our house was wired for electric the first time.  And so we put aside the kerosene lights, and we had lights, and we had electric.
Speaker 1: Were, were people in the family afraid of it?  'Cause I've, I've heard old people talk--older people talk about that in--
Speaker 2: No, no, well, I'll tell you something that--but no, they weren't afraid of the electric.  But then later on I remember when we got our first telephone.  And we were so proud of our phone, we'll sit there looking at the phone hoping somebody would call, hoping somebody would call.  And I remember--we had the radios all along.  I remember when we got our first television set.  And, and I remember there was a man who was in the, in the neighborhood who wouldn't stay in the room when there were cowboy pictures on.  And when they'd start shooting he'd leave.  He'll say, "Those bullets got no respect to person."  They got (laughter)--.  And so that was funny.  But, and all of those were, were, were major events in our life, things that people take for granted now.
Story_ID: 606724
Speaker 1: Well, you went to Douglass High School [D.F. Douglass High School, Montezuma, Georgia], right?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Now it wasn't named for Frederick Douglass, right?
Speaker 2: No, it was named for a local educator who was one of the pioneering black educators in Montezuma [Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Professor Dennis Fulton Douglass.
Speaker 1: Okay, Dennis Fulton Douglass, okay.  Now, what was high school like?  Were there a lot of new students from other parts of the area that were there?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was, it broadened us a bit, because the high school was a consolidated school.  And the high s- it, it was one high school for the entire county, and so we had students from all of the little towns within Macon County [Georgia] coming to the same high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you have a favorite course of study in high school?
Speaker 2: Not really.  It was a brand new high school.  And I entered in the ninth grade, and so we were the very first ninth grade class to come into that school.  The school was spick span, and we were so proud of the school.  We kept it clean.  Students participated in maintaining the school.  Things were done in a very, very orderly manner, going from one class to the other.  And my class was the first ninth grade class to--and the first class that would have gone four years through Douglass High School.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, now it's just in the--in the area right, in that, in that county?  Or (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I didn't--
Speaker 1: That's just for that county, right?
Speaker 2: It was the, yeah, that school served only residents of Macon County.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it was the first one in the county to, to take the black students through high school then?
Speaker 2: No.  There was other high schools in the county.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: There was Flint River High School [Flint River Farms High School], as I mentioned, the school that was out on the farms where we were [Flint River Farms, Macon County, Georgia].  There was a high school in Marshallville, Georgia, and there was a high school already in Montezuma--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --that was called Macon County Training School.  And so it was a consolidation of those three high schools to form Douglass High School.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 606725
Speaker 1: Did you manifest any interest in medicine in high school [D.F. Douglass High School, Montezuma, Georgia]?  Were you thinking about it then?
Speaker 2: No.  I was just thinking, more or less having the same peers, people that I had had contact or read about or experience that I perceived as possibilities for myself.  I always had a vision that I was headed some place and that I was headed some place other than the farm [Flint River Farms, Macon County, Georgia].  That was pretty much instilled in us from my mother [Estella Fleming West] and my father [Rufus West] in the beginning that you were somebody and you were headed somewhere worthwhile, and you would have a career beyond the farm, but didn't know exactly what it was.  And so, it was just a matter--my, my focus then was just to finish high school and then enter in a college.  My mother had already started preparing us for college.  Even in elementary school she had taken all of us, all the younger children, to the bank and had us to open accounts and started saving our little summer earnings in the bank in preparation for going to college.  And I mean, even by the time you're in twelfth grade, it wasn't a lot of money that you'll save, but I think it was more a psychological thing, that it wasn't any if, and, buts about it, that you're supposed to be headed for college.  And so I hadn't, at that point, decided on a specific career.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I wanted to see, you know, what--to get a little taste of the different disciplines and, and see.  But at that point, teaching I think was where I thought I was headed.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 606726
Speaker 1: Now did you play sports in high school [D.F. Douglass High School, Montezuma, Georgia]?  You're pretty tall, and I'm thinking in those days that somebody would've tried to get you out there (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) You know, out there on the farm [Flint River Farms, Macon County, Georgia] we--it was pretty early.  We didn't do a lot, and no, I didn't, yeah, just played some for fun but never played any on a formal team.
Speaker 1: Did, did, did you, did they have a team, football and basketball teams in high school?
Speaker 2: No, we did not have football.  All we had was a effort at trying to have a basketball team.  But even that was sort of fragmented because you had to do the practice during the school session because everybody had to go long distances after school back to their homes.  And nobody was gonna make that long distance back to practice that evening.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so were you involved in any other activities in high school?  Did you, did they have like a National Honor Society or anything like that, or did you--
Speaker 2: No, we, we didn't have--
Speaker 1: Were your grades--
Speaker 2: --the National Honor Society.  It was pretty routine education in high school, nothing that particularly stood out.
Speaker 1: Were you popular in high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was, yeah, I was a popular student.  Everybody knew me, respected me.  I participated in, you know, the, the different activities that came along.  As a matter of fact, to tell you the truth, I don't think we even when the--looking back, the first couple of years we didn't even have a basketball team because we didn't have a gymnasium.  We didn't have a gymnasium, but I, I participated in the drama club.  And, and, and that was probably the only thing 'cause we didn't have a yearbook or other things like that.  I participated in another club that was called the SLAGS, which was Student Library Assistants of Georgia.  And, and during high school I was a regional president of that organization.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 606727
Speaker 1: When you were on the verge of graduating from high school [D.F. Douglass High School, Montezuma, Georgia], I mean, what were your thoughts about a career?  You thought you were gonna be a teacher?  Is that pretty much it?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I, I thought that, but I never graduated from high school.
Speaker 1: What happened?
Speaker 2: What happened?  Well, I'm a high school dropout.
Speaker 1: Well, well, there must have been something to provoke this, so--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  Well, this--
Speaker 1: --so, so what happened?
Speaker 2: --this is what happened.  At, during my eleventh grade year, I had done pretty good for the first three years, and so I was asked to take the college entrance examination.  And I guess I lucked out and got a very nice score on the college entrance examination at the eleventh grade, and, and as a result, was in, invited and admitted to Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] directly from the eleventh grade.  So, technically I wasn't a dropout, but the truth is I didn't have to do the twelfth grade.
Speaker 1: All right, yeah, that's, that's no dropout.  That's (laughter)--but you, so you went to Morehouse as a teenager then in the, the eleventh grade or, or--
Speaker 2: After the eleventh grade--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I was admitted to Morehouse.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now this is nineteen fif- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sixty-one [1961].
Speaker 1: Sixty-one [1961], okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, that's 1961 was the year that I went to Morehouse.
Speaker 1: Now was President Benjamin Mays still in office?
Speaker 2: That's true.  That was a very important period in the history of Morehouse.  I was at Morehouse during the time when Benjamin E. Mays was president of Morehouse, and Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was a member of the faculty.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he was--what did Dr. King teach?
Speaker 2: He taught religion.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was never a student under him though.
Speaker 1: So this is after Montgomery cou- Montgomery Bus Boycott, and I think the Albany campaign [Albany Movement] had taken place, was getting ready to take place or?
Speaker 2: That was happening right along at that, right along at that time.
Speaker 1: Albany, Georgia--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's, that's what I'm thinking.  But, so did you have him in, in class?
Speaker 2: Do what?
Speaker 1: Did you have Dr. King as a teacher (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I never had a class under him, but used to see him often on the campus.
Story_ID: 606728
Speaker 1: What was your impression of Benjamin Mays [Benjamin E. Mays]?
Speaker 2: He was actually one of a kind, a very eloquent man who had a tremendous presence when he would walk into a room.  I, I was awed at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia].  I'd never been any place where everything was controlled by well-educated black people who were so much of an expert and so secure with themselves.  You know, having come from Montezuma [Georgia] where we always felt that we were second class in a sense and had to bow to so many other people, and here I was at a place now that everything on that campus was run by well-educated black people.  And, and, and Dr. Mays had a tremendous presence and a tremendous influence on the students and the student body.  He had--every Tuesday at our nine o'clock chapel session was our time with Dr. Mays, and he would come in and talk with the students.  And by the time you finished, got a--finished even one year at Morehouse, you were thinking that there was no segregation, no nothing, that you could turn the world upside down (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So he talked about the possibilities of--I mean the--opportunity and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: That, that is so--very much so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You have any stories about Dr. Mays, any personal accounts with him, or stories about, about him?
Speaker 2: Nothing in particular.  I, I can remember once he really chastised us real good.  There had been a panty raid at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia].  And so, and we, every, all the men from Morehouse had run up in the dormitories (laughter).  And, and, and you were supposed to--your prize was somebody grab somebody's panties and run or something.  And he was very upset, very mad with us, and called everybody into chapel.  And our excuse was that, well, people at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] do that.  And he lectured to us that we would--the audacity of wanting to do the worst that Harvard would do, and I challenge you to do the best that Harvard does.  You know, if you're gonna do that, then I expect you to excel, you know, in your studies.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, that made sense.
Story_ID: 606729
Speaker 1: What about Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] now?  Did you have any stories about him on campus that, that, or anything that you witnessed?
Speaker 2: No, nothing really outstanding, nothing that stands out.  I remember he had a close relationship with one of the English teachers who used to help him edit his speeches.  And that was--he was a outstanding professor.  His name was Mr. Chandler [Gladstone Lewis Chandler].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But other than that, I don't have anything that stands out about Dr. King at that time.
Speaker 1: Now who, who were some of the people that spoke to you at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia]?  They had a convocation every week when people come in to lecture.  Do you remember some of the other speakers?
Speaker 2: Well, there would be different professors.  We had to go to chapel every day at nine o'clock.  You had eight o'clock class.  The eight o'clock class lasted until nine, and then everybody was expected to go to chapel, and you had an assigned seat in chapel.  And Pop Dansby [Claude B. Dansby] would circle on his list the seats that weren't occupied.  And, and chapel would last a half an hour, and after that, the second class for the morning would start at 9:30.  We had various people, nobody of, that's renowned that I could think of right off that came to chapel.  It was just, it would rotate among the professors or the campus preacher, Sam--Reverend Samuel Williams [Samuel Woodrow Williams].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Did you have a favorite teacher at Morehouse, or, or a mentor, or you know?
Speaker 2: Well, I, no, I didn't have a favorite, as--I was a pretty independent, independent fellow.  (Laughter) There were a lot of people who played up to the teachers.  I'd come in and do my work, and, and go on, and, and, and earn whatever, you know, was given to me.  And so I didn't have any, any favorite.  I got along with everybody, and, and did my work, and, and went on.
Story_ID: 606730
Speaker 1: I know the campus was under--there was some, a little dissention on campus in those days, as I recall from reading, that some of the students wanted to try to desegregate some of the facilities in Atlanta [Georgia], the segregated facilities downtown.  And there were some that went over there, and there was some discussion between the, the faculty and the--I mean the, the school administration and the students about that, some strain (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, there was.  [HistoryMaker] Julian Bond was a student there at that time.  And he was one of, of several people that started the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee, SNCC.  And there was a little bit of friction between the, the school and some of the demonstrations.  This--we were charting unknown territory.  And just as parents, the school was responsible for the students and didn't know, you know, what could happen in unchartered territory, whether, you know, a student would get killed or was gonna get maimed or get hurt very badly.  And so the administration, I think, was concerned more about protecting them from harm.  They were in accordance with the mission.  And I went on some of those sit-ins with Julian Bond and, and sat in at some of the restaurants, sat in at a church, and I remember really getting hit hard on the head.  That was some real pain, but, you know, you couldn't fight back.  You were taught to be passive about it and move on--
Speaker 1: So you have classes ahead of time or instruction ahead of time about how to behave when--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah, before you--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --went down.  Before you went down, you had, you know, specific instructions of--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --who was the--
Speaker 1: Do people see the--
Speaker 2: --leader and what we were supposed to do.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they see the clips on televisions and, but nobody sees the meeting ahead of time, and so, you know, so that you all had to meet ahead of time and decide how to, how to control yourself, right, and how to--
Speaker 2: That's correct.  There was--I don't--a little house just off campus, so it wasn't controlled by the campus, called the Canterbury House [Atlanta, Georgia].  And I don't know what religious order supported the Canterbury House, it was the Episcopalian or Presbyterian, one of the other.  But that was a place where you could go and have all of these discussions.  It was always coffee and donuts available there.  And many times, a lot of the meetings tooks pla- took place there before we'd go out for the demonstrations and sit-ins.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So was [HistoryMaker] James Forman there or, or any of the other--
Speaker 2: No, no, James Forman--
Speaker 1: --nonviolent teachers?
Speaker 2: --wasn't, wasn't at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: James Lawson or, or--
Speaker 2: Lawson?  No, I don't remember that name either.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, who, who were--do you remember the names of the people who actually taught you nonviolent direct action there?
Speaker 2: Oh--I can't remember all of the, all of the people.  There was an editor of a local newspaper [The Atlanta Inquirer].  He was very prominent resident of Atlanta who was backing us to the degree that if anybody got arrested that would be bailed out.  His first name is Jesse, maybe Jesse Hill.
Speaker 1: Jesse Hill, that's right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 1: Jesse, that's right, exactly.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: Jesse Hill, some of those names now are names of streets in Atlanta, Jesse Hill and John Wesley Dobbs and some of the other people.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, John Wesley Dobbs, he was involved.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was in charge of the Masons.  And my father [Rufus West] was a friend of John Wesley Dobb because my father was wishful master [sic. worshipful master] of, of that lodge unit in Macon County [Georgia], in Montezuma [Georgia].  And then there was the pastor of Wheat Street Baptist Church [Atlanta, Georgia]--
Speaker 1: Right, right, Dr.--
Speaker 2: --Reverend Borders--
Speaker 1: Yeah, James Borders [sic. William Holmes Borders]--
Speaker 2: --at that time.
Speaker 1: --right.
Speaker 2: And then there was Reverend Abernathy [Ralph Abernathy], who had a church on Hunter Street [West Hunter Street Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia] at the corner of Hunter Street [Gordon Street; Ralph David Abernathy Boulevard] and Parson--not--Hunter Street and Chestnut [sic.] in Atlanta.
Story_ID: 606731
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, just tell us.  You, you were describing Hunter Street [Gordon Street; Ralph David Abernathy Boulevard, Atlanta, Georgia] and some of the businesses and activities on Hunter Street.  I think it's good to get this on tape because it captures the era in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, well, when, at the time that I was at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] from 1961 to '65 [1965], Hunter Street was a major business center for black businesses and very successful businesses.  Among them was Pascal's Restaurant; Frazier's Cafe Society restaurant; there was Tibbs Pharmacy; there was the Ashby Theatre.  Reverend Abernathy's [Ralph Abernathy] church [West Hunter Street Baptist Church] was on that little strip.  And it was a very progressive, progressive area, and well known black people coming into Atlanta [Georgia] would almost always end up eating at Pascal's.  And then later on, around 1964 and '65 [1965], Donn Clendenon, who was a baseball player, opened a restaurant and club [Donn Clendenon's Supper Club] there on Hunter Street too.
Speaker 1: Was, was he an Atlanta native?
Speaker 2: Pardon?
Speaker 1: Is, was Clendenon an Atlanta native?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't know if he was.  And--
Speaker 1: I know he was in the World Series, New York Mets, on the World Series New York Mets' team.  He was one of the stars of that team.
Speaker 2: That's--
Speaker 1: It was the 1969 Mets.
Speaker 2: --that, that is correct.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But you remember you mentioned something about Haugabooks and you had seen her.  Haugabooks Funeral Home [sic. Haugabrooks Funeral Home] in Atlanta is probably where you remember that name.  She either--it was run by a lady Haugabrooks [Geneva Moton Haugabrooks], and it was either on Hunter Street or on Auburn Avenue, one or the other.  It was one of the major funeral parlors in Atlanta at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 606732
Speaker 1: Now when you were involved in these demonstrations, were you, were your grades ever in jeopardy, or did you get in trouble with the administration [of Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] at all?
Speaker 2: No.  I didn't participate a lot, because I really didn't have that kind of time.  Coming from Montezuma [Georgia], coming out of the eleventh grade [D.F. Douglass High School, Montezuma, Georgia], I--during the first couple of years I had to work a little harder than many of the other kids who had come from major metropolitan areas.  And so I didn't have a lot of extra time to do that.  And the times that I did was either on the weekend or during the summer when I stayed, I stayed in Atlanta [Georgia] to work during the summer.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, but you did get hit in the head pretty good you said once, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Those, those memories you never forget.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you were never arrested or anything?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't get arrested.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So did you operate--I mean when you were--doing demonstrations as a student, were you a part of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], or did, was that pre-SNCC?
Speaker 2: No.  This was at the same time that SNCC, but I was never a formal, formal member of SNCC.  I just joined in to the demonstrations.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 606733
Speaker 1: Did I ask you what your major was?
Speaker 2: No, you didn't.
Speaker 1: Okay, what, what was your major?
Speaker 2: My major at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] was biology, (visual disturbance) and my minor was chemistry.  But at Morehouse, for the most part, biology is the same as pre-med curriculum.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now did you pledge a fraternity?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.  I, in my second year, I pledge Omega [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity], and so I'm an Omega man.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So did they pressure you to play sports?  Now you're still a pretty tall guy now.  They didn't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I played a little bit of intramural, and that, that was all.  Because I didn't play in high school [D.F. Douglass High School, Montezuma, Georgia], didn't have the opportunity to play in high school.  And as--I used to play as a little kid, but you know, that didn't amount to too much.  And so at Morehouse I didn't even, even try, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so, now, any--so I take it your grades were fairly, fairly good, if you--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I made decent grades at Morehouse.  And I was pretty highly motivated.  F- I didn't think I could possibly suffer the embarrassment of coming out of the eleventh grade, going to Morehouse, flunking out, and then having to go back to high school (laughter).  And the other motivation was, you know, coming off the farm [Flint River Farms, Macon County, Georgia].  You know, I had seen a better life and other possibilities.  And, and so I made every effort to get to reasonable grade so that I could stay at Morehouse.  Dr. Mays [Benjamin E. Mays] offered a special scholarship to us students, and that is if you made the dean's list two semesters consecutively, he would give you five hundred dollars on the next semester.  And funds being short, I took him on that.  And on a couple of occasions I was able to get the five hundred dollars, which actually paid for a full semester at Morehouse.
Speaker 1: Now that's good.  That's a good deal.  But, but you were there for the last two years of high school, and then you went through to your bachelor's degree.  Did you go all the way to bachelor's at Morehouse?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --from '61 [1961] to 1965.  I finished in 1965 with a bachelor of science.
Story_ID: 606734
Speaker 1: You went on to medical school at Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], right, is that?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.
Speaker 1: Or did you go right away, or did you--
Speaker 2: Yeah, here's what happened.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: During the senior year, because most of the biology majors were pre-med, everybody took the MCAT, the examination that's necessary to, to go to medical school.  And I took the MCAT right along with everybody else, but I had no formal plans for going to medical school.  It had been financially very tight to get through the four years at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia].  I had two younger brothers who were still in college.  And so my family expected that I would leave Morehouse and then go to work, and that was my intentions.  But after taking the MCAT, somehow I made a, a very good score and submitted some applications.  And of all of the pre-med students in my class, I was the first one to get accepted to medical school.  Still not planning to go, everybody was congratulating me.  And, and then I realized just from them that I had something very valuable (laughter) in my hand that they wanted.  They really wanted to go to medical--I was almost at the point, well, you can take my slot.  And so I, at that point, went and discussed it with my mother [Estella Fleming West] and father [Rufus West] and, and told them, you know, I would like to make a try at it, that, you know, it seems like it's something that's very coveted, to be able to go to medical school.  And, and so we made some arrangements, and I was able to go.  And the segregation policy of Georgia actually helped me to get through Meharry.  There was a law at that time that if the State of Georgia did not have a school that offered a discipline that you wanted to study as far as graduate school or professional school was concerned, they would pay the difference of what it would cost to go to the Medical College of Georgia [Augusta, Georgia] versus that school.  Since Medical College of Georgia was a state school, tuition was relatively low.  And so the State of Georgia reimbursed me, or actually paid the difference in what it would have cost to go to Medical College of Georgia and Meharry.  And so that worked to my advantage.
Speaker 1: Now, now Morehouse at that time didn't have a medical school, right?
Speaker 2: No, Morehouse did not have a medical school--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --at that time.
Speaker 1: That's rather recent (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They do have one now [Morehouse School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's a recent kind of occurrence--
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, yeah, we've heard of that, that story from some of the other interviews where they were paid to go to the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] or University of Minnesota [University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Minneapolis, Minnesota] or Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York].
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, they would pay for you to go to any school--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --if they didn't have that for you.  And so they had all of those--that available for whites, but it wasn't available for, for blacks, and so we were able to take--both--I have two older sisters took advantage of it and got their graduate degrees at Columbia and then another sister who studied at University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] with that same kind of support from the state.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 606735
Speaker 1: You go to Nashville, right, for, to go to Meharry [Meharry Medical College]--
Speaker 2: Yes--
Speaker 1: --in--
Speaker 2: --Nashville, Tennessee, yeah.
Speaker 1: So you went directly there in, in '65 [1965] and--
Speaker 2: That is correct.  I--
Speaker 1: Okay, so fall?
Speaker 2: --I finished Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] in June of '65 [1965] and entered Meharry September 1965.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, so what did you think of Meharry?  I mean, how did--was medical school what you thought it was gonna be, or did you--?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was.  Morehouse had really prepared me well for Meharry.  By the time I was ready to go to Meharry, I was no longer a naive farm boy.  (Background noise) It had been a very nice--Morehouse had provided a very nice transition from the isolation and the narrow environment of the farm [Flint River Farms, Macon County, Georgia] to something much broader.  And so I was very well prepared for Meharry, having left Morehouse.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So were there any special teachers or mentors at Meharry?
Speaker 2: Nobody special.  Everybody at Meharry was very similar to the, to Morehouse.  They were very dedicated teachers who did their very, very best to transfer knowledge to us.  And I think--and I have to take my hat off black teachers.  Somehow they knew how to communicate with their own to get to you and to get you motivated and get that learning process going.  I had a very pleasant experience at Meharry.  I did very well as a student academically.  I participated in the student government.  I was officer of my class, and during my senior year president of the student body.  During the time I was at Meharry I was inducted into Alpha Omega Alpha Honor Medical Society, which is a medi- academic medical socie- society which would, in medicine, would be the equivalent of Phi Beta Kappa [Phi Beta Kappa Society].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So the--now, okay, now did, did you have to--now, at this stage you're doing general studies basically, right?  You're not really specializing in--
Speaker 2: That is correct--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --just doing general studies, working toward an M.D. degree.  The first two years are basic science, and the second two years are clinical studies, where you are actually having patient contact.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 606736
Speaker 1: So were your parents surprised that they, now they have a doctor, and they're getting a doctor in the family, or?
Speaker 2: They were.  My father [Rufus West], I think, in the very beginning was a little bit pessimistic in that he didn't really think that that was going to happen and that, you know, this is a fantasy thing, and you know, but, you know, go ahead; you know, you're talking this doctor stuff.  But my mother [Estella Fleming West] was very encouraging from the very beginning.  And it was only about my junior year [at Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], or toward the very end, that my father came around and realized that it was for real, that he was going to have a son that was gonna be a doctor in another year.  But unfortunately, he passed away right around that time, in 1968.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, well, yeah, so, so he finally--but he, he did get it then before--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) he knew, he knew you were gonna--
Speaker 2: He started--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --being very encouraging around that time.
Story_ID: 606737
Speaker 1: Okay, so you graduated in '68 [1968]?
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-nine [1969].
Speaker 1: Sixty-nine [1969], okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, who was the president of Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] then?
Speaker 2: When I finished, Dr. Lloyd Elam [HistoryMaker Dr. Lloyd C. Elam] was president.  When I entered Meharry, Dr. Harold West [Harold D. West] was president.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, we did interview Dr. Elam down in--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --in Nashville [Tennessee], the last spring I think it was.
Speaker 2: Good.
Speaker 1: Yes, spring before last, I think.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he's a Chicago [Illinois] native.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now when you graduated with--did you do a residency someplace or an internship, I guess internship at--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, before I graduated I did an externship.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I mention that because that was a major turning point in my life.  During the summer between my junior and senior year I did an externship at Harlem Hospital [Harlem Hospital Center] in New York City [New York, New York].  And that's where I really got introduced to real medicine and real participation, rather than just being an outside observant, which is the role that we have as students, for the most part, at Meharry.  But at Harlem Hospital I got a lot of hands on experience with major illnesses, major injuries, saw the worst of drug abuse and how it affected people's bodies and their lives.  After the clinical rotation at Harlem Hospital, I be- was able then to begin to sort out the things, having had so much hands on experience.  And it was at that point that I decided that one of the surgical specialties was going to be the direction that I was going to go.  And so I--
Speaker 1: But you hadn't chosen which one of the--?
Speaker 2: I had pretty much decided either it was going to be general surgery or orthopedic surgery and pretty much was leaning toward, towards orthopedic surgery.
Story_ID: 606738
Speaker 1: What was it about orthopedic surgery that drew you to it?
Speaker 2: Well, there were some major things going on in orthopedics at that time.  It was a specialty that, for the most part, it's remained stagnant for a long, long time.  And right around that time, everybody was talking about what was going on in England with Dr. Charnley [John Charnley] and the revolutionary procedures that he was doing as far as joint replacements were concerned and how it turned around many people's lives markedly.  And so it was sort of an exciting times for orthopedics that stood out a little bit above many of the--some of the other specialties.  Other specialties were pretty much routine, but orthopedics was a shining light.
Speaker 1: In those days they were pioneering the--pioneering the use of silicon in, in kneecaps and other things.  I don't know.  Just what kinds of things were--
Speaker 2: Well, it was--
Speaker 1: --were they really doing.
Speaker 2: --the joint replacements, hip replacements, total hip replacements.  Prior to that time--
Speaker 1: Weren't they using silicon in, on, or steel, or was it silicon--
Speaker 2: Well, no.  It's--
Speaker 1: --socket or something?
Speaker 2: Well, it was the manner in which the prosthesis was interfaced to the bone.  We could put prosthesis into a bone, but they would just be very loose 'cause--and so then we--it developed a special kind of glue that was called methyl methacrylate that would seal the prosthesis against bone.  And there would not be any movement between the prosthesis, the methyl methacrylate, and the bone between them.  And pre- prior to that, with severe arthritis in the hips, regardless of what they did, you would only palliate it.  It would still remain a rather disabling condition.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 606739
Speaker 1: Now are there any particular, I guess, bone problems that, that afflict African Americans more than other people?  And is it--well, let me ask that question first I guess.
Speaker 2: Well, it's--couple of things that would come to mind.  One would probably be bone infarcts that result from sickle cell anemia.  And sometimes those could lead to situations where the joints would malfunction.  And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, now can you explain that term?  Bone in- what?
Speaker 2: Infarcts.
Speaker 1: Infarcts, how do you spell that?
Speaker 2: I-N-F-A-R-C-T-S.  That is where small areas of bone would die or become necrotic as a result of not having blood supply to that small area because of the sickling blocking the blood vessel.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: The other situation that's more common in blacks would be slipped capital femoral epiphysis.
Speaker 1: I don't know if I want you to spell that or not (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: You should probably try it--try it probably.  I don't know.
Speaker 2: Okay, slipped, S-L-I-P-P-E-D, capital, C-A-P-I-T-A-L, femoral, F-E-M-O-R-A-L--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --epiphysis, E-P-I-P-H-Y-S-I-S.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: That's not so bad after all, but--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --the way you said it, it really sounded like a, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah, like it was a big term.
Speaker 1: --big challenging term.
Speaker 2: And it's--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --yeah, it sounds more amazing than what it really is.  It's a pretty simple condition.  It's something involved in the hips in adolescent children, and it's a bit more prominent in, in black children.  And it occurs during the rapid growth phase where the head of the femur, the ball of the femur, actually slips off of the, off of the bone and becomes displaced.
Speaker 1: So this occurs in adolescence, when, when you're growing real fast, or is it, or is it, or it's some, some earlier stage, or--?
Speaker 2: That's what I'm saying.  It occurs in early adolescence--
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: --during the rapid growth phase.
Speaker 1: Okay, as you go through a bone spurt--I mean a growth spurt.
Speaker 2: Growth spurt, right.
Speaker 1: So, this--
Speaker 2: And that's--
Speaker 1: --sounds like it would be painful.  Your, your, your--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it, it's crippling and painful, if, if not treated, and, and can cause them to have a permanent limp later in life if it's not treated well.  But those are the two things that come to mind that are a bit more common in, in, in black--.  One of the interesting things, though, that I trained, did my orthopedic training--and I guess you were gonna get to that in a minute--at Yale University [Yale New Haven Hospital, New Haven, Connecticut] under Dr. Wayne O. Southwick [Wayne Southwick].  And Dr. Wayne O. Southwick developed and made popular the most frequently used operation to try to correct that, that kind of deformity in slipped capital femoral epiphysis.
Story_ID: 606740
Speaker 1: Did you go to Yale right after graduation in '69 [1969] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I didn't.  After I finished Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], I did my internship here in Chicago [Illinois] at Michael Reese Hospital [Michael Reese Hospital and Medical Center].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And I did one year of general surgery residency at Michael Reese Hospital because at that time you were required to do another year of post graduate training before you were allowed to do an orthopedic residency.  And then after that, around that time, got married and started a family.  And I took a year off and worked at the Daniel Hale Williams Health Center here in Chicago as a medical director.  And--
Speaker 1: Now is that on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois], the, the Daniel--?
Speaker 2: No.  It was based at Provident Hospital [Provident Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois] on 51st Street, directly behind--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --the, the health center, a leased space there.  And I did one year of working there and got a, a good financial base and the, the next year started my residency at Yale.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is 1971 then?
Speaker 2: We are now at 1972--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --is, is when I entered the residency at Yale New Haven Hospital [New Haven, Connecticut].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so, well, how was that?  Now you go from Meharry to Yale.  Did you have any trepidation about now I'm going to Yale, and this is supposed to be, you know, this top school, Harvard [Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts] and Yale are the top schools in the country, did you--
Speaker 2: Well, I was very grateful to have been admitted there and was very excited, you know, about going to a prestigious institution such as Yale.  Just as I said earlier, all along the way from elementary school [Flint River Farms School, Macon County, Georgia], high school [D.F. Douglass High School, Montezuma, Georgia], college, I always knew that I was headed some place, and it was my goal--but never knew exactly where.  I never--at the end of the four years at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], I wasn't sure where that was going to take me, but at the end of those four years, there was something that God presented to me.  And that was--allowed me to get a good score on the MCAT and presented Meharry to me.  Then at--as I went through Meharry, I had no idea where life would take me after Meharry.  You know, for us who don't have families or family members who are already in the profession, we are really trailblazing and pioneering into an unknown territory.  And so, at the end of my medical school years, I was able to get into Michael Reese.  And this was the, at about the time that many institutions were beginning to integrate and were opening up their institutions to a select few blacks to come in.  And, and I happened to be one of the fortunate ones that was able to get a good residency and good internship at, at, at Michael Reese.  And the same, I think, with, with Yale, it was at a point where they wanted to broaden their, their program.  At Yale I was the second black to go through the orthopedic residency program.
Story_ID: 606741
Speaker 1: Okay, Yale [Yale New Haven Hospital, New Haven, Connecticut], so, so, you were at Yale for, for two years?
Speaker 2: Three years.
Speaker 1: For three years, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right, now this school is adding up.  Now did you have any idea when you first started that it would take this much schooling to get to the place that you wanted to be in medicine?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't.  But after Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], I was actually getting a salary, so it's actually work and school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So you did, I did get paid while I was an intern, got paid while I was a resident at, at Michael Reese [Michael Reese Hospital; Michael Reese Hospital and Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois] and also while I was a resident at Yale.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So were there any special teachers or instruction at Yale that you re- that made--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, Yale was a great experience, to have some of the world's best orthopedic surgeons to consult with and to work with and to teach, to teach us.  Dr. Southwick [Wayne Southwick] was the chairman of the department [Department of Orthopaedics and Rehabilitation, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut].  He was world renowned.  It was a very liberal environment.  I was embraced and, and taken into the program just like any other resident.  At that time, I also, I was the second black to be trained in that program.  The first black to be trained in that program was Dr. Augustus White [HistoryMaker Dr. Augustus A. White, III], whom you've interviewed here already.  And he had stayed there or remained at Yale as one of the professors.  And he was a real mentor to me, and in many ways, is still a mentor and very good friend.
Speaker 1: Okay, Dr. Augustus White.
Story_ID: 606742
Speaker 1: You were mentioning sickle cell anemia before.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And I, and I know that in the early '70s [1970s], the, the early '70s [1970s] was the period where sickle cell anemia made the headlines as never before.  I'm sure existed for--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, many years, but people didn't think about it.  And I remember 'Tony Brown's Journal'--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, had a show devoted to sickle cell anemia.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: People started raise, started to raise money, you know, for sickle cell anemia.  It became associated as a disease that afflicts black people--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and Mediterraneans more than any, any other disease.  Do you have any thoughts about--?
Speaker 2: Well, I think people with sickle cell anemia now gets better care, that most, most of the major medical centers have special units that take care of sickle cell patients.  The state and federal government has made more funds available for those kinds of clinics and for research in, in sickle cell anemia.  I don't treat sickle cell anemia patients directly for the anemia but only for the bone complications.  And fortunately, I don't see as many of those complications now as I did in earlier years.  In the earlier years, we would often get called in for consultations for bone pain, which most times was due to bone infarcts.  And in some of them, the bone infarcts would be so massive that they've caused necrosis of the bone and would have to have surgery.  And in, in later years, if the sickle cell patient lived long enough, would possibly end up having to have a joint replacement.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Joint replacement surgery is, it seems to be, seems to really be popular now you know for older people.  And I, I don't--is there a, is there any reason--well, was it always a need for it before, and, and, and what causes--why would one person need it and another one not?
Speaker 2: Well, that's a good question, why some people's joints wear out and other people's joints last a longer period of time.  And I don't think that there's anybody with an answer for that, especially when both of them live fairly equivalent lives.  Other people who live dangerously and who stress their joints a lot with a lot of sports activities and other hazardous kinds of activities, we can understand why their joints, you know, become arthritic.  One of the other reasons that you hear more about it is that people are living longer.  And so, because more people are living longer and they're getting better medical care, more people are living long enough to get degenerative joint disease--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and as a result, need the replacements.  Without the replacements, the disability in patients is just so great.  Many of the patients I've done joint replacements on will come back and say, "I'm mad with myself that I could have been feeling this good ten years ago, and I suffered for the last ten years."  And it's a very gratifying operation for us to see patients do well and, for patients to be able to renew their lives, so to speak.
Story_ID: 606743
Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna stop digressing until we get you (laughter) in the office--get you out of Yale [Yale New Haven Hospital, New Haven, Connecticut] and everything.  But, but so you, you, you came out of Yale in what, '75 [1975], with a--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, finished Yale in 1975 (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And, and when you came out of Yale you were qualified to, to do what?  I mean what, what was the--
Speaker 2: Well, I'd finish the, the residency program at Yale in 1975.  And I started a private practice of orthopedic surgery that same year, in 1975.  I took the board examination, the certifying board for the, from the American Board of Orthopedic Surgery and became board certified in 1977.
Speaker 1: Okay, now--
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: --I think we skipped over you getting married at a certain point.  Now, you want to talk about how you met your wife and then--
Speaker 2: That--
Speaker 1: --does, does, does that impact you living in Chicago [Illinois], or, or was it another reason?
Speaker 2: No.  That--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I met my wife down in, we met down in, in Nashville, Tennessee--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Okay, and--
Speaker 2: --while I was still a, a medical student.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Is there a story about how, how you met or?
Speaker 2: Not really.  She was a nurse at the hospital.  And I had to go in for a, an evaluation of hypertension.  (Laughter) And they assigned her to be my nurse, and, and I stole her away from them to be my permanent nurse (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, so when you graduated from Yale, did you move back to Chicago immediately or to begin private practice or--
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.  I came back to Chicago and joined the staff at Michael Reese Hospital [Michael Reese Hospital and Center, Chicago, Illinois] and started a practice.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 606744
Speaker 1: Now I've read that you have--I don't know how long it took for all of this to take place, but you've treated, you know, several celebrities for one disorder or another, I know Muhammad Ali, Sammy Davis, Jr., Evel Knievel.  You know, I mean, are there some stories you can tell us about some of your patients?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, I've had a wide spectrum of patients, some were very well known and some the least well known, all of whom got treated equally well by me.  I have had some well known patients to come into my office from time to time.  I don't know if it's proper to mention names of people who are still living, but the ones who I think I can comfortably mention would be Mayor Washington [Harold Washington], Mayor Sawyer [HistoryMaker Eugene Sawyer], Evel Knievel, Sammy Davis, Jr., and there are some other--oh, and Muhammad Ali, yeah, he--
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Val Gray Ward, who our--is a good friend of ours.
Speaker 2: And there are others, but probably I should mention, you know, this is not proper now in medicine to do those kinds of things.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what issues did--I don't know.  Well, Ali's still alive.  I don't know if you can talk about him but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --what issues did Mayor Washington have in terms of--
Speaker 2: He had a shoulder problem.  And it was nothing that was, that was major.  It was a fairly common problem that I took care of him for that I think that we determined that the problem in his shoulder actually originated in his neck, and it was referred pain to the shoulder.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What about Sammy Davis, Jr.?
Speaker 2: That was an interesting encounter.  Sammy was performing at the amphithe- not amphitheater, the, there's a showroom in the McCormick Place [Chicago, Illinois], and I can't remember what the production was.
Speaker 1: Was it the Arie Crown Theater [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Arie Crown Theater, exactly.  And he had injured his back doing a stunt, and his primary care physician called me to consult with him.  But Sammy was a little bit stubborn.  I couldn't get him to come to the office, and I couldn't get him to come to the hospital [Michael Reese Hospital; Michael Reese Hospital and Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois].  And it's okay now that he's passed away.  I mention this because he definitely didn't want his health problems revealed (laughter) and so was very protective of that.  And so I had to go to the hotel where he was staying.  He was staying down at the Ritz-Carlton [Ritz-Carlton Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].  And so I had to pack up my paraphernalia and do something that's rarely done these days, that is make a house call.  And so I also had arranged for one of the anesthesiologists to come with me in case he needed an epidural steroid.  But it turned out that he did not need the epidural steroid, because that would have been one way of getting him back on the stage soon.  And as it turned out, the--we, we probably wouldn't have done an epidural steroid down at the--injection down at the Ritz-Carlton.  And I would have, at that point, insisted that he come to the hospital for that.  But I went down and examined him.  We gave him the correct medicines.  I took medications along with me, anticipating what I thought he might need.  And he recovered fast and was able to get back on stage with the production within a couple of days.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 606745
Speaker 1: Now have you had to treat very many athletes?
Speaker 2: (Pause) I've had some to come through from time to time, nobody of any real--nobody who's very well known.  Most of them have been people who did go to the majors, and was there for a short period of time, and unfortunately run out of funds; they're residents of Chicago [Illinois], and their parents bring them to me (laughter) later on.  And, but I haven't had anyone in any of the majors to come to me in recent years--(unclear) act- act- actively playing.
Speaker 1: I remember when in, during a, in the movie 'Hoop Dreams' the young man named William Gates had knee problems that kept him from becoming, you know, the basketball player that they had projected that he would be.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And he, you know, he continually had problems with his, with his knee.  Is that, that the kind of thing you're talking about, people that had a, a shot at it and had an injury, but they could never shake that injury and didn't have enough money to really fix it?
Speaker 2: Well, not so much didn't have enough money to fix it; it was probably something that couldn't be fixed, or they were marginal players in the first place.  And then once they had an injury, then they just were no longer valuable to that particular team, and those are the--basically the people that I'm talking about.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 606746
Speaker 1: What is the most common injury that you treat, and then what is the most common injury amongst African Americans?  Is it the same injury?
Speaker 2: Well, I treat mostly African Americans.  And I can't s- and since I don't have a large volume of Caucasian patients, I can't make a comparison.  But I think the, but I think for the most part it's very similar.  During the winter we get a lot of injuries that result from slipping on the ice, and those are ankle fractures and wrist injuries.  In older people, especially nursing home residents, we get a lot of hip fractures.  And we get little other minor injuries for youngsters playing softball, mallet finger deformities, dislocations of fingers, wrist fractures.  Fractures we call the Colles' fracture is pretty common.
Speaker 1: Okay
Speaker 2: But--
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, go ahead.
Speaker 2: But we, we get a whole gamut from the entire, entire body.  As an orthopedic surgeon, I, I have to be prepared to treat any and all injuries to the musculoskeletal system.
Speaker 1: Now what is the biggest challenge you've had?  What, is there a particular case where there was a, where you had the, the biggest challenge to deal with?
Speaker 2: (Pause) I can't recall any one that was more of a challenge than--that, that stands out, that stands out.  My philosophy, in general, is not to take on any challenge that I don't think I'm prepared to do.  If there's something that involves many different systems and is going to be very, very complicated, I always try to find someone who has a special interest in that particular kind of a problem, and we, in general, most orthopedics do that.  And then we'll feed that person most of those kinds of cases and, and then select those that we know or that I know that I can do a good job with, with the resources that I have.  With the hospital that I'm using, I know the, the nurses and the kinds of equipment that I have at my hospital.  And so, it's not a good thing to take on a challenge, and then once you get in the hos- into the operating room, have any surprises creep up on you.
Story_ID: 606747
Speaker 1: This is something I read years ago, and it has to do with anthropology.  It may be mythological anthropology, but there was a article I read that described black people as having denser bones than white people in general.  Is this, is this true, or is this a myth?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  Our diets, our lifestyles are getting very, very similar.  At one time, we were a little different.  Back in slavery and when many of us worked in, in the servient roles, it may have been a little bit different.  I was told that in the kitchen the cooks had to get the leftovers, and they would be given the gravy and the potlikker, and it turned out that all the vitamins was in the potlikker, that--what people thought was the, was the scraps.  At one time, we thought that black women didn't get a certain kind of hip fracture, the--and that femoral neck fractures was more prevalent among Caucasians and intertrochanteric fractures among others, but we see an equal number now because our diets are so similar.  There's not a, a big diversion.  At one time, we also thought that black women had wider hips and that might be a factor, but I think for the most part they've ruled that out now.
Speaker 1: What about osteoporosis in older women now?  There was a--I know I used to read at one time that white women were prone to it than black women.
Speaker 2: Well, I think the reason for that is that white women at that time lived longer than black women, and black women didn't live long enough to get it.  And so, I see a lot of osteoporosis in black women now after the, after the menopause.  And so, we have to treat them just as white women are treated for their osteoporosis.  I don't know if there's a major difference between the two.  But probably the reason for that was that black women didn't live as long, didn't live long enough to get it.  But we're living longer now, and so we are seeing that.  It used to be that say that blacks didn't get heart attacks; we only got strokes (laughter).  And so, we're getting our share of both now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 606748
Speaker 1: There seems to be--when you talk to people just in general conversation, they seem to--there's a train of thought that suggests that if you don't use something, you're actually saving it or something for--you're not gonna wear it out because you don't, so let's keep from walking so that we save our legs, or--is that a philosophy that, I mean, that makes any sense to you?
Speaker 2: No.  I think it's just the opposite.  If you--you have to use it, otherwise you get what is called disuse atrophy.  And so I, I think--the body is a dynamic machine, dynamic machine.  I mean, it's not like if you're using it you're gonna wear it out.  The cells are constantly being replaced, constantly being replaced.  New nutrition is constantly coming to all these area.  And the only adverse thing is not the use, it's the, the aging process.  But it, all of it is optimal though.  I mean, you can overdo.  Many of the injuries that I see in orthopedics, most of them are due to overuse syndrome, of going beyond what is reasonable, and you can injure yourself, injure yourself.  But I don't think you have anything to gain by trying not to use something and saving it.  I think you're better off using it.
Speaker 1: By overuse, are you referring to like the, the, some of the wrist injuries in secretaries and people on these computers get from you doing it, being in the same position all day or, or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right, and--
Speaker 1: Yeah, that type of--
Speaker 2: --tendonitis--
Speaker 1: Tendon- yeah.
Speaker 2: --sometimes bursitis, people go in their gardens and go to work, and you know, they're pretty sedentary people in the first place and go in the garden and work all day, and next they can't get out of bed, muscles are sore; it's overuse.  And so if you're going to try to stress your body, then you should in a gradual fashion, and then you won't get the overuse syndromes.
Story_ID: 606749
Speaker 1: Chiropractors, there are quite a few black chiropractors nowadays.  I know a few of them, and I don't know what to think.  What do you think as an orthopedic surgeon about chiropractic medicine?
Speaker 2: You know, I've not had enough experience with that entity to know.  My gut feeling is that when people get better from a chiropractic manipulation, it's probably they were gonna get better anyway.  From what I can see, I don't see any physical basis from, you know, dissections and going down and knowing how joints work, where some of the things they do could really be of any real benefit.  (Pause) That's pretty much my thought about it.  I don't think that the chiropractor, for the most part, could do anything that an orthopedist couldn't do and probably do it a little better.
Speaker 1: Spinal manipul- do orthopedic surgeons engage in spinal manipulations and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: There are a few who think that that might benefit, but people who specialize in spine problems just can't conceive how manipulating can do anything to, to a spine.  The spine is such a rigid structure with such tight ligaments, tight muscles that you're really not gonna move the spine too much with any of those manipulations.  And they--and, and people who operate on spines know that because when they operate, they know how difficult it is for them to--when they got it wide open and got it--how difficult it is for them to move anything, and they got big heavy instruments, pulling.  And so, I think that that's probably in situations where a person was probably gonna get better anyway.  Most times people do spontaneously get better with back aches anyway--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --if they wait long enough.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 606750
Speaker 1: Since you've been a professional for a long time, and one of the highest respected professionals in the, in the business, you were contacted by Evel Knievel after he, you know, tried to jump something and missed, I think, in the aquarium, I think, here in Chicago [Shedd Aquarium, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: It was over at the amphitheater [International Amphitheatre, Chicago, Illinois] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) at the amphitheater.  He, he--
Speaker 2: And they had a, a manmade pond of--
Speaker 1: Sharks (laughter).
Speaker 2: --sharks, and he was supposed to jump over it.  I'll tell you exactly what happened.  That was early in my practice.  And whenever there is a VIP at a circus or even the president in town, they have a designated hospital in case there is an incident.  I remember one occasion when it was President Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan], I guess, was in Chicago, and Michael Reese [Michael Reese Hospital; Michael Reese Hospital and Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois] turned out to be the designated hospital.  And under those circumstances, a representative of every specialty has to be in the hospital.  You can't be on call; you have to be in the hospital during the entire time that the president is in town so that you don't have to travel to the hospital or do anything.  Other times when things like, they're having a circus or some kind of major event over at the McCormick Place [Chicago, Illinois] they would designate a hospital.  And then they will ask different specialties to have a representative from that specialty on call.  And so that particular evening--I've gotten, I had gotten those kinds of calls many, many times.  They'd call me and ask me if I would be a VIP on call, which means that I have to be close to the hospital and available immediately to come if there's any untoward event, and nothing ever happened.  And so that particular evening I got a call from Evel Knievel's entourage, or somebody in his team that called and asked if I would be available and be VIP on call for Mr. Knievel, and if anything should happen, Michael Reese is the designated hospital.  And I said fine, just like I all--had said many, many times to other people.  And, but unfortunately, on that particular--on his practice jump, he missed it.  And I had basically totally forgotten about it 'cause I really didn't expect a call.  And then they called me and said, "Dr. West [HistoryMaker Dr. Carlton A. West], we are on our way to the hospital."  I said, "Oh, my god," (laughter).  So I went out and told all of my patients that there was an emergency at the hospital, and I'm gonna have to leave and that I would have to reschedule them.  So I went to the hospital, and when I got to the hospital, by that time, it was already on the news, and the emergency room was surrounded by police.  And I told one of the police officers that I was Dr. West and that I had been summoned to the hospital to, to see--take care of Mr. Knievel.  Well, it was a big, fat, jolly--and he had himself a big laugh.  He said, "Ha, ha, ha, ha, what else is new?  If you don't get away from here--," (laughter).
Speaker 1: So he thought it was funny.  He didn't believe you.  He thought it was funny (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, he didn't believe me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He didn't believe me (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 606751
Speaker 1: So this large Chicago [Illinois] police officer tells you--he starts laughing at you.  He doesn't believe that you're the--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --the orthopedic (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Because this was early in my practice.  I had looked rather young and, and I guess, you know, didn't have--wasn't the stereotype of what they were expecting, a middle age Caucasian doctor, you know.  And so, and then I told him again, and fortunately, they--right behind him was one of the security officers from the hospital [Michael Reese Hospital; Michael Reese Hospital and Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois].  And so the security officer came and identified me, and, and then I was able to proceed and go on into the, into the emergency room.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so I went, and by the time I got there, one of my residents was there also.  And so my resident had told Mr. Knievel [Evel Knievel] that I was on my way.  And so I came in and I told him what his injuries were.  He appeared to be a little bit surprised, seeing somebody who was very, very young and, and maybe of a--and, and, and probably because I was black.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It was a bit of a surprise.  And I didn't want to pressure him to accept me one way or the other, so I made it very clear to him that the kind of injuries he had, we could send him anywhere in the country he wanted to go.  All it required would be some splinting.  And I also told him that if there was some other orthopedic surgeon that he wanted to take care of him, 'cause that's the last thing I want to do is try to take care of somebody who don't want me to take care of, that, you know, that would be no problem.  I could arrange that.  And then on the other hand, if he wanted me to do it, then this is something that I could very easily handle for you.  And I told him and his wife [Linda Knievel], now, you all can just conference over it, and, and let me know what your thoughts are.  And so I walked out of the room, and within thirty seconds he say, "I want you to be my doctor."  And so that's the way that, that happened.  We then arranged for him to be hospitalized, and I took him to the operating room the next day and fixed the fractures that he had.  And--
Speaker 1: What kind of injuries did he sustain, I mean, if you could--
Speaker 2: He--that particular injury, he sustained fractures in three locations: ankle, forearm and collar bone.  And I operated on the forearm, opened it, plated it.  And he did very well, had an excellent, excellent result and was able to actually resume his jumping routine.
Speaker 1: And, and had several other accidents so, did he not?  I mean, over the course of the years?  Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, he had some more accidents.
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: He had some more accidents.
Speaker 1: How, how does, I mean, how does a person fare if they've had multiple fractures like that and compounded fractures, I mean--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --what kind of toll did that take on him, do you think?
Speaker 2: Well, as long as you've got somebody to fix them and as long as you're healthy enough to heal the fractures, then, you know, you can go on.  Because once the fracture is healed and back in place, it's almost as good as it was before you injured it.  And so, you can resume all your normal activities.  And there's no physical law that says that those same bones can't be fractured again.  And so, on--he had a lot of old healed fractures.  And I'm sure in his late years, I would have predicted that he would have been in a fair amount of pain, that those joints would have then become arthritic much earlier in life than otherwise.
Story_ID: 606752
Speaker 1: I don't know if you want to comment on this or not, but there, there was--the year that the Bulls [Chicago Bulls] wound up with Michael Jordan, they actually drafted a man named Sam Bowie first out of Kentucky [University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Bowie had sustained a fractured leg while at Kentucky.  He was seven feet tall.  Everybody projected him to be the next Wilt Chamberlain--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --or something.  And in fact, he's, his injuries had healed.  There's a plate in his leg, I think.  And they, the Portland Trail Blazers traded Jordan to Chicago for Sam Bowie.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Sam Bowie played maybe a quarter of a season and was injured again, the same leg, same time and over the course of the next ten years I mean his leg would never properly heal up.  Is there--did, did you follow that at all in the papers?
Speaker 2: I, oh, I knew of it, but I wasn't privy to the medical aspects of it as to exactly why he didn't fully recover.  And it seems that he apparently had either a malunion or a nonunion of bone.  Certain bones are, especially down in that part of the leg, are very slow to heal and then the fact that he had a plate.  I don't know if the plate was taken out.  Sometimes when you take the plate off, immediately after you take the plate off the bone is actually weakened for a good period of time before those holes, where the screws were in, fill in with bone and become hard again.  Those areas become what we call stress risers.  And, and if you torque it right, put the right kind of bending moment on it, can break it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 606753
Speaker 1: Is there any particular injury that really surprised you, which--is there any, like, story of a--was this pretty much a routine--once you achieve mastery of this, is it pretty much routine on down the line, you know, doing--or?
Speaker 2: That is, yeah, it's pretty much routine now.  I, after forty years I've seen most of the kind of, kind of injuries that happens in civilian life, you know, in warfare you'd probably see, you know, all kinds of open, devastating kind of problems.  But fortunately, in civilian life, we don't see those kind of massive things, except maybe in automobile accidents.
Speaker 1: In terms of prevention, is there anything that, that's reflected in the everyday popular culture diet of black people that would make their bones more susceptible, or is there any diet that you would recommend for people to keep their bones healthier?
Speaker 2: Well, for older people, it should be foods that are fairly high in calcium.  And I have a, a lecture that I give to seniors, and it's called 'Collard Greens and Hip Fractures' [ph.].  And it's that because I want to impress upon them that dark leafy vegetables is the way to go, and collards, turnips.  And the only dark leafy vegetable that is not good for bones would probably be spinach.  Spinach has many other nutrients, but the calcium in spinach is not made available to be absorbed in the, in the, in the body.  And, and then for others, if they can't maintain it in a diet, I suggest that they take a supplement of calcium with vitamin D.  And, and then others who have a definite diagnosis--this is prevention.  And those who have a definite diagnosis of osteoporosis may have to have other drugs added, such as Fosamax, to help strengthen the bones and to help them to better utilize the calcium that they take in.
Story_ID: 606754
Speaker 1: You have a wide range of interests that you volunteer for.  Can you talk about some of your volunteer activities?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't have a, a wide range.  And the reason for it is that I sort of go with Bill Cosby's philosophy.  And he said that one way of guaranteeing failure is to try to please everybody.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so, in order to have any kind of impact, rather than dilute all of the efforts, I just pick a couple of ones that I'll be serious about.  I've been on the board of directors of the American Diabetes Association, the Chicago [Illinois] affiliate.  And during the time, that time, I was a member and officer of the board of directors and devoted as much time as I possibly could to making my time on their board worthwhile.  I've been on the board of, of--the national board of oth- Operation PUSH [Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois], and more recently, my extra time has been devoted toward helping to raise fund for my--funds for my alma mater, Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee].  I have served as president of the local alumni association.  I was in that capacity for several years, and, and I continue to do that.  I used to go do--ski and fish but don't do as much of that now as I used to.  When my son [Derek West] was young, I used to sponsor a bus once a year, fill up the bus with relatives and all of my staff's children, and take them skiing every year.  And most of them became very good skiers.  I was a member of the (Unclear), which is a group of physicians.  And, and the reason for them is, is sort of a fraternal order of physicians that promoted interrelationships between our families and support for each other's practices.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 606755
Speaker 1: Now what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well, one concern is young adult--young African Americans not taking advantage of the some of the opportunities that's thrown in front of them.  My generation, had they had some of the opportunities that these kids had would have taken advantage of them in a big way.  I have a concern that the few of us who have achieved something might be a one generation super boy, you know.  And I've, to that end, tried to be a mentor to as many youngsters as I could, members of my family and other children who've come by me through my office.  And I'm proud to say that many of them have gone on to have professional careers of their own in medicine, law, business, and some other disciplines.  But that's the main thing, is that we have a good supply of professionals coming back to our community.  It seems that as time goes by now, we're getting worse off than we were years back.  There is a large segment of the black community now that's considered medically underserved because there are so few medical professionals and such scarce medical, medical resources in those communities right here in Chicago [Illinois] even.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 606756
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently now if you could?
Speaker 2: No, I th- I don't.  Things seemed to have fell in order very well for me.  And I can't think of a medical specialty that I would have enjoyed more than the career that I've had as, as an orthopedic surgeon.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And likewise, when you look back on your career, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: (Pause) I don't know if it would be considered a legacy or not, but the fact that I went out on my own and started a practice from scratch and built it and almost to the point of it being an institution on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois], and I think that I've serviced the people of my community and the area that I, I've served, I think I've done a reasonable job.  Again, I hope that I won't be a one generation wonder boy for the community.  I'm hoping that some others will continue the kind of service for this community that I've started.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 606757
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about your family now.
Speaker 2: I have a son who's, did follow in my footsteps.  And he is an interventional radiologist over at the University of Illinois [University of Illinois Hospital and Health Sciences System, Chicago, Illinois], and his name is Derek West.  Brothers and sisters, most of them were able to leave Montezuma [Georgia] and pursue good careers of their own.  I have a sister who retired from the board of education, the City of Chicago [Chicago Board of Education], a brother who retired from the board of education here.  He taught at the Chicago vocational school [Chicago Vocational High School, Chicago, Illinois].  Another brother who recently retired as a placement director for a vocational school in Columbus, Georgia.  His twin--they both are graduates of Fort Valley State College [Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia], and his twin retired from Delta Air Lines.  And another brother, who is just older than I, finished Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama].  And he had a career of working with disabled, mentally challenged youth.  And he retired a few years ago.  Actually, I am the only one out of the nine that's still working (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so the pendulum is pointing toward me now for retirement.
Speaker 1: So you're looking forward to retirement soon?
Speaker 2: I'm looking forward to retirement soon, yes.
Story_ID: 606758
Speaker 1: Well, is there anything we haven't asked you that we need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: No, I can't think of anything.  It seems like you covered everything very well.
Speaker 1: Well, all right.  Well, the last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered as a person who remained anchored in spite of the few things that I was able to achieve and feel that I--what I've done has been an inspiration for other members of, of my family to try to achieve, one member who is generous and compassionate and one who took the work ethic very seriously, worked hard, and, and tried to always do my best.
Speaker 1: All right.  You can't do any better than that.  Thank you, sir.
Speaker 2: All right, thank you.
