Story_ID: 29244
Speaker 1: All right.  My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is Isiah Warner, I-S-I-A-H, W-A-R-N-E-R.
Speaker 1: Okay, and--
Speaker 2: Middle initial "M".
Speaker 1: And what does it stand for?
Speaker 2: Manuel.
Speaker 1: Okay, and that's M-A--?
Speaker 2: M-A-N-U-E-L.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My date of birth is July 20, 1946.  I was born in DeQuincy, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: And how do you spell DeQuincy?
Speaker 2: Capital D-E-, capital Q-U-I-N-C-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a professor of chemistry.  That's the occupation I claim (chuckle), but I'm also vice chancellor for strategic initiatives at LSU.
Speaker 1: All right, that's Louisiana State University?
Speaker 2: Right, Louisiana State University.
Speaker 1: And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is, it must be November 5, 2004.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in my laboratory at LSU [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], my chemistry laboratory at LSU.
Story_ID: 29245
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, before we go into depth, there are five light-weight, "People Magazine-ish" type questions that I am compelled to ask you--
Speaker 2: Yes, sure.
Speaker 1: --and they only require a short answer.  The first one is, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Oh, favorite ethnic food, type of food?
Speaker 1: Any kind of food, yeah.
Speaker 2: I would say probably Thai food is my favorite.
Speaker 1: Now, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Favorite color is blue.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Favorite time of the year is probably this time of the year when it's not too warm and not too cool.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And that time of the year is in the autumn.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Favorite vacation destination.  It's probably overseas, and that could be Europe or Africa.  My wife [Della Blount Warner] and I have traveled extensively in Europe and in Africa.
Speaker 1: All right, now, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Probably my favorite phrase for myself is to always remind myself of who I am, and not get caught up in activities like this and think that I am more important than anyone else.  And so in that respect, a favorite phrase is I always say to myself, "I'm Isiah Warner, and I'm a country boy from Bunkie, Louisiana."  So I always remember who I am, and not get caught up in all of these kinds of things.
Story_ID: 29246
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, I'm gonna ask you about your family history.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side.  And we'll start with your mother's side.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Full maiden name?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: My mother's full maiden name was--and my mother passed away about ten years ago, it was Erma, E-R-M-A, Pricilla, St. Romaine.
Speaker 1: And how do you spell St. Romain?
Speaker 2: S-T- period, capital R-O-M-A-I-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born February 29th, I have to do some calculations.  Let's see, she was, oh, boy, I have to go way back.  It was in the 1920s, and I don't remember the exact right now.  It was like '26 [1926] or '28 [1928].  It must have been '28 [1928], 1928, cause I'm trying to calculate it relative to my father's birth.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right--
Speaker 2: I can, yeah, 1928 cause my mother was eighteen when I was born.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Mansura, Louisiana, M-A-N-S-U-R-A.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what do you know about your ancestors on your mother's side of the family?
Speaker 2: Well, I can go back all the way to my great grandfather.  I can remember him when I was young.  His name was Pierre Carmouche.
Speaker 1: How do you spell Carmouche?
Speaker 2: C-A-R-M-O-U-C-H-E.  And his wife's name, my great grandmother was Ida Carmouche.  I don't know what her maiden name was.
Speaker 1: Okay, are there any stories about that side of the family?  Do they go all the way back to slavery, I mean to slavery days and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  They go all the way back to slavery days.  I haven't pursued that history.  I don't think my great grandparents were slaves, but certainly before them, there were slaves.  My grandmother used to tell me stories about slavery.
Speaker 1: Can you remember any stories that she told, any--?
Speaker 2: Well, I can remember some, some things that she would tell me.  She would tell me, for example, about her great grandfather, I'm sorry, her grandfather.  It would be my great, great grandfather who was apparently a medicine man from Africa.  And she would tell me the story about how he had all these different medicines, and there would be people from all over who would come to get treated for medicine.  In those days, there weren't any cures for cancer and so whites and blacks would come to him to be treated.  So it wasn't just like it was restricted to blacks.  But she told me these stories about whites and blacks who would come to him.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, yeah, he was some sort of chemist or something or apothecary--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess, yeah.  Maybe that's the first chemist, right, right.  Yeah, he probably was some herbalists is what they call them nowadays.  In fact, when I go back to Africa, there's a lot of truth to their herbalists in that they work alongside the traditional medical doctors nowadays.  And Africans really believe in the herbalists.  And it turns out that a lot of our medicinal medicine that we get from plants comes from herbs in countries like Africa, South America, and there's usually some medical basis behind the use of these compounds.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, as a matter of fact, one of my research areas, is I'm extracting some compounds that are now used in Africa for treating patients.  And we're trying to find out what are the chemicals in there that might be helping.  That's one of my research areas.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: I hadn't thought about that connection, but you make a good connection there (chuckle) because as I'm reaching back to my ancestry.
Speaker 1: Right, that's, and people are, you know, you see on television, I think Bill Kurtis' team and they're over there, documenting going to South America to find these particular herbs and stuff that only the Indians knew where they were.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, you know, there's a lot of research being done.  The natural world provides a lot of things that we don't really--it's hard for us to create otherwise.  So any other stories about your ancestors on your mother's side?  Now, he was a traditional healer?
Speaker 2: Yes, a traditional African healer.
Speaker 1: Your great, great, great grandfather?
Speaker 2: Yeah, maybe what they call a medicine man or witch doctor.  I don't know what they call them.  That's the Westernized term that's developed for them, but now they're called herbalists in Africa.
Speaker 1: Do you know his name or what--?
Speaker 2: No, I don't remember.  I don't think she's [grandmother] ever told me his name.
Speaker 1: Or what group he came from?
Speaker 2: No, no, that's the sad part of this history.  None of us know where we came from because there were no, there was no documentation.  We assume we came from some part of Western Africa.
Speaker 1: That's true for so many people.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Hardly anybody I interview knows.  Okay, any stories about Reconstruction or any of that?
Speaker 2: There was some negative stories.  I can remember one story my grandmother would tell, you know, when one of our female relatives, you know, was a house cook or housekeeper or something.  And if they were to talk back to slave master, you know, and they had to empty the, since there were no toilets, there would be toilet, you know--
Speaker 1: Those jars, slop jars.
Speaker 2: --jars and all that.  If they were to talk back, the master might throw this stuff back in their face, you know, or something like be smart or not prompt.  I can remember that story because that was very negative in my opinion.  But those are the two that stick in my mind mostly.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they didn't portray that time as a happy time?
Speaker 2: No.  It was not portrayed as a happy time.
Story_ID: 29247
Speaker 1: Now, did your family on your mother's [Erma Priscilla St. Romain] side ever own any property or anything?  Did they ever acquire any property?
Speaker 2: Yes.  As a matter of we were one of the only ones.  My grandmother essentially raised me.  My mother and father [Humphrey Warner, Jr.] were divorced from the time I was about two years old.  So my grandmother and my mother raised me.  And we were one of the first to own property in the black community.  As a matter of fact, out of all my friends, most of my friends lived in the project, the government projects.  We lived across the street in a house that we owned.  And it was through hard work and diligence that my grandmother and mother were able to purchase this land.  And I can remember, I can remember clearly going to this land, seeing nothing but a cornfield, that she had bought.  And I remember working with them and stripping this land down so that a house could be built on this property.
Speaker 1: So, and they, your grandmother and mother actually supervised the building of a house on the property?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, they got someone to build the house, but I can remember them and my uncle and us clearing off the land so that it can be built, right.
Speaker 1: Well, that's something, to see a house built, you know, I think that happens very rarely now that we, you know, unless people have a lot of money, where they identify a spot for a house and build it.  So, now, what did your grandmother do for a living?
Speaker 2: My grandmother was a housekeeper, housekeeper and, that's primarily what she did, housekeeper and cooking.  My mother was the same thing, housekeeper and cook.  And that's primarily what they did.
Speaker 1: Now, did your mother or your grandmother have much chance to go to school or anything?
Speaker 2: My mother had an eighth grade education.  My grandmother probably didn't have much formal education at all, maybe second or third grade education, as I recall.  And the interesting thing also is that Creole, they were both fluent in Creole.  That side of my family spoke this broken French language called Creole.  And they would use it to talk above the kids.  So I never learned the language, but I know a few words.  But they would use it in the house so that the kids wouldn't understand what they, when they wanted to talk about something (unclear).
Speaker 1: And tell me--
Speaker 2: Interesting stories, my grandmother was more fluent in this language than she was in English.  I can remember when President Kennedy, it wasn't President Kennedy, that [John F.] Kennedy as a candidate was running for president.  And he was speaking on television in English, and my grandmother heard him and she turned to me and said, what language is he speaking?  And I didn't know what she was talking about.  I said, what do you mean, what language is he speaking?  She said, what is that language that he's speaking.  And it dawned on me she must have meant what accent is that, you know.  I said, well, grandmother, he's speaking English.  And she said, you know what I mean.  And I said, well, it's an accent from, a Boston accent from the area of the country where he comes from.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, I had a--well, is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: Yes, sort of.  I can vaguely remember that story.  They met, my father started dating my mother in the little, in the town of DeQuincy [Louisiana], which is where he's from.  And my mother and grandmother lived there for a while.  And so my grandfather and father became close friends and some kind of way, he was, introduced him to my mother.  And they courted for a while, and he decided, you know, he wanted to marry my mother.
Story_ID: 29248
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: It's Humphrey, H-U-M-P-H-R-E-Y, Warner.
Speaker 1: Okay--.
Speaker 2: Junior.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: It's July 7, 1924.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: I can go back to my great grandmother.  And her name was Lou Cosby was her maiden name, Lou Crosby, L-O-U Crosby.  I don't know if that was Luella or whatever.  All I know is Lou Crosby, and that side of my family is absolutely amazing in terms of longevity.  I mean they lived to be old.  When my grandmother, my great grandmother, Lou Crosby, died, she was 106 years old.  And she, up until she died, she was taking care of her baby boy who was in his eighties (laughter), my grandfather and housekeeping, cooking and everything.  And I can remember going over to the house, you know, because my grandfather's wife died in the '50s [1950s] from cancer.  And so it just dawned on me, her name was Ida too.  I hadn't made that relationship.  Her name was Ida Warner, yeah, I remember that.  Ida, and I know the maiden name.  They're from near here in the Baker, Louisiana area.  I'll have to think of it later.  I can't remember the name.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, with such old relatives, I mean who lived such a long time, did they have stories to tell, that they passed on to you?
Speaker 2: No, they didn't pass, I didn't see them because, as I indicated, my mother [Erma Priscilla St. Romain] and father [Humphrey Warner] were divorced from the time I was about two years old.  And so I didn't see them very much.  And my grandfather would tell stories, but I don't remember all those stories (chuckle).  He was a man very curious.  And it was obvious to me that my grandfather on my father's side was a very intelligent man, wasn't educated, no formal education.  But he acquired a lot of property.  To this day, he owned some property in Houston [Texas], and people tried to figure out how in the heck could a black own this property in Houston in a very wealthy area in Houston.  And he would question things.  You know, when man first landed on the moon, he wanted to know if I believed that.  I said, yes.  He said, oh, baby boy, you know that's not true.  They're playing around in somebody's backyard.  They're not on the moon.  If they were on the moon, God wouldn't allow that (laughter), you know.  I could never convince that man till the day he died that man had landed on the moon.  So I had a lot of interactions with him.  I didn't have very many interactions with my great grandmother, his mother.  I think she had a little bit less patience with kids.  But my wife [Della Blount Warner] was so fascinated by that side of my family that she wanted to meet her baby sister who was 102 years old.  So my wife and I decided, we were visiting back home from the State of Washington, my wife said, "Well, let's go visit her."  "I said, okay, we'll go tomorrow.  We'll drive over there," and my wife said, "Shouldn't we call?" I looked at her and said "Well, where would a 102 year old woman be but at home?"  And so we drove over to see her in Wilson, Louisiana.  She had just hopped a bus to go visit her great grandkids in Oklahoma.  So my wife never got to meet her.  And, I mean, they were so active in their 100s.  You know, I just hope that I capture some part of that longevity, you know, not only to live long, but to have a healthy life and with sharp minds.  And they all had that.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what can you tell us about your father's personality?  What did he do for a living and--
Speaker 2: He did various kinds of jobs.  When I was growing up as a teenager, he was a longshoreman, worked on ships.  He was a painter at various times.  So he was just a regular worker.  My father had a ninth grade education, went back and got his GED later on.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you get a chance to know him fairly well at all?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  My father's still alive.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know my father very well.  As a matter of fact, you know, I mentioned the fact that they were divorced, but my father would stop in at the school unexpectedly even though we were probably 120 miles from where he was.  He'd just drive up and check on us in school.  So the principal knew him as well as he did any other father.  And we spent summers with my father.  He made sure of that, even though we didn't, at first didn't wanna go, he made sure that we would come and spend time with him so that we could get to know him well.
Speaker 1: Well, that's good.
Speaker 2: And to this day, my father will say that the divorce was not my mother's fault.  It was totally his fault.  He said he was just not settled enough, and if he had settled down more, never would have divorced.  And he regrets that.  In his old age, that's all he talks about is the fact that he didn't settle down and stay with his family.
Speaker 1: Okay, but he certainly seemed to have been concerned and--
Speaker 2: Yes, he was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He just had major surgery last week.  He's staying with my brother [Charles].  My father is a strong man, very opinionated.  It's very difficult to convince him, sort of, I guess sort of like my grandfather, except in a more obstinate way.  It's difficult to convince my father (laughter) he's not wrong about something.  If he believes something, you have to do a lot of convincing to convince him he's wrong about.
Story_ID: 29249
Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Earliest childhood memory.  Vaguely, when I was told the story, there was an incident when I was a little over two years old where I drank kerosene and ended up in the hospital.  And I vaguely remember some elements of that, and I became unconscious.  And I'm told by my grandmother that my mother [Erma Priscilla St. Romain] was working in the cotton fields.  She grabbed me and picked me up and ran through the cotton fields with me.  And then they rushed me to the hospital in Alexandria [Louisiana] where they pumped, they pumped all, tried to pump these fumes out of me.  I guess I'm lucky to be alive, considering the time that that happened.  That was in the late '40s [1940s].
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  It sound like an early manifestation of the interest in chemistry.
Speaker 2: That's exactly what I tell people, is that that was my first chemistry experiment.  So I decided to test it by mouth and learned that that's not the way you test chemicals.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have brothers and sisters, sir?
Speaker 2: Yes, I have one brother and one sister.  My brother is a professor at South Carolina State [University, Orangeburg, South Carolina].  And he spent twenty-seven years in the [U.S.] Navy, has a master's degree in mechanical engineering and in, he's now on the faculty, engineering faculty at South Carolina State.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your sister?
Speaker 2: My sister lives in Cottonport, Louisiana, and she's married and they own a business, a night club, she and her husband, and she also works for the state here in Baton Rouge [Louisiana], drives from Cottonport to Baton Rouge all the time.
Speaker 1: Now, are you, where do you fall in the order?  Are you the--?
Speaker 2: I'm the oldest.
Speaker 1: The oldest?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well, tell us about, now, you grew up in Bunkie [Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: Bunkie.
Speaker 1: Bunkie.  How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: B-U-N-K-I-E.
Speaker 1: Bunkie, okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Interesting--
Speaker 1: Bunkie, Louisiana.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Bunkie got its name from a plantation owner whose daughter had a speech impediment.  She had a pet monkey and she couldn't say monkey.  She called it Bunkie, and so the pet monkey was named Bunkie.  And when they decided to name the town, they named the town Bunkie after the monkey Bunkie (laughter), and interesting story.  I never believed them until I saw it printed in the paper one day.  Then I believed it.
Speaker 1: My word, that's quite a story, so.  So Bunkie, Louisiana, you grew up there.  How did the family come to move to Bunkie?  Now, your parents met in DeQuincy [Louisiana], right?
Speaker 2: Right, that's right.  After the divorce, I assume that my parents weren't, my mother and grandmother rather, wanted to move to Bunkie and closer to Mansura [Louisiana] where most of the relatives were.  Mansura is only fifteen miles away from Bunkie.  So, and my auntie, my aunt, my grandmother's aunt lived in Bunkie.  So I imagine she had some influence and a matter of fact, I'm pretty sure, I recall that we lived with her for a while when we first moved back to Bunkie before we got our own place.
Speaker 1: Now, what were, can you describe the place that you grew up in?
Speaker 2: The town?
Speaker 1: Well, the neighborhood, you know--
Speaker 2: As I indicated, the neighborhood, most of my friends lived in the government projects.  There were a few exceptions.  On my side of the street, there were about three or four families that owned their own homes.  And across the street were the projects which filled up the whole block, you know, the block in front of us, the block on the side.  It just filled up the whole block.  And it would be one block deep and one block wide.  And so these are the friends that we share school and time with.
Speaker 1: Now, were most of the houses like frame houses or brick or what?
Speaker 2: Yes, our house was a frame house.  The project homes were brick.
Story_ID: 29250
Speaker 1: Tell us what were, we always ask this question, and take your time with it, but what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, there was always the smell of cotton.  During the summertime, we used to work in the cotton fields.  And that's how I earned money in the summertime to help my parents [Humphrey Warner and Erma Priscilla St. Romain] pay for my school clothing.  There wasn't many sounds of cars because I can't think of anyone, maybe one or two families had a car of their own.  Mostly where we went, we walked there.  At the time it seemed like a long ways.  Nowadays, I walk and it seems very short because the blocks are very short.  The Catholic church, I was raised in the Catholic church--I'm Catholic, was about a block from my house.  And there was a priest there, Father Pago who took a very, great interest in my brother and I because when he taught, when he taught classes, he recognized that we were very bright.  And so he made us altar boys.  We became altar boys at two years old.  And every year--
Speaker 1: Two years old?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry, in second grade, when I was second grade, not at two years old.  When I was in the second grade--
Speaker 1: I was gonna say, that's a story (laughter)--
Speaker 2: No, yeah, right, yeah, no, it wasn't two years old.  When I was in the second grade, became an altar boy, and every year, he would give a silver dollar to the altar boy who had the best grades.  And I think that's one of the things that inspired us to do well in school.  Both my brother and I did well in school.  And I had a cousin who was also an altar boy, and I remember one year he won that silver dollar.  And I swore that my brother and I would never let that silver dollar out of the family again (laughter), out of the immediate family.  And so from then on we'd work hard to get that silver dollar, to earn that silver dollar.  It would always be earned by my brother or myself.
Speaker 1: Now, what was the name of your church?
Speaker 2: St. Christopher's.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It doesn't exist anymore.
Speaker 1: Crispers?
Speaker 2: St. Christopher.
Speaker 1: Christopher, St. Christopher, okay.
Speaker 2: Right.  It doesn't exist anymore because back in those days we had black churches and white churches.  And eventually Bunkie [Louisiana] got rid of the black church because of a limited number of priests.  And now it's the white church across town that everyone goes to, St. Anthony's.
Speaker 1: All right.  What were some of the other sights and sounds and smells?
Speaker 2: There just wasn't very much in my hometown. (laughter)  It was a rural town.  Cotton, I mean not just cotton, but any kind of agriculture was the biggest industry, sugar cane, cotton, soy beans and those kind of things.
Speaker 1: Did you see a lot of green around you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, lots of green, lots of corn.  There was corn fields on the opposite side of the projects.  There would be corn fields, and there would be cotton fields, and before the projects were built there, I can remember there were cotton fields on the area where the projects were built later on.  And the cotton fields used to be directly across the road from my house when I was young.
Speaker 1: All right, well tell us what kind of personality did you have as a little boy?
Speaker 2: I was very much an introvert, very shy, very introverted, very different than my brother.  I can remember the first grade, my uncle's wife had a sister who was going to high school.  And my, I didn't wanna go to school by myself.  My mother [Erma Priscilla St. Romain], who was working, she couldn't take me every day.  So they had her to take me to school.  One day, she walked off and forgot me or got tired of me or what.  I don't know.  But I'm standing there, I can remember crying the whole time, decided well, she's not coming.  I'm gonna go home by myself.  So I cried and walked myself home, which was only about, one, two, three, four, maybe five blocks (chuckle), six blocks at the most.  But I cried all the way home cause I had to go by myself.  And from then on, I told my mother I can go home--go to school by myself.
Speaker 1: So what was the name of your school?
Speaker 2: It was Carver High School, well, Carver High and elementary.  It was Carver.  It went from kindergarten, well, from first grade all the way to twelfth grade.
Story_ID: 29251
Speaker 1: So, well, tell me about school.  Now, Carver High School, what were your favorite subjects in school?
Speaker 2: Oh, I always liked science and mathematics.  Early on, you know, I went back and looked at my grades.  They were terrible when I was in first grade, again, probably because of my emotional attachment to my mother [Erma Priscilla St. Romain].  You know, I was very emotionally attached to my mother, didn't wanna be away from her, which is part of the reason why they had to escort me to school.  So my grades were terrible, but as I progressed, it was clear to everyone that I was "the student" in the class.  And I graduated Valedictorian of my class eventually.
Speaker 1: Did it bother you, I mean how old were you when your parents [Erma Priscilla St. Romain and Humphrey Warner] separated?  Were you--
Speaker 2: I was two.
Speaker 1: Two, so you don't really remember much?
Speaker 2: So I don't remember that, no.  And I don't think it bothered me.  I just don't remember it.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that wasn't an issue or anything?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: But you were a good student, a pretty bright student?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was a pretty good student, as I progressed along, you know.  I didn't start out to be a good student.  But as I progressed along, I--and again, it's the challenge of this priest with the silver dollar.  You know, I said, oh, I'm gonna get that silver dollar.  And I wish I'd kept those silver dollars.   They would probably be worth a lot of money now, a lot more than a dollar.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But it was those challenges.  And there were always people instrumental in my life.  When I got into high school, the principal took a lot of interest in me.
Speaker 1: What were his name?
Speaker 2: Prince Albert Frazier, P. A. Frazier.
Speaker 1: Prince Albert Frazier.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, any other teachers that you remember that really--
Speaker 2: Oh, there were lots of teachers there that I remember.  I can remember Ms. Nadie (ph.) White who was strict and disciplined.  And I guess the first teacher that had an impact on me and made believe I was something special was a teacher named Mrs. Wickcliffe, W-I-C-K-C-L-I-F-F-E.  She loved to hear me read.  She thought my voice was so melodious.  She thought I would read with such eloquence that she'd have me reading before the class.  And I think this was fourth or fifth grade.  And after I'd read, she'd say, "Isn't his voice beautiful?  Isn't he just a wonderful reader?"  And the kids would be looking around saying, what's wrong with this woman (laughter), you know?  We don't hear anything special.  But her special interest in me encouraged me also.  And I don't know why she thought I was so special, but she really thought I was special and treated me that way.  And because of that, also I wanted to perform better.
Speaker 1: How many students were in your class typically?  You know, was it like a, the grades kind of lumped together or was it--?
Speaker 2: No, there were separate sections.  Typically, it may have been twenty to thirty students in a class.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: We all moved up through elementary school together, but then the music teacher decided, he's having trouble in high school scheduling classes.  So he put all of the places in music the same section.  So we had our class reoriented.  You know, before that we had all stuck in the same people we had been with.  When we got to the ninth grade, the music teacher changed all that around and put all of the people in the choir and the band in the same section.  So one day in the ninth grade, we were singing for morning invocation.  We were singing 'Let Us Break Bread Together.'  And when we finished, then we heard all this clapping.  And we looked up.  All the teachers from down the hall had come to hear who this group was, singing like that (laughter).  And they said, we've never heard a class that could sing like this.  But they didn't know that this was the choir singing (laughter) cause Mr. Green had arranged it all so that we'd all be in the same class.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's something.  So, you sang in a choir?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What else did you enjoy doing?
Speaker 2: Oh, I loved playing music.  I just loved music in general.  Mr. Green was a big factor in my life.  He was our music teacher.  He was a big factor in my life.  I mean this was a no nonsense man.  I still keep up with him to this day.  I had a fiftieth birthday party, and I invited him to this.  He was just a no, nonsense person who believed in strict discipline, believed in perfectionism, you know.  And he just instilled those kinds of qualities in me.  I played the baritone sax, you know.  And we'd be playing and he hears, baritone sax, what are you doing?  I don't hear that note coming in when it's supposed to come in.  I mean he's just absolutely an amazing man.  He sung and performed on off-Broadway.  He would take some of the popular tunes and choreograph the whole band.  He would write parts for each instrument and then choreograph the whole band.  So everybody will, when there were parades during the holidays, everybody wanted to see Bunkie's band because they knew that Bunkie's band was something else because of Mr. Green.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah.  Did he stay in Bunkie [Louisiana] or did he move on to a college or something?
Speaker 2: When the schools segregated, integrated, I'm sorry, when the schools integrated and became, he was no longer a high school teacher.  They put him back in the elementary school to teach.  And then somebody else took over the high school.  I mean integration did not treat the black faculty well, and the interesting thing is a lot of us from Bunkie are very motivated because of those teachers.  Those opportunities don't exist in Bunkie anymore because there aren't the teachers there to push us.  You know, we didn't have the best equipment, we didn't have the best schools.  But we had teachers who would push us and push us.  And that helped motivate a lot of people.  As a matter of fact, I heard somebody exclaim recently, you know, why are there so many Ph.D.s from Bunkie?  Was there something in the water?  You know, (laughter), and we don't know.  I think it's the teachers that made a difference, that pushed us on.  I had a good friend of mine who has a Ph.D. in chemistry, he's a vice president at University of Washington, just came recently.  And that's where someone said, I just saw someone else from Bunkie with Ph.D..  Why are there so many Ph.D.s from Bunkie?
Speaker 1: That's something, that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and a lot of people bemoan that, you know, the loss of the, I guess the--
Speaker 2: The leadership in the community really.  The teachers were leaders, the teachers and the preachers.  Those were the leaders in the black community.  We've lost the teachers, and so the community doesn't still, doesn't have the same cohesiveness that it used to have.
Speaker 1: And the preachers can't do it by themselves.
Speaker 2: That's right, because the teachers actually see us more often.  The preachers see us only once on Sundays, right?  The teachers see us five days a week, so we've lost that.
Story_ID: 29252
Speaker 1: Okay, well, as you progressed through high school, did you, I mean when did you first take your first chemistry course?
Speaker 2: It was probably about the tenth grade.  A brilliant man taught me chemistry, but he was quite lazy.  I mean he'd sit there, and he'd talk to us about chemistry.  He didn't do much lecturing on the board.  We tried to do mathematical computations, I can remember once we wanted to do something.  And we were wanting to go to the board and multiple it out, said, why do you have to do that?  And he did it in his head.  I said, how did you do that?  And he showed, talked about how he approximated the numbers and got a good estimate.  He was within five or so on a number that was in the thousands, okay?  And I was fascinated by that and thinking that this has got to be the smartest man in the world, but, you know, it's a trick.  I mean you learn how do those kinds of things.  We didn't have a laboratory.  We didn't have the chemicals, and if we had the chemicals, I'm not sure that he would have (laughter), he would have had the laboratory because he was, but he was a brilliant man.  And so I admired his brilliance, and I picked his brain all the time.  Same thing with our biology teachers.  We had a biology teacher who was very brilliant, picked his brain all the time, man math teacher.  I had a math teacher who was a young woman, came in about the eleventh or twelfth grade.  I'd pick her brain all the time, and I just knew that I loved science.  It was just something, early on, when I was about twelve years old my father got me a chemistry set cause I left begging for a chemistry set.  I don't know, oh, I do know why.  I take it back.  It was 'Mr. Wizard' on television.  I used to watch, that was my favorite show when I was growing up, 'Mr. Wizard.'  And so I wanted a chemistry set so I can do chemistry.  My grandmother wouldn't let me do it, play with it in the house.  We'd have to go outside cause she was afraid we'd burn the house down.  But I still have fond remembrance of that chemistry set.  And I was talking to a group of students recently about it.  And I couldn't remember exactly when we got the chemistry set.  So I called my brother up and said, when did we get that chemistry set?  He said, "Why are you asking that?"  I said, "Because I was talking to a class about it."  He said, "Well, that's amazing."  He said, "I was just talking to a class about that exact same chemistry set," you know.  And so, you know, obviously it had some impact on both of us.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you watched the Don Herbert, you watched 'Mr. Wizard?'
Speaker 2: That's right.  Yeah, that was probably my favorite show.  I can't think of any show I enjoyed more than that one.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you, well, you liked to play music, but did you listen to popular music too and stuff like that?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I listened to popular music, but because I was so introverted, I didn't go out dancing or anything like that.  I can remember from my senior prom, my so-called girlfriend, I never really had a girlfriend (laughter), but there was this young woman that I guess took an interest in me, and I guess we called each other girlfriend, boyfriend [phone ringing]--I don't know why somebody's not answering that phone, called each other girlfriend and boyfriend.  And she and her cousin and his date picked me up at the, for the prom.  And after the prom, we went out for the prom, and then after the prom, they dropped me off while they went off dancing, went off partying I guess the rest of the night.  That's how introverted I was.
Speaker 1: They dropped you off and the rest of them--
Speaker 2: They dropped me off and they went off partying, and my brother said that night I came home and opened my chemistry book.  I think he's right.  I do recall that.  I came home (laughter) and started studying chemistry, and my brother said I made life hard for him.  You know, on my fiftieth birthday, they sort of roasted me.  And he--
Speaker 1: Go ahead.
Speaker 2: They were roasting me, and my brother said, "Can you imagine having to come behind this guy, and everybody's telling you, why can't you be like your brother?"  And I would say to them, "Nobody can be like Isiah.  He's not human" (laughter).  That's what my brother said.  So everybody was laughing about that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were really serious about chemistry?
Speaker 2: I was serious about chemistry.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was serious about science, and chemistry was just one of them.  And, in fact, it was my English teacher, when I, I had a full scholarship to Southern [University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  LSU [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] was still segregated.  So I couldn't come to LSU.  And I had a full scholarship to Southern.  My English teacher said, what are you gonna major in?  I said, I don't know, but it's gonna be some area of science.  And she said, well there's a chemistry institute.  Let me see if I can get you into it.  And she called, and it was sixty dollars to get into it because they'd given away all the scholarships.  I called my father [Humphrey Warner], can you come up with sixty dollars?  And my father borrowed sixty dollars from his father, and that's how I got in that institute.  When I finished that chemistry institute, the chair of the department came to a group of us and said, if you guys come to Southern and major in chemistry, you can skip the first year of chemistry; sounded like a good deal to us, so that's how I ended up in chemistry.
Story_ID: 29253
Speaker 1: Okay, so you started Southern [University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] in?
Speaker 2: 1964.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what was Southern like for you?
Speaker 2: A long way from home, a long way from my mother [Erma Priscilla St. Romain] .  I'm still very attached to my mother.
Speaker 1: So Baton Rouge [Louisiana] is a long way from Bunkie [Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: No, not really.  To me, it was.  Seventy-five miles away.  To me, I felt it was a long way.  I was wondering why can't there be a college in Bunkie so I don't have to leave home (laughter).  And so again, I had a difficult time adjusting, but that summer institute really helped me out quite a bit, you know, because I was in a dormitory run by an ex-military officer.  And he ran that place like, with an iron hand.  "Hey, you do what I say do, son, or you're out of here."  He was kicking people out left and right.  He took a liking to me, he really liked me.  And later on, I went to another dormitory, couldn't study.  So most people didn't wanna go back to that dorm because he was so strict.  I went and begged him to let me come back to the dorm (laughter).  So I came back in as a proctor for the dormitory.  So I lived in the dormitory to help the students.
Speaker 1: So you had plenty of time to study there because it was so--?
Speaker 2: Yes, because, you know, there was curfews.  You had to come back at a certain hour, a time for music.  You couldn't play music at certain hours, you know.  It was just really a good place to be if you wanted to be a student, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is 1964.  Now, most of the activities were on the Southern campus, right?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: So you didn't really have to go into Baton Rouge that much for anything?
Speaker 2: No, right.  As a matter of fact, Scotlandville [Baton Rouge, Louisiana] at that time, which is right off of Southern's campus, that was an notoriously dangerous part of town.  And so very few Southern students would venture off of campus, not at night.  Daytime, it would be fine, but at night, you could get in some serious trouble.
Speaker 1: Well, the local, white population would get you or it was just a dangerous--
Speaker 2: No, it was mostly a black neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Mostly black, but it was--
Speaker 2: Right, just a dangerous area.  The people outside of Southern's campus didn't like Southern students, you know, and so that was a problem.  At least for me, that's the way I felt.  There was a nightclub right off of campus that people would go to.  I never went there.
Speaker 1: Okay, there's a, I don't know if you've ever seen Spike Lee's movie, 'School Days'--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --where he has that scene in the chicken, in the Kentucky Fried Chicken with the town people, the townies and the students.  Was it that kind of relationship where they just really didn't get along--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I mean the towns people didn't like the students.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's basically what it was in this environment.
Speaker 1: So, well, now Southern is famous for, you know, they've got a law school, and they also have like sports, I mean a big football team and band--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --that's really exciting.
Speaker 2: Yeah, back in my day, it was the band.  Yeah, football was okay, but the band was the big thing.
Speaker 1: Now, did you play in the band?
Speaker 2: No, not at--, no.  The sad thing is when you go into science and chemistry, in particular, you don't have time for any other activities.  I would have liked to have played sports, but that wouldn't work well with chemistry.
Story_ID: 29254
Speaker 1: Okay, did you play football in high school or--
Speaker 2: No, my high school didn't have a football team until my senior year.  They started training for a football team.  And the reason was, the superintendent of schools said that as long as he was superintendent of schools for Boyles (ph.) Parish, there would never be any football team at the black schools.  And there never was until he died, which was about the time my brother was coming up.  So my brother who's much smaller than me, got to play football.  We used to play sandlot football.  And I was always the best, and they still talk about that now.  If I got the ball, the whole team would have to ride me to pull me down (laughter) cause I was pretty strong for my age, incredibly strong.  I was pretty agile.  And I always wondered how I would have been as a football player.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Back then also, it was illegal for blacks and whites to play on the same field.  I don't know if you know that.  In Louisiana, there was this law that you could be jailed if you were playing on the same sports field.  There was a movie made about that where the first black team and white team played together.  There were separate contests for the black teams and the white teams.  And so in New Orleans [Louisiana], it turns out that the black team, St. Augustine and the white team, I think one of the Jesuit schools, were the state champions.  And there was a priest that got them to play together for the first time, got in some serious trouble about that.
Speaker 1: About what year was this?
Speaker 2: That was probably in the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: So it lasted that long?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Segregation, oh, yeah.  There was a time when LSU [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] was all white.  They had won a bowl game.  And they had to play Colorado, the University of Colorado or Colorado State.  And they had, the University of Colorado had, I think it was Colorado State, they had blacks on their team.  LSU could not play that team unless they got a special dispensation from the legislature.  So in order to play that bowl game, they had to get a special dispensation to play blacks, a team that had blacks on it.
Speaker 1: Now, that's, this sounds like the most extreme of the segregation laws that I've heard in terms of that, I mean.  I don't think, I don't know if that was true in Alabama or Mississippi even.
Speaker 2: No, I don't think so.  I think that was a Louisiana law, and there were some extreme laws here in Louisiana.
Speaker 1: I know LSU, Alabama--
Speaker 2: But at the same time, we didn't have all of the violence when integration occurred.  We didn't have all of the violence as some of the other towns had.  So I don't understand that discrepancy.
Speaker 1: Yeah, especially since Louisiana had so many different, I mean there's always been black folks here that have had privilege above others and different groups--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, that's Louisiana's history, particularly, in New Orleans, yeah.
Speaker 1: Even had black slave owners--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --back in the Civil War [1861-1865], not many but a few.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: So there's always these exceptions.  I think the first black force in the Civil War was the Louisiana Guards out of there.  So, which was formed independence--
Speaker 2: Well, an interesting history about Louisiana while we're talking about it, the first president of Louisiana, do you know who that was?
Speaker 1: First president?
Speaker 2: First president of LSU, I'm sorry, of LSU, William Tecumseh Sherman [Union Army General].  Sherman was president of LSU, first one, and when the Civil War started here, he resigned to take a commission in the Union Army while the students resigned to take a commission in the South.  So Sherman marching all over the South (laughter), whipping out the South, originally, he was president of LSU.
Speaker 1: No, I didn't know that.  And I think that's probably not widely known.
Speaker 2: No, it's not widely known.
Story_ID: 29255
Speaker 1: Okay, well, how did things go for you here.  I imagine they went well at Southern [University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], you know?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they did, and, you know, because of how we were raised, Southern gave me the kind of nurturing environment I needed to develop.  You know, if I were to be one of the first students at LSU [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], and, in fact, six students, black students were the first in the Class of '64 [1964] that came here.  So my class would have, was the first class, and when I say my class, in the state, was the first to integrate LSU.  They'll talk about somebody that came in the '50s [1950s], but he didn't last a semester, you know, because of the harassment.  But in the, '64 [1964] was the first time they admitted blacks to LSU in the undergraduate program.  And so Southern provided an environment in which I could grow and nurture.  Had I come to LSU, I probably wouldn't have been able to survive, not only because of the harassment, but because of the nurturing that I needed.  I wouldn't have gotten it here.
Speaker 1: Well, who were some of the teachers and some of the people that nurtured you at Southern?
Speaker 2: Oh, Vandon White, chair of the chemistry department.  He was a big person in my life.
Speaker 1: Vandon White, V-A-N-D-O-N?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Wilbur Clark.  He's a professor or organic chemistry.  He's still around.  He's retired now.  He was very important in my life.  Mildred Smalley she's still at Southern.  I don't wanna leave anybody out (laughter).  Oh, Jack Jefferson.  He lives in Nevada now.
Speaker 1: So when you were at Southern, you were like deeply merged in science?
Speaker 2: Right, there was a whole group of us.  There were probably about a dozen of us, took a lot of classes together, including our non-science classes.  Again, this is a man, similar to my high school music teacher.  Vandon White organized and orchestrated all of this so that we would take classes together.  In fact, there were some people in that group with me.  I was a senior, had graduated from high school, but there were some people who were like tenth and eleventh grade.  Vandon White arranged that they would skip the last two years of high school, come directly into college.  And on top of that, skip the first year of chemistry.  So there were some in this group who were able to do this.
Story_ID: 29256
Speaker 1: Now, was any, in the early '60s I know there were like sit-ins, the sit-in movement was going on down South and in some places.  Did any of that effect you here at Southern [University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: No, that was really in the late '60s [1960s], a lot of that happened.  No, it didn't affect us.  And in fact, I think around 1970, some of the kids who were involved in the sit-in's were actually, somewhere around either late '60s [1960s] or early '70s [1970s] or around that time, some of the kids who were originally involved in these major sit-ins were ostracized from the State of Louisiana.  They could not get an education in the state of Louisiana, not at Southern, not at anywhere.  And so just recently there was a ceremony to honor all of those kids who went elsewhere to get schooling.  And, you know, Louisiana had to admit its mistake and honor them because it was wrong, what was done.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you get involved in any campus activities?
Speaker 2: No, there wasn't any activism, well, I guess there was a little bit of activism around my senior year.  You know, when Dr. King [Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed in '68 [1968], that caused a major uprising in town.  And I recall the campus closing cause there was burning all over Baton Rouge [Louisiana] during that time.
Speaker 1: Okay, so when you were on the verge of graduating from college here at Southern, what was your plan?
Speaker 2: To avoid the draft (laughter).  I went to my draft board, and I asked them were they giving any kind of deferments.  And they said, you might as well forget that.  We're gonna get you.  And I said, well, I'm about to get married, will that help?  No.  And it went on and on, and I finally said, well, are you giving any kind of deferment?  They said, well, the only kind of deferment we give are those in national need.  If you're going, if you have a job that's national need, and we don't think you can get one of those, that's the only kind of deferment we'll give.  I said, okay.  So I interviewed with a company, Battelle Northwest, and they were gonna make me a job offer.  I said, are you in the national need.  And they said, yes.  I said, why?  They said because we're prime contractors with the Atomic Energy Commission.  I said, have you ever lost anyone to the draft?  Nope.  I said, are you gonna make me an offer?  They said, yes.  So I said, I accept.  Well, don't you wanna come and see the site?  Nope, I don't need to see anything.  I accept (laughter), and so I went to work for Battelle clear across, as far away from Louisiana as I can get in the continental United States, from Louisiana to the state of Washington, site unseen.
Speaker 1: Now, this is, how do you spell this?
Speaker 2: What?
Speaker 1: How do you spell the--?
Speaker 2: Battelle.
Speaker 1: Battelle, V-A-
Speaker 2: Battelle, B-A-T-T-E-L-L-E, and Battelle Northwest.  It was part of Battelle Memorial Institute.  They were a private company that subcontracted out to the government.  Neither my wife [Della Blount Warner] and I had ever been outside of Louisiana, Texas or Mississippi, and so she's crying all the way up to Washington State on the plane with me, very attached to her mother and father.  And we're gonna live in this little town that we had never seen before.
Story_ID: 29257
Speaker 1: Now, tell us how you met your wife [Della Blount Warner]?  Now, we didn't talk about that.
Speaker 2: Oh, it's interesting, when I'd go back to visit my father [Humphrey Warner], and this is the story I tell my wife all the time, but it's sort of true.  I'd go back to visit my father.  I'd go by and visit the high school chemistry teacher when I was in college.  It turns out the high school chemistry teacher was my wife's mother.  And so her mother took a big liking to me.  She really liked me, and so I found out she had a daughter.  My wife was absolutely gorgeous.  I never thought I was even in the same league with my wife.  She's still gorgeous.  People think that I married for a second or third time (laughter) because my wife looks twenty years younger than I do.  But my wife is only two years younger than I am (chuckle), but they think this is my second or third marriage.  And so my wife, I guess I was going away on a co-op, and I asked my wife if she'd write to me, and she said, yes.  I guess it was, no, it was before that.  When I was at my father's house, my wife would be driving by.  Her mother lived, and father, lived the next block over.  She'd be driving by, and she'd stop and say hello to me.  And after a couple of times, my father noticed this--again, I was very naive and introverted.  My father said, "Isiah, you ever say anything to that little Blount girl?"  I said, "Dad, you see me talk to her all the time."  He said, "No, no, no."  He says, "You ever ask her out on a date?"  I said, "What are you talking about, Dad?"  "Well, she's obviously interested in you."  "Why do you say that?"  "Well, she keeps stopping by here to say hello to you."  "I said, that girl's not interested in me" cause I, like I said, I thought she was just out of my league.  So when I got ready to go off to co-op, I asked her if she would write to me?  She said, sure.  I said, well, I'll write first, give you my address.  She gave me her address, and I wrote back, never heard from her (laughter).  She said she'd gotten busy and everything.  And so when I got back I thought well, she just blew me off.  She was just being kind.  And so a friend of hers called and said, "I was talking to Della (unclear), she's avoiding you cause she's so embarrassed that she didn't write back to you."  I said, "oh, she did care then (laughter).  So I asked her out on a picnic, and we went out on a picnic.  She fixed a lunch and we went out to the picnic and sat down and started talking.  That was the first time I really had a date.  And then we started dating that summer, and then we started dating when we went back to Southern, and that's how it all started.
Story_ID: 29258
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were just talking about, you know, how you met your wife [Della Blount Warner] and got married.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And shortly thereafter, you graduated and you're on your way to Washington to Battelle [Northwest].
Speaker 2: Right, yeah, here we are as a couple, had never in our entire life lived in an integrated environment.  So we landed in Washington.  The first place, we had--it turns out there was a friend of mine who graduated with me in chemistry who had gone ahead of me.  So he had a place, and we stayed with him a couple of days.  And we found a place over in Kennewick [Washington] where there were very few blacks.  And so we had this apartment that we lived in, and there weren't any blacks in the immediate community.  So we essentially lived in an integrated environment for the first times in our lives.  And we were the only blacks in the community.  And we found, we liked this place a lot because we could easily walk to stores and things like that before we, you know, before we were able to buy a car.
Speaker 1: Well, this is, you're used to like Southern University [Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and Bunkie, Louisiana, I mean, where people, there are a lot of black people, a whole black community and everybody kind of looks out for each other.
Speaker 2: Right, that's right.
Speaker 1: Well, was it tough to adjust to the situation--
Speaker 2: It was tough to adjust to that because none of the neighbors, you know, socialized with us or, you know, interacted with us, you know.  We just had each other.  In a way it was tough, but in another way it was easy because it helped us to grow closer, you know.  It's the first time we're away from home.
Speaker 1: Kind of a honeymoon in some ways?
Speaker 2: Right, yeah, right.  That's right.  That was a big part of it.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, did you enjoy working for Battelle?
Speaker 2: In a way I did.  It was a good company to start off with, but after about five years, I was very bored because it was, I was a technician.  I thought I didn't like chemistry.  In fact, there were about four or five of us from Southern [University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] who were chemistry majors who went up there and worked for Battelle, and I'm the only one still in chemistry because they didn't like it.  And I didn't like it.  I thought it was chemistry, and I went, my wife was working for a psychiatrist.  After about five years, I said, I must like something else other than chemistry.  So I went to the psychiatrist, and I said, "Do you have any aptitude tests you can give?"  He said, "Oh, yeah, I have some," and gave me the aptitude test so that I could figure out what it is I like because obviously, chemistry is not it.  Came back in a couple weeks, I said, "Well, what's the results?"  He said, "Well, you're gonna be surprised."  I said, "No, just tell me."  He said, "Well, it says you're best suited to be a chemist."  "What?  (laughter)  Well, what's wrong?  Why am I hating my job?"  And that's when he said, "Well maybe you need to go and get your graduate degree.  Maybe you hate being a technician."  And so that's where I decided to go and get a Ph.D..  I had been taking classes all along.  I probably had the equivalent of a master's because I was taking graduate classes in the area.
Story_ID: 29259
Speaker 1: Okay, so where did you go to graduate school?
Speaker 2: University of Washington [Seattle, Washington].  I was just recognized this last Spring by the University of Washington as a distinguished alumnus.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you went there to get a, was a combination master's and Ph.D. program?
Speaker 2: Ph.D.  I went directly for a Ph.D.
Speaker 1: Ph.D.  Okay.  So you can do that?  You can just bypass the master's?
Speaker 2: Yeah, in chemistry.  Most people do that in chemistry.  You don't get a master's unless you want to get a master's for some reason.
Speaker 1: Okay, so when did you start and when did you finish?
Speaker 2: I started in October '73 [1973] and finished in April of '77 [1977], about three and a half years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so, well, did you learn a lot in the Ph.D. process?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I learned a considerable amount.  And I, one of the things I learned is that I love teaching, and that's why I started, I looked at some industrial positions, but I really focused on trying to get a teaching position.  Yeah, and I started on the faculty at Texas A&M [former: Texas Agricultural and Mechanical University, College Station, Texas] .
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were a graduate assistant when you were working on your Ph.D.?
Speaker 2: Right, at the University of Washington, right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you started at Texas A&M and--
Speaker 2: As a faculty member at Texas A&M.
Speaker 1: --in '77 [1977]?
Speaker 2: Right, '77 [1977], June of '77 [1977].
Story_ID: 29260
Speaker 1: All right, well tell us about that.  Were you one of the first blacks on that faculty?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was in chemistry.  I was the first black ever on that faculty.  And the way I ended up taking that position is the chair of the department was at a conference that I, when I was giving a lecture.  And he was very impressed with my talk.  Afterwards, another graduate student gave a talk, and he got stuck with a question, and I helped answer the question.  So all that made him very impressed.  And so he went back, said, look we've got this position open.  We've got to interview this young man.  He's applied for this position.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, h- how were you received there?  I mean did people--did they expect you not to know as much because you're a black or what did they, how did they or did it matter to them?
Speaker 2: Again, I wasn't quite as aggressive as the typical person.  So, for example, when I negotiated my equipment and all that, the, there was an Asian guy, who was Chinese, took a liking to me, said, "You'd better get it in writing."  I said, "For what?"  He said, "Just get in writing."  I said, well, we shook hands, you know (laughter).  He said, "Get it writing!"  And sure enough, that was useful later on.  But the first year, there was, a member of the National Academy comes in.  He brings in two assistant professors, takes over all the space, you know.  And I didn't have any space.  I was sitting in someone else's office for a year, no laboratory.  And finally I had to pull up this letter saying I want my equipment and finally got some space.  And those two assistant professors he brought in ended up being denied tenure.  And I was given tenure.  And so, in the end, things worked out best for me.  And if it were not for that chair, I wouldn't be in academics today.  He was a big factor in my life.
Speaker 1: What's his name?
Speaker 2: His name was Arthur Martelle [ph.].  He's passed away, was it last year?  Yeah, he passed away last year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He built the chemistry department at Texas A&M [University, College Station, Texas] into what it is today.
Speaker 1: Okay, how long was it before you got tenure there at Texas A&M?
Speaker 2: Five years.  I got early tenure, a year earlier than a typical person, mostly because other schools were trying to court me like Purdue [University, West Lafayette, Indiana] was trying to recruit me.  And so they moved up my tenure early, but I didn't stay there.  Once I got tenure I just moved to Emory University [Atlanta, Georgia] because the place was so large, I decided I wanted to go to a smaller school.  And Texas A&M was the largest chemistry department in the world.  I mean they have about eighty, full-time equivalent faculty members.  So I moved to Emory University.  I applied for a position at Emory University and moved there.  They had about twenty faculty.
Speaker 1: Now, that's in Atlanta [Georgia], right?
Speaker 2: Right, in Atlanta.
Speaker 1: Now, how did you like that?
Speaker 2: I liked it much better, smaller department.  But I found out, no matter where you go in academics, there's always politics.  So, and I'd been there for ten years when LSU [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] started trying to recruit me actively.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is like, when did you go to Emory?  Was it '82 [1982]?
Speaker 2: Eighty-two [1982], right.
Speaker 1: I'm trying to calculate, okay, '82 [1982].  So you were there for ten years--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --until 1992?
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 29261
Speaker 1: All right, and--now, when you were there, I mean, were you able to engage in any independent research or anything?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I did at Texas A&M [University, College Station, Texas].  That's a requirement in those kinds of schools.  Texas A&M, Emory [University, Atlanta, Georgia], and LSU [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], it's a requirement.  If you're tenure tracked, you engage in research.  So I've been actively involved in research from the time I was at Texas A&M.
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm a chemical ignoramus myself, but there are gonna be people watching this that know some chemistry probably and they wanna know what you were doing.  So if you would explain it and don't worry about the terminology not--going over my head because (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay, when I left graduate school, one of the things I developed was a new instrument for measuring fluorescent spectroscopy.  Fluorescence has to do with--you shine light on a molecule, and molecules give you off a different light.  Both of those lights are characteristics of the molecule, the light that's absorbed and the light that's given off.  And so I, I developed an instrument that would measure all the light that was absorbed and given off simultaneously for all molecules at a given time.  And so when I left school, I started applying that instrument, I developed another instrument similar to it and started applying it to various applications.  So that was the focus of my research a lot of time, using that instrument to identify molecules.  In fact, it was used, it was a video camera really that I used as a detector since the image was two dimensional.  I would have a two-dimensional representation of the molecule, and it would be the light that was given off as a function of exciting wavelength and emitting wavelength.  And that image could be plotted, you know, as a, just as a television camera image in two dimensions.  And so I could use, apply that to identifying molecules and pollutants like poly-aromatic hydrocarbons and different kinds of molecules.  That's what I, that was my first area of research.
Speaker 1: Okay, and that's at Texas A&M?
Speaker 2: That's at Texas A&M.  And I continued that until I, after I got to Emory also, developing new kinds of applications, identifying bacteria, using this instrumentation and fingerprinting, phytoplanktons in the ocean.  You know, there were all kinds of applications that I've developed over the years for this technique.
Speaker 1: Now, what's a phytoplankton?
Speaker 2: Well, plants that are growing out in the ocean.  So that was an oceanography application that we had.
Story_ID: 29262
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, anything else that we--
Speaker 2: Well, since I've come here [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], I've started getting into the area of separation science where I develop, most drugs are chiral and chirality has to do with handiness, just like my hand, my left hand and my right hand are mirror images of each other, but I can't superimpose them.  There are molecules like that, that are mirror images of each other, same chemical formula, they can't be superimposed.  And they have a special name.  They're called chiral molecules.  And most drugs exist in that form.  They're chiral, they have two forms.  One form, they're both called enantiomers.  One might be called a "R" form and the other one called the "S" form.  And one form might be very beneficial to you medicinally.  The other form might be very detrimental to you.  And there was a drug called Thalidomide which as given to pregnant women in the '60s [1960s] and it turns out that was exactly the case.  One form was beneficial.  It was an anti-nausea drug.  The other one was a Teratogen causing birth defects.  And so women that took this drug gave birth to babies with no arms, no legs or truncated arms and legs.
Speaker 1: Right, I know some people that were born like that.
Speaker 2: Is that right?
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.  And--
Speaker 2: In this country?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It wasn't used very much in this country.
Speaker 1: Yeah, there's a, well, there's a lady I used to work with that had, was a Thalidomide baby.  She was pretty much fully formed, but she had--
Speaker 2: Oh, really.  Was she from overseas or--
Speaker 1: I don't, no, I don't think she was.  She was an African American woman.  I don't know if she was born here or in the service or something, but she, I know her hands weren't fully developed and her spinal cord was twisted and some cranial kind of problems too.  She had most of her faculties and stuff.  She could deal with things.  She worked a job and lived in a community, but she was a Thalidomide baby.  So those two forms of Thalidomide look alike.  They're mirror images of each other--
Speaker 2: Not only do they look alike, but it's only in the presence of other chiral molecules that they act different.  If you didn't have another chiral molecule, they would behave exactly the same.  They would have the same melting point, boiling point.  They would react exactly the same.  But only in a chiral environment, that is, an environment where you have other molecules that are mirror images.  It turns out the body is a factory for those kind of molecules.  All proteins are mirror images, have mirror images because all amino acids have mirror images.  So proteins--, the body's highly selective.  The body only uses pretty much "L" Amino acids.  It only uses the "B" form of the sugars.  And so the body is probably the most selective machine that you can find.  So when they introduce these two forms, the body says, I don't like this other form and it started, what happens is, when the mother takes it, that formula that's bad start truncating blood vessels.  And so since the blood vessel grows, gets truncated, the arms can't grow.  And whatever depends on growing blood vessels gets truncated.  Most drugs that are marketed are chiral.  That's an extreme case.  The less extreme case is that one is medicinal properties and the other one has no properties whatsoever.  And then there are other cases where they might have opposite properties.  One might be good for the heart and the other one might be good, just as a sedative, you know.  And they even taste, some drugs taste different.  You know, if you add different forms of sugar, one might be sour or something.  The other one might taste sweet, you know.  So the body is able to recognize these differences because it is a chiral environment.  In the normal sort of chemical reactions, it doesn't matter which is which.
Speaker 1: Now, how do you spell chiral?
Speaker 2: C-H-I-R-A-L.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  That's for my benefit, again (laughter).  A chemist would know, I guess.  But okay, well, this is interesting work.  So, you--
Speaker 2: No, I'm developing techniques to separate these molecules.  And had an idea of how to do this when I was at Emory [University, Atlanta, Georgia], but it was only here [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] that the tools were available, and I expressed this idea to one of my graduate students.  And he went out and found the resources and started doing this.  And that became a big part of my research area.
Speaker 1: So, here at the university, you're able to get a lot of the tools that you need to do (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, because it's a bigger university than Emory.  It's not a wealthier university.  Emory's endowment is about a billion dollars or a couple billion dollars.  You know, so, but this is a bigger university, has more resources.  And what I needed was a gamma radiation source.  Emory didn't have that.  There was one at Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia] across town, but I never pursued it.
Story_ID: 29263
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, has your research been like recognized by--?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I've received a number of awards.  Probably, I received as many awards for mentoring students as I have for research.
Speaker 1: We noticed when we came in here, this place was full of students and they all knew you and it seemed like--
Speaker 2: Well, these are all my students.  These are my labs.  These are all my students, undergraduates, graduate students and post docs.  Chris, for example, is a post doc.  She already has her Ph.D. so she's come here to work with me to learn some more things.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And they all seem very busy and very serious--
Speaker 2: Right.  Yeah, they're very upset with me cause I'm keeping them from doing their work right now (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you've had some good experiences with students here (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Oh, I love my students.  My students are like my kids.  I take the same pride in my students as I do in my own kids.  Any accomplishments they make, I feel happy about it.  One of my students is CEO and president of a small pharmaceutical company.  Another is vice president of Eastman Kodak.  And so I've got some students in all walks of life.  One's a professor at Dela-, University of Delaware [Newark, Delaware], one's a professor at Texas Tech [University, Lubbock, Texas].  So I've got several post docs in faculty positions all over the country.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, you know the hardest thing for us to do usually is to find successful black people in science because there aren't as many around the country, and--
Speaker 2: Well, believe it or not, I have another notoriety.  LSU [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] is the number one producer of African American Ph.D.s in chemistry.  We have thirty-two African Americans working on Ph.D.s in chemistry.  And that's the average over the last ten years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I think I've, we were told at Xavier University [New Orleans, Louisiana] that they produced more black pharmacists than any other--
Speaker 2: That's probably true, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, a lot of--
Speaker 2: I have two students in my group from Xavier.  And several of my students, black students have perfect 4.0s.  The young woman who was saying "Give me time to move my chemical," she's a graduate of Louisiana Tech [University, Ruston, Louisiana].  She's in her third year and she's got a perfect 4.0.  And she has a good friend who's a Xavier graduate who's a perfect 4.0.  Yeah, so several of my students have close to perfect grades.
Speaker 1: Okay, so when they get on this level, they've got a lot of encouragement and can do what they really need to do, but it seems like we have a problem at the lower end, you know, in grade school trying to--
Speaker 2: That's one of the things I'm working on.  That's one of the things I wanna have an impact on.  I'm running for president of the American Chemical Society.  I have an education program, which is an off--I guess we could have gone to that office if I had thought about it.  You guys then, probably parking would have been easier.  I didn't think about that.  And that office was a lot cleaner than this office (laughter), my vice chancellor's office.  And we could have done a lot of this if I'd thought about it.
Speaker 1: Okay, so have you been engaged in projects to try to get--
Speaker 2: I've been engaged in educational projects--
Speaker 1: --young people--
Speaker 2: --for young people.  And we have a program I think can be a model for the rest of the country.  And if I'm elected president of the American Chemical Society, I will try to implement that model.
Story_ID: 29264
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do black people have a chemical society?  Has there ever been a black chemical society?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's the National Organization of Black Chemists and Chemical Engineers [NOBChCE].  I'm actually on their board of directors.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But the American Chemical Society is a--
Speaker 2: The biggest organization, I mean 160,000 members.
Speaker 1: What are your chances of becoming the president?
Speaker 2: Well, people all--there are three of us running, and everyone thought that I would be a shoe-in.  But we had a mishap with our computers that I think will cost me the election.  We'll know in two weeks, well, a week and a half, a week from Monday, we'll know who's president.
Speaker 1: Now, when you were coming along in school, did you know about other black chemists in the world?  I mean had you read about any of them?
Speaker 2: George Washington Carver, that's the only person and people at Southern [University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] who were encouraging me in the chemistry department.  Southern had a phenomenal chemistry department, had sixteen faculty members, twelve Ph.D.s from some of the best schools in the country.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what do you plan to do as president of the American Chemical Society?
Speaker 2: Well, one of the things is implement some of the education programs I have in my other office.  Also, try to put interdisciplinary chemistry on a more formal footing and basically, that involves chemists and biologists and physicists interacting together.  And right now, that's happening, but it's happening in a less structured format.  I'd like to find a more structured format.  And the third thing I'd like to do is really interact with more foreign chemists.  That's been limited to some extent since nine eleven [September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks on the U.S.].  I think science should not be political, and so I like to keep it non-political, apolitical.  And so that's one of my efforts also.
Speaker 1: Now, you always hear that certain cures for disease have been discovered in other countries and they're not allowed to be used here.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I mean how much of that is really true, I mean, do you think?
Speaker 2: Our FDA [Food and Drug Administration] is a lot more cautious than many of the equivalent organizations in other countries.  We have to go through extensive testing and clinical trials before a drug is marketed because of cases like the Thalidomide case.  And so, yeah, there will be drugs that will be released in other countries before it's released here.
Speaker 1: Do you think it's good that the standards are--
Speaker 2: Right.  It certainly is good that the standards are high so that we don't end up with the kind of problems, like a Thalidomide, but at the same time sometimes, maybe the standards are too high, that we don't trust, for example, the experiments of other countries.  We have to run our own experiments and if it's being used in the other country without any problems, it seems to me there ought to be a way to expedite the use of certain drugs.
Speaker 1: Okay, I don't know how to put this, but do you have a certain kind of a scientific philosophy of your own?
Speaker 2: Well, my philosophy is trying to encourage as many people as I can to get into science.  That's all I try to do.  If you're interested in science, I try to be a facilitator to help people get into science, interested and have the aptitude for it.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're willing to go to whatever level, the grade school level, the high school level or wherever it takes to--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I've done all of that.  I've gone to talk to kids.  When my kids were in elementary school, I used to go by and visit the schools.  Now, we've got a big enough group that our group, as a matter of fact, the African American students here in chemistry, graduate students, have formed an organization, a graduate chapter of the National Organization of Black Chemists, and they function as a group.  I'm their advisor.  And they go out in the high schools and elementary schools and talk about chemistry and do demonstrations and things like that.
Story_ID: 29265
Speaker 1: For someone interested in a career in chemistry, to tell the truth, this week I've heard a couple of references to chemists from black entrepreneurs selling different hair formulas and so forth, you know?
Speaker 2: Like who?
Speaker 1: Well, Colmer Kotchen [ph.] we talked to in Dallas [Texas].
Speaker 2: Okay, cause I have--
Speaker 1: He developed Pro-Line, you know, the Jheri Curl (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was talking about his first step was to go find a chemist that could get him a formula cheap enough to outsell the other companies doing that.  And he, you know, I mean that was--
Speaker 2: I have a friend who I, one of my former students had started a company doing that.  And he has his own formula that he's patented.  So if you put me in touch with him, I can put him in touch with my friend who's in Maryland now, in the [Washington] D.C. area.  And he has a formula for Jheri Curls, well, not for Jheri Curls, I'm sorry.  He has a formula for braiding hair.  You know, when African Americans braid hair, it's lots of, it hurts a lot.  So he has a formula that--
Speaker 1: Well it's tension on your scalp?
Speaker 2: That's right.  He has a formula that keeps that tension down.  And I'm sure he can, he's one of our graduates as a matter of fact.  And I found him, and he's, I'm responsible for him getting into graduate school.  And I found him at the University, at Chicago State [University, Chicago, Illinois].  And he's come down here and did very well and went out and started his own business.
Speaker 1: And so there're a lot of, in your opinion, a lot of opportunities for young black--
Speaker 2: Oh, but with Ph.D.s in chemistry, the door is wide open for you.  You can make it whatever you want to make it.
Story_ID: 29266
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community in general?
Speaker 2: One of the things that I wish, there are so many African American kids that are being lost.  And I told you about the sense of community that we had when we were growing up.  If there were some way of recovering that, the sense of community, and finding new leaders in the community, that will help kids find their way and focus their way because without those teachers being in place for me, I had no idea, you know, about what to do, what's the next step?  There were always people who told me, okay, here's the next step, here's the next step.  And when you're growing in a rural black community, you need that sort of guidance.  And so I just hope that someday, some way, we'll find those new leaders who give us this guidance.  I do as much as I can, but I'm one person.  You know, I can't make a difference, not to say that I'm the only person that's doing this, but there aren't enough of us out there trying to help guide the black community.
Speaker 1: Okay, when you look back on your career in chemistry, and you're still fairly young at this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think, I always make a decision, and I never look back.  And there's nothing I've ever looked back and said, oh, I wish I'd done that.  I've never done that.  I've always looked forward.
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Erma Priscilla St. Romain] get a chance to see you become a successful chemist?
Speaker 2: My mother saw me become a professor here at LSU [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  I wish my grandmother could have seen that, you know, but my mother did.  For two years, one of the reasons I moved back was because my mother and father [Humphrey Warner] were getting up in age.  And for two years I was a professor here at LSU.  And I'm the first black vice chancellor of this university.  My home town is all excited about that.  They're talking about having an Isiah Warner Day one day in Bunkie [Louisiana].
Speaker 1: All right, and our last question is basically similar to legacy, but how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Probably as I indicated, you know, the country boy from Bunkie, Louisiana who came into his own--I don't wanna say made it big, but came into his own so that he could help others.  I'd like to be remembered as a person who was able to help and facilitate things for others.  That's just my nature, helping others.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you very much.
Speaker 2: All right.  Thank you.
