Story_ID: 635982
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: James M. Whitley [HistoryMaker James Whitley], J-A-M-E-S, W-H-I-T-L-E-Y.
Speaker 1: And you middle name is?
Speaker 2: Moses.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.  What is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Four, twenty-nine, nineteen thirty-four [April 29, 1934].
Speaker 1: In, you were born in?
Speaker 2: Rochester, New York.
Speaker 1: Okay and sir what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: I'm an architect for, for--title, principal, for Whitley/Whitley, Inc. [Whitley and Whitley, Architects and Planners; Whitley/Whitley Architects and Planners LLC].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: What is today's date?
Speaker 2: Four, twenty--eleven, well February 12th, that's what it is two thousand, damn, twelve [2012]?'  Fourteen [2014], 2014 (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Fourteen [2014], right.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time.
Speaker 2: At William's [HistoryMaker William Whitley] house.
Speaker 1: Okay, your brother?
Speaker 2: Right (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Story_ID: 635983
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth there are five lightweight questions we always ask as kind of a warm up, and they only require a short answer.  First one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I like red.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: The South, Florida, that part of the country (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay and the last one is do, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had that on my resume (laughter).  About a month ago, they asked the same question.  No.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 635984
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Moses Whitley] side of the family.  But separately, and then we'll put 'em together.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Beatrice, B-E-A-T-R-I-C-E, Nivens N-I-V-E-N-S, Whitley [Beatrice Nivens Whitley].  I mean her name was Nivens, that was her name.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Nivens.
Speaker 1: So, Beatrice Nivens.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born in Monroe, North Carolina.  I know it was 1902, her birth day is in July. So I'd say the 12th of July.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How, how far back can you trace that side of any stories about (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well it's--you can go way back. The last family reunion was I guess two years ago.  We were surprised they could trace way, way back.  And what happened was that it appears that during the Civil War this one guy or their great-great-great-great-grandfather was a, was on, was in the South but he was helping the North.  He had one slave, my grandmother's great-great-great-great-grandmother.  He had one slave.  All right ultimately they had children, but he helped the North so they rewarded him with land.
Speaker 1: Okay, so was he a, a black person, or?
Speaker 2: Yeah, no he was white.
Speaker 1: He, he was white and he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was white and what happened--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And what happened, and what happened--
Speaker 1: All right--
Speaker 2: No, that's what made the stories int- my, my, my cousin is trying to write a book on it.  Where he can take his life, he can take his life back another twenty, thirty years.
Speaker 1: So, he as a northern sympathizer living in the South?
Speaker 2: Living in the South.
Speaker 1: He had one slave?
Speaker 2: He had him one slave, a female.  One, one female slave.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Ultimately turned out we were surprised to learn that was one of the grandmothers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And the Brewers came from that, that group.  And, and we'll mention the Brewers many times.  'Cause that's what my mother's family calls themselves, the Brewers.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so the Brewers. All right.  B-R-E-W-E-R-S?
Speaker 2: That's it.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, so the family so this was in North Carolina, in, in the same region that, your mother was born in?
Speaker 2: Definitely, in the same, definitely the same region.
Speaker 1: Okay?
Speaker 2: It was in Nor- Char- outside Char- Charlotte, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, that--so, your, your mother's so, your, did you know your grandparents, your mother's parents?
Speaker 2: I met my grandmother [Effie Brewer Nivens] only, I remember my grandmother.  But I was about six or so.
Speaker 1: So, was, was your grandmother a, a child of the, of the white man and the--
Speaker 2: Yes,
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean she was the second generation after that.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, any, any other stories about that time?  I said seem like they have like some, some--
Speaker 2: There's a lot stories about that time, they were the, well for--they were the elite of that area.  They and we call ourselves there are about twelve different families that have sprouted from, from that name.  We're in group six, group six.  And out of group six there're fifteen, twenty that always show up at the family reunions, and they've all done quite well.  Well, we think six is the best of all the groups.  'Cause we have one guy--my cousin's a, thoracic surgeon, which is a heart surgeon, he does operating on the hearts.  I have many lawyers, and their children are lawyers.  My cousin's father was a lawyer and his three, two sons are lawyers, one a physician.  We're on the architectural, or the technical side (laughter).  The two architects and really have now, we have William's son's an architect.  I have, I've a son [Kent Whitley] that's majored in architecture--he hasn't gotten registered just yet.  And William [HistoryMaker William Whitley] has a son that majored in architecture that's not registered just yet.  But, the technical side is covered there.
Story_ID: 635985
Speaker 1: Now, did you mother [Beatrice Nivens Whitley] have a chance go to college?
Speaker 2: My mother went to college, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She met my father [Moses Whitley] at I want to say Fisk [Fisk University], up there in Nashville, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she was, so she wasn't going to Fisk, but she was going to--your, your mother was going to Fisk, or?
Speaker 2: She went to Fisk, my father went to Fisk (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right, all right.
Speaker 2: They met at Fisk.
Speaker 1: Okay, now was she the first person in her family to go to college, or did her mother [Effie Brewer Nivens] go?
Speaker 2: Her mother did not go.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, her mother did not go.
Speaker 1: So, she may have been the first?
Speaker 2: Right, she may have been the first.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay and what did you mother--did she have any stories about growing up in North Carolina?
Speaker 2: Oh my mother had hundreds of stories.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know 'cause they thought they were the elite, and, you know, they didn't take anything and they, they ran their group.  They ran their group and everybody looked up to them.  But, the Brewers in general were, were uppity people.  You know they just in other words they, they were better than everybody else.  I like their characteristic. It kind of followed through.
Speaker 1: Okay, so now what did you mother, what was she, aim for at Fisk, what, what was her aspiration (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Her as- aspiration was always to be a businessperson.  She had some limited opportunities but that was her major.  She basically didn't work.  She worked I think--she raised the kids.  After the kids were gone then she was working for the government actually Internal Revenue [Internal Revenue Service].
Story_ID: 635986
Speaker 1: I'm gonna go to your father's side now.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it?
Speaker 2: Moses, M-O-S-E-S, James Whitley [Moses Whitley].
Speaker 1: Now, what is he's date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: It's Marked Tree, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: And Mar- how, how do you spell Mar- Marked Tree?
Speaker 2: M-A-R-K, T-R-E-E [sic.].
Speaker 1: Yeah. Is there a story behind that name?
Speaker 2: No, not that I'm aware (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I understand that it's a lumber town, or was a lumber town.
Speaker 1: Mark Tree, Arkansas.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, it's just south [sic.] of Memphis [Tennessee].
Speaker 1: What year was he born?
Speaker 2: Eighteen ninety-eight [1898].
Speaker 1: Okay, now okay, so what are the stories on your father's side?  They--does he have the same kind of--
Speaker 2: No, my father's side was a little rougher.  Basically, well we had an opportunity to go to Marked Tree.  We were going to Texas, going to the [U.S.] military.  And we drove through Marked Tree.  Now, Marked Tree is across the river [Mississippi River] from Memphis on the Ark- Arkansas side.  And about, you know, twenty miles downriver.  Well, when we got there we were somewhat surprised because, of the, what we saw was all cotton.  I mean cotton as far as you could see, as tall as you could see.  I mean it was up there, and it was amazing to us to see that.  And our, our cousins were still living there. A lot of Whitleys were still there, were still there.  And they were living in houses they were off the ground above two feet, you know, chickens running under the house, that, that typical image of the South.  That's what, that was what we saw.  But, my father's best cousins were right there.  We looked them up, made that touch.  His aunts were in Memphis now.  But, that's, that's but they were on the farm side of--and so my mother [Beatrice Nivens Whitley] always thought she's better than my father now, I can tell you that right now (laughter).  And would tell him that, you know (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's, that's pretty cold.  So--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was pretty cold.
Story_ID: 635987
Speaker 1: Now was, was your father [Moses Whitley] the first person in his family to go to college (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) First, first, first.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He's first and how he got there I don't even know, I don't even know how, how he made that, 'cause he, he, you know he had no money.  He had to go and work, work his way through.
Speaker 1: Did, did he share any stories about growing up with, with you?
Speaker 2: Not really he was, my father was a quiet kind of guy.  My mother [Beatrice Nivens Whitley], big mouth.  Father was quiet, I mean he never complained or talked about hard times, or any of that.  So, from his side I never got those kinds of stories.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what was your father studying at Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: Chemistry.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did he become a chemist?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Now so your parents met at Fisk as students (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, right.
Speaker 2: And is, is there a story about how they fell in love and got together, or?
Speaker 1: No, not really, I, I never read any stories like that.  Just this country boy meets (laughter) this so called sophisticated person, you know.  That's what happens.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 635988
Speaker 1: When you think about their personalities, their, their sense of humor, their dispositions, their, way they walked, talked, the way they looked.  Who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Oh, kind of in the middle, really kind of in the middle.  My father [Moses Whitley] was very thin, he weighed probably 140 pounds or something, he's 6'2", a very narrow profile.  My mother [Beatrice Nivens Whitley] was--had a little weight on her.  So, I mean they were two different styles I'll tell you that (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: What about their personalities?
Speaker 2: My mother was a very ta- talkative person, very in fact unbelievable talkable.  She thought she should be on the radio that kind of personality and that kind of added to and that kind of skill really.  We had a, we were named family of the year here in Cleveland [Ohio].  I guess that was maybe well that's twenty, better than twenty years ago.  It may have been thirty years ago.  But, I just remember that she had an opportunity to go up in fr- with the mic and talk to the audience and there was about a thousand people out.  She was wailing.  And Mayor Stokes [Carl Stokes] had just been, become mayor and he had to take his hat off and say, "I'm sorry," you know (laughter).  This woman can talk, but she was very talkative person.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, very good.
Story_ID: 635989
Speaker 1: When did they get married?
Speaker 2: I'd say--trying to remember, my, I'd say '20 [1920], '22 [1922].  My father [Moses Whitley] was probably twenty-four or something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, 1922, okay.
Speaker 2: There's four years between 'em, so.  Well maybe '26 [1926], but I saying right after college I would assume.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, did, did you mother's [Beatrice Nivens Whitley] side of the family resent your father for being--
Speaker 2: Well, they thought they were better than they were that's for sure.  They didn't resent him.  Because--no they didn't resent him but, I mean I always heard those kinds of comments, you know.  In fact, I mean they got married and my father's mother [Elizah Whitley] followed the minster to, to Rochester, New York, Rochester, New York, the church.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well and then all of a sudden this so now when he finishes college [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee].  He takes his family to Rochester, New York, that's where I was born there.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And that was a story we always talked about.  But, his family, a whole lot of his family came with him.  So, I always heard a story about Aunt So and So and Uncle So and So.  And negative kind of comments (makes sound) or whatever on his side.  On her side it was always good (laughter) it was always good.  But, my father was tough, my father was tough. He ran the house that's for sure though.  But, he was a quiet guy.
Story_ID: 635990
Speaker 1: You're born in 1934?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Tell us about your siblings. You, you--we know about your brother, but--well can you, can you name the rest of your siblings from oldest (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure, my oldest sister is Gloria Whitley [Gloria Whitley Fleming].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Or Gloria Fleming, her name is now.  She, she was six years older than I am.  So, in terms of relating to her, I was always the little kid and she was, you know, finishing high school, or in college and I'm still in junior high school or whatever, so.  I saw that kind of activity but we got close after, after her, after college, way after college.  My second sister is Joyce Whitley.  She is two years behind Gloria.  And to tell the truth, in fact my oldest sister was born in Montgomery, Alabama, my father [Moses Whitley] was teaching at that time at I guess Alabama State [State Teachers College; Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama].  My second sister was born in Monroe, North Carolina.  And then they moved to Rochester [New York] and that's where William [HistoryMaker William Whitley] and I and my youngest sister [Janice Whitley Carlstedt] came along.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So did your father teach in Monroe, or when--?
Speaker 2: In, in Monroe, see I don't know what he was doing in Monroe I, I would assume--in other words, he's at Alabama State.  But, Joyce was born in Monroe. And then he could have been a situation where they just went to Monroe and had the baby.
Speaker 1: Right (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They can, I don't have the details right there.
Speaker 1: Yeah, often, you know, women would go to their--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --their, their mother's house to have a baby--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --and that sort of thing in those days, so.  That's probably--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 635991
Speaker 1: So your father's [Moses Whitley] teach- teaching at Alabama State [State Teachers College; Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and, and you all were born in Rochester [New York]--
Speaker 2: Rochester--
Speaker 1: Yeah. 'Cause he, he reloc- was he teaching around Rochester?
Speaker 2: I assume he was teaching, I would assume he was teaching in Rochester.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, I, I would say if he was teaching, see I don't even have any facts on that.  I he were teaching I think it would have been on the high school level or the elementary school level on the public school situation.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  You were about, now the family moved to Ohio--
Speaker 2: I'd say in '41 [1941].  We moved here at the start of the war [World War II, WWII].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay in 1941.  So-
Speaker 2: It could have '42 [1942], but it's, it's the early part of the war.
Speaker 1: And that was to Warren [Ohio], right?
Speaker 2: We moved to--he got a job in Ravenna Arsenal plant [Ravenna Army Ammunition Plant; Camp Ravenna Joint Military Training Center, Ohio] which is a government facility that made bombs.  That's where all the bombs were made.  I heard a story about that, it was kind of interesting.
Speaker 1: What, what was--
Speaker 2: They picked Rava- Ravenna Arsenal plant was where, where the plant was. The most cloudiest spot in the country, Ravenna, Ohio. (Laughter) And they were concerned about bombing, getting bombed.  The most cloudiest spot in the country.
Speaker 1: Okay so, to conceal the--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --arsenal.
Speaker 2: I mean you wouldn't be able to see the plants or whatever.
Speaker 1: That's interesting 'cause we thinking, we were discussing on the way here about Cleveland [Ohio] being overcast.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And, and it was his impression it was overcast a lot.  When I was kid I used to think that same thing.  But, I said well it can't really be--
Speaker 2: But, it is.
Speaker 1: --statistically overcast more than any other place, but--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh yeah, Cleveland (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) he looked that up on the computer, our videographer [Matthew Hickey] looked on the computer and there are only sixty-six sunny days in Cleveland per year.
Speaker 2: There is no doubt about it. It's a cloudy spot and Ravenna is the worst, in the, in the country.
Speaker 1: That is something.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right that makes sense that they would have--
Speaker 2: That's right, right.
Speaker 1: --a munitions plant in a place where you can't see it from the air, you know.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, so all right.
Story_ID: 635992
Speaker 1: Do you have an--are those--so, so you and your brother [HistoryMaker William Whitley] are the last two in the family?
Speaker 2: No, I have sister (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You have a younger--
Speaker 2: --younger sister.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She's a year younger than we are.  Have her tell it maybe two years, but (laughter) she's under us.
Speaker 1: What, what's her name?
Speaker 2: Janice [Janice Whitley Carlstedt].
Speaker 1: Okay.  J-A-N-I-C-E (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) C-E, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right so that, is that it, that's the whole family?
Speaker 2: That's it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's it.  But, she's interesting, 'cause she's under us and always was my, you know, always following us.  And she's close enough to go to our same parties and the whole bit.  But, she got a Ford [Ford Foundation] scholarship in the tenth grade.  Of course we're in the eleventh.  'Course she--and she went to Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee], she jumped over us and she's in college (laughter) we're in high school all of sudden.  So but, that's, that's Janice.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, what did she end up doing?
Speaker 2: She's a, she's--my, my oldest sister's [Gloria Whitley Fleming] a music major.  She goes to New York [New York] every, she meets another person in music, John Fleming.  All right, they, they take off they go to Sweden.  So, they live in Sweden.  He's a opera singer basically what he is.  My sister was too.  But, they lived in Sweden.  Well, my sister goes over, over to visit, she never came back.  She married a Swede over there.
Speaker 1: Okay so, she's in Sweden, so Janice (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She's in Sweden right now.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Okay so, you have two sisters in Sweden.  And--
Speaker 2: No, no now my oldest sister back in, she's in California now.  But, she's, she's eighty-five now, but she--I mean, my, my brother in law died and when that happened she came back, and.  She's in California, with her daughter.
Story_ID: 635993
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Well, one--I guess this comes to mind.  William [HistoryMaker William Whitley] and I we have drapes in the--let's say the dining room--and there was dust on 'em and there was a little line of dust that would come from the top all the way down.  And we lit the dust and flame would just run up the wall (laughter), run up the--not up the wall up the curtain.  And we did that maybe three or four times.  Said, man this is nice.  But, one time it got to the top and boom it caught on fire.  Well, in Rochester [New York] the street we lived on was Clarendon Street [ph.].  But, it was a, a street was no wider than about ten feet.  See, I mean real, real narrow street.  So the next door neighbor sees the fire. Mrs.--I've forgotten her name.  But, she see the fire, alarms my parents [Beatrice Nivens Whitley and Moses Whitley] and you know fire engine comes and puts the fire out.  That's the first thing I remember about Rochester.  Playing in, playing in the dining room.  Lighting--
Speaker 1: What with matches or something?
Speaker 2: Playing with matches, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 635994
Speaker 1: Now you're a little kid with a twin. I mean most of us don't have a twin.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, what was it like growing up with a, with a twin?
Speaker 2: See, I don't appreciate it until now.  In other words I have twin--my son [Kent Whitley] has twins.  So, I can see what's hap- well you always had a friend.  I mean somebody was always laying there.  I never had a fight, 'cause they had to take two, I mean the things that I see kids, I never had those problems.  And then we were athletic.  We'd practice, you know, I wink, he knows what I'm gonna do, and I know what he's gonna do. I mean it was very difficult to guard us or to--I mean and we practice together.  I mean I don't, I don't see in terms--and we, we work together. I mean in school how could you--I mean it, it's, it's for, for one person to compete with two, it's very, very difficult, very difficult.  Committed, no, two committed people, very difficult.  So, we had the edge all the time.  And the bigger thing, I, I'd say about being a twin is you're always noticed.  I mean you, I mean if we walk in the room, people know we're there.  You gotta, you gotta heads up on somebody, I mean there is no doubt.  And I see my twin grand-girls same, the same thing.  Everybody stop them. "The twins, (makes sound) aren't they cute."  And they're not wearing the same thing, but you can tell they look alike.  And I mean they can be in McDonald's and you get comments from, you know, the person waiting on you.  So, in terms of--well, no I'll tell you one picture.  I don't care if I'm in high school or if we were--good football players--we'd be in the paper and the coach would be scratching his head.  And that scratching his head, I saw that in college when the, I got to college [Kent State University, Kent, Ohio].  The coach is scratching his head. We were navigators in the [U.S.] Air Force and we're in navigation training, they come out to take pictures of us and the guy's scratching his head looking.  You know, I, I mean that kind I get that all time, I get that all the time.  And well I mean, I mean there's an advantage.  Okay, I get into the Boule [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity] here in Cleveland [Ohio], you know, you gotta take your, your twin brother in too.  So, I mean all right, I, I made I got the b- the b- man my high school year I scored so many touchdowns it was unbelievable.  So, all of the, all of the recruits they came to see--oh, oh no, here, here's the better thing.  All right we're playing football the announcer says, "Whitley [HistoryMaker James Whitley] carries the ball to the right." That's me.  "Whitley carries the ball to the left." That's William [HistoryMaker William Whitley].  But, they only say, "Whitley g- ," so the people in the stands, you know, what their saying.  Whitley is a hell of a (laughter)--he's carrying the ball all the time.  I mean those kinds of things.  I mean it was a hell of life, that's all I'm just saying, in terms of being seen, being noticed.  It was almost, you're an actor almost.  You, I mean the (unclear) make it kind of and I, I see many people they'll, they'll say, "Well we hear the twins in--," not referring to me, but to the twins in their class.  But, if they name five people in their class, the, the twins are gonna be one of 'em I guarantee you.  So, so that's, that's what's happened all the way through life, to tell the truth.  And it's always been a edge.
Speaker 1: Yeah instant notoriety and--
Speaker 2: Instant notoriety, instant notoriety and celebrity.  I mean in other words you get a little, get that feeling, hey.  Which is nice, it's a nice feeling to have.  But, I never had a fight.  I never, unh-uh.  I hear these people bullying. Bullying? Shit (laughter). Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Okay, so people would think twice about--
Speaker 2: They, they'd, they'd three times before they (unclear).  And well, I mean it's funny, it's funny.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you all do most things together?  I mean did you--
Speaker 2: Most things were together, in other words right now my brother's wife [Kaysonia Whitley] died over two years ago.  But, the big thing is I hear the women always thought, our wives are just like that (gesture).  In other words they say most, you know, families the wives don't get along.  My wife and his wife were just like us.  If we were there they were there.  And had no problem being there.  And one wasn't nice to the other one.  So, it was, it was, it made life very, very nice to tell the truth.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Very nice.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was hoping my, my twin girls would be twin boys but (laughter), they're girls.
Story_ID: 635995
Speaker 1: Can you describe--now, now you--when you started off life in Rochester [New York] you said you were on, on this narrow street.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did, did the neighborhood have a, a specific name or anything or?
Speaker 2: See Rochester they had about twenty five hundred black people, families in--or people I guess.  Very, very, very limited black folks anyway.  So, the school was closed--what was your question again?
Speaker 1: I was asking you about the neighborhood, (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Oh there was--
Speaker 1: --describe the neighborhood?
Speaker 2: No, the neighborhood, it was a nice neighborhood because I know across the street were, were neighborhoods that I remember.  The minister was, you know, two, two to three doors.  The doctor was around the corner.  It was the neighborhood I, I enjoyed.  And I've been back we get, I got an opportunity to design a playground for Rochester.  Boy I got back there and they were tearing down--they were tearing down the street.  They were (laughter) I mean tearing down the street.  And I, our house was still there, our house was still there.  But, ultimately they gotta, got it removed.  But, I en- I enjoyed that neighborhood. It was a small neighborhood though.
Speaker 1: This was a black neighborhood?  Basically or what was the (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) See I would say, I would say from the people there I would say probably so, probably so.  'Cause I don't remember--when I came to Cleveland [Ohio] I remember whites in the neighborhood.  But, in b- in, in Rochester I do not.
Story_ID: 635996
Speaker 1: Rochester, New York.  Now, this is--Rochester is the home that, well Frederick Douglass lived there for years.
Speaker 2: But I mean, Kodak [Eastman Kodak Company] was the big thing, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Douglass did live there and I saw that just maybe two or three years ago.  Douglass lived short time in Rochester.  But, Rochester, we thought of it as a kind of progressive fair city, with opportunity that's what I'm saying, you know.   Kodak was there and a lot of people worked for Kodak.
Speaker 1: So, did your father [Moses Whitley] have anything to do with Kodak?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: No, he was, he was in teaching when the war [World War II, WWII] broke out we came to Ohio.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're like seven years old--
Speaker 2: Yeah, about seven years.
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Speaker 2: About seven years old.
Speaker 1: --when you moved to Ravenna [Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Right, right.  I was like in first grade.  'Cause I remember catching the bus and all that at Ravenna.  Then we moved to Warren [Ohio].  We finished the war in Warren.
Speaker 1: Okay, Okay.  Now, what was your, your first school?
Speaker 2: My first school that I remember?  No. 3 School [Nathaniel Rochester School No. 3; Nathaniel Rochester Community School No. 3, Rochester, New York] in--no, to tell the truth, it was the No. 3 School in Rochester.  I went and I think I was in kindergarten then.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I, I take it you liked school?
Speaker 2: I liked school.  And when we got to Warren, I li- I was in Roosevelt Elementary School [Warren, Ohio].  And I went to Central Junior High School [Warren, Ohio] one year.  Then we came to Cleveland [Ohio]. So in the seventh grade., I think seventh grade I came to Cleveland.
Story_ID: 635997
Speaker 1: What were you interested in as a little kid?
Speaker 2: Small, real s- just playing and--oh I'll say one thing the Warren [Ohio] experience I think probably was the most memorable. But we, we lived at--Warren's a small, you know, small basically a rural kind of community.  And we lived close to the edge of town.  So, the woods and the trees and all of that was accessible to us, and oh we played that to death.  We played that to death.  I mean it was just, just pure freedom, I mean pure freedom.  And we ran out the door, you ran, you ran out to woods.  You could do anything you want out there, you know what I'm saying.  And that's what we did.  And, I, I would say maybe that's when one of the start of the creative side, anyway.  During the war [World War II, WWII], we're playing war.  And you could play war in the woods.  You can dig, you can dig trenches, you can build, build huts.  And then we, we were famous 'cause we--tree huts.  We'd have 'em swing the tree.  And they had a popular tree which was about a inch and half, two inch diameter.  Oh you could cut down with one or two hacks, tie 'em together or nail them together. Tied 'em together was basically what we did.  And you could make anything you wanted.  And we had a, a cement, we found a cement mixer--hands.  Boy we made that a boat.  We both--and had a creek out there.  You could go down the creek and the creek is maybe, say it's eight foot wide.  But, but enough to float and you know, play with what you had to do.  And you, we knew how to swim, so we weren't afraid of water.  But, as I think back on it those experiences were very, very nice, I mean that was a--you were free to do what you wanted to do.  And it's kind of of nice, but I felt I was living in the city, I didn't feel like I was living in the country.  It was a city life but freedom at the edge.  You could play baseball out there, you know build yourself a--it's funny. Yeah we built baseball diamonds, it's not like there was the baseball diamond out there.  But, you could put that together and play.  And I remember the people that--but that was basically a white community.  We were in a, all those people I remember those were, were white kids.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and none those problems in the South.  I mean no southern kind of problems at all.  That was like, you know I remember Paul Picerelli [ph.] lived behind me.  I could come down with those, those guys names, you know.  The pretty girl was Shirley Novak [ph.], you know, what I'm saying.  But, a good experience, and Warren was a very good experience.  Then we came to the big city, Cleveland [Ohio].  Now, that's the big difference.  There's a big difference there now.
Story_ID: 635998
Speaker 1: Now did your father [Moses Whitley] get a job in Cleveland [Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he, he worked for I want to say, it's not--NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] wasn't here yet.  But, it was a government agency that had labs here. He was at the airport [Cleveland Municipal Airport; Cleveland Hopkins International Airport, Cleveland, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Okay, this is out the air--
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: You said the air- airport?
Speaker 2: It was at the, the facility was at the airport.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Or I want to say, better yet--around the airport.  NASA is out there now, and I assume that kind of warfed into NASA.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: But, it was a government laboratory.
Speaker 1: All right, so this was when you're, what in--
Speaker 2: I'm--
Speaker 1: --how, how old are you now?
Speaker 2: I'm, I'm--'46 [1946], '47 [1947]. This is 1946 and 1947.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, so you're in--
Speaker 2: Oh I'm in junior high school.
Speaker 1: Junior high school.
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  And this is what, what was the name of your junior high school?
Speaker 2: Here in, in Cleveland it was, I went to--well this is, this is a story, too.  I went to Rawlings Junior High School [Cleveland, Ohio].  Now, Rawlings Junior High School was 100 percent black.  And 100 percent, controlled.  I remember Mrs. Powell [ph.] was the principal (laughter).  Well, I come from Warren [Ohio], where it's really basically you know, highly integrated I come to Rawlings, now a hundred percent black.  Discipline unbelievable you could not talk in the hall, you're (makes sound).  And they had me, I think in section three or whatever that was.  And they had levels, they had these levels.  Well, I, I had did that one semester I guess it was and my mother [Beatrice Nivens Whitley] comes up there kicks them (laughter).  "What is my boys doing in three" and all of that kind of stuff.  Well, then they transferred me to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, that, that's when they had what they call tracking right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were doing that tracking.
Speaker 1: They had, had a section one, section two (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Section one, two, three, four and doing down the order--
Speaker 1: Well, one was the top, right?
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: One was--all right.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: So, you and your brother [HistoryMaker William Whitley] were in three?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We were in three.  Well, my mother broke that up.
Story_ID: 635999
Speaker 1: So, they, they transferred us to Alexander Hamilton [Alexander Hamilton Junior High School, Cleveland, Ohio].  And I don't know if this was special educa- I mean special motivating kids or whatever.  But, I mean it was in a different area.  At that highly integrated, highly integrated, but it's out of my community.  I don't, I don't live in that community.  So, I'm catching a bus, the long bus to, to, to Alexander Hamilton.  All right, when I finish Hamilton it's in the John Adams district.  But, John Adams (background noise) is a very good football team.  All right so--
Speaker 2: We better pause here because (background noise)--
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: Okay so Alexander Ham--
Speaker 1: Wait, wait, wait hold on this popped off--
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: All right.  So, Alexander Hamilton Junior High School is a feeder school to John Adams High School [Cleveland, Ohio] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.
Speaker 2: And, and now you, you guys were playing football in, in, in junior high school too?
Speaker 1: In hi- sure, sure, sure.  I, I when I left Warren [Ohio], I th- think it was seventh, seventh grade maybe seven, eight or what it was.  But, I was looking forward to playing for the Warren Panthers [Warren G. Harding High School, Warren, Ohio].  I, boy they, I, I look forward to playing for the Warren Panthers.  Then we moved to Cleveland [Ohio].
Speaker 2: Okay, now, four, now Warren is a town that Paul Warfield came out of?
Speaker 1: Paul Warfield came, he's right behind me.  In other words--
Speaker 2: Was he? Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but--
Speaker 2: So, did you know him?
Speaker 1: No, I didn't know him.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: 'Cause like we, would we said, we lived on the north side in Warren.  He lived on the south side of Warren.  And it always was kind of (laughter).
Speaker 2: So, was the south side like the--
Speaker 1: Well, the south side was, was where the black churches were.  We always say where the railroad tracks cross Warren, you know.  That side we were no the north side.
Speaker 2: I see okay.
Story_ID: 636000
Speaker 1: Before I get you to high school [John Adams High School, Cleveland, Ohio].  Now, were there any special teachers or mentors on a, on a elementary level, or a junior high level (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is what I'm saying--oh I remember Mrs. E, Mrs. English [ph.], Mrs. English, she was my third grade teacher [at Roosevelt Elementary School, Warren, Ohio].  And I, I and I don't know how this happened but I remember she called me to the blackboard and I had to draw some, some, some, some drawing.  And I got up there and I drew it to death.  'Cause I could draw.  In other words, she must have picked up or I must have known.  I, I could draw.  And I remember getting up on that board drawing, drawing.  So, I never forget Mrs. English.  And when I got to college I ran into her into--in a teacher's seminar or whatever at Kent [Kent State University, Kent, Ohio].  And she said, "I knew you were gonna do something in drawing."  But, that's one teacher I remember.  I remember my kindergarten teacher--no or I guess maybe it wasn't kindergarten, maybe it was second grade teacher.  But, she was an art teacher, I mean, she, she was an art teacher she drew a Morgan, an English car.  So, I think I got a little direction there.  I remember the second grade teacher that she was very attractive, and I think she was twenty-one, twenty-two.  And they always had stories going around the building that she was dating the principal.  I mean it was like (laughter) but one of those kind of stories.  Coming from Warren [Ohio], coming to, only think I remember about Rawlings [Rawlings Junior High School, Cleveland, Ohio] is their, their track coach.  It was a old guy that was the track coach and when we picked up hurdles, he taught us how to run hurdles.  Then I got to high school and all kind of things, all kind of people were available and helping, then.  I remember my German teacher Hare, Dr. Hare [ph.].  But, in, in high school it was more athletics than, than art.
Story_ID: 636001
Speaker 1: So, this is John Adams High School [Cleveland, Ohio] is where, where you went?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And okay so this, this is a integrated high school, right?
Speaker 2: Integrated high school, yeah.
Speaker 1: All these schools are pretty much (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All of them, yeah, every, every, everything expect for Rawlings [Rawlings Junior High School, Cleveland, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, so you're in--by this time you're in the, you're taking college prep courses?
Speaker 2: Yep, I'm taking 'em, yeah I started that, immediately.  My mother [Beatrice Nivens Whitley] put me in that immediately.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I had no problem there.  And then in the college preps, you know, we were good students, but ex- excellent students.  But, we could, but I--you know the funny thing about high school anyway, our best courses were math.  I mean, you know, I look back on that, I loved math.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, did you take, get a chance to take calculus in high school?
Speaker 2: Took in high school and every, everybody in our class was preparing to go to Case [Case Institute of Technology; Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio] and most those guys did go to Case.  Or they were--it was definitely, well you know, some of them were physicians.  But, it was a college, it was a college kind of a thing, but we took calculus.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Case Western Reserve's the highest rated college in Ohio.
Speaker 2: That's right, there is, that's right, that's right.  Most those kids were going to Case.  And she said, "I'm gonna teach you calculus 'cause, you know, you can use it in your physics as a freshman."  Not--'cause Case, 'cause calculus in college came as a sophomore or junior ye- class it wasn't first.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, we got it in high school.
Story_ID: 636002
Speaker 1: So, were, were you and your brother football stars in high school?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, oh yes, oh yes.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 2: Again, like I'm telling you, when, when Whitley's carrying the ball all the time (laughter).  Whitley's getting a lot of press, lot of press.  I remember the first time we got the press, we're playing Glenville [Glenville High School, Cleveland, Ohio] and, and I think I was in tenth grader.  I scored four touchdowns, William [HistoryMaker William Whitley] scored one.  You know, the day, the headlines, Whitleys score five, or whatever, I mean it was (laughter).  We said, "Man this is kind of nice." All right, but, after, after then they found we were supposed to go to Glenville not, not John Adams [John Adams High School, Cleveland, Ohio].  So, they was to transfer us over to Glenville 'cause we're out of the district.  'Cause my--oh we--no, let me say, between junior high school and high school my parents [Beatrice Nivens Whitley and Moses Whitley] moved to Glenville [Cleveland, Ohio].  We lived on, we lived on Rawlings [Rawlings Junior High School, Cleveland, Ohio]--we lived initially in the, in the Rawlings community or school district.  Then they moved to the Glenville school district and we didn't tell anybody 'cause we were at, at, Alexander Hamilton [Alexander Hamilton Junior High School, Cleveland, Ohio] and John Adams.  But, we knew Glenville had a poor football team.  And we don't want to go to Glenville (laughter).  And the coach didn't want us to go either.  So, he, he, he worked that out, he worked that out.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, this is, this is--Ohio in those days and even now, this part of Ohio is football (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh football was important, football was important, football was important.
Speaker 1: This is the home of basically this the home of the NFL [National Football League].  But, that basically--
Speaker 2: There's no--with Paul Brown and all? There's no doubt about it.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: No doubt about it.
Speaker 1: And, the Football Hall of Fame [Pro Football Hall of Fame] is in Canton [Ohio], right now--
Speaker 2: Canton, uh-huh (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) even as we speak.  Massillon, Ohio has strong football team, the--
Speaker 2: I mean tremendous teams.
Speaker 1: All these, these places--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Warren [Warren G. Harding High School, Warren, Ohio] was a power- powerhouse.
Speaker 1: So, this is the center, this is all so been said to be the center of coaches you know Paul Brown--
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: --and the Miami- the guys that with to Miami University [Oxford, Ohio] the cradle of coaches.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: They ended up co coaching all over Ohio.  And especially in this area of northeast Ohio.  So, so you're, you're coming along just as the I guess this is just as at the being of the NFL too right?
Speaker 2: Just being. I never was a--'46 [1946], you know, they won three straight national titles, Cleveland [Cleveland Browns].  You know, right here in Cleveland [Ohio], Paul Brown (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that's right, that's right.  So, I guess that's--
Speaker 2: Football was big. And then what was nice they had Marion Motley you know, black fullback. I mean you had people you could emulate right there on the team.
Speaker 1: Right now this was unusually too 'cause--
Speaker 2: It was unusually.
Speaker 1: --Cleveland integrated football basically.
Speaker 2: That's right.  There was no doubt about it, no doubt about it.
Speaker 1: I think Ellis [sic.]--what, what's--I'm sorry, what's his--his name Ellis? The, the first black in the NFL. His--
Speaker 2: Who that, what, what position?
Speaker 1: He was before Marion Motley. Actually they, they were on a team together but he actually was--Bill Willis.
Speaker 2: Bill Willis, oh yeah--
Speaker 1: Bill Willis, yes.
Speaker 2: --he was the, he was the kicker and, and the he was a guard.
Speaker 1: Right.  So, Willis and Marion Motley and you know the whole Cleveland Brown tradition is going on as you when you're in high school?
Speaker 2: That's right, when I'm in high school.
Story_ID: 636003
Speaker 1: You're good in math. You're taking calculus.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: As you're approaching graduation I mean were you involved in other activities in, in high school [John Adams High School, Cleveland, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: You know I'm in the band, but in general no.  Basically that was it. That was it.
Speaker 1: What, what did you play in the band?
Speaker 2: I played the clarinet, William [HistoryMaker William Whitley] played the trumpet but, I played the clarinet.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Did--I think, I think your brother has something to say--
Speaker 2: (WILLIAM WHITLEY):  (Unclear).
Speaker 1: Probably 1:30 is probably good.
Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: Take care.
Speaker 2: We'll see you later.  Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right. Speed.
Speaker 1: Okay, so were in any clubs in high school or anything like that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there was a Hi-Y (unclear) as I recall, you know, we were, we were rushed in the tenth grade so we're in they call it the Hi-Y.  But for, I guess that black community that was a big deal being invited to the Hi-Y.  So, we got in the Hi-Y in the tenth grade.  Made the varsity in the tenth grade.  One thing I haven't said that, that even--I guess in junior high school maybe, maybe yeah it was probably junior high school.  They had a soapbox derby here you know?
Speaker 1: Oh, okay right.
Speaker 2: Man, we were, we were in that three years.  Making the, making the soapbox derbies and trying win that.  But, I'm saying that you know the skill of making things, you know, was always in our blood.  I remember in junior high school the, there was an automobile, General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company] gave a contest for designing cars.  And if you, the winners got scholarships to General Motor's college I guess or university.  And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What they called the GMI the General Motors Institute.
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: Right?
Speaker 2: And we tried, we tried that 'cause the 'cause our--I guess forgot what they call 'em. The--wasn't the art teacher it was more like the, the plastics or shop on that side of.  He suggested that that we participate.  So we did that a couple of years.  But we were always making something, I tell ya.
Speaker 1: Were, were you involved in the science fairs growing up?
Speaker 2: No, no, no science fairs.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you have drafting in high school?
Speaker 2: Yes, we had drafting, they had drafting courses.  We took that all the time too.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you, you knew how to do drafting?
Speaker 2: Oh we knew how to draft.  Well we could draw I mean that's.  We knew--
Speaker 1: What would you draw (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) we knew we had that skill.  But I tell you one thing it's even here you're gonna see a step- see that right there?  William made that--I--that was in high school (unclear).
Speaker 1: This is a sculpture (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A sculpture of himself he did that in high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, that, that's well done.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's well done, yeah okay so both of you had that skill.
Speaker 2: Well, we had that skill, yeah we could we could make things I tell ya.  I mean, I mean that was a natural that we both could do, and we could do it together.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 636004
Speaker 1: What kind of counseling did you get in high school [John Adams High School, Cleveland, Ohio]--
Speaker 2: High school (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) about college, yeah.
Speaker 2: About college? The only thing I remember about--the whole--they pushed college, the school did.  But, the thing I remember is that they had these I guess professional people pretty much like HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers], coming in talking about architecture, medicine, dentistry whatever.  And I remember a guy a red headed guy, he comes to (laughter)--he said, "You shouldn't go into architecture." And he probably was, you know, in terms of reality maybe, maybe he had something there.  But, he discouraged us from going into it.  But, we went anyway, that would--and I'm gonna tell you why we went. This is a story.  We, we saw a movie with John Wayne and he's, he's building a tunnel in South America through, through a mountain.  We said we like math, we like yeah maybe that's what we ought to be, engineers.  So, our, our thing was engineering. Our thing was engineering.  All right. We got football scholarships.  Then the question was I got one at, from Reserve [Western Reserve University; Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio], which had a poor football team.  And did not, and well they had architecture but they did not have engineering.  You'd have to go to Case [Case Institute of Technology; Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio] for engineering.  All right then we saw another movie before we finished high school.  'Fountainhead' ['The Fountainhead'] Gary Cooper, remem- 'Fountainhead' (laughter)--
Speaker 1: The Ayn Rand movie.
Speaker 2: Standing, standi- Ayn Rand, standing on top of that mountain, or on top of the building with the, with the young lady.  We said man we're going to be architects, that's was we want to be.  And then that made the--really made the big shift and then my sisters [Gloria Whitley Fleming, Joyce Whitley and Janice Whitley Carlstedt] oh they like the sound of architect.  My sisters went crazy, "Oh that'd be fabulous" (laughter).  So, that's what we, that's what we chose.
Story_ID: 636005
Speaker 1: How'd you wind up choosing Kent State [Kent State University, Kent, Ohio] or did they come after you?
Speaker 2: They came after us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The, the coach at Kent State was--Collinwood [Collinwood High School, Cleveland, Ohio], Collinwood won the league championship that year.  But, their coach saw we beat, we didn't beat Collinwood they beat us. But, their coach noticed us and he got, he got hired at Kent.  And he took us to Kent with them.  He took half his team and half our team to Kent.
Speaker 1: Okay, so Kent State they, they play in the Mid American league [Mid American Conference] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Mid American league.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Kent State University.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right outside of Cleveland [Ohio], here not too far away.
Speaker 2: Not too far, no.
Speaker 1: Yeah, about what a half hour away?
Speaker 2: It's a, it was forty-five minutes.
Speaker 1: Forty-five minutes, okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear).
Speaker 2: 'Course the freeway wasn't in at that time (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Kent State Golden Flashes?
Speaker 2: That's it Golden Flashes.
Speaker 1: All right, so.  So you go to Kent and so you all--I, I read in the (unclear) you all were football stars at Kent State?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, we, we were, we were all-scholastic players in high school [John Adams High School, Cleveland, Ohio].  So, you know, we were again, you know.  I, I tell you about those photographs, so a lot of those kind of photographs guys scratching heads you know, (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, how did they--football fans would probably like to know this but, those were the days when they were playing like a T formation and so of what?
Speaker 2: It was a T. We'd play a split T.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah it was a split T.
Speaker 1: So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And a split T is the halfbacks are just wider out and you get the ball in the line, you know.  He drives to the line.
Speaker 1: So, the quarterback's under the center.
Speaker 2: Center, yeah.
Speaker 1: The fullbacks are directly behind the--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And the halfbacks (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And the halfbacks are split.
Speaker 1: Split, okay.
Speaker 2: That's, right and a full- fullback field too.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so you were the two fullbacks, the Whitleys?
Speaker 2: No, two halfbacks, two--
Speaker 1: Two, two halfbacks (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Two halfbacks, right.
Speaker 1: Two halfbacks, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Two halfbacks.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But, let me say something about personalities.  And just--I maybe say the whole life. In other words we came up we were in situations we got relationships you know how deal with people.  I mean you had to, you didn't, you didn't bring problems and you didn't make problems and got a, you knew how to get along, all right.  We get to high school, we're the halfbacks. The fullback--I don't want to mention his name--tremendous.  I have to give it to him, he's better than we were.  He was better than we were.  And, and when I say better, not better football player, he was faster, in other words he could run the hundred ten flat.  We did it ten two.  He beat us every time.  But, in terms of relationships and getting along, the coach hated him.  The coach hated him, anybody comes to talk about football, "Well talk to the Whitleys."  What I'm saying we got the push every time.  He did not get a scholarship he did not get a scholarship, the guy was tremendous.  Ultimately, he finished, he finished college and did get a scholarship scuffling around by himself.  But, I'm just saying in terms of young people anyway.   You can't get along with your coach I mean, you know, (laughter), it's stupidity.
Speaker 1: Now, now was he a, was, was he African American, too?
Speaker 2: African American.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was African American, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, but just had a personality--
Speaker 2: Personality, he, he didn't want to, he didn't want to do, he wanted to do, what he want to do. So, you can't win that way and you can't get along.  I mean you don't get pushed along that way.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're at, you're at Kent State.  Well, now what, what was your coach's name?
Speaker 2: His name--the one I, that we had Frank Lautenberg [ph.] was the one that took us there.  But, the coach's name was Trevor Rees.
Story_ID: 636006
Speaker 1: What was it like at Kent State [Kent State University, Kent, Ohio]?  Did you like Kent State?
Speaker 2: I'm gonna tell you, when we got there.  We couldn't believe college is that easy.  We could not believe (laughter). We could not believe it. 'Cause our first course was architecture, architecture I think it was shades and shadows which is another drawing course.  English, English, and well let me throw in calculus.  I mean it was like my goodness, it's--people said college is hard.  I mean that's what we thought, we thought.  And the so and, and what we found on college a five hour A is, is heavy you get a, get a F in something you're, you're at a C I mean it's just, just amazing.  What a five hour A will do.  So, we're heavy in math and architecture.  It was like my goodness.  So, we, I mean we, well, we no difficulty.  But, I'd, I'd even say as a twin also we were good, we were good in math, we were good, we could draw and we're creative.  And well, I've forgotten what my point was there (laughter).
Speaker 1: Just talking about the course of study at Kent and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay the course, okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, oh well what I was about to say is that there were two of us, man we could stay up all night.  In other words, I know, I mean we could stay, I could keep him awake, in other words, or inspire him to--I mean it was, whatever it took, there were two of us to make it happen.  And, you know any number of times, you know, if, if, if I'm tired and he can draw the trees you, you could make that happen.  Or put the grass on it and, and the process keeps going on.  But, I--and people don't have that. I, I, I see there was a there was a there's (unclear) my, my--well we were navigators in the [U.S.] Air Force.  And one course it always say cooperate and graduate, I mean it's always cooperating.  And then, my, my, my cousin's medical school they said the same thing.  In other words if there isn't some kind of connection that you're making you'll never get out of there.  You will never get out, but in architecture I had my brother [HistoryMaker William Whitley] and, and the rest I.  And then architecture was competitive. Oh man that was competitive.  So, you know, you couldn't draw, you couldn't draw, you'd let them see in the study you had to do that at home.  With, with the study you did the, you did the grass and things that didn't matter. The background, put the boards together, you did all of that.  But, you took your work home.  So when you walked in there the next day, oh well, they're (makes sound) you know, you try to get that out of them.  We got that every time, every time, you know.  But, it, it stru- it makes you--well my father [Moses Whitley] used to say the difference, the difference in life is this: we always talk about being excellent. Everybody--but people don't know what excellent is. You know, be excellent, work hard.  Well, what the hell does that mean?  You know what he said, "Guess what excellence is? Excellence is more than they expect." If you gotta do a little bit more than they expect that's excellence.  So, it's not impossible. It's not when they say, "I can never." Get, more than they expect.  So, I mean that's been our rule basically with everything.  Give 'em more than they expect and you'll, you'll--you know, in architecture the same thing.  I'm not gonna give you box. What else would you expect?  You know, if I tilt it to the side, I mean, it's gonna be something you don't expect.  And I think it's a good philosophy to tell the truth.
Story_ID: 636007
Speaker 1: So you're in--you left high school [John Adams High School, Cleveland, Ohio] in '53 [1953]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And you're in Kent State [Kent State University, Kent, Ohio] from '53 [1953] to '57 [1957], right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, and now, now did you--had you heard of Robert Madison [HistoryMaker Robert P. Madison], at this point?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, tell us who he's and what--
Speaker 2: Robert Madison is a, really quite eminent architect here in Cleveland [Ohio].  A graduate of Case Western Reserve [Western Reserve University; Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio] and then on to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  Then a Fulbright scholar but a quite competent architect.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh but, but, how--my mother [Beatrice Nivens Whitley], my mother knew his mother [Nettie Brown Madison].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it appears, I mean going way, way back somehow my mother knew his mother.  And when we were in school I remember one year the task was in--during the summer you had to work--they requested that you work for an architect come back next year with a sense of how an architect's office works.  Bob was grateful, I mean not grateful but gr- Bob took the attitude that he would allow us to come in his office for that summer.  And that was a fabulous experience.  I mean it was a fabulous experience.  'Cause we're in a situation where a project would take a month, two month, three months and when you got in an office, they did it in a week, or they did it in two days.  And we said, "What the hell, these guys can do it in two days, and I'm taking a month."  So, you, you, you, you change, you know, (laughter) your attitude in terms of what time was like.  But, it's invaluable really in terms of, getting us ready.  And we were concerned that we wouldn't get that opportunity really.  We said, "Gee well who were we gonna ask?"  My mother took care of that though.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Bob Madison.
Speaker 1: All right, so he's an African American?
Speaker 2: African American architect.
Speaker 1: Right.  And built the Cleveland Browns' stadium [Cleveland Municipal Stadium; FirstEnergy Stadium, Cleveland, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: Which is important around here?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 636008
Speaker 1: So, at, at Kent [Kent State University, Kent, Ohio] you all are playing football and taking courses that's way too easy, you said (laughter)?
Speaker 2: These are--well I'm just saying everybody says, "Oh how did you do it?"  Well easy, I mean it, it, you see it wasn't a chore.  What I see people even our children as they came through, the man was I mean you, you had to put the hours in it.  But, I'm saying we, I never thought hours were a negatives.  I enjoyed doing the work.  So, it was never a negative.  But, for us I mean it was (laughter) we thought, we thought it was easy.
Speaker 1: Okay, so now in terms of football now you, you--did, did Kent win?
Speaker 2: We lost to the, I think four games in all the yeas we were there.  One ye- one game a year.  And normally it was to Miami [Miami University, Oxford, Ohio], (laughter) so you didn't win, you didn't win the championship.  But, one year, one--in other words we had a very good football team.
Speaker 1: Who, who did Miami have in those days?
Speaker 2: Miami, I can't, I can't name any names that you're gonna name but they were, they were quite competent, quite go- they were good, they were good.
Speaker 1: What was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Parseghian was the coach at the time.
Speaker 1: Ara Parseghian?
Speaker 2: Ara Parseghian was the coach at Miami at that time.
Speaker 1: Who, who went on to fame at Notre Dame [University of Notre Dame, South Bend, Indiana] and--
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right
Speaker 1: --and yeah, commentator on television?
Speaker 2: That's him, that's him.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, so at Kent now did you become a Kappa at Kent?
Speaker 2: Became a Kappa and yeah we got there you know freshman, again.  And the Kappa's were in Akron [Ohio], they weren't on campus.  But, they had letters that say a Kappa Kappa Kappa on, on campus that was trying to become Kappa Alpha Psi [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity].  So we went over to Akron became Kappas.  And we came back to Kent Kappa was at Kent's campus.
Speaker 1: So, so was there an Akron State [sic. University of Akron, Akron, Ohio] chapter?
Speaker 2: No, it was a alumni chapter.
Speaker 1: Alumni chapter, okay?
Speaker 2: Alumni chapter.
Speaker 1: All right, all right.  'Cause I wondered--
Speaker 2: And I remember there was a Dr. Sharp [E.T. Sharp] was the, was the polemarch of the, the chapter.  And ultimately, I mean sad story though he was at Kent State and his son got killed in the, in the, you know, fooling around with the Kappas.  In the, in the--
Speaker 1: In a--
Speaker 2: --hazing, in a hazing situation.
Speaker 1: Well, what did they do to him?
Speaker 2: I think he fell, you know picked him up or something fell off, hit his head at the river, or whatever, one of those kind of stories.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, this, so hazing problems have been--are old--
Speaker 2: They're old. They go way back, go way back.
Speaker 1: Okay, not just with the Kappas but--
Speaker 2: Yeah, everywhere, everywhere.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, sometime I tell people those hazing thing I mean, they're, they're, you know.  We, we basically got in fairly easy 'cause they needed us but the next class, these guys went crazy on the next class.  They went--the guys that got in (laughter) easy went crazy on the next class.
Speaker 1: So, all right so now I mentioned--oh, now you were at Kent which I think at that time had the only black professor at Ohio?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Ritchie, Ritch- Dr. Ritchie.
Speaker 1: Oscar Ritchie [Oscar W. Ritchie]?
Speaker 2: Oscar Ritchie, Ritchie yeah.
Speaker 1: Did, did you have any classes from him?
Speaker 2: No, he taught social studies I think I never had a class with him, Dr. Ritchie.
Speaker 1: Okay, but he was the--
Speaker 2: But, he brought the Alphas [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity] on campus, I, I do remember that (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  So, this is the beginning of the Greek fraternities on--?
Speaker 2: Right, right, this is the beginning of it.
Speaker 1: And in Ohio system (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At Kent yeah, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, all right.
Story_ID: 636009
Speaker 1: So did you--so when, when you two graduated [from Kent State University, Kent, Ohio], did you graduate with any honors or anything or?
Speaker 2: Not really, in other words I guess there were architecture awards but you talking about--negative. To answer your question no.
Speaker 1: What, what about football awards did you have any?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah Mid American [Mid American Conference] and all of those kind of you got that of accommodations, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: We were in, we were, we--football, track, basketball I didn't go out for basketball no.
Speaker 1: Nothing but football and track?
Speaker 2: Football and track.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did your brother [HistoryMaker William Whitley] play basketball?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In fact, in fact 'cause and really we were I thought better in basketball than the football.  But, in, at Adams [John Adams High School, Cleveland, Ohio] you weren't given that--during my time black folks didn't play basketball.  You could play football and that was about it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And track.
Speaker 1: That's, that's interesting. Do you have any idea why, there--
Speaker 2: Well, it was--I know that when I got to Adams there was Frank Lethup [ph.] was ahead of us and had made the football team.  So, that was open and he was a very skilled guy.  Basketball was a closed kind of group kind of thing.
Speaker 1: So, they just hadn't started and weren't gonna start?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah coaches can make a lot of decisions that affect you know how things are gonna go.
Story_ID: 636010
Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-seven [1957] you graduated. Dwight Eisenhower's [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower] the president.  The country's in the, what they call the Cold War?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, what was and so what did you do immediately after graduation?
Speaker 2: Well, that's another story really.  'Cause now, now we're graduating and you have to, well I mean you got to get that first job.  And in architecture what's key is that you get into a office were you can learn the skill.  Basically what college has done is kind of whet your appetite and you learn the skill, you're an apprentice when you get your first job.  I've seen many people that don't get that opportunity and they never become architects.  The--we were fortunate again, the dean, the dean was an ex-football coach.  (Laughter) And he, so you know we talk football all the time.  So, what said, he said, "I'm gonna get you your first job," and he did.  And the job was done around Columbus, Ohio.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, now what was the dean's name?
Speaker 2: Joe Moreito [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay, Mar- Moreito.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: M-A-R-B-I- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, M-O-R.
Speaker 1: M-O-R, okay.
Speaker 2: E-I-T-O, I guess.
Speaker 1: Okay. Were there any other mentors at Kent State [Kent State University, Kent, Ohio] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At Kent.
Speaker 1: Or any, any favorite instructors?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there was--I, I tell you--oh for some reason, some reason history was flunking more people out of Kent State--not history.  Geography was flunking more people out of Kent State than you can shake a stick at.  I mean I don't know why. The geography teacher came to us and this is like in one of the first, you know the first year anyway.  And said--he talked about one, an athlete named Webb Little [ph.].  And Webb Little played let's see in 1947 or somewhere around there, tremendous black halfback.  Caught hell in history, geography, those kind of of courses and never got out of college, never finished college.  He said he came to us and said, "I never want that to happen to you."  So, in geography again, very--a grade that we didn't deserve to tell the truth.  But he, his name was Dr., Dr. Myles [ph.].  But, a guy. He, he went out of his way to help us.  In other words if we deserved a C he gave you a B.  At one time. It's the only time we got that Kent.  But, I remember it was early, (laughter) it was in, in that first year we said, "Man this is, this is straightforward nice."
Speaker 1: Now, now was August Meier there then?
Speaker 2: August Meier?
Speaker 1: Yeah, he taught history.  He, he ended up becoming like a--he's a white professor but he was an expert on black history (unclear) later on.
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm not aware of him.
Speaker 1: He was at Kent State, yeah.
Speaker 2: I'm not aware.
Speaker 1: August Meier and Elliott Rudwick they were--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --both Kent State guys.  But, all right so they weren't there.
Story_ID: 636011
Speaker 1: You get--the Dean Morbito [Joseph F. Morbito] gets you your first job (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, he got us first job. And now--and then see as I look back that was critical, what I'm saying. Without that first job life would have been completely different you would have been working at the board of education, you would have been working for HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development] or I mean just different type jobs.  You wouldn't have been in the practice of architecture.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so where did you work in Columbus [Ohio]?
Speaker 2: It was called the, in was in the Newark [Ohio] to tell the truth, wasn't Columbus but just outside of Columbus.  And the name of the place was Joseph Baker [Joseph Baker and Associates; JBA Architects].  And you know, what was exciting about Joseph Baker it was a firm that had maybe twelve to fifteen people working in it.  And they did all the schools in that area.  So, it was the type of building we were doing in the firm you're working for, and then their facilities were just what you would expect in an architect's office.  You know this is full grange from zero to 100 but he was closer a hundred than zero.  And you could hear everything you could see everything and even his open- his office was open I mean they didn't lock anything.  You, you can hear, you can hear everybody talking to clients. You could hear.  I mean that's you really learning when you get in a situation like that.
Speaker 1: Now, now did Baker take both of you?
Speaker 2: Took both of us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, took both of us.
Speaker 1: So were you, were the first African Americans to work for him?
Speaker 2: Yes. And he was, and, and see he was kind of a unique guy. He couldn't--he was in a small town, he wanted to be in a position where he could keep his people ten to fifteen years or something like.  So, that was a added situation where on our side it gave us a plus.  But, Moreito made that happen.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so you got your, your feet wet at Baker's.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: So, what did you learn there that you didn't know already?
Speaker 2: See again school and the practice of architecture you got, you have to come through apprenticeship.  An apprenticeship is seeing how the building is put together.  The people that work together to make it happen, how many people there are, you know the public image is fifty people do a job, no maybe three or four do a job, you know.  It's, it's a diff- then you're dealing with the engineers, mechanical, electrical, structural engineers that are fitting into, to the situation.  Well it's a, it's, it's, it's a eye opening experience, if you get it, if you get it.
Speaker 1: Okay, but without it you're not going anywhere?
Speaker 2: Not going anywhere.  And then there's some offices that do this.  They put you in the corner and you do window details, that's all you do.  Well, a window's not the whole building.  Now, if you don't--not given the opportunity of the whole experience, you're losing.  You're not going to be that competent.  And I've known quite a few people that are limited on what they know.  Although, they've worked somewhere twenty years, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, so how were you at, at Baker?
Speaker 2: Oh, let's say a year, we went to the [U.S.] military after that.  Went to the [U.S.] Air Force, after that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is the balance of '57 [1957] and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --part of '58 [1958]--
Speaker 2: That's right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) you're there?
Story_ID: 636012
Speaker 1: So you joined (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We had a year 'cause when we graduated the next year we were, we were dead in the service, we were in the Air Force.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--Air Force.  So U.S. Air Force.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: In 1958 and where were you stationed?
Speaker 2: Well, first it was Lackland, Texas [Lackland Air Force Base, Bexar County, Texas].
Speaker 1: Oh, I didn't ask you now were, were you ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps]?
Speaker 2: ROTC.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you went in as a second lieutenant?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, we second, second lieutenant.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, did you have a chance to practice architecture in the, in the Air Force?
Speaker 2: My brother did, yeah.  Funny thing about life, you know.  So, you when you learn something you use it.  Well we're, we're--he'll probably tell you the story.  But, he, he's in the aircraft.  Well, we, we, we, we'd taken surveying, we'd taken calculus, and so in the aircraft the first course let's say DR [ph.] and DR you look out the window and you say that's Dallas [Texas].  And you kind of guesstimate how far you are from Dallas and you put it on a map.  Well, William's [HistoryMaker William Whitley] up there with the, with a angle and (laughter) a protractor, he knew exactly how many miles, he, he would.  But, the Air Force didn't like that (laughter). They didn't like that at all.  He said, "I'm precisely, you know, two, two and half miles from, from Dallas," or whatever the, the bridge or whatever.  They didn't like that.  So, but in life you use what you know, and that's what, what he knew.
Speaker 1: So, the Air Force didn't like it because they, it was--
Speaker 2: They're, they're trying to say, you know, "Look out and guesstimate and all of that."  Say, "Why guesstimate when I know exactly," (laughter), "where I am?"
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you all serve together in the Air Force (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, were down in Texas together.  The, what happened though we, Texas training basic navigation was twelve month, twelve months.  And then after basic it went to bombardier school which is in Cal- was in Sacramento, California, Mather Air Force Base.  I went to bombardier school after navigation school, William was married [to Kaysonia Whitley] and didn't.  He went to, he went to 135s [Boeing KC-135 Stratotanker], I went to B-52s [Boeing B-52 Stratofortress].
Speaker 1: Okay, so you all kind of split up?
Speaker 2: That's when we split up.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the next year William was out of the service.  He gave, said that the commitment was three years.  After they gave you all that training they learned, "I want you five years."  But, gave William that option you can get out or you're out.  Well, he got out in two years.  He was out of the service in two years.  And I went, I went three years.  But, I, I, got the experience of going to Waco, Texas training, Mather Air Force Base training, Shaw Air Force Base [South Carolina], (unclear) training, training and a year in England, for the active service.  I had twelve months active service on a bomber (laughter) in England.  For twelve months then I was out of the service.
Story_ID: 636013
Speaker 1: But, we always thought about opening practice.  And while William [HistoryMaker William Whitley] got out he started, he started using my mother- he fixed my mother's [Beatrice Nivens Whitley] basement up.  We had office down in my mother's basement (laughter).  So, when I came out all that was, all that was together.  So, we were ready to go.  And I was able to save a little, say like five thousand dollars, which was a lot of money, I thought at that time.
Speaker 2: Yeah that's a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But, I was always in the--a position where I said I could live six months, I could live six months.  And I can do what I gotta do.
Speaker 2: Yeah five thousand dollars in those days to put it in perspective would be a year's salary for a college graduate.
Speaker 1: There is no doubt about it.  Every, my, my first job, well my job then was like sixty-five hundred dollars a year.  My first car in England I spent thirteen hundred dollars Volkswagen brand new.  I bought an MG in, in, in Sacramento [California] nineteen hundred dollars.  I mean, I mean, so.  Those were the times.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  So, you're back here in 19--what '62 [1962]? Is that--
Speaker 1: Sixty--I'm back at '62 [1962].
Speaker 2: Sixty--
Speaker 1: Sixty-one [1961], really?
Speaker 2: Sixty-one [1961], okay.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-one [1961], all right.  So--
Speaker 1: Before Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] got killed, really.
Speaker 2: All right, okay.  So and so Whitley and Whitley [Whitley and Whitley, Architects and Planners; Whitley/Whitley Architects and Planners LLC] is officially founded in 1963, though right?
Speaker 1: About '63 [1963], yeah.
Speaker 2: But '61 [1961] you started you opened a practice in--
Speaker 1: No, I still working, in other words I was, we were always working but our head set was how to, how to, how to, how to come out and start practicing.
Speaker 2: Okay, well who did you work for '61 [1961] when you came out?
Speaker 1: Well, I came out I worked for Keith Haag [Everett Keith Haag], Keith Haag is a, was a really was a professor of mine at Kent State [Kent State University, Kent, Ohio].  He, he had a practice outside of Akron [Ohio] there.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you were, so you were in Akron. Was your brother [HistoryMaker William Whitley] living in Akron too? Or did he live near Cle- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, he, he worked for, he worked for Damon, Worley and Samuels [Damon, Worley, Samuels and Associates], here in Cleveland [Ohio].  But, they did churches.  But, fancy churches, which was, I mean, very educational for him.
Speaker 2: So, now what happened to--so you all had both intended to found your own firm?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And what happened, how'd that happen?  And here's how it happened.  I'm working for Keith Haag, all right.  My mother lived on 154th Street and Harvard [Avenue].  And at the corner of 154th Street and Harvard is a vacant light--lot.  And there's a sign up there and the sign says, "Future Home of Advent Lutheran Church [Advent Evangelical Lutheran Church, Cleveland, Ohio]."  Future Home of Ad- I said--now I saw that sign.  I said, "Now how do I get this church?"  So, I start trying to meet the minister and met the minister and the minister really, really liked me for whatever reason.  You know, he started invited me to hunting; we went hunting together.  I really noticed, I really knew this minister, I really knew this better, all right.  This now this, this is a good story.  So after I met, now he's ready, now he and, and the Lutherans build at that time one church a week.  I said, "One church a week?" Now if I got in with these people I would be in good shape.
Speaker 2: So, somewhere in the country or the world they're building one church every--
Speaker 1: In the, in the United States.
Speaker 2: In the United States.
Speaker 1: They were building one church a week.  So, ultimately I get interviewed for this, for the church, the new church.  And I haven't done a church in my life. (Laughter) I haven't done a church in my life.  So, I go to the interview and I, you know there's three or four other architects that are interviewing.  But, what I found, and this is a lesson in fellowship and getting to know people and relationships.  I, as I go to the church meeting I find everybody on the board lives in that community.  And I know (laughter) everybody on the board I know and live in that community.  I mean that was a no, there was no, no doubt. I know the minister I know everybody on the board that we were gonna come out with that job.  All right we get that job.  Now, I'm working for Keith Haag, Keith Haag is in Akron, but he is interested, in, in one church a week for the Lutherans too.  So, he's, he's interviewing too.  I didn't know that.  Now of course when he finds that I got the job he is upset. (Laughter) He is upset. So, I leave Keith Haag, but I knew I had, I had five, I had five thousand dollars in the bank and I knew I had church that was gonna pay a fee of six thousand.  So, now I got eleven thousand dollars, we can start.  And that's what we did.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's a good story. Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that's when we started.
Story_ID: 636014
Speaker 1: So your brother just came on over from--
Speaker 2: No, he just left, he just--but see, the fre- I'm single, I was single at this time.  William [HistoryMaker William Whitley] was married [to Kaysonia Whitley] with children.  I, I can live, I knew I could live six months and, and the fee was six thousand dollars no way, I mean.  I was quite, quite free and able to do and with, with that, he came along.  'Cause the fee was set could do what he had to do.
Speaker 1: Okay, so where did you set up your offices?
Speaker 2: It's, the first offices was at Lee Road and, and Chagrin Boulevard.
Speaker 1: It's in, in Cleveland [Ohio]?
Speaker 2: In Cl- Shaker Heights [Ohio], really but--
Speaker 1: Shaker Heights (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) Cleveland, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, and now, now your sister Joyce [Joyce Whitley] is I guess involved at some point. Does she--
Speaker 2: Now, here's what happened, then there's the (unclear).  Now, now we're architects. My sister majored in anthropology. Case Western Reserve [Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio]. She went to Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] though, she went to Fisk.  But, she smoked, so my mother [Beatrice Nivens Whitley] took her out of there.  So, she finished at Reserve, anthropology.  But, when she finishes school she says--and, and I don't know, happenstance, whatever. Urban, urban planning is a big deal at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  Well, she somehow gets hooked up and take- goes to University of Chicago.  Takes up planning city planning, all right.  Comes out and she's working for a guy named Meltzer [Jack Meltzer] in Chicago [Illinois].  And as all of this comes together, I'm leave- I'm, we're going into architecture.  She's getting trained as a city planner.  The riots occur, the riots occur.  Now when the riots occur all the federal funds go to solve that problem.  But, to solve the problem you have to have a plan, you have to have a plan to solve the problem.  Meltzer is, is right in position to do it.  And he jumps on it immediately.  Now, Joyce is in there with, with him and sees how it's done, and it's all over the country.  I mean it's all over the, planning is all over the country.  Joyce comes out city planner and works- experience with Meltzer every, every major city. Cleveland.  So, all of a sudden she's getting work, Cleveland, Buffalo [New York], St. Louis [Missouri], Fort Wayne [Indiana], Cincinnati [Ohio], Chinatown in Washington D.C., New York City [New York, New York], New York City, Roosevelt Island, Roosevelt Island.  I mean it was all over the place.  But, when you get a planning, what comes after planning?  Buildings. Now we're in a position, now we're in a position--we're open [as Whitley and Whitley, Architects and Planners; Whitley/Whitley Architects and Planners LLC], now this opportunity starts.  Now, all over the, all these federal buildings I mean and I'm talking about multifamily, multifamily structures are going up in all the--where, where these plans are.  So, then we're up and rolling then, I mean then, you know.  We were knocking those things out, you know three or four a year, for many years.  And the planning studies.
Speaker 1: So, so, so you get started in '63 [1963] but your, your sister gets involved in the late '60s [1960s] I guess--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was the late '60s [1960s], '60s [1960s] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Around when the riots are happening--
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: --and post riots.
Speaker 2: And when that start happening--
Story_ID: 636015
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And then another thing started happened that you didn't, that we didn't appreciate, and we understand now.  Black power all of a sudden came in. These people got power that they never had.  And they've lost it since then, but at that time, they got power they never had.  That they were making the decision who got the resources.  They were making those decisions.  And black was beautiful, man they were grabbing black people they, they enjoyed giving work to black people.  Now, the situation is almost the reverse of that.  (Unclear) that day is over.  But, that, that was--we were right there, right time right place and that's, that's what abled us to really establish the bu- we were at a lot of places around the country.
Story_ID: 636016
Speaker 1: This, the ascent of Whitley and Whitley [Whitley and Whitley, Architects and Planners; Whitley/Whitley Architects and Planners LLC] is taking place as political climate in Cleveland [Ohio] is changing, right?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: So, you got--so tell us about--now did you know Carl Stokes before he became mayor?
Speaker 2: Not, not really, no.  Not really, no.
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--
Speaker 2: But, you didn't have to know him. It was--I mean Cleveland, I mean it was unbelievable that I'm just saying the feeling was in Cleveland, when Stokes came into office, it was like an unbelievable thing.  It's almost like the Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], Obama thing but in locally.  And I remember you, you used to run downtown to go to their speeches.  I mean it was unbelievable, good time, that right, good time.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so we got Carl Stokes' campaign, now did you have any idea at the time that it was possible for him to win?
Speaker 2: Not really. Not really, in fact it was almost like the attitude around here was what's this upstart trying to, trying to, it's not his turn yet.  I mean, there's other guys ahead of him, you know, guys--not his turn, you know, so he had that going on.  But, he, he ultimately rode right over all of that.  Then he was the, you know, he was, then he was the king.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's a--come to think back on this now, I'm a kid during this time--
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in Cleveland and I was in high school I guess when Carl Stokes was elected--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --or be- beginning of high school.  And I'm thinking like the Cleveland was, the Cleveland Browns had just won a NFL [National Football League] championship.
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right Jim Brown was yeah--
Speaker 1: Jim Brown.
Speaker 2: --yeah right.
Speaker 1: Jim Brown was in the movies.
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: He's a, you know, that took this country by storm.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Everybody was thinking about, you know, this great football player, now he's a actor.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: He was the hottest commodity out here.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And then, they made the movie, I think it was this was in the late '60s [1960s], 'Uptight' which took place in Hough [Cleveland, Ohio].
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: It was about Cleveland too.
Speaker 2: Right, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's about the downside of Cleveland.
Speaker 2: Right the downside of Clev--
Speaker 1: But, Cleveland was a lot of--was in the news a lot--
Speaker 2: Right, no doubt about it.
Speaker 1: --before Carl Stokes gets elected.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: So, did the election of Carl Stokes affect your business?
Speaker 2: His was--I mean, definitely did. In other words he, he was elected mayor.  I don't wanna say--I'm, I'm pushing this but, I bet you within three months we had the first job which were--the fee was over a hundred thousand dollars.  I mean just (makes sound).  And then I go down to his, his, his directors, they were on the Lutheran church board of (laughter) trustees.  These same guys that gave me my first job.  Now, they're his administrators, making decisions, got a job, you know, I mean, you know, within three, four months.  So, I knew (makes sound) political power, things shift, bit difference.
Speaker 1: Okay, now so, so what happened to Whitley and Whitley is what usually happens to white people all the time (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well there's no--all, every, all time I mean that's the way the system works.  I mean, just way it is. Hatcher [HistoryMaker Richard Hatcher] went in, oh yeah, we, we, went to Gary [Indiana].  Did, yeah, did four or five projects in Gary.  I mean, that's the way the system--I mean, me--most people want to fight the system and change the system.  You better join the system.  What you gotta acknowledge that, that's the way the system--and you not changing it.  And but it takes--you gotta be a part of that, you gotta, most people don't wanna be a part of it.  But, want to take (laughter) you know, get some of the goodies after the fact as, you know, they didn't support the whole effort.
Story_ID: 636017
Speaker 1: Yeah, well when you think about it though, as an architect like what are you gonna do, if you can't get a contract you know, right?
Speaker 2: I mean, say there's, here's only, there're only two ways to get a contract.  You either a wealthy person that runs in a wealthy circle or your parents are in the circle and you grow up with these kids that are in positions of power to make decisions.  Now, if you happen to be that kind of person, great.  The, the easier position is to be on the, the public side but be an active member in that and you can be success- because you gotta re- in architecture, relationships are everything. If you don't have a relationship you're not getting any work.  And people say, an amazing thing, I was talking about excellence before.  Excellence is good, but they're not giving work on excellence on anything, you know.  It's relationships, you see it in the White House all the time.  You know, these major contracts, you said that guy was the best.  I mean that never happens.
Speaker 1: So, let me ask you about, you, you had mentioned 'The Fountainhead' earlier?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Like Gary Cooper--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --is the character who believes in his own brand of excellence.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And he doesn't compromise, he doesn't negotiate with anybody, he has a I mean--
Speaker 2: See that works in the, on the public's, on the private side that could work on the private side.  But, public side have regulations, they have controls, they I mean they're protecting the public's money.  Now the pr- private they do what they wanna. You get a crazy architect (unclear) (laughter) and you like his personality, like Frank Lloyd Wright. I mean, people liked his personality, yeah.  And he is gonna give you something different. (Laughter) But, I'm saying that, those are two different, two, two different areas.
Speaker 1: Right, right, right.  So, did you think, did you think a black architect could go anywhere like Gary Cooper had in 'The Fountainhead'?
Speaker 2: No, but what I'm saying if you get over--what I meant to say, color, color can be trumped.  But, you have to get over--like Obama's trump.  I mean nobody talks about Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], they talk about him, but, they, they don't look at him as a black man.  He can be trumped, but you have to be at very high level.  If you can get yourself over that level, well you can function like that.  But, very difficult to do.
Story_ID: 636018
Speaker 1: Carl Stokes is elected mayor in '67 [1967].  And, and you all are, your, this first big project was at Advent Lutheran Church [Advent Evangelical Lutheran Church, Cleveland, Ohio], is that?
Speaker 2: No, that was the first church that we ever did.
Speaker 1: Oh, first one, yeah.
Speaker 2: The first, the first public job we ever did was for the city and the school board doing a recreational facility and that came from Stokes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So this is, well exactly what was it, what was the project, what, what did you do (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was a recreational facility.
Speaker 1: Where, where was it?
Speaker 2: It's at Harvard [Avenue] and Lee Road, but it's right at JFK High School [John F. Kennedy High School, Cleveland, Ohio], attached to the high school, or adjacent to the high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, so when, when you first got started with--what significant challenges did you face in terms of getting work done here in Cleveland [Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Getting work done?
Speaker 1: Yeah?
Speaker 2: When you say getting it done do you mean producing the project?
Speaker 1: Yeah, when you plan things, it's, it's one thing, but I know if you, any I think in any, almost any profession when you get to the point where you have to depend on other people in order to do things you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, that's what I'm saying that's where, in other words the, the ba- especially on that job.  Architecture takes about, let's say three or four people.  This is the base core.  What I, I have two of 'em, right, you know, one sitting here, you know, we can turn out half of it, you know, ourselves.  And if you had given us a little more time turn all of it.  So, it's not, it's, it's more, well we accomplish and we could deliver.  So, to hire two other people to support us is, is, was inexpensive and you could make that happen.  But, as you got more jobs, it took more people.  'Cause you had more jobs going at one time.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, the architect on a job, you, you design and plan for it, but what, what about your contractors that work for you to build it (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, they you see but that's one person that supervises construction.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's, that could be one of the four.  I mean but it, it, it's just a, a skill, a part of the whole package.  That's all that is (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did, did you ever face any discrimination in terms of the, the contractors?
Speaker 2: Contractors, no.  I find people if you have green money (laughter) you'd be surprised who shows up.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's what I, that's what I was trying to get at (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well no, heck no, heck no.  I'm not saying there isn't discrimination going on.  We, oh well this is maybe eight, ten years ago now.  The East Cleveland schools [East Cleveland City School District], you know, which is a $100 million job.  Now, you, you had a $100 million job all of a sudden the contractors are they want all of it.  They wanted--they're--well, well getting, getting non whites to work on a job is not difficult.
Speaker 1: Or non blacks you mean?
Speaker 2: Yeah, non blacks. Yeah non--
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 636019
Speaker 1: Yeah you've done a lot of public projects.  What have been some of the more memorable projects you, you did in this period of time in the late '60s [1960s] going towards the--
Speaker 2: In the late '60s [1960s]?
Speaker 1: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Early? You're saying early on.  Memorable early on jobs?  Really, they were all memorable.  You know, we won awards almost on, you know, and those are always exciting because there was freedom to do something unique.  And then we got, got a- got awards for them.  We did an RTA [Greater Cleveland Regional Transit Authority] station, we did one job for the Cleveland Clinic.  Now, how do you get a job?  That's I, I wanna tell ya that's the one private job we've ever gotten.  And there, there's a story behind that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Cleveland Clinic, an institution in terms of Cleveland [Ohio], the most powerful institution in Cleveland.  Now, and their, their standard is excellence and they wouldn't ruin that image at all.  I go to a party. In fact, they were, the Cleveland Clinic was supporting a black hospital.  They were gonna fund it.  So, I'm at a party in that kind of environment.  And met the chairman of the board or chairman of the foundation.  And I find he lives on the next street over from me.  And my son [Kent Whitley] tells me his son is always cutting through our yard to get to (laughter) the swimming pool.  So, I see him at the party I say, "Yeah your son is always cutting through my yard." And so we, we have a relationship.  So, so many years passed after that and I send him a letter and I say, "Dr. Kaiser [ph.] I'd like some work from the Cleveland Clinic."  And he writes me back and says, "You know something? The Cleveland Clinic is a," and I'm paraphrasing this now but, "is an institution that's for excellence and it just wouldn't be right.  But, what I'll do, if anything is off campus, off our campus, I'll give it to you."  So, a year or so later as it turns up we get a contract in the mail (laughter) from Dr. Kaiser.  They're building a, they have a hotel for the kings and the queens on Carnegie [Avenue] but they want to put a hotel on the Euclid [Avenue] side for the average guy.  "We'll give you that." And then that was maybe a $10 million job. You know, the fees, you know, it's up there.  And they paid every two weeks. I mean it was like their payment schedule, everything about it was an unbelievable experience.  Now, that was the best ins.  But, that was private, private--
Speaker 1: Now this is dif- the, the pay schedule is, is, was more than regular than say a public job, from, from what I understand.
Speaker 2: It didn't, it didn't--what I'm saying, when they, when they say, when they, when they--the comptroller signs off they pay it, I mean it's not like we gotta go through this and go, this board and all.  Unh-uh, they, they were very fast payers and we couldn't believe that, we couldn't believe that.  And that was our one experience with the private side.  Which was a hell of an experience I'm telling you.  Hell of an experience.
Speaker 1: Okay, so just it's hard to get private--
Speaker 2: Well, all I'm saying--
Speaker 1: --contracts (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) you gotta be in that circle and if you're not in that circle I mean you know, it's not gonna happen.
Speaker 1: So, if it hadn't been for the son cutting through your yard having that (unclear)--
Speaker 2: In, In other words no but, I was on the I was on the, the growth association and Cleveland leadership and all these, all these group that meet because after, after the riots they had all kind of groups that met once a month.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: To preclude that from happening.
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about the Greater Cleveland Growth Association [Greater Cleveland Partnership], right?
Speaker 2: Well, again that's a circle of businesspeople that meet once a month for the good of the city.  But, but for the good of themselves also.  And if you're in that circle and you can get that circle it's not like they're gonna hold you out, you can get in that circle.  It'd be beneficial 'cause those people have private dollars to do private things.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you alluded to that fact that when you--public jobs have a lot of red tape to get through to get your (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah in other words they do.  In other words I don't make that a negative term but it's, it's a fact that they have regulations trying to protect the public.  Where the, the business community says I want the building up because I can make money.  But, I mean their, their interest is completely different.
Story_ID: 636020
Speaker 1: What style of architecture, what materials typify your work?
Speaker 2: You know, basically I, I like to see, in other words architecture it should go out in general there, there's masonry, there's, there's stained glass, there's glass, there's metals.  I mean it's not like these are unknown and exotic, and it's a matter of manipulating them so that they come--give you a different impression, as you, as you become a part of the building.  That's it.
Speaker 1: That I mean--okay, so you don't have, you're not--
Speaker 2: I'm not stuck to, I'm not, you know, it could be anything.
Speaker 1: I know people look at a Frank Lloyd Wright building, they say all, they--you can, you can tell one, by looking at it, because--
Speaker 2: But, it's quite unique, what I'm saying, he is unique and you recognize it way off.  There are a few people like that. Not many.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not many like that.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Mies van der Rohe [Ludwig Mies van der Rohe], I mean you see his buildings, hey, you know what they are.  Frank Lloyd Wright, you know what are; Caboo [ph.], you know what they are.  I didn't say one thing. Our office building [of Whitley and Whitley, Architects and Planners; Whitley/Whitley Architects and Planners LLC] was in a Caboo building.  I mean Caboo didn't do it, but a disciple of Caboo did do it.  So, you know, architecture in terms of style, I mean it's open and free as far as I'm concerned.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you, so you--then the way you design a building is it like dependent on how the building ought to function or--
Speaker 2: No, no well basically it comes from (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How do you?
Speaker 2: --your needs and desires.  What are you needs and your desires, you tie that with the requirements of the building. You marry those two together you come up with some kind of demands on the building.  But, if I've satisfied your needs and your desires you're gonna like the building.  Now, if I don't, and some people don't.  They do their own thing, instead of your thing.  There's conflict there.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I, I know, we were interviewing Jeanne Moutoussamy [HistoryMaker Jeanne Moutoussamy-Ashe] she was telling us about her father's [John Warren Moutoussamy, Sr.], her father was almost like a disciple of Mies van der Rohe or, or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he's in Chicago [Illinois], I mean, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so he did a lot of steel and glass, you know.
Speaker 2: That's right.  But, steel and glass, yes that's private side that's see that's, that's private side.  He not when he did, he did that.  He didn't do that for the State of Illinois or (laughter).  I mean it's different. 'Cause I, I like Chicago 'cause Chicago is a, I mean Chicago's a lovely place. There isn't no getting around it.
Story_ID: 636021
Speaker 1: So you don't favor any particular materials or design concepts or anything or? Particularly?
Speaker 2: I like masonry to tell the truth.  I mean if I were--in other words, the thing I say about masonry that I appreciate as an older person anyway, when you deal with the public what the public knows is a part of the equation.  If I come up with materials that you don't understand and don't know I mean I get comments that, you know, surprise me.  Frank Lloyd Wright, everything he did was unique you expect that.  [HistoryMaker] James Whitley you don't expect that and you and you're gonna get some negative comments that's what I'm really saying.  If I give a place you're comfortable, scale is right, you recognized the materials, that's good.  Have you, well you have been don't to Case Reserve [Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio] they have a, a Gehry building down there.
Speaker 1: Frank Gehry, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah. And I for me to do a Frank Gehry building I don't think they, I don't think the owner would even allow it.  What I'm saying he's, he's gotten over where, "Oh he's crazy." What I'm just saying to, to reach for that, very, very difficult.  I mean that takes years of, you know, millionaires giving you money that, that, that you do what you wanna do.  And I know it leaks, and I know it leaks 'cause, you know, you can't stop that kind of building from leaking.  But, that kind of criticism I couldn't take, personally.  So, I'll, I'll be a long way from that direction.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay I, I know you're familiar with the State of Illinois Building [James R. Thompson Center] in Chicago, Helmut Jahn (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, yeah, right, right.
Speaker 1: Which I think the major drawback from, I mean some people like the design some people didn't?  I liked it but, I think people started to cook in there in the summertime. They couldn't get the air conditioning to work and it was like a big furnace.
Speaker 2: Oh it just--
Speaker 1: Furnace.
Speaker 2: Well but the see that's what nobody appreciates it and you get no points for it either.  A guy, guy that sticks his neck out. Every time--I love skylights.  Boy, I'd put skylights in as often as I can. They leak every time, they leak.  I put them in the library, they leak.  And I see a person now, "Lord our library," you know, every, first thing comes out of their mouth.  This recreational center we got, we got a Progressive Architecture award for it, which is a national award.  It leaked, I mean we had a skylight going down the middle over the pool, it leaked.  Well, I'm saying the architect that does that is on the edge and, and just being a minority, see that kind of criticism I can't--it's a problem, that's what I'm saying.  That kind of criticism is a, is a constraint.
Speaker 1: So, would you think that the criticism would be harder on you as a black architect?
Speaker 2: It would. See in other words, a black architect, if it leaks, you're incompetent is what I'm saying.  A white architect, it leaks, the building the leaks or the contractor did it wrong.  There's other things that, you know, if you do it, oh no, no, no, no, you're incompetent.  So, I mean that's a constraint you gotta deal with, you gotta deal with that.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you, do you think that kind of, you know, stymies some of the creativity of black architects?
Speaker 2: Definitely, definitely.
Story_ID: 636022
Speaker 1: I'll tell you one story they--this is a good one.  I've--you talking about relationships and knowing people.  I have a friend in my class. This friend, this friend--and he's one of these friends every time he's comes through Cleveland [Ohio] he calls me.  And I'll get a call next week, I mean, it's like this guy, I mean he keeps in touch, has kept in touch for many, many years and we worked at my second job together.  He sat right behind me and we had a good relationship.  He's since, he's since been, he's since been Hilton [Hilton Hotels and Resorts], head of Hilton, all of Hilton's construction, all of Hilton's.  And I remember I called him when he was head of everything Hilton and he told me this.  He said, "If the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] calls me and forces me to do something, I'm gon- I giving you the job."  Now, when working under constraint from a friend now, this is a friend a close friend and he tells you that, it tells you what it is.  In other words what he's concerned about, if he gives you work, a minority work, his judgment is skewed, there's something wrong. He makes bad judgments, in his mind.  And I think it's true.  'Cause this guy I've known what forty or fifty years.  And I haven't got a garage from him, not a garage from him.  Not a garage from him.  We did the fashion museum at Kent State [Kent State University Museum, Kent, Ohio].  He was head of all the architecture at Kent State.  And he was well he, he wasn't giving us the job, but he was the head of all of it.  So, we worked with him there.  But, I'm just saying how that, that when you understand that you kind of, you function a little different.  In other words, friendship didn't do it, hasn't moved him one inch.  Not moved him one inch.  And now I'm starting to see that in, in black people with power.  I'm starting to see that with black people with power.  If they give it to a minority they're, they're, they're not safe, they're not safe.  And ev- they're in a position of power now.  'Cause my son [Kent Whitley] tells me that, that he leans towards the politics. And Cleveland has more black power than it ever had.  Maybe three times it had when Stokes [Carl Stokes] was in power.  Has more power not less power.  And, and the black community is getting less.  Not participating eq- you're--well, you're not even getting your share.  If you're supposed to get 10 percent or 15 percent you're not even getting that.  You're down around 1 or 2 percent.  And black people are in positions of power, we have a black mayor.  We have black councilman, we have black administrators, head of the airport, head of the port, head of the so and so, police department, chief of police yesterday.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, right.
Speaker 1: Yesterday. What I'm just saying you go right on down the list, there's more black power in Cleveland and I would say in Chicago [Illinois] or and everywhere else.  But, now they're locked in to, these people are not they're, they're just safe people.  In other words, they have jobs and they don't wanna lose 'em.  And they're giving me the same argument that my friend gives me.  If the NAACP makes him do something then if something goes wrong if the roof leaks, if the roof leaks I can say the, the, the NAACP made me hire him, or whatever.  But, I mean that's a fact of life.  I mean that's, that's true.
Story_ID: 636023
Speaker 1: So, this is--I know the talk about this being a post-racial America--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --when President Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] was elected and I mean does, post racism means you don't focus on, on race as much.
Speaker 2: Well, in other words, see it's, it's a bad word now, in other words, even anything black, white I mean you can't even talk black white you got to use a different term now, because it turns people off.  Even black people turns, I mean, they're, they're tired of hearing it. They're tired of hearing it so, that's what's going down.  Yeah, but, but black power, there's a, there's a whole lot of black power.  And but the only thing I would say even about Obama what he's doing, I don't know if it's gonna fix it or not.  What he is doing, is he's limited on what he can do.  But, I see his second positions that will emerge two, three years, five years from now.  These guys he's putting in second positions, oh they gonna be some powerful folk.  Now, whether they, they, they make for difference, I don't know.  'Cause they may do the same thing (laughter), they may do the--but they're gonna be some black people. "So where did he come from?"  Boy, he's in, he's under the radar right now.  But, he's getting certain kinds of experiences, oh man that's good.  And, when he emerges, now if he's the right kind of guy and can do certain thi- he can, he can make some differences.
Speaker 1: Do you have any ideas as how, as to how we can, you know, change this or turn this around?
Speaker 2: Yeah and, and I, I, my, my, the, the, the--we gotta do it.  That's what I'm really saying if we have the power well we could do it.  But, that, that, that, I'll say that leader hasn't emerged that's all I'm really saying.  And, and that's down at the grassroots level.  'Cause at that level they can make a difference.  'Cause our communities I see Arabs in it, in our black communities.  And I see these guys, I mean they're making a living.  These are guys that can't speak English, hardly.  Then I see other groups, brothers are still struggling on the, one the simplest of things.  Guy from high school can't get a job. That's pitiful.  Yet, I'll take a guy that's very powerful he hasn't hired one.  And, and all he'd have to do is hire one or two.  He hasn't done that, if he and if everybody took that as, as my contribution, you know, my contribution to the effort.  'Cause I see other groups man they're tight, the other groups are tight.  And, and the Jewish groups I mean they're the best. They are the best.  And they're powerful, they're powerful.  And like South Carolina I see the story in South Carolina. When they can in South Carolina when, when the browns, all the browns get together.  Put the governor out of office, now man, or threaten the governor.  Now, that's real power.  Now, what, what they do with it, who knows.  But, I think that day, that day shifting, so.  But, but that leader hasn't come, well that message hasn't, isn't out there.  I don't see anybody talking that kind of stuff at that level.
Story_ID: 636024
Speaker 1: From what your brother [HistoryMaker William Whitley] was saying, you do a lot of the traveling, on behalf of the organization [Whitley and Whitley, Architects and Planners; Whitley/Whitley Architects and Planners LLC], I mean  (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, in other words, his, his, his thing, he used to do the work.  So, I would the traveling and well start the presentation, or go to the present- interview and that kind of stuff, I was taking most of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, Joyce [Joyce Whitley], my sister, took some of it too.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, this is I know, we mentioned it you worked on the redevelopment of Central State Uni- University [Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: And Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio] and Paul Robeson arts center [Paul Robeson Cultural and Performing Arts Center, Wilberforce, Ohio].
Speaker 2: But, see even, even there though, that was black power man.  Central State, oh man, I mean and it worked so smoothly.  That's I saying (makes sound).  Now, you go to Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] that's a different game. What I'm just saying is it's a different game, you know.  We don't appreciate that that's what I'm saying.  You know, that part of the way the system works you complaining that it doesn't that it doesn't work for you, yet you, you're not making, you're not participating I mean that's ridiculous.
Speaker 1: So, yeah, so we were saying before there are people who are in power that really recognize what they can do?
Speaker 2: They don't recog- see they are in power but, see the word power frightens them.  I'm telling you, the word power frightens, frightens them.  You see, what you don't appreciate, when fro- when Stokes was in office, I mean when Stokes was here every politician, I don't care what color you were, you had to go through their 21st caucus group [21st Congressional District].  And I saw judges coming through, I mean all peo- what are these guys doing.  The west siders come, but if they needed the black vote the governors coming through there.  They had to come through there is no place like that now.  There is no place that where all the power comes together say, "You come through we'll anoint you or we'll say you're on our side or their side."  They have any of that, that, that isn't around anymore.  If they, they'd do that they could affect some change, a whole lot of change in fact.
Speaker 1: Okay?
Speaker 2: One day we'll get there.
Speaker 1: Yeah. So, well you think about all of your, now how have the, well you know, Stokes was--Carl Stokes was mayor for I guess four, four years.
Speaker 2: Four years, that's it, yeah.
Speaker 1: Four years, that's, that's it, okay.
Speaker 2: That's it.
Speaker 1: And there wasn't another black mayor until Michael White [Michael R. White], right?
Speaker 2: Michael White, Michael White, Michael White, nay, I'll tell you Michael White understood power, now.  Oh, Michael White understood power he just used it--he was, he was tight with it.  He didn't let everybody in, he didn't let us in for sure.  But, I'm saying I can't even complaint that he didn't let--I didn't support him.  What have (laughter) I was on the other side so, I'm not bitching and moaning over here.  But, oh, he, he knew how to use power now.  He knew how to use power.
Story_ID: 636025
Speaker 1: Yeah, and was it Paul Madison [sic.] built the Cleveland Browns stadium [Cleveland Municipal Stadium; FirstEnergy Stadium, Cleveland, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, right, right, right, right.
Speaker 1: How's your relationship been with Paul, Paul Madison's firm?
Speaker 2: You, you mean Bob Madison [HistoryMaker Robert P. Madison]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, everybody asks me that question.  You know, we, we, we've bumped heads maybe two or three times in, in forty years.  I say, it's not, it's not, there's so much work. He does his thing, I do my thing and it's not like we're in completion. I'm in the Boule [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity] with him and I, you know, I sit beside him almost every meeting.
Speaker 1: Okay so, good working relationship?
Speaker 2: Yeah, in other words I don't have any ill feelings about Bob Madison.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay do you ever help each other, do, do things, or work together?
Speaker 2: I'm trying to think. Do- we worked--we've been at, we've gone after together, none of them came through but we've gone after jobs together.
Story_ID: 636026
Speaker 1: So you mainly handle administration and design, and your brother [HistoryMaker William Whitley] deals with architecture and pro- production, research (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right, right, right, right.
Speaker 1: And your, your sister [Joyce Whitley] did the planning?
Speaker 2: She did the planning, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, what was the biggest project you worked on?
Speaker 2: I guess it was East Cleveland schools [East Cleveland City School District].  Those were eight facilities that had to be replaced on the OFCC [Ohio Facilities Construction Commission] which is a state agency that produced all the educational facilities across the State of Ohio.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We were the, in fact we were the first group to get funded.
Speaker 1: So, you had to build eight, eight schools or you built eight schools?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, that's right eight schools. In fact I gave one of the schools to Bob Madison [HistoryMaker Robert P. Madison].  'Cause we had to turn those out very quickly.  So--
Speaker 1: So, when was the school when, when was the project?
Speaker 2: Started in 2000, say 2000 ended maybe--well even, maybe 1998, somewhere in there.  In other words, it's a five or six year project.
Speaker 1: It started in 2000 and?
Speaker 2: Two- let's say '98 [1998], I mean two- 1998.
Speaker 1: Okay. And it went through well what year '98 [1998] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Let's see six years in, say through '6 [2006]. Two thousand and six [2006].
Speaker 1: Okay. Two thousand and six [2006], okay.
Story_ID: 636027
Speaker 1: What's been your toughest project?
Speaker 2: Toughest? (Pause) Not too many tough projects.  I mean we had, we've had glitches and things like that.  But, nothing, nothing tough.
Speaker 1: Well what's a typical glitch, or, or is there a typical problem you (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Normally payment, I mean, that's what I call a glitches, when the money get's messed up.  And or, or--I'm trying to come up with an example.  Or, well, even one project, you start the project and the state kills the project in the middle.  But, you've gone,  you, you know, you didn't stop, you're way down here, he cuts it off here on the contract and, you know, you, you're left out there.  I, I call those glitches.  But, but the work, the work's pretty straightforward.  Work is pretty straightforward.
Speaker 1: So, so, so has that happened where you, where you, you start a project?
Speaker 2: Well, it's just a matter of--
Speaker 1: And then the state decides it doesn't want to do and, and in the middle of it (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right, that's right.  And then you look at your contract and your contract didn't, didn't, didn't solve the problem.  That's what I'm say- that's what, that's what (laughter).  You know, normally you say okay, you stop the dd [design development] or cd [construction document] or, or that's where I stop but, we're trying to fi- we know we can finish.  So, we continue to work before you got that approval.  And when they stop the contract they go back to you know.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: They never gave you authority to go forward, those kinds of problems.
Speaker 1: So, so the effort to be efficient a lot of times you, you go ahead and then but it's a risk because (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, oh yeah, oh yeah.  It's a risk and it is a risk, and there a lot of things that which are risks.  You think it's worth the risk and it'll never happen.  But, hey, sometimes it happens.
Story_ID: 636028
Speaker 1: Do you have a project that you're the most proud of in terms of design or scope or (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, but I guess--see we got a Progressive Architecture Award and that was in 1970.  And we were just starting.  In fact it's the job that the Stokes [Carl Stokes] gave us.  Man that's the highest award you can get in architecture.  It's the Oscar of architecture.  That was in '70 [1970], no '71 [1971] somewhere, I mean its way back then.
Speaker 1: Did you like that project the best?
Speaker 2: Very nice interesting project, very interesting project (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: Because what happened is that they had a tight site where they had to put a pool, a gym and a stadium in the one location.  So, it was all bunch up like--so, we put the stadium over the pool.  And you know, it went over so the pool, oh so it made it interesting section.  Oh man, it was, it was unique by, by, by forced to be.  I mean my nature, I mean by the site.  Man the judges saw that boy, first honor, we got first honor, man.  You know, the awards were given in New York City [New York, New York], at the, at the Guggenheim Museum [Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum].  The awards were given at the Guggenheim Museum and I, I never forget that.  I got there and I say, "Well, I will, I'll be back next year."  And the guy said, "You probably will never come back, never," (laughter). That's what the guy said.  And, and I, and I, we got, we got two awards that year.  We got one in planning and we got one in architecture.  And it- so I assumed I would be back.  But, I, he was true, he was telling the truth.  I--we haven't been back since then.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is a honor that few get?
Speaker 2: Very, in Cleveland [Ohio] I think three guys have gotten it in Cleveland.  Very few people get it.  Then it was first honor, not, they got first honor, they got honor, they got citations, they got merits, they got a whole lot of them.  First honor, first honor award.
Story_ID: 636029
Speaker 1: Let's see now, in terms of organization I guess with other architectural firms, are you a member of the National Organization of Minority Architects?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, well I, well that's a story too.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I have two stories and I don't--
Speaker 1: This is NOMA they call it, right?
Speaker 2: I, I want to go back.  Let me tell you, tell you, a problem I had that was a problem.  This was a problem.  We struggled to get GSA [General Services Administration] qualification and that's working for the government.  Man, spent all kinds of money, going to Washington [D.C.] blah, blah, blah.  We get it. They give us, they give us--and GSA is a minority program.  I mean it's a minority program where it's, it's a set aside, it is a set aside.  The first job they give us are lighthouses on the Atlantic coast, stretching from Maine down to South Carolina.  Lighthouse repair, now, we get lighthouse repair (laughter).  And, and, and a boat takes out to the lighthouse and if you have bad weather, and if you have bad weather the boat doesn't go (laughter).  But, you have contract and you have to perform the work.  And you have to hire staff 'cause it's in, it's in Maine or it's in South Carolina, it's not in Cleveland [Ohio].  I'm not sending people from Cleveland to do the work.  Now, how to get we, we, we just prayed to get out of that. It was terrible, terrible contract.  I mean not a terrible contractor, but us being in Cleveland not at the spot where the lighthouse was, was the big problem and we had them all down the East Coast.  That, that was a problem as I recall.
Story_ID: 636030
Speaker 1: Now, your next point was what?
Speaker 2: No I was asking you about the NOMA. The National Organization of Minority--
Speaker 1: Yeah, the oh the AIA, AIA, 'cause we cut 'em all off.  Yeah the AIA and this is many years ago.  They call us to a meeting this is Bob Madison [HistoryMaker Robert P. Madison], myself and Tom Zung [Thomas T.K. Zung] which is a, a Japanese guy.  They, they brought us to a meeting and the meeting was about the federal government has said that a minority has to be involved in RTA work, RTA is the transit authority work.  That's what the government had said.  And they call us to a meeting and they tell us (laughter) they tell us, how unfair that is.  That there is no minority competent to do it. And Bob Madison's there and I'm there and Tom Zung's there.  That's what they said.  And we go through it and at the end of the meeting Bob Madison jumps up and tells them, "You're too small to stop the government, forget it, forget it."  Then we just left, but I was through with the AIA I said well if they're gonna call me to a meeting--and the thing that amazes me, I've done four RTA stations [for the Greater Cleveland Regional Transit Authority]. Four.  Bob maybe--I, did, did you come in a terminal, did you fly did you take the rapid in?  The Terminal Tower [Cleveland, Ohio], I was on that team, the Terminal Tower.  What I'm just saying I've done so much RTA work that I was not qualified to do from these guys' point of view.  And I've doubt if they've done one.  What I'm just saying the RTA work all the major firms of the country, they come in from New York [New York], Chicago [Illinois], San Francisco [California] and get the work.  Because, they are the transportation people.  But, since the government had this tag along it brought a few minorities into, on, in to the team process.  So, now there's minorities that have experience now if you talking about experience.  The minorities have the experience and the majority of people Cleveland [Ohio] do not have rail experience.  But, I do, but we got, we, we turn--I mean AIA far as I was concerned were not my friends.
Speaker 2: AIA is American Institute of Architecture [sic.] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) American Institute of Architects.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, what about NOMA, the National Organization of Minority Architects (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I went, I went to that, but NOMA is, was a--it was not, it wasn't--in other words I was part of the problem there.  I think--see NOMA could have probably done some good things had everybody including me been a part of it.  I was member let's say ten years.  But, ultimately I stopped doing it.
Speaker 2: Okay, well and is there a reason or just the time or what?
Speaker 1: In other words, it was a--more benefit. What am I getting out of it? I didn't see them having a strong enough structure to, to do me any good.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: Just like the AIA, to tell the truth the AIA doesn't not have a strong enough structure either, to do for their members even.  I mean just the way we function, we're--the architects are nice people.  We're if they weren't nice people they you know MA- the American institute of doctors are not nice people.  Lawyers are not nice people.  Well, we, we, we don't, we, we don't have that posture at all.  So, we're not effective.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the AIA you right (unclear)?
Speaker 1: They get what they want for their members what I'm saying.  Surance [ph.], Surance which is AIA too, they're powerful people.
Story_ID: 636031
Speaker 1: Now have you been involved in any, any projects to mentor young African American architects?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we've, our office [Whitley and Whitley, Architects and Planners; Whitley/Whitley Architects and Planners LLC]--and we always had two, three of 'em.  Always did, 'cause we appreciate what Bob [HistoryMaker Robert P. Madison] had done for us.  Plenty people have come up. Plenty, plenty of them.
Speaker 1: Okay, have any gone on to become established (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, the one, the one that gets me though. One, you know kid in ninth grade. He comes in, "I wanna be an architect." His mother brings him in there.  You know, and seems like we turn around, he's graduate he went to Illinois Tech [Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, Illinois] you know, he graduated.  And then we turn around again he's competing with us. We said, "Lord" (laughter), time flies, time flies.  So, but I mean we felt good about it.  There are a couple people around there that're doing quite well, they, they came out of our office.  I mean all that we can say we trained them--I mean it's not--Bob wants to claim me.  See Bob wants to claim me right now.  'Cause I worked at his office (laughter) fifty something years ago.  So, it's not that we're claiming 'em but in, in other words it, it probably made a difference in their lives.  The people got some opportunities that--'cause I, I could never, our imagination was this I could never say I'm not registered or I have had, had no experience.  And I mean and that's a killer when you're talking on the phone and you--, "Who have you worked for?"  I, I got one guy who have you worked for and we just had the summer with Bob Mad- I said, "I worked for Bob Madison," the guy hung the phone (laughter), hung the phone up.  Yeah but, but--well everybody gets that I guess.
Story_ID: 636032
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --is there any major thing you would do differently if you could go back and change something?
Speaker 2: Oh, I'd say we were fortunate, lucky, right place, right time, I mean all those goody things.  I mean, we, we stumbled up into it. I mean it was just good for us.  Things have changed and I was, for a young people they, they--I would lean toward empower yourselves in other words you're in a business that, that's, that's influential but you're, you're, we're, we're, we're becoming--see fifty years ago, the architect was the leader of the process.  What's happened over the last fifty years, you're getting people that are above you.  Construction managers, I mean all kinds of people above you.  And ultimately you're becoming a staff position, that's what's happening on these big jobs.  Oh man you can believe Turner's running it or--do you know Turner construction [Turner Construction Company]?  But, the major, those major large contractors, they're run- they're running you (laughter).  It's coming down that way, so I say unless we structure ourselves to be more powerful to control the industry, these other people are becoming--'cause they're lawyers.  We go to Chicago [Illinois] we--never forget--going to Chicago on one of the projects the contractors were lawyers.  And what they told, if you don't, if you don't write it down, if you not sending memos, writing it down, you go to court you have a problem 'cause they're bringing a lot of paper.  So, but I mean until you start thinking like that you, you're not going to be effective.
Speaker 1: Now, do you have to hire a legal counsel to, put, put together your con- contractors (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, we, we're basically our own lawyers.  I mean the documents are but you have to stay on top of it.  In other words it's the, it's the memo that you didn't write.  You see but what I see these large contractors, they structure it that you're forced write it.  It's not that if you don't write it (laughter).  I mean their whole structure is it's got to be written.  Certain things have to be written.  In fact there's one lawyer in town here [Cleveland, Ohio], he's probably the biggest lawyer in the country now for construction.  Guess what he, guess what he promises the client?  "I will save you lawsuits. You will have 1 percent lawsuit at the end of this project."  And he di- and he can deliver it.  Now, and he can deliver it. Know how he delivers it? Everything's written down, you talk to only certain people, you don't talk to--you talk certain people, so the chain is right, going through paper.  Well, a very effective guy.  I tell you architects should be leaning that way, that's what I'm saying.  Architects should be leaning in that direction.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay now how many people do you employ [with Whitley and Whitley, Architects and Planners; Whitley/Whitley Architects and Planners LLC]?
Speaker 2: At the most I--we have twenty-three people.
Speaker 1: Okay and you still have Shaker Heights [Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, but now, now you, oh we've got four or five people, you know.  It's up and it's down.
Speaker 1: Okay, depending on the project you're working on, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It depends on the project yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, so the life of an architect unless you have your own firm is, is you could find work but you work in different--
Speaker 2: You move around in other words you're right.  In other words I'd say, the, the, the next generation if you're not practicing your--so that's what I'm saying where you are, you gotta be thinking about practicing yourself staying in a situation no more than ten years. Probably five years.  You better be doing your own thing somehow.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah. And on the political side that's available to you, on the private side it's a little (laughter).  But, I'm saying if you understand the political side is available to you if you participate and you're a part of their process and know and know those people.
Story_ID: 636033
Speaker 1: Do you have any thoughts about the--or any hopes, what are, what are your hopes and concerns about Cleveland [Ohio] today, the African American community in particular here in Cleveland?
Speaker 2: No power, no, no unders- and it was in, invented here is what I'm saying. It was invented, the Stokes brothers [Carl Stokes and HistoryMaker Louis Stokes] invented it.  It's, but and it's, and it's so easy I mean that's what's amazing to me.  They invented. You don't have to--the template is sitting right here, you know, the template is right here.   You know, I see the congressperson not that strong.  The (unclear) person, the mayor our mayor, (makes sound), I you know, the, the newspaper loves the mayor, so what does that tell you?  What does that tell you if the newspaper loves the mayor?
Speaker 1: It's not a lot of criticism of the mayor.
Speaker 2: No, what I'm saying, he's not doing--in other words you let him do something for black people and the papers are gonna jump all over him.  Well, I'm just saying I don't see any criticism from anybody on our mayor, they say he's doing a good job.  And I'm not saying isn't doing a good job, for the City of Cleveland.  I mean for the overall city, he might be doing a tremendous job.
Story_ID: 636034
Speaker 1: Once again if you look back on everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: There's some buildings out there they wouldn't be (laughter) without us so I mean that's probably what you have, that's probably what you have.  You know, we have a, I have one son [Kent Whitley] that's following behind, my brother [HistoryMaker William Whitley] has two [Kyle Whitley and Scott Whitley], that's, that's basically your legacy.  In that, and the grandchildren are you know, the, the next group.  And, and my son's son unbelievable.  I mean that guy is unbelievable.  So hey, he'll, he'll, he'll, he'll make for the legacy, you know.  'Cause it's--I mean he's, he's doing what he's got to do.  And the thing I like about him, he's that next leader is what I'm saying.  You should have seen him, high school he's running everything, he's running all the interracial things you gotta go through him.  And that's in high school.  So, I said I know what he's gonna do in college.  And then he's captain of the swimming team, captain of the so and so, oh he's taking, he's got all those goodies we had without a twin see.
Story_ID: 636035
Speaker 1: What advice would you give to young people going into architecture today, African Americans?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'd say you gotta be a--it's a credit--you gotta be a creative person.  You better be a social person too.  I tell you some people, don't, don't believe you better be a very social person.  And if you're good looking that helps too.  What I'm just saying (laughter) all the positives you can get, but politics is available to you.  That's all I tell all of 'em.  Politics is available to 'em.  The, the, the private side has some limitations beyond color is what I'm saying, this is just some limitations over there.  So, and if you're, if you're in a circle that's giving away dollars to build buildings, you can function as an architect.
Story_ID: 636036
Speaker 1: I was--when we were going over the outline in Chicago [Illinois] we were talking about how you're in a position with your business [Whitley and Whitley, Architects and Planners; Whitley/Whitley Architects and Planners LLC] where you actually have your children actually coming into the business, who want to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) If they want to do it, yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean you, you have a business that children want to be a part of (unclear).
Speaker 2: Well I'm saying you know, when, when you're taking good vacations, there's no getting around it (laughter). I mean just I mean some of those years were like boy I mean you think everything's gonna always remain the same, which it doesn't of course, but it's like man the money just, it's almost like actors like William's daughter [Kym Whitley] is an actor, oh man, I mean you're making more money you can spend.  You know, what I'm saying, so influences their decisions of what they want to be.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Any- anything more about your children before I ask the--
Speaker 2: The children are, the children are good, good (unclear), the grandchildren.  I have three, two girls and one boy.  And the twins will get probably the same thing we get and then they're tremendous athletics.  I mean they got a lot of good things.  The boy's exceptional, always exceptional.  William's children same thing, very bright people, very bright people.  William's [HistoryMaker William Whitley]--well I'll let him talk about it, with his child- I mean their, their co- my mother [Beatrice Nivens Whitley] would be very happy, that's what I'm saying.  And she always thought she was better than anybody else.
Speaker 1: She did. Now she was around when you became successful.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, heck yeah, my, my, my father [Moses Whitley] died in '79 [1979], you know.  I had good contracts since '70 [1970].  So, he was--my mother died at--in '91 [1991], so I had twenty years of her living, so.
Story_ID: 636037
Speaker 1: Now is there anything we haven't discussed that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, you've talked about a lot of things. I mean seems like the--I mean it's two thous- five thousand years from now, won't even look at this you know.  I think we've covered what the, what the Whitleys [HistoryMaker James Whitley and HistoryMaker William Whitley] could do.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right well, the, there's a last question.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But, it's similar to legacy but it's a little different.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Somebody who tried to do his best, that's it.  I mean, no I was, my, my, my father [Moses Whitley] again.  I was trying to be exceptional in other works. I just wanted to be a little better that what you expect.  That's all I'm trying get and that's all I want to do for you.  And if I follow that path I think, you know, things turn out well.  I had a house, my house I turned--and this is almost amazing to me.  You come into the house straight I turned the, the entry on a 45 degree angle.  So, you come in on a 45 and then, then you come up to a square.  I mean you come out to a regular square.  Man when people come, they're confused and when they go out, they don't know what door to go--I mean, I mean it's--but the amazing thing that I get out of it.  A simple adjustment, a simple--but if I let you just walk in and you, you don't think any, you won't even remember my house.  You, you, but I guarantee when you get lost at the front door (laughter) you'll always remember my house.  So, that's what, I, that's what I think about architecture.  Just make it a little, a little bit different a little, a little, a little better than you expect.  That's my last words.
