Story_ID: 15269
Speaker 1: This HistoryMakers interview is being conducted with Benaree P. Wiley, President and Chief Executive Officer of The Partnership [Inc.] in Boston, Massachusetts.  The interview is being held at The Partnership headquarters at 172 Newbury Street, Boston, Massachusetts.  And the date is January 27, 2005.  The HistoryMaker interviewer is Robert C. Hayden, and the videographer is Mr. Scott Stearns.  Good morning, Ms. HistoryMaker.
Speaker 2: (laughs) Good morning.
Speaker 1: Would you give me your full name and spell your name for me?
Speaker 2: It's Benaree Pratt Wiley, B-E-N-A-R-E-E, P-R-A-T-T, W-I-L-E-Y.
Speaker 1: Good, thank you.  And where were you born?
Speaker 2: Washington, D.C., Freedmen's Hospital (laughs).
Speaker 1: All right, and your birth date?
Speaker 2: 5/13/1946 [May 13th, 1946].
Speaker 1: How do you describe or designate your profession, your occupation currently?  What, what do you do?
Speaker 2: Well, I am the president and the CEO [Chief Executive Officer] of The Partnership.  And The Partnership is an organization that works with Boston businesses and institutions to help them more effectively attract and retain and advance professionals of color.
Speaker 1: Your academic preparation is?
Speaker 2: I attended Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  I was a, a major in marketing at Howard and so I was in the business department before it was a business school.  And then I attended Harvard Business School [Cambridge, Massachusetts], and I received an MBA there.
Story_ID: 15270
Speaker 1: We have four or five kind of loosen-up question 'People' magazine type questions--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --just to have some fun and to give people a sense of your personality.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And so I want to ask you, what is your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Oh, that's a tough question because I love seasons, and I love the, the opportunity to have seasons.  But, I don't know. I am one of the those people that absolutely loves winter.  I love snow.  I think snow creates a certain spirit in the air, where people are friendly and, and, and working together.  And it just has a, it has a certain, I don't know, vitality to it.
Speaker 1: What is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: I love black (laughs).
Speaker 1: Black, okay.  And your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Martha's Vineyard, without a doubt.
Speaker 1: Your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Ah, that's a tough one cause I like food.  I like food a lot.
Speaker 1: Pig out food?
Speaker 2: Hmm?
Speaker 1: Pig out food.
Speaker 2: Pig out food, well, I love fried chicken.
Speaker 1: Fried chicken, okay.  Do you have a favorite saying or phrase that you like to use that kind of demonstrates a part of your philosophy in life?
Speaker 2: I have a couple that I think I use a lot.  One is kind of "go with your gut."  And what I mean by that is you got to do what feels right for you.  And I think, too often--and I work with a lot of young people.  So, you know, it's something I, I have an opportunity to talk about a lot, is that, you know, sometimes we make decisions based on what we think we ought to be doing or what others expect of us to do.  And its really important to do what feels right for you at that particular point in your life.
Story_ID: 15271
Speaker 1: Would you tell us what your mother's name was and where she was born and where she grew up?
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Mildred Petticord.  Everybody called her Peggy.  She was born in St. Paul, Minnesota, and spent her formative years there and then relocated to Washington, D.C. when she was a young adolescent.
Speaker 1: What do you know about her growing up years in St. Paul, has that been shared with you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't know a whole lot.  My mother died when I was two.  She was twenty-seven.  She, I--what I do know is that they were part of a, a black community in St. Paul that centered Pullman porters primarily, through my grandfather, her father was a Pullman porter because that was a, you know, stop on the railroad.  And, you know, and, and all of his family was there.  And I don't know where they, how they ended up there, but I know his sisters were there, and that's where he met my mother's mother.  And, you know, I know that they sent them from St. Paul to Camp Atwater [North Brookline, Massachusetts]. So my mother and her sister came east to go to Camp Atwater.  So that would suggest that, you know, they, you know, certainly had certain values and, you know, of certain importance of building and being part of a larger black community.  And--.
Speaker 1: Your grandfather, Edward Pratt, the porter--.
Speaker 2: No, did I put that down wrong there, paternal and maternal?
Speaker 1: Or maybe I got it wrong.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's on my father's side.  Henry Petticord is my--.
Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Yeah, was the, yeah, was the Pullman porter.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry.  That's my fault, yeah.  What do you know about his early life and where he was from?
Speaker 2: No, I don't know.
Speaker 1: You don't know.  Okay.  What things have been handed down to you from your father and other relatives about your mother's personality?  I know you were two when she passed, but what, what do you know about her through family stories and--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.  You know, it's interesting.  My dad [Carlisle Pratt] talked about her a lot.  So even though I didn't know her, I kind, I kind of feel like I, I did know her.  And I, I kind of grew up with her image in terms of trying emulate it in a lot of ways.  People always talked about how she always carried herself with a great deal of dignity, that she was someone that got along with everyone, that she cared a lot about, you know, her physical being.  So she was very vain, but in a positive way, that it was, you know, seen as, say, my, my dad used to tell, you know, your mother would not answer the doorbell without putting lipstick on, you know.  And, and he raised two daughters, so he constantly kind of talked about her.  Her intellect and, you know, and her potential, I mean I think everybody saw that she had a phenomenal potential that she didn't have a chance to realize.
Story_ID: 15272
Speaker 1: Tell me about your father, his name and where he was born?
Speaker 2: My father's name was Carlisle Edward Pratt.  He was born in Washington, D.C. and raised in Washington, D.C., probably the strongest influence in my life because, primarily, because he was our, our primary parent.  He, he was in law school when our mother [Mildred Petticord] passed [in 1948] and then completed law school afterwards and was an attorney for twenty-five years, and then ultimately, was on the bench of the Superior Court in Washington, D.C.  And then he passed in '93 [1993].
Speaker 1: What are some of the major challenges that he faced, particularly as a judge and working in law in Washington?  The decades now when he was a lawyer and a judge would be?
Speaker 2: When he became a judge, oh, gosh, I was married by that time.  I would say in the '80s [1980s], probably in--was he judge when the kid--maybe late '70s [1970s], '80s [1980s].  He became a judge, so most of, you know, all of my childhood, he was a, a practicing attorney.  He, you know, back then it wasn't easy to join a, a law firm, a majority law firm or to, you know, certainly weren't gonna be in-house counsel.  I mean the, the world has changed dramatically, but he had, he, he always had his own practice with different partners over the years.  And, you know, they had a range of, of, you know, specialties, I guess, from divorce to litigation, you know, criminal law to, you know, a little bit of corporate law cause he worked with, you know, other black businesses.  But that was the kind of law that black lawyers practiced then.  My dad loved the law.  He absolutely loved the law, and he didn't do it because it was something to do.  I mean he really believed in it and loved it and, and talked to us about it a lot, talked about the importance of it.  And I can remember once my sister [Sharon Pratt Kelly] and I were teenagers, and we challenged him about some, you know, in terms of criminal law, and how could you, how could you defend someone who may have committed a crime.  And he really believed in everyone had a right to the best legal defense and knowledge, and that, that was what the system was designed to, to kind of filter out.  And, you know, a lot of, a lot of his clients couldn't pay him.  And so we would get hams and other ways of, of--ways that people would express their appreciation for the work that he did.  So he wasn't driven by the money or anything else.  I mean he really loved it, and he loved being able to kind of help people, yeah.
Speaker 1: Tell me about his judgeship years and what do you recall about the judgeship years and?
Speaker 2: Well, he became a judge after I had moved to Boston [Massachusetts].  So I don't have the same intimacy around those years that I did, you know, when he was a practicing attorney 'cause I was, I wasn't living there.  I know he took it seriously.  And I know he labored and deliberated a lot over some decisions that sometimes were controversial and tough, but, you know, kind of go back to his, his, you know, you know, his strong and fundamental belief in the system, you know, I think was, you know, probably the, the, his kind of driving philosophy.
Speaker 1: What are your memories of your father in terms of his personality?  What was he like as a person?
Speaker 2: He was fun.  He had a great sense of humor.  He was, could be--had a, a slightly sarcastic humor.  So sometimes it could be cutting, so you had to appreciate the humor aspect of it; very intellectually developed and, and enjoyed intellectual stimulation and debates, challenged us to engage in those kind of dialogues and debates with him; just, kind of a--you know, he was social.  He enjoyed people, loved to play cards, bridge and poker.
Speaker 1: What was his growing up years like?  And where did he grow up?
Speaker 2: He grew up in Washington, D.C.  He grew up with a sister [Amy Pratt] who helped raise us, along with his mother [Hazel Pratt].  His father [Edward Pratt] died when he was young.  His father died when he was about five, roughly, around five, with lots of aunts around.  My grandmother had several sisters.
Story_ID: 15273
Speaker 1: Your [paternal] grandfather?  What was his name?
Speaker 2: His name was Edward Carlisle Pratt.  I think it was Ed--I know it was Edward Pratt.  I know--I think it was Edward Carlisle Pratt, and my dad was Carlisle Edward Pratt.  I don't know much about him.  You know, I, I know his, members of his family cause he had brothers that were in D.C. and they had children.  So we knew all of them growing up.  But I didn't know his parents, and I don't know--I don't even know what he did professionally, to be honest with you.
Speaker 1: Okay, what about his wife, your father's mother?
Speaker 2: Oh, she was a figure (laughs).
Speaker 1: Her name?
Speaker 2: She was definitely the matriarch of our family.  Hazel Drew was her name.  Drew is her married, and I'm trying to think of what her maiden name was, but Hazel--Hazel Drew Pratt.  Obviously, Drew was her maiden name.  That's what it was, yeah.  Drew is my, is my birth middle name.
Speaker 1: What do you know about her background, where she was born and raised and?
Speaker 2: I think she was born in, I think she was born in Virginia, but I'm not certain.  She was raised in Washington.  She might have been born in Washington [D.C.], though.  That I don't know.  Both of my grandmothers were mixed.  They, my grandmother's father--this grandmother's father was English, and my maternal grandmother's mother was white.  And I don't know where she was from.  And I don't know anything about their background.  My grandmother's mother was also, you know, had strong Native American background, so they've told me.  But I don't, you know, I didn't know her.  They grew up in Washington, she and several sisters.  Three of them grew up to full adulthood, yeah.  I think they started with eight children, and many didn't make it to full adulthood, but she had a very strong personality.  She worked in the government for years and, and, you know, retired, I think in her fifties.  And she was definitely a strong influence in the family.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, your mother [Mildred Petticord] passed when you were two [in 1948]?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Who raised you?  Your father and--?
Speaker 2: And his mother and his sister.
Speaker 1: Okay, tell me about his mother, your grandmother who raised you?  Her name again and?
Speaker 2: My grandmother, Hazel Pratt, my aunt, Amy Pratt, who is still living.  And it, you know, was just won--you know, wonderful to both my sister [Sharon Pratt Kelly] and myself.  She is as much our mother and grandmother to our kids as, as anyone.  And she worked in the library con--Library of Congress [Washington, D.C.] for years, in an administrative role; retired a number of years ago, and also grew up in Washington, D.C.  And she and my dad went to Dunbar High School [Washington, D.C.], and she went to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  I don't know that she finished.
Story_ID: 15274
Speaker 1: My dad [Carlisle Pratt] was in the service, and then went to a school called [Robert H.] Terrell [School of Law, Washington, D.C.]--are you familiar with Terrell?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Terrell is a school that was for veteran, black veterans who had potential and hadn't had the opportunity to go to college.  And I think it was kind of an accelerated program that also provided legal training.  I don't know all the details, but it was something that was established for black veterans.
Speaker 2: So this would have been in the mid '40s [1940s]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: After the war, mid '40s [1940s]?  Okay, just backing up, what law school did your father finish?
Speaker 1: I think it was Terrell, was the actual school.
Speaker 2: Oh, it was.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: You don't recall the exact year or time?
Speaker 1: My aunt [Amy Pratt] probably knows a lot (laughs), so if there are any things I need to get some data on, my Aunt Amy would know.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 15275
Speaker 1: What is your earliest memory, your farthest back, farthest back memory that you have as a child?  How far back can you go?  What do you remember?
Speaker 2: I think because it was traumatic, I remember this.  My dad [Carlisle Pratt], my dad took my sister [Sharon Pratt Kelly] and I to a playground when my mother [Mildred Petticord] had passed.  And I guess he told us then that she had passed, but that part I don't remember.  But I remember him telling my sister and I that we would be the most important people in the world to each other, and that it was really important for us to always be there for each other.  So I can, I can remember that setting.  So I was pretty young.
Speaker 1: Your sister was?
Speaker 2: She's two and a half years older than I am.
Speaker 1: Older.  Okay.
Speaker 2: And she took that very seriously (laughs).  And she took that charge very seriously that her role was to look out for me (laughs).
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about that relationship at that very young age.  She was four, you were two?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: How do you remember that relationship or even as you became six, seven and eight?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, I think, again, probably there was more trauma around it than we are aware that--I think we both remember that kind of charge vividly, and so we've--and we've always been, the two of us have always been together.  So when, after my mother passed, my dad didn't live with us for a few years.  We lived with my grandmother [Hazel Pratt] and aunt [Amy Pratt].  And he came, you know, every evening for dinner.  Then he remarried.  And then we went to live with, with him and his new wife.  And they subsequently divorced and so the stepmother that's listed here is not that same stepmother.  And so we--but the two of us were always a unit, I guess, is probably the best of describing it.  And, and, you know, we certainly had the usual sibling disagreements, but I think because of the fact that we had had this kind of trauma in our life and, and, you know, kind of immediately had to, to look out for each other, maybe in a even greater way than we would have under normal circumstances, that we've, you know, we've always been very close.
Story_ID: 15276
Speaker 1: When you lived with your grandmother [Hazel Pratt], what street did you live on and exactly--where were you?
Speaker 2: We lived on Rhode Island Avenue [Washington, D.C.] in the early years.  It was in an apartment building.  I don't remember the exact address.  And then for many--and then she moved to 4419 15th Street Northwest W, and that's where my aunt Amy [Pratt] still lives.
Speaker 1: What was that neighborhood like as you were growing up?
Speaker 2: That's the LeDroit Park neighborhood in Washington, D.C., not far from Howard University [Washington, D.C.], yeah, certainly, well, but all--really, everywhere I lived in Washington for most of my life was always all black.  And your milkman was black, and your postman was black and your doctor was black.  I mean it was, it was a different, very different world than the world that my children certainly knew.  It was, you know, it was back in the days when everybody in the neighborhood knew everybody and everybody's home, you know, you were in and out of each other's home.  And you knew that, you know, if you went around the corner and did something that it was gonna get back to your family before you got home.  So you didn't do anything that you didn't want to get back to your family.  So it was, you know, it was a very middle class by those--as one would define middle class in those days--you know, probably working class by today's definition.  But certainly middle class in values.
Story_ID: 15277
Speaker 1: Was the early civil rights activity in the mid-fifties [1950s], were you aware of that as a, as a youngster?
Speaker 2: I remember '54 [1954] vividly.  I remember May 17th, 1954 vividly.  I had just turned eight.  I was home with the mumps.  And my dad [Carlisle Pratt] came home that evening with a bottle of champagne.  And he poured glass of champagne for my sister [Sharon Pratt Kelly] and for myself.  So I was eight and I was ten--yeah, she was ten.  And he said, "I want to toast you."  And, of course, we were excited cause we got to drink champagne.  And he said, "I want to toast you girls because as of today, the world is yours, and you can be anything you decide you want to be.  It's just up to you to decide what it is you want to be."  And then he said, "Let me explain to you what happened this afternoon."  And then he sat down and explained to us the decision that had been rendered that afternoon 'Brown v. Board of Education [of Topeka, Kansas', 1954].  So I--.
Speaker 1: Had he been involved in any way with the lawyers and the efforts and the background work for that [U.S.] Supreme Court build-up in the decision?  Do you know whether he was involved?
Speaker 2: He certainly wasn't a part of the team that were the litigators.  What I remember hearing is that he had been involved in doing some of the research.  So it had been some of the background work.  But he wasn't part of the Thurgood Marshall team.  So, but he was, I, I can remember his excitement as if it was yesterday.  Yes, so that I remember real well.  Then, yes, so yeah, I was aware.  They talked, you know, in our home they talked a lot about what was going on.  So it wasn't, you know, so we were, we were pretty aware of a lot of things.  The, the [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] and the, you know, Malcolm X years, you know, was a coming of age for my sister and myself.  That was high school, college years.  So we were, you know, you know.
Speaker 1: The murder of Emmett Till, were you aware of that and did it impact you in any ways?  Did your father discuss that with you?
Speaker 2: That's, I don't remember that.  That one I don't remember.  And that could--it doesn't necessarily mean he didn't discuss it.  He talked about, you know, we--dinner table was, you know, you know, we always had dinner, you know, eat together.  So, you know, again, this is, you know, the '50s [1950s] and--. I don't remember Emmett Till in particular, but he certainly talked about, you know, what was going on in the world and what it meant for us.
Speaker 1: Did he discuss the Rosa Parks protests with you all during that time?
Speaker 2: No, I don't, you know, the truth is, I don't remember the particulars.  My sister may remember all this better than I.  I know we were aware of it.  I know we talked about it.  I, I just don't remember.
Story_ID: 15278
Speaker 1: Where did you first attend elementary school in Washington [D.C.], and how do you remember those early years?
Speaker 2: Well, when I first started school, Washington was still legally segregated.  And I went to a school called Gage [Elementary School, Washington, D.C.], and then a school called [Lucretia] Mott [Elementary School, Washington, D.C.], which were black elementary schools that were, you know, in the neighborhood of where we lived in LeDroit Park.  And after '54 [1954], we moved to a different part of the city, but it took a while for the school system to catch up with where we lived.  So then we continued to go to our old neighborhood to go to school because we--even though there was a school right on the corner, where we lived, but we couldn't go there for the first few years.  So we continued to go to Mott.  And then I don't remember the exact year when you could really, you know, the, the integration really began to take place.  And then I went to the school in the neighborhood which was Rudolph [Elementary School, Washington, D.C.].  And for about two years it was integrated, and then it was all black.  And so early memories, you know, I remember, I remember Gage and Mott with great fondness and warmth.  The teachers took a real interest in you.  They really cared about you.  They, you know, we had things--and we had celebrations like May Day and, and, you know, and so you were kind of validated a lot as a, as a person in, in those, in those early years.
Speaker 1: Is there any one teacher at Gage or Mott that you remember in any special way?
Speaker 2: I'm so bad about names.  I can remember a face.  I can remember face.  I want to say her name was Hamilton, and, you know, mostly because she, you know, her eyes lit up when she saw you.  So you just, you just felt so, that, that the teach--she was so interested in who you were.  So I do remember her.  I want to say Hamilton.
Speaker 1: Did you have a middle or junior high school system at that point or did you complete grade eight at the elementary school?
Speaker 2: No, we went to McFarland Junior High School [Washington, D.C.] and Roosevelt High School [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Briefly, what are your memories of McFarland?  What were those years like, about seventh and eighth?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, the seventh, eighth and ninth was how it was it set up then.  Well, they were good, you know, I enjoyed it.
Speaker 1: Did you enjoy school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did.  I enjoyed school.
Speaker 1: What kind of student were you?  What were you like as a student?
Speaker 2: I was a good student.  I wasn't an off-the-charts good student.  I was, I cared a lot about also being socially accepted.  So there was always a balance to be, unfortunately, to be played, you know, that maintained around that in terms of, you know, being too intellectual, you know, too academically driven.  And I always did well.  I don't think I maximized my potential, but I also, you know, was socially engaged.
Story_ID: 15279
Speaker 1: Tell me briefly about your middle school experience [at McFarland Junior High School, Washington, D.C.], and how do you remember that?
Speaker 2: Well, I remember it as, I won't, I wouldn't say fondly.  I think those are tough years anyway, and they're very awkward years.  I was this height at that age.  So I towered over all the boys, and, and some of the girls.  And, you know, just felt awkward in general.  You know, I remember, you know, doing sports and, and enjoying that.  That was before women really had, you know, teams, but we did have intramural sports.  A lot of our family friends went to Catholic school, which were the private schools during that period, not the, the independent schools, but the pri--the Catholic schools.  My dad [Carlisle Pratt] really wanted us to go to public school, and he strongly believed in public school and believed in, you know, being able to interface and, you know, thrive in any kind of setting.  So that sometimes had its challenges, but, you know, made certainly lifelong friendships.
Story_ID: 15280
Speaker 1: You then you went to Roosevelt High School [Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Right. Which was like--almost everybody from McFarland [Junior High School, Washington, D.C.] went to Roosevelt.  So it was the feeder school for Roosevelt, and there may have been another feeder school to it; went to Roosevelt.  You know, those were good years.  They were, you know, again, you know, you start coming into your own in high school, was a cheerleader, captain of the cheerleaders.  You know, was in honors classes.  Again, I wasn't, you know, at the top of the class, but I was doing well enough to be in honors classes.
Speaker 1: What subject interested you the most in high school?
Speaker 2: Latin.
Speaker 1: Latin?
Speaker 2: So, and it probably goes back--now, that teacher's name I remember, Mrs. Davenport.  And it's probably like anything, the function of the teacher as much as anything.  And I actually, when I graduated from high school and went to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], my intent was to major in Romance languages.  I really wanted to, you know, to, you know, study Latin and Greek and languages and kind of pursue that as, as a career because she had such a strong influence on it.
Speaker 1: At that moment, did you have any notion or aspirations about what you wanted to do professionally as an occupation?
Speaker 2: I thought I would be a teacher.  That's what I--you know, my stepmother was a teacher.  You know, I had a lot of admiration for the teachers that were in my life.  A lot of the people that I, were part of our kind of, you know, my family's friends, the, the, the wives were teachers.  And I, and that's what I, that's what I went to Howard intending to do.
Speaker 1: Was there any teacher or family friend who was especially influential in your life at that point during the high school years?
Speaker 2: Mrs. Davenport and Mrs. Blackburn were very influential, were both teachers at Roosevelt High School.  Mrs. Blackburn was a history teacher, but, you know, and they were different styles, but both were, just carried themselves with great poise and (laughter), and confidence and dignity and were very knowledgeable about their subject matter.  And they seemed to love to what they were doing.
Speaker 1: Now, was this an all-black high school or was it mixed or--?
Speaker 2: No, it was technically mixed, but it was all black.  So it was, after formal segregation, but by the time we were in high school.  So there may have been one or two white kids there, but it was a black high school.
Speaker 1: I see.  Was black or African American history dealt with and taught at your high school?
Speaker 2: Not separately, but we talked about it.  So you knew about it.  I don't, we didn't have a Black History class, but in a lot of classes you learned about significant black people in history.
Speaker 1: And that would have been in history class also?
Speaker 2: In history, but, you know, I don't think it was only history, yeah.  So it was, it was kind of integrated into what you learned about.
Speaker 1: During your high school years, did you have an after-school job or a weekend job?  Did you work at all?
Speaker 2: Not during the school years.  I worked during the summers.
Speaker 1: What did you do?
Speaker 2: Worked in my dad's office.  So, yeah. And then I worked at a clerk, I worked at like Sears one summer as--it was, it wasn't a sales clerk.  It was like a claims clerk.  So I, I worked during the summers, but I didn't work during the school years.
Speaker 1: So you graduate now from Roosevelt High School in what year?
Speaker 2: '64 [1964].
Story_ID: 15281
Speaker 1: And you go where [after graduating Roosevelt High School, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Howard University [Washington, D.C.] in September of '64 [1964] 'cause my dad [Carlisle Pratt] wanted me to go there (laughs).
Speaker 1: That's right in the middle of the Civil Rights Movement.
Speaker 2: That's exactly.
Speaker 1: What was it like to be a student at Howard in the mid '60s [1960s]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, a lot of things changed during my four years there, from '64 [1964] to '68 [1968].  You know, by '68 [1968], you know, first of all that's when [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] was, you know, assassinated and the Vietnam War, and all the protests around that.  You know, and so by '68 [1968] there was a big student movement and students taking more control for the curriculum and, and having a voice and, and activism was very much a part of the culture in the latter half of my--.
Speaker 1: What role did you play in all of this?
Speaker 2: I was not a leader, but I was active.  I was, I was a leader, I shouldn't say--I wasn't a leader in the community activism.  I certainly was part of the group that took over the administration building and, you know, kind of, and, and in terms of kind of playing a role.  I was a leader in a lot of other ways.  But not, you know, I wasn't one of the, the rebels on campus.  So I, I understood it.  I believed in it.  I supported it, and I, but I wasn't, you know, one of the voices of the activism.
Speaker 1: Did your father give you any advice or suggestions about how you should work through all of this as a Howard student?  Did he talk to you about it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, he did (laughs).  You know, our dad always encouraged us to, you know, to, to, one, think for ourselves and not to be caught up in peer pressure.  And then he started that at a young age.  So it became, clear that it's what you believe, and it's not what, you know, kind of, you're feeling drawn into.  No, he certainly always taught us that, that we would always, we would have a role in, in, in effecting change cause we had been beneficiaries.  And so he always taught us that, that we had a responsibility and a role.  But he also taught us to, you know, be strategic about how you make choices and that, you know, you--make sure that the decisions you make today, you're gonna be comfortable with tomorrow.  So, you know, yeah, he, he, you know, he gave you space, but he also gave you advice.
Story_ID: 15282
Speaker 1: You majored in [at Howard University, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: I ended up majoring in marketing.  I ended up majoring in marketing.
Speaker 1: How did you make that shift from the language into--Romance languages to marketing?
Speaker 2: I'm trying to remember which professor it was.  I had a professor that pulled me aside--God, I can't even remember who it was, and said, "Have you ever considered business?"  Now, I didn't even know business as a profession then, yeah.  And I think it was a economics class, yeah.  And I said, "No" (laughs).  And he asked me what was I thinking about doing, and, you know, but I still--I had taken some economic classes, even though--and maybe it was a requirement.  I don't, I don't remember.  And, and I said I was planning to be a teacher, and I was, you know, so I was really off on that path.  And he said, "I'd like you to take a few business classes."  And he said, "There is a whole new world out there that most black people haven't really been a part of.  And there's a lot of, it's just, it's a, it's a open, you know, it's just a open area for, that, you know, that you could probably just excel in."  And so I started taking a couple of courses just to learn a little bit more about it, and I became increasing intrigued with it.  It was, you know, something that my family didn't really--you know, they knew the professions, but business wasn't a profession.  My grandmother [Hazel Pratt] never, ever understood what it was (laughs).  But I just, I, I, I would say, I'm one of those people that actually loves business.  I mean the more I learned about it, I mean I still, I mean I loved business cases and etcetera.  So it was, you know, somebody pulling me aside.
Speaker 1: Where was your sister [Sharon Pratt Kelly] at this point when you were in Howard?  Was she?
Speaker 2: She was a senior when I was a freshman.
Speaker 1: At Howard?
Speaker 2: At Howard, yeah.  And then she went straight to law school.  She went to Howard Law School [Washington, D.C.].  So she was also on campus.
Speaker 1: You graduated from Howard Law--Howard University in what year?
Speaker 2: '68 [1968].
Story_ID: 15283
Speaker 1: Then where'd you go [after graduating from Howard University, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: I worked at IBM [Corporation] for two years.  And that was unusual back then because everybody else went straight to graduate school.  But I wasn't sure what I wanted to do.  Again, I had majored in business, and this was kind of, you know, early years of people really, the kind of thing, got involved in business. And, you know, so that was kind of, kind of stepping away from the pack in a lot of ways to go to work for a few years.  But I worked at IBM for a couple of years.  I was what they called a marketing research--what did they, marketing research specialist.  And basically, what that was, that might not be the exact name, it was a role for women at IBM.  And we went out with the salesmen to--it was, it was the office products.  So we had to really know the, the products very well.  And would accompany the salesmen when they would go to clients to sell the products, and we often helped to kind of demonstrate the products.  And then if they got the deal, then we would often work with the client in helping them to set it up and to train their employees.  Just towards my, the end of my tenure at IBM, they were beginning to test women actually being sales people in their own right because we didn't get to benefit from the commissions.  So if the guy closed the deal, you know, you might be lucky if you got flowers to thank you for helping them.  But you didn't get to participate in the commissions.  So this is, you know, you know, a long time ago.
Speaker 1: Were you still in the Washington area?
Speaker 2: I was still in D.C.
Story_ID: 15284
Speaker 1: Two years at IBM, and what was next in your life?
Speaker 2: Harvard Business School [Cambridge, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Harvard Business School.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Tell me about that decision and why Harvard Business School?
Speaker 2: Okay, several of the guys that I went to Howard with, who were also in business, start--majored in business, went, went directly into Harvard Business School.  So over those two years where I worked--and some of them were ahead of me, so they might not have gone directly.  But they were in, went to business school and partic-particularly, Harvard Business School during those, those two years.  And several of them, a couple of them who I was, you know, good friends with encouraged me to apply and to think about getting an MBA if I, you know, really wanted to stay in business.  And this was kind of, you know, it was just when the, the schools were beginning to admit larger numbers of African Americans.  Remember this is kind of right after the assassination of [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], and, you know, a lot of things were kind of beginning to open up for African Americans.  And so a couple of the, of my colleagues from undergraduate school strongly encouraged me to apply to Harvard Business School, and I did.
Speaker 1: Their names?
Speaker 2: One was, oh, God, give me a minute, John Hall.  One was Rayton Gerald, and one was Henry Edwards.
Speaker 1: So you applied and you were accepted?
Speaker 2: And I was accepted.
Speaker 1: And you entered in what year?
Speaker 2: Entered in 1970.
Story_ID: 15285
Speaker 1: You got married in '70 [1970], and you went to Harvard Business School.  You married Fletcher 'Flash' Wiley.  Well, talk about those years and the marriage and then that move to Boston [Massachusetts] with your new husband?
Speaker 2: So, okay, we, we--and Flash also went, he went to Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts].  We started dating in April of '97--of, of '70 [1970], and we had each independently applied to go to school up here, before we started dating.  And I think when we started dating, he already knew he had been accepted.  And then I subsequently learned that I had been accepted.  So that, that was in, that was, you know, independent decisions, but to us it was kind of a, you know, you know, a sign or serendipity or whatever it was, you know, etcetera.  And since we were both coming up here to, to go to law school--to go to school, we decided to get married, and we got married in July of 1970 and then moved here in August of 1970.  So it was a pretty short, a pretty short timeline, and we actually had considered just both moving up here together and living together.  And then when he shared that information with my family, they didn't think it was such a good idea, so we ended up deciding to get married.  And it's worked.  It's been almost thirty-five years, so, yeah.
Speaker 1: How did you find Cambridge and the Boston area when you--what was your first impression when you got here?  Had you been here before at all?
Speaker 2: No, I hadn't, except when we came.  We came up, on our honeymoon, we came up here to look for an apartment.  Well, it was very different from Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: How was it different?
Speaker 2: Well, first Washington is primarily black, and Boston and Cambridge are not, and certainly weren't back then.  When we came up and decided we want to--first we decided we were gonna live in a black neighborhood because that's what, you know, we knew.  And the distance, first of all was, you know, you couldn't live in a black neighborhood and, easily, and go to school in Cambridge.  And, you know, we didn't see black neighborhoods that were like the black neighborhoods we were used to in Washington.  So that was, that was a, you know, a cultural shock.  I remember even being shocked at Harvard, that even the, this, the people who worked in the cafeteria and the, the, the janitorial staff weren't black.  You know, so I mean you didn't, you didn't see black people anywhere (laughs).  So that was culture shock.  Yeah, so it was very, it was, it was very different.
Speaker 1: Somewhere I read that you reflected as you arrived here and settled in that there were no hellos and no smiles.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and so, you know, D.C.'s the South, you know.  It's very much the South.  I mean it's, it's, it's gotten more cosmopolitan and, and East Coast-like since I've grown up.  But it was a real southern town when I was growing up.  And people spoke to you on the street, and you called your neighbors Ms. Helen and Ms. Hazel, and I mean you, you know, you didn't even call them Mrs. because that was too formal.  And, but there were, you know, there were these kind of, you know--.
Speaker 1: Where did you and Flash then first settle and live?
Speaker 2: We lived in Cambridge.
Speaker 1: Where?
Speaker 2: We lived, we lived in North Cambridge on Clinton Street. See, Flash is much better at all the (laughs)--I think at Clinton Street, yeah, it's North Cambridge.  And so we lived there for about four years.
Speaker 1: So what adjustments did you have to make during your first year or so at the business school, not at the school, but just in living in this Cambridge-Boston community?  How did you cope with that?
Speaker 2: Well, well, one, school was very intense (laughs).  So that took up a lot of, you know, and it was our first year of being married and so that had its own, you know, you know, learning each other and, and being married.  But we, you, you start creating your own community, and, you know, so we started, you know, you--I guess what I learned here and in some ways has been so influential on even how, things that we do at The Partnership, is that you have to work at creating community here in some ways that are a little bit different than if you come from a city where community was around you.  But it's there.  And so we started creating relationships with other, I guess initially with other black students, some that were in the business school and some in the law school, and some at the ed school, and, and other places.  And, you know, that's who we played cards with on the weekend and got together with to go to the movies and, you know, kind of became your, your community.
Story_ID: 15286
Speaker 1: Tell me about your Harvard Business School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] presence?  What was that like being an African American woman in the early '70s [1970s] at Harvard Business School?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was challenging.  It was challenging.  That was--there were less women than African Americans.  There were only twenty-eight women in my class, and there were eight--eight hundred of us.  So it was very, very few women, and I think there were forty-some, fifty-some African Americans in my section.  The way the business school is organized, your first year you do everything with your section.  So there were roughly eighty people in your section.  There were three women, and one of them was a woman of color, and who identified as a woman of color.  And there were five of us that were African American.  And, you know, it was, you know, a different point in time in history.  I mean, you know, it was very, very competitive.  For me, it was a big, it was a first time I'd really gone to a school that wasn't all black, because, you know, except for those few years when my elementary school was mixed,  I had gone to a black college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], and even though IBM [Corporation] was certainly very different, it was still a different setting.  And so that was a, a learning experience.  And, you know that, you know, you, you learn it, and you, you do okay, and--.
Speaker 1: 1974, we had a federal court order to desegregate the Boston public schools--.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and we went through a lot of turmoil throughout the city in greater Boston area.  Do you recall those years and were you active in any of that?
Speaker 2: We were not active at all.  And that's, that's also been a great learning that, you know, I've kind of thought about in the work that I do at The Partnership.  We were in Cambridge.  We saw it on TV, and we could have been looking at it from California as much as across the river.  I mean we felt as removed from it as anything.  So it didn't, you know, it didn't impact us, and I, I--and, you know, in any kind of visceral way at that time.  We were students.  We were living in Cambridge, and we, you know, it was in Boston (laughs).
Story_ID: 15287
Speaker 1: Now, you have two children.  Give us their names and when were they born in this decade of the '70s [1970s]--I assume it was the '70s [1970s]?
Speaker 2: Our son's whose name is Pratt, P-R-A-T-T, Wiley.  He was born May 9, 1976, and our daughter goes by B.J. Wiley.  She's actually Benaree Wiley, and the "J" is for junior.  And she was born May 6, 1978.
Speaker 1: So you had finished--.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --Harvard Business School [Cambridge, Massachusetts]--.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --before you started your family?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  We were married for six years before we had our, our first child.  I actually was, had worked for a number of years as a consultant before we had our first child.
Speaker 1: Where is Pratt today?
Speaker 2: Pratt is a second-year student at Boston College Law School [Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: And B.J. is?
Speaker 2: B.J. is a first-year student at Harvard Business School.
Story_ID: 15288
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your leaving with your BA--Master degree in Business Administration.  What did you do with that, after that, besides start your family?  Where did you move--?
Speaker 2: After Harvard Business School [Cambridge, Massachusetts]?  I first worked at Abt Associates [Inc.], when I finished Harvard Business School.  It's a consulting firm in Cambridge.  I don't know how much texture you want in all of this.
Speaker 1: What did you do there?  What did you do there?
Speaker 2: Okay, I was, I was a analyst there.  It was, it, it--that was the, kind of a first kind of decision point for me, I should, I should--that's why I was asking in terms of the context.  Most people, when they finish the business school, go to New York, and they go to investment banking or large consulting firms or they go work for a big business.  So you tell me if I'm giving more information than you need.
Speaker 1: I'll stop you.
Speaker 2: And so I felt a lot of pressure to do that because there weren't many black people there, and there were even less women there.  And I made a decision, and it was kind of one of those first, you know, kind of a hard decision, is that I did not want to have a commuter marriage.  And that's when commuter marriages were just beginning to come into vogue cause [Fletcher] 'Flash' [Wiley, husband] was in a four-year program and, and discovered Abt because they, they weren't recruiting at the, the campus.  I don't think they're--I don't remember a lot of Boston [Massachusetts]-based companies that were recruiting at the campus.  And Abt was very attractive because it was intellectually stimulating, but, and it would allow me to use business skills, but the issues that they, they, they focused on were issues of healthcare and issues of education.  And, you know, I really was attracted to the fact that they, they had a kind of public policy, having a impact, and so I was an analyst there, to answer your question, primarily around housing issues.
Speaker 1: Housing issues?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 15289
Speaker 1: A group of vice presidents from Abt [Associates, Inc., Cambridge, Massachusetts] left the company and started their own firm a year later, and they invited two employees to go with them, and I was one of the employees that was invited to go with them, and--.
Speaker 2: So what was this new venture called?
Speaker 1: It was Contract Research Corporation [Boston, Massachusetts].  They were in the same kind of business, same kind of space.  It was just smaller, a little bit more entrepreneurial, and they had, you know, a slightly different philosophy about how to run the business.  But it really did, did much of the same kind of work.  Another spin-off of that was a company called Urban Systems Research and Engineering [Boston, Massachusetts], and I subsequently went to work with them and worked with them for a few years.  And then in '78 [1978], when I had--well, '76 [1976] when I had our first child [Pratt Wiley], I decided I didn't want to work at the same pace that I had been working at.  Consultancy is very face-paced, a lot of long hours.  You do a lot of all-nighters.  Your day starts early, ends late, and you travel a lot.  And so I decided that I liked what I did, but I didn't want to do at, at the same intensity and, and largely, you know, as I reflect upon it, I knew, you know, I mentioned before, my mother [Mildred Petticord] died when I was young.  And I knew I wanted to have the pleasure of being really involved in my kids' lives in a way my mother never had the pleasure of being.  I always missed having my mother around even though I had a wonderful, wonderful childhood and had an aunt [Amy Pratt] and grandmother [Hazel Pratt] and father [Carlisle Pratt] that, that were fabulous.  And so I knew I wanted to be, you know, kind of more active in, in the kids' lives.  All that being said, I talked to the CEO [chief executive officer] about creating a, a part-time position.  And this is in '76 [1976], and so part-time work wasn't really very common then and certainly not in that industry.  And the CEO said, "Well, we'll try it."  And we tried it and it worked, and so I actually worked, I worked with them for a number of years part time, and, and a lot of other women started, subsequently working there part-time cause it kind of turned out to be a win-win for the company and for women in, in the firm.  And I worked part time, I worked less than full time for fifteen years until I became president of The Partnership.  And I, I worked with consulting firms such as Urban Systems.  I did some independent consulting.  I had a, a toy store for a while on Martha's Vineyard.  Then I worked part time at Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] in their graduate program, and, and then subsequently came back full-time to, to The Partnership.
Story_ID: 15290
Speaker 1: After many years of various consulting positions and activities, you went into business briefly.  Tell us about that business.
Speaker 2: I had a toy store.  It was one of my favorite things.  It was called Giocatolli which is Italian for toys.  It was on Martha's Vineyard, and the reason it ended up being on Martha's Vineyard is my original plan was to have a store in the Cambridge-Boston [Massachusetts] area and then have a, a summer store on the Vineyard.  But I learned that you couldn't--it was harder to, to get the real estate if you didn't have a track record.  So, you know, I, I started with the Vineyard.  I--during these years when I was working less than full-time, my primary focus was on my kids.  So it's, you know, raising the kids.  So that was, you know, so I was very focused on kind of issues of child development.  All of my volunteer work was with organizations that were involved in children in some way, children's museum and etcetera.  And I just became increasingly intrigued with, you know, the kind of environment that you create that helps kids to thrive and develop, and, and I always enjoyed the, being able to find, you know, great puzzles and books and toys for them.  And, and so, you know, I knew I liked being in business, you know.  As I said before, I loved business, and, and kind of even had my own consulting firm.  And, so, you know, just, you know, started thinking about how much I would enjoy having a toy store.  And it was, you know, a labor of love.  And it was perfect, I mean really, it was, it turned out well as kind of a family adventure as well because it on the Vineyard.  And the Vineyard is safe.  So the kids were able to work in the store.  They were my internal consultants.  They helped me, not only select items, they helped me figure out display.  They learned how to work the cash register.  They learned about how to maintain inventory.  My son [Pratt Wiley] was even able to close up the store some time, and he'd leave on his bicycle and be able to ride home and have the, the, you know, what's the, what's the--the maturity.  And that's not quite the word, a responsibility, of being responsible enough to be able to actually--so it was a great, it was a great family endeavor.
Speaker 1: And how long did you have it there?
Speaker 2: The store was four years, and then we, you know, had, you know, we would take the inventory and sell it at the Chilmark [Massachusetts] flea market for a couple of years (laughs).  It, but it was, it was a great time in our lives.
Story_ID: 15291
Speaker 1: Now, at some point along the way here, and you can give me the year, you and your family moved to Boston [Massachusetts].  Where did you move to and why?
Speaker 2: We moved to Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts].  We moved to the Fort Hill section of Roxbury.  We brought the--I think we moved in '78 [1978] 'cause my daughter [B. J. Wiley] was three months old when we moved.  And we may have purchased the brownstone that we renovated in '77 [1977].  The why is, we started having a family.  You know, again, we both had grown up--my husband and I both had grown up in, in cities and in neighborhoods that were primarily black.  We hadn't experienced that, that since we had lived in Boston nor had we found, you know, that kind of neighborhood as we visioned it, envisioned it in, in Boston.  And we wanted our children to, to be raised in a neighborhood where they, you know, had this sense of who they were, and with a group of friends, decided that--who were, you know, similar age, kids similar ages, that we together would move into the Fort Hill section of Roxbury, become homeowners, actually even purchased some other homes to try to sell to friends so that we could begin to try to create the kind of neighborhood that we were used to in the cities that, that we grew up in.  And so we lived there for fifteen years.
Speaker 1: Fifteen years.
Speaker 2: Fifteen years.  We, we moved to Brookline [Massachusetts] when our kids were in high school, actually, when our son was going into the tenth grade.
Speaker 1: And so you currently reside in?
Speaker 2: We currently reside in Brookline.
Story_ID: 15292
Speaker 1: You also moved to Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] and worked there.  Tell us about that position.
Speaker 2: Well, again, I, I was working, you know, less than full-time.  I, I'd had the toy store [Giocatolli] at this time, and the only reason I didn't fulfill the, the, the original plan with the toy store is that the economy changed, toward the mid or late '80s [1980s] and our pockets just weren't deep enough to, to capitalize it in the way we needed to in order, you know.  So I started thinking about, well, what else?  And I taught at Roxbury Community College [Roxbury Crossing, Massachusetts] part time, a couple of business classes there is what I loved.  I absolutely loved it.  And so it made me start thinking about, well, do I have the interest in, you know, academic administration in some way?  And a friend of mine actually had, had the position at the law school and was, I think leaving the area, and said, "You, maybe you might have some interest in this."  It's a good way of testing whether you have interest in academic administration, and it was part-time.  And I did, and I did it for a couple of years and did determine I did not have interest in that (laughs).  And, you know, but I, you know, I, I, you know, I learned a lot like any, any opportunity.  And I learned that I liked very much working with young people.  And it kind of confirmed that.  I knew I liked it when I talked to--taught at RCC, and it confirmed I liked that.  But I wasn't quite sure what, what shape it would take.
Speaker 1: You were, of course, employed by Roxbury Community College and you were living in Roxbury instead of Boston. [Note: Roxbury, a neighborhood near the center of modern Boston, was annexed to the City of Boston in 1868]  What community agencies, civic activities did you and your husband become involved in, in the City of Boston once you got here?
Speaker 2: Well, I would say a turning point for us in a lot of ways of beginning to feel more connected to Boston was when we became active in community organizations.  Crispus Attucks Children's Center [Inc, Dorchester, Massachusetts] was one of the ones that we became most active in.  We actually wrote the proposal for Crispus Attucks as students because the, the people who were doing it were family friends, people who were starting it.  And then, as we became professionals in the city, we were asked the join the board and [Fletcher] 'Flash' [Wiley, husband] was the lawyer, and, and we started feel--it helped us to start feeling more a part of, of the broader community.  We became involved--neither one of us are social workers, but we became involved with the black social workers organization.  And I don't remember how, but they were broadening their, their membership to bring in other professionals.  And a lot of people we know today we met through that organization, and then, you know, that, those organizations are doing other things in the city and kind of one thing kind of led to another.  We've been active in lots of, lots of nonprofits in the city, over the years.
Story_ID: 15293
Speaker 1: I want to come back to your sister [Sharon Pratt Kelly] because the two of you were so, so, so close growing up.  And you came to Cambridge [Massachusetts] in route to Boston [Massachusetts].  Tell me a little bit about your sister's life during the '70s [1970s].  What was she doing and where did she end up?
Speaker 2: My sister stayed in Washington [D.C.].  She, she became a lawyer.  My dad [Carlisle Pratt] really wanted one of us to become a lawyer.  She, remember she's the first born, so I, and I know she had a lot of choice.  I think she got the 'Black Law Dictionary' as a high school graduation gift (laughs).  I don't even think it was a college graduation gift from my dad.  And she taught law.  She worked at his, with him for a while, and she taught law for a while.  And then she became an executive at the electricity company in Washington.  She was always very active in politics, but behind the scenes politics.  Her husband ran for school committee and --and, and city council.  She was always--Errington Dixon is his name.  She was always his campaign manager and helped write his speeches and was out there.  And, and even though we lived in Boston, [Fletcher] 'Flash' [Wiley] and I would go to D.C. for the campaigns and sometimes stay during the summer.  We always worked on his campaigns.  So she was always--and then she became very active in the Democratic Party.  She actually became treasurer of the Democratic Party, which is something a lot of people don't know.  She was--.
Speaker 1: National?
Speaker 2: National treasurer of the Democratic Party, and was a representative--it's like state representative of the party, but D.C.'s not a state.  She ran Patricia Harris' campaign for mayor.  So she was very active.  At the same time, she had, you know, her career, also very active in politics; had two daughters.  Her daughters always spent the summers with us.  So our children are as much like siblings as cousins.  And then she was encouraged by a lot of people in the late '80s [1980s] to really consider running for mayor of Washington.  Marion Barry had been the mayor and it was in between one of his terms.  I don't, I think this may be--I, I don't want to state facts I don't remember, but it was in between.  And she'd run for elected office before.  And she ran against a lot of people who had run for elected office before, and was, you know, certainly the, the perceived underdog.  But I think she brought a fresh voice to a city that had undergone some scandal and was elected as mayor in 1990.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what role did you play in helping your sister become the mayor of Washington, D.C.?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, we were, first, always supportive.  We, I kind of ran, I did run her kind of campaign, the finance aspect of her, her campaign, so organizing all of the, the fundraisers and, you know, targeting the money for the, the campaign, and then kind of being part of the kitchen cabinet.  And then we were, we certainly went down there a lot, and we certainly worked the polls, all of us.  And, and obviously, and she really, she really wanted me to, to relocate down there when she was in office.
Speaker 1: And the years that she served as mayor?
Speaker 2: She was sworn in, I think in the--I think she was elected in fall of '90 [1990] and sworn in, in January 1991.
Story_ID: 15294
Speaker 1: I joined The Partnership [Inc.] a few months after [sister, Sharon Pratt Kelly became mayor of Washington, D.C.] .
Speaker 2: I was gonna say 1991 was a big turn (unclear) in your life, and here you are still president and CEO of The Partnership.  So 1991, tell me how you became a leader of The Partnership?
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Yeah, yeah. Okay, well.
Speaker 2: Maybe you should tell us first of all what The Partnership is and has been, and then how you came to The Partnership?
Speaker 1: Okay, let me give you the little history of The Partnership.  The Partnership is an organization that is a merger of two organizations that were created in the early '70s [1970s] to respond to racial tensions around enforced busing here in Boston [Massachusetts].  And you talked about it in '74 [1974] and it being on the, you know, national networks.  So there was a lot of, of recognition that there were serious racial issues in the city following the, the--what we refer to as the busing crisis.  Two organizations were created.  One was started by Kevin White, who was the mayor at the time.  He started an organization called the Boston Committee.  And his belief was if you could convene the leaders of the, the core power centers in Boston, the church, the business community, the political infrastructure and the media, then you could kind of begin to develop strategies for African Americans to have more access.  Around the same--and this is, I've learned from history.  I was not involved in either one of them.  Around the same time, Hubie Jones, who, you know, is a community activist here in Boston for more than forty years, started another organization called The Corporation for Boston, and they brought together business and civil leaders such as the president of Boston College [Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts] and the president of Beth Israel Hospital [Boston, Massachusetts] and the president of the only financial institution.  So it was a mix racially of business and civic leaders with the philosophy that you need to look at the underlying factors that contributed to systemic racial tensions, if you were going to address it.  And those two organizations coexisted for a long time and then in the mid '80s [1980s] were merged really with the funding community because racial tensions were less visible and became The Partnership in 1987.  The Partnership has always had and continues to have as its kind of alternate vision to, to improve the racial climate of Boston.  We kind of reevaluated what role we, as an organization, can play towards that vision and, you know, continue to tweak it over time as the landscape changes and, you know, the, the conditions change.  But kind of one of the, the first things that I did in '91 [1991] when I joined, and then we can kind of go back if you want to, to how I joined, was to kind of--talked, I talked about seventy stakeholders, from the business community to the civic community, the foundation community, of, kind of, what, how a minor organization like The Partnership helped to influence the, the racial climate in the city.  Excuse me, my stomach's gonna talk too.  And we kind of determined that the most important power center for us to, to penetrate was the economic one, and if we could successfully penetrate the economic power center, then we would be able to influence social and public policy in the city and that those were the ways of kind of really influencing the racial climate, and that the way that we could influence the power center is to, again, to penetrate it.  And we couldn't penetrate it if we couldn't effectively attract and retain talented, African Americans that were coming to the coming to the city and committed to the city, and to be taking on leadership roles, both within the economic, mainstream, but also within the broader community.  So, give--kind of started peeling that onion back.  Everything we do is trying to penetrate the econom-economic mainstreams.  Our strategies or tactics we're doing, doing center on building a leadership that started with just African American and broadened to professionals of color who can influence change within both the business community and in the broader community.
Story_ID: 15295
Speaker 1: How did you become the president and CEO [chief executive officer] of The Partnership [Inc.] in 1991, and what led you to this position?
Speaker 2: Actually, they were doing a search, and [Fletcher] 'Flash' [Wiley] was much more involved.  Flash is my husband--was much more involved and in downtown Boston [Massachusetts], than I was.  I, again, I was working less than full-time.  Most of my work was centered in Cambridge [Massachusetts], and I wasn't even that aware of, you know, The Partnership.  And some of his colleagues, Richard Taylor, mentioned to him that, you know, they, that they, the current CEO was leaving to go to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], and that they were doing a search.  And Flash said, "I know the perfect person that you ought to consider."  And so they called me, and I didn't know that much about The Partnership.  Again, I was working less than full-time, but the more I learned about it, the more interested and intrigued I became with it.  I worked a lot as a volunteer during my non full-time years, during those fifteen years.  So I became, I was becoming, let me see if I can say this as succinctly as possible.  I was becoming increasing intrigued by the difficulty organizations have in sharing power with people of color, even when there's no money on the table.  So I wasn't surprised in my [business] consulting life that there were issues.  But I worked with some of the, I mean the finest nonprofit institutions who had the best intention and, and I mean I know in their heart in heart, really wanted to create an inclusion environment.  And it just--there were so many things that there were just so intrinsic to the culture and intrinsic to the environment, that prevent creating that, that, that, that inclusivity.  I was just, I was already becoming intrigued with that observation.  So, when The Partnership presented itself to me as an opportunity, it, I, as I say to the younger people, it was the right opportunity for me at the right time in my life.  I knew I liked running my own business.  I cared a lot about the issue.  I knew I liked working with young people.  I was ready to reimmerse myself in my career.  My kids were in high school.  I was, you know, so it was a good time.  It was just the right opportunity with the right attributes at the right time in my life.
Story_ID: 15296
Speaker 1: What were the specific program and strategies of The Partnership [Inc.] as you moved in, in the early '90s [1990s] and what was the process through the '90s [1990s]?  What, what did you do here?  What's been accomplished? What were the goals?
Speaker 2: Oh, okay, give me minute, 'cause it's evolved so.  When I joined The Partnership, The Partnership had a lot, several great assets.  It had a great mission.  I mean it was, it wanted to, to enhance the racial climate.  It had luminaries that served on its board of directors because it had merged these two boards, business and civic leaders from the Father [J. Donald] Monans of Boston College [Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts] to the John Drews of the World Trade Center [Boston, Massachusetts], I mean you name them.  And it had the, it had that, it had a Boston Fellows Program.  So it had a program that was designed to try to retain mid-level professionals of color.  So it had those three assets.  It also had a lot of liabilities.  It had, it was not financially sound.  It was actually on the verge of bankruptcy.  It had a lot of broken relationships because there had been some promises made that hadn't been, been kept and some concerns by some people both in the civic and business community about the integrity of the organization.  And it had, it had, it had no sustainable kind of infrastructure.  And those were, and some of these things were good because they, they were--those were things that--the assets and the liabilities were as attractive in some ways because, you know, you knew you could come in and, and do things.  But you, you had, you had a great, you know, a great board, and, and committed.  So the question is how did it evolve?
Speaker 1: What was the process in the '90s [1990s] to work towards your mission and goals?
Speaker 2: Okay, you know, it's interesting.  A lot of things, you know, you, when you read business books, they talk about the first ninety days, a lot of, a lot of The Partnership today, and some of the things were put into place in those first ninety days of, of, of my tension.  I, I mentioned, you know, kind of, kind of really defining the mission of The Partnership, kind of meeting with the stakeholders, engaging the board in a process where they were, one, operating as a unit, cause they were not operating--they were still two boards that now were, you know--they were still operating as two boards even though--so operating as one, being invested in helping to, to design, to determine what the mission is.  We put a lot of things in place to get from underneath some of the, the factors that were creating the bankruptcy, and started creating a, a sustainable, beginning to create what became a sustainable revenue stream.  And what I mean by that is, when, when I joined The Partnership, besides the financial debt, we were very dependent on foundations.  And yet, we had the core of this program that was really bringing together professionals from companies.  And so even in those first three months on the--I guess another thing we did is started creating the, the Vineyard [Martha's Vineyard] as a conference that June.  And my sister [Sharon Pratt Kelly] who had just become mayor [or Washington, D.C.] was our conference speaker.  But there hadn't--the, the idea of taking the fellows to the Vineyard predated my joining The Partnership.  My predecessor did that.  It just, it just wasn't a conference.  And so we tested companies paying a very, very small fee for their participants to go to the Vineyard conference.  So we began the process of what has now become our primary business model of being fee for services, that if it's a value and if it has a value proposition and adds to the ability of companies to attract and retain talent, then there's a fee associated with it.  And as long as we're delivering a service that adds value to the companies, then they will provide a fee.
Speaker 1: Who were the Boston Fellows and what did you provide for the fellow over the decade of the '90s [1990s]?  Who were these people and what did you do with them?
Speaker 2: Okay, they were mid-level professional from law firms, from hospitals and from businesses in the Boston area.  What we did with them, we still do with them, although we've tweaked the program and expanded it over the years.  We bring them together monthly.  They're across discipline and they're across industries so that they, one, get to be together monthly and build relationships among peers.  In the early years, it was primarily to help them better understand Boston.  So we would have dinner meetings with the mayor and dinner meetings with the head of the Boston Foundation, which is our community foundations or with the head of the superintendent of schools or we may have a panel discussion with professionals who were in, in the legal field, about different ways that you can thrive within the legal field.  So it was a monthly gathering that culminated with this weekend retreat on Martha's Vineyard that we'd have nationally speakers come and bring together other participants with.  Over the years we've evolved.  And we've evolved both in terms of number of programs, but also in terms of program content.  And we've evolved based upon listening to what the professionals say they need and, and what I mean by that is, we still have the elements of helping them to better understand the city.  But we also focus very heavily on their ability to thrive within their professions.  So we have a lot more professional development content than we had in the early years, although we still have the community investment, and certainly the relationship building portion of, or aspect dimension of the programs.  Professional development where they can be in a safe environment because then they're with other professionals of color to self reflect, learn about their strengths, learn about the areas that they need to, that they would like to develop, helping to provide them some of those tools and strategies and providing them some of the relationships they need in order to be able to grow within their profession.  So we do, we actually provide opportunity for strengthening relationships among peers, and then as the year goes on, building opportunity for the fellows who are mid-career to meet with our executives who are people at senior stages within their professions, to meet with the early stage professionals.  So there's this cross generational dialogue and informal mentoring that takes place as well.
Speaker 1: How many fellows do you have currently this year, 2005?
Speaker 2: We're starting our new class tomorrow morning.  We have about seventy-five fellows and about fifty associates, which is our early stage professionals.  They, the programs are a year in duration, and again, they meet monthly.  So they start in January, and they culminate in December.
Speaker 1: So how many fellows have you serviced now over the decade with this?
Speaker 2: About, around thirteen, thirteen hundred, thirty-thirty is the total number participants in our program.
Speaker 1: And can you give me a rough estimate of the percentage of those fellows who are still professional and working in the City of Boston?
Speaker 2: 85 percent are still in Boston.  When interviewed by an independent research firm, 70 percent said they wouldn't be here if it hadn't been for The Partnership.
Story_ID: 15297
Speaker 1: Boston [Massachusetts]'s changed a lot in the last twenty to thirty years.  I believe The Partnership has played a major role in that change.  Now, how would you describe the change in Boston from the time you came in 1970 to the present?
Speaker 2: Well, it, it has changed a lot.  And I, I think it's great progress.  First of all, the demographics have changed.  There are many, many more people of color, African Americans, in particular, that are living here and working here and committed to being here.  So demographically, it, it's improved by my definition of improvement.  You're seeing an increasing number of African American in, in positions of leadership and influence.  Are we where we'd like to be?  No, but we certainly are seeing progress, and I think it's important to acknowledge at the same time, we continue to, to try to address the challenges.  You know, I think there's, there's, there's--Boston is becoming more collegial than I think it used to be.  And what I mean by that is, you know, I, at least my perception is that, you know, there were always these pockets.  And, you know, people still talk about the tribes in Boston, and, you know, you kind of--you know, one community didn't know the other community, and you didn't feel this kind of collective sense of, you know, hype as, as a city as a whole.  And I think it--when we did the Democratic National Convention here last summer [2004], that was a milestone for Boston.  I mean that was the--every aspect of the community, I think wanted it to be successful, were, were invested in it being successful, felt pride that Boston was, you know, being presented on the national stage in the best light.  And I think, I, I don't think you would have, we would have even been working together towards that shared vision thirty years ago.  So I think that's all progress.
Story_ID: 15298
Speaker 1: Why The Partnership [Inc.] and how specifically is The Partnership connected to the communities of Boston [Massachusetts] and the city?
Speaker 2: Okay, and I think, you know, one reason we get such a high rating, why 70 percent [of minority professionals in Boston] say The Partnership was critical to their decision to decide to stay here is that the relationships that get formed and the fact that people do feel that they're a part of a larger community, as a result of participating in the programs that we offer.  Many of the professionals that participate in the partnership are racially isolated in their day-to-day lives.  They, they work in environments where many of them, the only African American and now, of course, other professionals of color or they are, they're one of few.  And some of them live in neighborhoods where they're, they're racially isolated because they may live in a neighborhood that's near to where they work.  So the opportunity to come together, be with other professionals of color who have similar goals and aspirations and, and, and challenges and, and, and ambitions starts creating a community among the participants that just grows as they've become more connected to the other Partnership family.  People who have come before and then the other classes and our speakers and, and etc.  And, and the way we designed the program, the way it has evolved over the years is that we consciously have kind of three legs.  One is the professional development.  One is relationship building, and one is community or civic engagement because our belief is that if we're going to effectively retain and develop into leaders, these professionals of color who participate in our programs, that they need to be able to continue to thrive within their careers and within their professions.  They need to have the relationships that are important to them both professionally, but also that enrich their personal lives.  And they need to be part of something larger than the workplace.  They need to be part of a large community.  So we sequence the programs for those kind of three dimensions.  They spend the first focused on professional development, and what I mean by that, for our early-stage professionals, for our young professionals.  Many of them are in the first year of their first job.  So our emphasis on professional development is even greater than it is for the mid-career because they are trying to figure out how to navigate these corporate environments as much as navigate being a professional living in Boston.  So we have forums on, how do you negotiate with someone who has more authority?  How do you manage your performance evaluation all year long, that it's they manage their evaluations.  It's not their manager that does, and, and they're responsible.  Why you have to--why it's important to have good working relationships that you need, that being technically competent is important.  It's a ground floor, and if you aren't, you're not gonna thrive.  But you've got to also have good social and political skills.  So really helping them to be able to thrive as professionals.  And we do the same with our mid-career.  But we also train our professionals on the roles and responsibilities on being on nonprofit boards of directors and we help to place them on nonprofit boards.  We feel they have value to add to the many nonprofits that exists in the city, but at the same time, it's a opportunity for them to hone and develop skills that they might be able to do within the workplace and broaden their relationships.  So as a result, I think fifty percent of our alum are, are serving on nonprofit boards and seventy percent are actively involved as volunteers within the community.  And we count that as much of a success as we do their advancement within their companies.
Story_ID: 15299
Speaker 1: 1991 to 2005, you've been leading this very unique organization, fourteen, fifteen years, what is your legacy with The Partnership [Inc.]?  How do you see your legacy?  What have you accomplished?
Speaker 2: Well, I think, well, I think The Partnership today as it exists is certainly my creation, building upon some wonderful assets that were here--excuse me--when I joined.  I think the legacy is along several dimensions, you know, those thousand plus people who live here, who are making a difference in the community.  That's probably the strongest legacy, but as an organization, we now have, you know, well-defined programs and services.  We have a sustainable business model.  We have, we're perceived as an organization that, you know, has made a difference in the city and that is, has, has some influence in the city, that, you know, we have strong relationships with all the political leaders and business leaders and civic leaders and, you know, we're, you know, and as a result so do the thirteen hundred people who've participated in our programs.  You know, we have a reputation of being quality and having integrity, and, you know, bringing together just the enormous talent that sometimes doesn't get the opportunity to even be seen and giving them a voice.  I think all of those are, are part of the legacy.  And, and it's, it's, it's got a strong, it's got a strong foundation now with good programs for sustainable revenue with a great board of directors, you know, good staff, influential with people who are committed to staying here, who are emerging leaders within the city and I think the next person can take it to new heights.  I'm really excited.
Story_ID: 15300
Speaker 1: Is there anything else that you'd like to add to this interview that I haven't asked you about?
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh.
Speaker 1: You could go back and think about the scope of what we've talked about, anything else that you want to add to this?
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, that's hard.  We've covered a lot of, a lot of ground.  Well, we've, we've, you know, you've inferred that 2005 is, you know, is legacy, and I, I'm  leaving The Partnership.  You haven't asked me why? (laughter).  And it kind of goes back to something when you asked me early on, and you said, these are just kind of warm-up questions, of kind of what is some of your philosophy.  And I strongly believe you got to go with what's right for you at different times in your life.  And been thinking about, you know, kind of where The Partnership is for a while now.  And I love it.  It's my baby, it's, it is my legacy.  I get joy out of what I do every day, and the true grace is the talented professionals I get to work with all the time.  And those are elements of it that I'll miss.  But, my gut, in my gut, I know I'm ready for, like the next season of my life.  I'm not what shape it's gonna take.  I know I'll do something, but I'm not sure what and how and, you know, whether I'll go back to do something that's more entrepreneurial or whether I, you know, whether I'll go back to working less than full-time.
Speaker 1: So you're not sure at this point whether you really have something in mind that you want to do that you haven't been able to do yet?
Speaker 2: But I know, I know instinctively, so it's really trusting my instincts that there's something there.  You know, I'm not retiring, retiring, that I haven't--I've been so focused on this, oh, you know, for fifteen years, you know, the kids and those things and this, which again I've loved, that's allowed me to grow and, and, and blossom in ways that, you know, I just feel so blessed.  But there's another season.  And I want time to think about it and figure it out and--.
Story_ID: 15301
Speaker 1: How do you feel about the way that you've lived your life so far?
Speaker 2: I feel very blessed in the way I've lived my life.  I've, I've always made decisions based upon what felt right for me.  And my, if you listen to my career, it's pretty eclectic, and I am very much a Type-A personality, and so I, I think I've, I tend to be very focused at whatever it is I'm doing at that particular time, and I give it, you know, I give it at least a hundred percent.  And, you know, it's just, it's all kind of come together.  I feel very blessed.  I've had a wonderful marriage.  I have great kids, I have a lot of good friends, and I have a good family.  And I've had, I've had a good professional life.  I don't think you could ask for any more.
Story_ID: 15302
Speaker 1: What are your hopes and concerns for the African American community today and in the future?
Speaker 2: Well, my hopes, is that, you know, we will continue to just have more and more of the talent that I get to see.  And there, and I can't under--I can't overstate the enormous that exists and that, you know, the--but I also know that it's not yet a level playing field for them.  And the opportunities to demonstrate that talent is, you know, sometimes still tough without organizations like The Partnership [Inc.] or certain, certain other organizations that exist, business or civic-wise.  So more opportunity to, for that talent to be able to get identified and to thrive and to really grow into leadership positions because I firmly believe as more of us become leaders and are really in the decision-making role, more of us will have those opportunities and that my concern is that those opportunities get spread as widely so that we don't lose as many of the talent that exists in our community before they even get a chance to demonstrate it.
Story_ID: 15303
Speaker 1: How do you want to be remembered?  What do you want people to say about you?
Speaker 2: God that's a--well, that's a hard question.  Ah, man, there's so many things.  One that, you know, I lived life to its fullest, always saw the best in people and in the situations, and always gave 100 percent to everything I did.
Story_ID: 15304
Speaker 1: This is a photo of me, [Fletcher] 'Flash' [Wiley], our daughter, B. J. [Wiley] and our son Pratt [Wiley].  It was two years ago.  It was our niece's wedding, my sister's youngest daughter got married on Martha's Vineyard.
Speaker 2: [Benaree Wiley with her husband Fletcher 'Flash' Wiley, daughter B. J. Wiley and son Pratt Wiley, Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts, 2003. From the collection of Benaree Wiley]
Story_ID: 15305
Speaker 1: My paternal grandmother, the one that helped raise us.  I am two and so it's 1948.  It may be January 1949.  It's my sister's [Sharon Pratt Kelly] fifth birthday party.  My mother [Mildred Petticord] had just died, and they wanted to have a big party for her to try to, you know--.
Speaker 2: And your grandmother's name?
Speaker 1: Hazel Pratt.
Speaker 2: [Benaree Wiley with her paternal grandmother Hazel Pratt, ca. 1948-1949. From the collection of Benaree Wiley]
Story_ID: 15306
Speaker 1: On the left is me.  That's my sister, Sharon Pratt [Kelly] and our dad, Carlisle Pratt.  That's in front of our home in Washington, D.C.  I'm going to say that was around '54 [1954].
Speaker 2: [Benaree Wiley (left) with her sister Sharon Pratt and father Carlisle Pratt in front of their house, Washington, D.C., 1954. From the collection of Benaree Wiley]
Story_ID: 15307
Speaker 1: On the left is me.  That's my sister, Sharon.
Speaker 2: We're gonna hold that one (siren in background).
Speaker 1: Okay, my sister, Sharon Pratt [Kelly] on the right.  It is the January 1949.  It's my sister's fifth birthday party.  It's the same setting.  I think that's the same dress I had on (laughter).
Speaker 2: [Benaree Wiley (left) with her sister Sharon Pratt [Kelly] at Sharon's fifth birthday party, 1949. From the collectino of Benaree Wiley]
Story_ID: 15308
Speaker 1: That's me on the left.  I don't remember the name of the girl in the middle, and that's my sister [Sharon Pratt Kelly] on the right.  And I would say, I look I'm about five and she's about seven.  So I'd say it's about '51 [1951].
Speaker 2: [Benaree Wiley (left) with an unidentified person, and her sister Sharon Pratt (right), ca. 1951. From the collection of Benaree Wiley]
Story_ID: 15309
Speaker 1: On the left is my sister, Sharon Pratt [Kelly], and that's me on the right.  I don't know year, but we, it would be in the '50s [1950s].
Speaker 2: Turn it upright on time for me real quick.
Speaker 1: We look like we're about what?  Nine and eleven, oh, no, maybe not that old, maybe eight and ten.  So it's probably around '54 [1954].
Speaker 2: [Benaree Wiley (right) with her sister Sharon Pratt Kelly, ca. 1954. From the collection of Benaree Wiley]
Story_ID: 15310
Speaker 1: This is my kindergarten picture at Gage Elementary School [Washington, D.C.].  And that's back when everybody dressed for class pictures.  I am in the third in on the second row from the left, with my head--.
Speaker 2: With your head tilted to the--.
Speaker 1: Head tilted just like I do now (laughter).
Speaker 2: [Benaree Wiley (third from left in second row) with her Gage Elementary School kindergaten class photo, Washington, D.C. ca. 1951. From the collection of Benaree Wiley]
Story_ID: 15311
Speaker 1: That's my sister, Sharon Pratt [Kelly].  That's my first cousin, Jalisa Hazard is her name now, and I'm the one on the far right.  I don't remember the occasion, I don't remember the occasion, but we were all young, so I would say, so probably 1950?
Speaker 2: [Right to left: Benaree Wiley, cousin Jalisa Hazard, sister Sharon Pratt and unidentified boy, ca. 1950. From the collection of Benaree Wiley]
Story_ID: 15312
Speaker 1: The person on the left's name is Faye Wilson.  That's my husband, [Fletcher] 'Flash' Wiley, and I'm the one upfront in the yellow.  This is in our apartment.  Which apartment is that?  I want to say--so that would be when we lived on Beacon [Street, Boston, Massachusetts].  Okay, that would have to be the early, that would be around '75 [1975].
Speaker 2: [Benaree Wiley with Faye Wilson (left) and her husband Fletcher 'Flash' Wiley, Boston, Massachusetts, ca. 1975. From the collection of Benaree Wiley]
Story_ID: 15313
Speaker 1: That's me on the left, and that's my husband, [Fletcher] 'Flash' [Wiley] on the right, and that's 1971.
Speaker 2: Don't take it yet, sorry.
Speaker 1: Taking in the forest of Washington, D.C.
Speaker 2: Is that Rock Creek Park?
Speaker 1: It is (laughter).  It is.
Speaker 2: [Benaree Wiley with her husband Fletch 'Flash' Wiley, Rock Creek Park, Washington, D.C., 1971. From the collection of Benaree Wiley]
Story_ID: 15314
Speaker 1: On the far left is my husband, [Fletcher] 'Flash' [Wiley], then me, then our son, Pratt [Wiley], then our daughter, B. J. [Wiley].  The next is a little girl whose last name is Welch, and I can't remember her last name.  But that's her mother, Martha Welch and her father, Tom Welch.  We were all skiing together.  It's in Killington, Vermont.  I will say, looking at the kids, they were about eight and ten, so it should be about '86 [1986].
Speaker 2: [Left to right: Benaree Wiley's husband Fletcher 'Flash' Wiley, Benaree Wiley, son Pratt Wiley, daughter B. J. Wiley, unidentified Welch female family member, Martha Welch and Tom Welch during a ski trip at Killington, Vermont, 1986. From the collection of Benaree Wiley]
Story_ID: 15315
Speaker 1: That's me on the left.  To my left is my sister's oldest daughter, Amy Dickson.  To her left is my daughter, B. J. Wiley, to her left is my Aunt Amy Pratt, the one who helped raise her.  To her left is my sister's youngest daughter, Drew Dickson Williams.  And then on the, and to her left is my sister, Sharon Pratt [Kelly].  The occasion was my aunt's eightieth birthday, and we all took her to France for a girl's trip to France, and that was 1999.
Speaker 2: Great.
Speaker 1: Although the--does it say '97 [1997] there on the cover?
Speaker 2: It says eighteen, ten, '97 [1997].
Speaker 1: Okay, well, then it must have--.
Speaker 2: October 18, at least that's when it was processed.
Speaker 1: Well, then it had to be '97 [1997] so it must not, it must not have been her eightieth so don't put that in the recording 'cause she'll be upset with me.  It must have been her seventy-fifth.
Speaker 2: [Left to right: Benaree Wiley, niece Amy Dickson, daughter B.J. Wiley, aunt Amy Pratt, niece Drew Dickson Williams and sister Sharon Pratt Kelly, France, 1997. From the collection of Benaree Wiley]
Story_ID: 15316
Speaker 1: To the left is Wayne Budd.  That is his wife next to him, Jackie Budd.  Then that's me and then that's [Fletcher] 'Flash' [Wiley].  This was at a fundraiser for the Children's Museum [Boston, Massachusetts] when I was chair of that board, and that would have had to have been, whew, probably like 1990, '91 [1991], so early '90s [1990].
Speaker 2: Tell us about Wayne Budd?
Speaker 1: Oh, Wayne Budd has been a lot of things.  He most recently was the general counsel and executive vice president of John Hancock [Insurance].  He was the U.S. Attorney General for the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.  He was Associate Attorney General for the United States, been a partner in major law firms in the area and is probably one of the most recognized leaders of any color, and certainly African American leader in Boston.
Speaker 2: [Left to right: John Hancock Financial Services Inc. Executive Vice President Wayne Budd, Jackie Budd, Benaree Wiley and husband Fletcher 'Flash' Wiley, ca. 1990-1991. From the collection of Benaree Wiley]
Story_ID: 15317
Speaker 1: To the left is Leo Breitman, B-R-E-I-T-M-A-N, and he was the CEO [chief executive officer] of Fleet at the time, Fleet Bank, before it was FleetBoston.  Then I'm in the middle.  Then to my left is Ron Brown who was the [United States] Secretary of Commerce at the time, and to his left is Richard Taylor who was the chair of The Partnership [Inc.]'s board at the time.  He's an entrepreneur in Boston [Massachusetts], and one time was the Secretary of Transportation for the Commonwealth.  This was a Partnership event.  They--Ron Brown was the speaker for it.  I want to say that's '93 [1993], '94 [1994].
Speaker 2: [Left to right: Fleet Bank CEO Leo Breitman, Benaree Wiley, Secretary of Commerce Ron Brown and The Partnership, Inc. Board Chair Richard Taylor, ca. 1993-1994. From the collection of Benaree Wiley]
Story_ID: 15318
Speaker 1: That's me on the far left.  Oh, god, I'm blanking on her name, Carolyn--do you know who she is?  Oh, she did a lot of work with Cally Crosley.  Oh, my goodness, I can't remember her name.  I can't the person's name next to me.  Carolyn's her first name.  I can't--and then Cally Crosley's on the other side of the podium, and the last person is Barbara Nobles Crawford.  This was The Partnership [Inc.] conference on Martha's Vineyard, and they were all facilitators of that conference for the Sunday morning--this was a Sunday morning.  I don't remember the year.  I'm gonna say it was probably six years ago.  So that would be like '98 [1998], '99 [1999], roughly.
Speaker 2: [Left to right: Benaree Wiley, unidentified woman, Cally Crosley and Barbara Nobles Crawford, The Partnership, Inc. conference on Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts, ca. 1999. From the collection of Benaree Wiley]
Story_ID: 15319
Speaker 1: To the far left is Liz Walker.  Liz Walker is, was a well-known anchor for a number of years.  To her left is [Robert] 'Bob' Johnson whose the founder and CEO [chief executive officer] of Black Entertainment Television Network.  And I'm the last person, he was our keynote speaker at The Partnership [Inc.]'s conference on Martha's Vineyard.  Liz Walker was our MC [master of ceremonies].
Speaker 2: [Left to right: News Anchor Liz Walker, Black Entertainment Television founder and CEO Bob Johnson and Benaree Wiley, The Partnership, Inc. press conference on Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts, ca. 1999. From the collection of Benaree Wiley]
Story_ID: 15320
Speaker 1: On the back row it's myself.  And then next to me is, oh, god, he's a participant in The Partnership [Inc.].  Oh, he worked at John Hancock [Insurance].  Oh, I'm blanking on his name, and to his left is Carol Faulk whose vice president for community relations at John Hancock.  This was taken at the John Marshall Elementary School, which is a school, inner-city school in Dorchester [Massachusetts] that The Partnership alumni have been working with for ten years, where we go in and bring all of our alum to kind of help them learn about different careers.  And John Hancock was one of our primary sponsors for that effort.
Speaker 2: [Benaree Wiley with Carol Faulk and an unidentified man and students, John Marshall Elementary School, Dorchester, Massachusetts, ca. 2000. From the collection of Benaree Wiley]
Story_ID: 15321
Speaker 1: [Fletcher] 'Flash' [Wiley], my husband, on the left, me, our governor, Mitt Romney and our son Pratt Wiley, and that was at a Partnership event here in Boston in which Mitt Romney was our keynote speaker.  And it was right after he became governor.  I'm trying to see do we have anything in here that would tell me what the year was.
Speaker 2: It's, no it doesn't tell you anything.
Speaker 1: We can look it up in our book.  We had it in our book.  It's probably, what would that be, 2003, 2002?  We can look it up.  It was right after he became governor, yeah.
Speaker 2: [Left to right: Benaree Wiley's husband Fletcher 'Flash' Wiley, Benaree Wiley, Governor Mitt Romney and son Pratt Wiley, 2003. From the collection of Benaree Wiley]
Story_ID: 15322
Speaker 1: I'm the person in the red on the right, and it's one of our [The Partnership, Inc.] Boston Fellow [Program] classes.
Speaker 2: [Benaree Wiley (in red) with a Boston Fellows [Program] class, organized by The Partnership, Inc., 2000. From the collection of Benaree Wiley]
Story_ID: 15323
Speaker 1: This is just a group of [The] Partnership [Inc.] participants who gathered for a picture at one of our conferences on Martha's Vineyard.  I'm the person in the middle.  I could probably come up with some of the names if you need them, but I'm gonna need to put my glasses on.  I know that's Rosalyn Eastman on the far left.  I can't even see it well enough.  Oh, Cobely, Cobley, oh, gosh, I'm sorry, Cobley whose last name I don't remember, Sherrie Ann Burnett, don't remember her name, Rachel, Raquel Morgan--.
Speaker 2: Say in the blue.
Speaker 1: In the blue, Sherri Johnson in the white, Vitalita Johnson with the black pocketbook, and I don't remember the name of the last person.
Speaker 2: [Benaree Wiley (center, in black) with Partnership conference participants, Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts, not dated, from the collection of Benaree Wiley]
Story_ID: 15324
Speaker 1: This was also at one of The Partnership [Inc.] conferences on Martha's Vineyard.  On the far left is Diane Patrick, in the center is David Thomas, and the next person is Gail Snowden, and I'm the person on the right.  We celebrated all three of them for--'cause they had all just been promoted to senior roles.  At the time, Diane Patrick had became, had became a partner at Ropes and Gray [LLP].  She's married to Deval Patrick, you know, a great leader in the business community.  David Thomas had just become tenured professor at Harvard Business School, and he's done really the most amazing and seminal work on how African Americans and Latinos advance within corporations differently from their white counterparts.  And he's now the chair of the board of the Partnership.  And Gail Snowden had just become an executive vice president at, which was it at the time, FleetBoston, I guess.  It might have been Bank of Boston at the time.  And she's kind of one of the first and pioneers of African Americans really, you know, ascending to a leadership position in a large financial institution.
Speaker 2: [Left to right: Ropes and Gray Partner Diane Patrick, Harvard Business School Professor David Thomas, Bank of Boston Executive Vice Presiden Gail Snowden and Benaree Wiley, Partnership conference on Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts, not dated, from the collection of Benaree Wiley]
