Story_ID: 15492
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the interviewer for The HistoryMakers today.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: It's Dr. Barbara, B-A-R-B-A-R-A, Williams, W-I-L-L-I-A-M-S, hyphen S-K-I-N-N-E-R.
Speaker 1: Do you have a middle name?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Do you have any nicknames?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: No. I mean my--a couple of my, friends used to call me 'BJ,' you know.  They--when they really get on my nerves, they call me 'Barbara Jean.'  That was my middle name before I got married, you know.  So I just dropped 'Jean' and formally took a--but they know not to do that too often.  I don't like 'Barbara Jean'.
Speaker 1: All right. Now, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: It's 12/23/43 [December 23rd, 1943]. Let's say for your sake, Antioch, California because you can't tape Pittsburg [California].
Speaker 1: Okay, well, we, can say Pittsburg.
Speaker 2: No, it's really Antioch.  I mean it's actually Antioch Hospital.  So, Antioch.
Speaker 1: Okay, Antioch, California.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a social activist minister and leadership trainer.
Speaker 1: Okay and the organization that you are--.
Speaker 2: Skinner Leadership Institute.  I'm the president.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is September the 15th [2003].
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: You're at Skinner Leadership Institute in Tracys Landing, Maryland.  T-R-A-C-Y-S, Landing, Maryland.
Speaker 1: All right, now--.
Speaker 2: This is--you want to know the city you're in?
Speaker 1: Oh, go ahead.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's Tracys Landing, Maryland, it's right near Annapolis [Maryland], outside of Washington, D.C., south of Washington, D.C.
Story_ID: 15493
Speaker 1: There are five 'People Magazine'-ish type questions that we ask.  They're lightweight questions, and they only deserve a lightweight answer, short answer.  The first one is, Ma'am, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Tofu.  Barbecued tofu.
Speaker 1: All right.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Red.  I have it on.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: It's fall.
Speaker 1: All right, a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Baja California, Mexico.
Speaker 1: And, ma'am, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: "Excellent."  It's just, "That's absolutely excellent."  I say that all the time.
Story_ID: 15494
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your family history.  Now, can you give us your parents' names and spell them for us and their dates and places of birth?
Speaker 2: Okay.  My mother is Katherine with a 'K'-A-T-H-E-R-I-N-E, Katherine Williams.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my father, who's deceased is Nobel, N-O-B-E-L--(correcting) N-O-B-L-E, I'm sorry, N-O-B-L-E, Noble Williams.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what are their dates of birth and places of birth?
Speaker 2: My mother is 11/24/25 [November 24th, 1925], and my father is 12/13 [December 13th]--I want to say '13.  I think it's 1913, yeah.
Story_ID: 15495
Speaker 1: Can you tell us about your mother's [Katherine Williams's] side of the family?  How far back can you trace her?
Speaker 2: On my mother's side of the family, I can trace back to her, grand--her maternal--her paternal grandfather, grandfather's father, who I never met.  And on my mother's mother's side I only know my grandmother.  I can't go back further than my grandmother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She probably can.  My mother was--she was given away.  She was like, actually given away.  So she was--had a lot of foster parents.  So I don't think she really has a memory of a lot of.  So she talked more about her foster parents.  But there's no straight line back to her grandparents or that I remember.  I never met, I never met my great grandmother, for example, or great grandfather.
Speaker 1: Well, did she have any stories about her side of the family, on her mother's side or father's side that she shared?
Speaker 2: Well, my father--my grandfather owned a saloon.  He was sort of like the mayor of Tallulah, Louisiana, (unclear) the unofficial, unelected mayor.  And I remember as a child, going, summers.  And it was kind of like sawdust on the floor and really reminded you of something out of a western [movie genre].  I won't say there was spittoons or whatever, but, you know, it was really like a throwback to the early westerns that I can remember watching as a child.  And I remember my grand-father seemed to always have--he couldn't read or write, but he always knew exactly how much money he had.  And he owned a lot of land, and he owned a lot of houses.  And it seems like everybody came to him for money.  And he was sort of like, since I didn't have a--my father was not there from, since I was four.  He was sort of like our, you know, the male anchor in our family.  So whenever we needed something or we needed advice or my mother couldn't handle us or--because I was the one who was like always running away from home.  And she couldn't find me or, you know, whatever, or she didn't know how to handle me because I was so quote 'rebellious,' unquote.  Then she'd call my grandfather.  My grandfather seemed to be the only person who listened to me.  And so I could--if he said, "Come back" or "do this or that," she'd put him on the phone.  And she'd say, "I'm gonna send--," if she said, "I'm gonna send you to your grandfather," then that was like it.  I straightened up.
Speaker 1: He lived in Los--in California?
Speaker 2: No, no.  He was in Tallulah, Louisiana.  He was always in Louisiana.  He grew up in Louisiana.
Speaker 1: So she would call Louisiana to--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she did.  I mean my grand-father like was the--he was the authority figure.  If he said, you know, "Now, Barbara--."  He would say, "Now, Barbara Jean, if your mother says, you know, whatever, then you should listen to Kat," and they called her 'Kat'. And then he'd just tell me some philosophy about, you know, discipline or whatever.  So, I got a lot of my understanding about discipline and about thinking through, you know, problem situations from my grandfather.  But it was through my mother, you know.  She talked about--my mother was very into animals.  So she used to track alligators and snakes.  And she had an animal--she had a--she had a name for every animal and every animal--every person she met, she would attach them to a personality of an animal.  And, of course, I hate animals, so I thought this was very weird.  But it was her way as a child who was given away to find, you know, something that she could connect to.  And she bonded with animals.  And she brought every stray cat and dog into our house.  So here we were--we were, you know, on welfare some of the time.  We were barely eating ourselves, but she always had enough money to get dog and cat food.  I thought this was very strange, but it was like her compassionate side.  And I think she got that from her father who was always giving things away.
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm gonna ask you more about your childhood later, but I was trying to establish like your family history, how far back you could go with--.
Speaker 2: Not very far.  Not very far.
Speaker 1: And what, if anything was passed down from--any stories from Africa or slavery or Reconstruction [1865-1877]?
Speaker 2: No, no.  It's just--they were just, you know, hardworking, southern black folk who were not very educated in the traditional sense, but seemingly very smart and capable, you know, of negotiating racism in their environment in the South, Deep South.  Remember, this is Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.  And did your grandfather talk about how he acquired a saloon and all that?
Speaker 2: He always saved money.  He just said that was the only way.  And he, watched people gamble away their money, and he thought this was the most wasteful thing.  He was the one who taught us, you know, the power of just saving and investing.  And as people lost their property, my grandfather would buy it up.  And he would buy--he bought a lot in foreclosure.  I mean this is a man with no formal education.  And I don't remember my grandfather being able to write his name formally.  He'd use an 'X', but he knew a lot of things that you can't learn, you know, in school.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, on your, mother's mother's side, you said you couldn't go back very far on that side.
Speaker 2: No, no.  She never talked about her mother's mother.  My mother's still alive, but there was a break in her family because she was given away.  So I don't think--.
Speaker 1: So her mother actually had custody of her and gave her away?
Speaker 2: Her mother and father because, of the color issue.  My mother was very dark and her sister was light.  There were just two of them, oh yes.  This is still a kind of vicious sickness, you know, in the African American community.  So they gave her away because she was so dark.  She was dark like me.  And so she, found a way to survive.  She's absolutely the most positive person I've ever met.  So you can never keep my mother down.  She's always gonna find a way.  No, but so she never really talked about her mother's--she loved her mother, but she got disconnected from her family at an early age.  She got married when she was like fourteen.  So she was not long--she wasn't there with them very long.  She was given away when she was like a very young child, almost like a baby.  So she stayed connected because she wanted to be, but she was, in a way, rejected.  Now, her father wasn't in favor of that, but--so she, stayed in close touch with him.
Story_ID: 15496
Speaker 1: Can you tell us about your father [Noble Williams] now, his side of the family.  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: My father's mother was a very strong influence in our family.  And I don't remember--my grandmother never wanted to talk about her family.  So unfortunately, I don't know a lot beyond my grandparents.  So my father's mother and stepfather--my father's father I knew very well as a child growing up, but I can't go back beyond that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they--did they have a tradition about where they were from?
Speaker 2: They were all from Louisiana.
Story_ID: 15497
Speaker 1: My father [Noble Williams] and mother [Katherine Williams] grew up together as children, got married as teenagers, and his side of the family ended up in Las Vegas [Nevada], and her side of the family stayed in Louisiana.  They ended up in California.  That's where, you know, we were raised.  So we still have the connection to Las Vegas and to Louisiana.
Speaker 2: Okay, and that's Tallulah, Louisiana?
Speaker 1: Tallulah, T-A-L-L-U-L-A-H, Tallulah.  And then, of course, Las Vegas.  And so my father and mother split when, you know, I was four. So they--we don't have that--I don't have a continuous connection.  I stayed very close to my father's family though, until my grandparents died.
Story_ID: 15498
Speaker 1: Tell us about your--now you said your mother got married early in life at fourteen.
Speaker 2: Oh, my mother [Katherine Williams] was like thirteen and a half or fourteen years of age.
Speaker 1: And she always had pets around?
Speaker 2: Oh God, yes, to this very day.
Speaker 1: So she created kind of a family out of her pets?
Speaker 2: She did.  She felt, you know, that God put everything on the earth for something.  And she couldn't stand seeing an animal abused.  And so she identified with that, or rejected.  So she created a happy environment for herself with animals.  And she raised, you know, dogs and cats.  We always had animals around.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did she have a chance to go to school?
Speaker 2: My mother is really amazing.  She formally got to the eighth grade.  I don't know the Louisiana system, but it's, you know, different like a normal school I think.  But eighth grade.  And she stopped.  She got married at like 14, 13 and a half, 14.  But then, after my mother raised all of us, when she was in her fifties, and we were--I was out of college and out of law school, my mother went back to junior college.  And she got her associates degree and so she's always been a student.  My mother was incredible.  She loved books and loved to read and was a wonderful writer.  So she, made her children her life for those years.  I mean that's her singular passion is being a mother, even to this day.  If you said, "How many children do you have?"  She'd say, "How much time do you have?"  (Laughing) And she has time to tell a story to each person, but she has very little what you call formal education.  She wanted to be a lawyer, and she probably influenced me a lot in what I eventually, not became, but the course of study I took, you know, law school graduate and so forth, social work and so forth.
Story_ID: 15499
Speaker 1: What's your father like, and what did he do for a living?
Speaker 2: My father [Noble Williams] passed away about ten years ago.  But my father was, and my mother [Katherine Williams] are very similar personalities.  They are very gregarious, very outgoing, very charismatic.  They would light up this whole room.  They would have us on the floor laughing and rolling.  And that's probably why they couldn't--they couldn't stay together, you know, they were so much alike.  So with my father, we got disconnected for a long time because when they divorced, then I lost track of him until I was like eighteen.  And so I went to look for him and reconnected with him after I graduated from college and stayed connected with him until he died.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I have a good relationship with him.
Speaker 1: So what did he do for a living?
Speaker 2: My father was a minister, yeah, at a time when I couldn't stand ministers.
Speaker 1: What denomination was he?
Speaker 2: He was Pentecostal.  Yeah, and that was like a real problem. I left the church when I was like--we grew--we were Pentecostals for like a few years.  And then I couldn't stand it because I'm a very quiet person.  It was a very noisy denomination to me.  So when I was twelve, I wrote a letter of resignation for my mother and told her, you know, she could put me in reform school, she could do whatever, she could send me to my grandfather, but I was not going back to church.  And I got a part-time job and so she was--she sort of--she could rationalize since I was bringing money home.  You know, I was doing something tangible.  I was a good child.  I wasn't going to embarrass the family getting, you know, pregnant at fourteen and whatever, that I was probably okay.  So she never bugged me about church after that.  And I never went back to church until I got married at thirty-seven.
Story_ID: 15500
Speaker 1: How did your parents meet?  Now, they grew up in Tallulah, Louisiana together?
Speaker 2: My father [Noble Williams], I believe, worked for my grandfather in one of his saloons, and that's how my father and mother [Katherine Williams] met.  And then they ran away.  (Laughing) They were both fourteen, and got married.  And, you know, they probably lied about their age or whatever because they looked older.  And they came to California, and we were all raised in California.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, and how did they--did they know people in California, or did they just hop on a train?
Speaker 2: No. My father found out through friends that they were hiring a lot of people in the ship industry, shipping industry in San Francisco and Vallejo, California.  And he went out there and went to work.  And then they stayed together until he left and went with his parents who had just moved to Las Vegas [Nevada] from Louisiana.  So that's--they were like a lot of African Americans, they were migrating, you know, for a better life.  And that's, what they think they found.  And for a young man, he could work without a lot of skills.  My father doesn't have much formal education either, but he was very hardworking.  And so they made their way in California.  She worked and he worked.
Story_ID: 15501
Speaker 1: Tell me about growing up. Now, you grew up in California and what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: I just remember a lot of food (laughter).  I just--a lot of cooking.  We didn't have a lot of money, but it seems like my mother [Katherine Williams] was always able to wrestle up something really good.  I remember whenever, you know, I got really good grades, she would make a--she would go and get a--make a chocolate, hot chocolate, chocolate fudge cake, you know, with hot fudge icing and invite people over and talk about what her daughter was doing, or whatever.  So she always--I was just--I remember sweets.  And I remember just food being the basis of bringing people together, you know.  I remember that.  I remember school being a struggle for my sisters and really a happy place for me.  I don't remember that being a challenge.  I hated report card day because I got great grades all the way, and I've always gotten really good grades.  And my sisters struggled.  So I remember just the battleground of our house on report card day--that I almost like wanted to lie and say I flunked a class or whatever, just so that they wouldn't, they would accept me, they would like me.  So I remember negotiating to help them with their homework.  So that was my, that was my source of survival of helping my sisters do well so that, you know, I could survive because I'm like one of--I'm like the fourth of eight children.  And my mother is not there a lot so we were like together, and so I've got to survive.  I remember that.  Early on--.
Speaker 1: You didn't want to be hated and (unclear) for having good grades.
Speaker 2: No, and I was doing, you know, getting awards, and teachers liked me and they gave me extra chits and whatever.  We were in a track system.  So, you know, I was in like the pre-college, whatever, smart kids track.  And my sisters would be in a track that was gonna lead to home ec [economics] and it wasn't a very good picture.  So, I didn't feel very good about that.  So that was like the unhappy part.  I remember people banding together when people had, you know, tragedies or somebody lost their job.  I remember the closeness of community.  Even though we didn't have a dad, there were a lot of men around, watching boxing.  There were very few people with televisions in the '50s [1950s], you know, when I was a kid.  So whoever had a television, everybody gathered around their house.  So my grandfather, I remember this, sent money for us to do--pay a down payment on a house and we talked my mother into getting a television so we could be the most popular family in our neighborhood.  And she did.
Speaker 1: So did you get the house and television?
Speaker 2: No, we did not have a house.  We kept renting, and we had a television.  That was a terrible decision, but anyway, it helped us a lot with our friends, and it was great too because there were a lot of guys around or couples around, not a lot of couples, more guys who were like play uncles.  And so it gave us as young girls a kind of the male connection, you know, that we didn't have by not having a father.  So I remember a lot of men, and sports, and boxing, and all the other sports that people were around, my mother cooking, a lot of people in and out, you know.  Our house was kind of like a relay station so to speak.  So I remember that as a very happy kind of a community time.  I remember the smell of the church.  I hated the church.  I hated--I hated noise.  I used to go under the bed with a flashlight to read because that was the only quiet place in our house because my mother opened the house up to any and everybody, okay?
Speaker 1: Now, did you have like all sisters?
Speaker 2: I had--there's six girls, and then the boys are like the younger boys.  But I was always like--interestingly, though the middle child, the leader.  And so everybody came to me with their problems.  I was always like the, social worker for the Williams household (laughter).  So if people couldn't get along, you know, I didn't like to fight, and so I was always solving, you know, the get-along problems.  Let's all get along, that was always me.  So I never had time to myself.  And everything you owned was community property.  So if I baby-sat or, you know, did somebody's yard or whatever, you know, at like 12 or 13, and I bought something to go--to wear to school, my sisters would just show up in it.  So that was like, you know, fighting time.  But I didn't like to fight, so I would just hide my stuff.  And likewise, I never had quiet.  Our house was just really noisy.  I remember a lot of noise, except on Sundays.  So I know--going into the--under the bed: those high, high beds, with a flashlight and just reading.  That was like my library.  I remember the sound of the-this little library, a little mobile library coming every, I think it was the end of the week, coming on Friday.  And it was the only thing I could have, you know. I could have my own library card and I liked going in there.  It was maybe the size of a huge van, you know.
Speaker 1: Bookmobile.
Speaker 2: Books everywhere.  And my love for books began really early.  I could read like from the time, from my mother who taught me.  I was 4.  And so I would read to my sisters, and then I would go to the bookmobile and take my sisters to the bookmobile and try to show them, you know, the importance of reading.  I just thought reading was so exciting.  Because you can go anywhere, through a book.  We would never go any place.  We never actually, moved outside of twenty blocks from our house.  We were only seventeen miles from San Francisco [California] and never went until I graduated from high school.  So our world was so small, but through books, my world grew very large.  I could go to other countries and like--I remember the smell of that place, the smell of these old books that people would donate, you know, to our bookmobile.  But those were some of the things that I remember.
Story_ID: 15502
Speaker 1: Now, what kind of a neighborhood did you live in?  Was it an integrated neighborhood or was there a black community in Pittsburg [California]--was it Pittsburg?
Speaker 2: No, actually, I grew up in Richmond, California.  Richmond is like maybe less than ten miles from Berkeley [California].  It was mostly African American in our section.  We grew up in the really North Richmond.  North Richmond was the unincorporated part of Richmond, it was the poor section.  It would be like the projects except they were like low-rise, not high-rise.  It was mostly black.  I remember living across the street from this bar--our house--and that there were fights every Friday night.  Somebody got killed and/or wounded and the police would come.  The only time we ever saw white people, three times: teachers, police, firemen.  Firemen came after everything was burned.  Police came after the body, to count the bodies.  And the teachers, to tell us how, you know, how little we knew.  You know, teachers had very low expectations for us as African American students.  Those were my only contacts with white people at that time.  Everybody else I think in our community was African American.  I do remember, once in a while, in this little Pentecostal church, white politicians coming in during election time to campaign for votes, only time.
Speaker 1: Now, Richmond was right across the bay from San Francisco [California]--,
Speaker 2: Yes, it is.
Speaker 1: --near Oakland [California].
Speaker 2: Near Oakland, like right next to Oakland and Berkeley.
Story_ID: 15503
Speaker 1: What was the name of your church, the Pentecostal church?
Speaker 2: It was McGlothen Temple.
Speaker 1: McGlothen--how do you spell that?
Speaker 2: M-C-G-L-O-T-T-E-N [sic, McGlothen].  It was named after the pastor bishop.  Now, maybe I have the name wrong, but I remember calling it McGlothen Temple Church of God in Christ.  And it was on, like the main street, it was like Fillmore Street [sic, Filbert Street].  And we lived right off of Fillmore Street.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you say this was an annoying church somehow to you?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, because we lived two blocks from the church.  We had to pass the liquor store.  We had to pass the winos.  We had to pass the guys who hung out on the block, so, to get to the church.  And when we got to the church, it was like, okay, all right, now we're safe.  But it's just so loud, you know.  This is before all this, you know, all this hi-fidelity music, I mean sound systems and all.  It was just loud!  You could go outside the church a block away and still hear them.
Speaker 1: Did you have drums in church?
Speaker 2: Oh, we had drums.  We were one of the first churches with--we had drums.  We had piano.  We had--it was one guy even had a guitar.  It was like, really.  We had a big choir. It was about three hundred people in the church.  But it was just--it was not that the pastor was like hooping all the time, you know, preaching-hooping, you know what I mean?
Speaker 1: Yes, I know.  But, but you can describe it for us because this a history interview.
Speaker 2: Okay, well it was kind of like--we didn't have Bible study.  So the pastor--the assumption was the pastor was the direct link to God. So everything you needed to know about the Bible, you would get from the pastor.  And he'd just say the same thing over and over and over.  And the more he said, the louder he got, like, "Oh, (loud hollering voice) and John said to Jesus, hah!"  You know, he just--then he'd--by the time he finished, he's wounding up, it's about an hour and a half later.  He's got his handkerchief and he's waving it.  And he's got his coat off, and it's draped across.  And this guy is, he's--I don't want to belittle, you know, pastors.  I really don't, but I'm just saying our pastor in this very poor church--this is not all churches, okay, because black church has been very important to the history of black people.  But our church, okay, was very poor and the people were like my mother [Katherine Williams].  They were domestics, they were cab drivers.  They were people who, you know, didn't have necessarily a lot of education, right.  They gave a lot to this man to care for him and his family.
Story_ID: 15504
Speaker 1: You had a hard time trying to find a quiet spot and you had to run a gauntlet to get to church.  And church is noisy and--.
Speaker 2: I just felt like my world was just so noisy, and I was trying to understand, you know, why we were so poor, why was my mother, who prayed so much and seemed to be so committed to God, not able to get through to God.  Like why didn't we didn't have a father and food, and, you know, a consistent roof.  We moved a lot, you know, we moved. I remember we moved--we were there for a while, and we moved somewhere else and we moved somewhere else.  I'd been to a lot of different schools.  You know, I'd feel like, "Where was God?"  So I decided I was just not gonna be dealing with her God.  So I just--I left the church.  I never looked back.
Speaker 1: Did you try to find another church or did you just leave?
Speaker 2: No, no.  I didn't have enough understanding that if one church, you know, failed you, that doesn't mean all churches would fail you.  I just, as a child found the experience so, more negative than positive.  I felt the pastor--we lavished gifts on the pastor, including food, when we were barely eating.  There were days when we didn't have food.  You know, my mother [Katherine Williams] was sick a lot.  Sometimes she worked, sometimes she didn't work.  And so I thought there was something inconsistent about that.  The messages, about, you know, Jesus' love for people, particularly, the poor and the greatest of God and the capacity of God to provide every need.  And then here we were.  You know, we couldn't tell people at our church that we were hurting.  We had to be very proud, you know. My mother made sure you looked great going out the house, even if your clothes were faded, they were very clean.  And my mother was very proud like that, and so we, couldn't say to anybody, you know, "We can't go to the church basement," you know, afterwards and eat because we don't have but fifty cents for eight of us to eat a plate of food.  I'd be willing to go and, and wash the dishes or clean.  But my mother wouldn't allow us to tell the pastor.  So who--how could he stop by our house, you know, looking for food or, you know, he's got cuff links that are monogrammed and shirts that are monogrammed.  And we're barely surviving.  I mean I don't see anybody talking about job training or, you know, skills training or people trying to help poor families like ours.  So I became very resentful and I decided basically, not that church was irrelevant, but God was irrelevant.  Okay, so there wasn't a--why would I look for another church.  So my issue was spend your time on that which matters, which was your intellectual pursuit, that you could do something positive in the world with education.  You could help make the world better for others, like your family, like your mother.  You could make sure people were fed.  You could use your skills to go to college, you know, get a good education, get a job that helped you to give back and serve others.  So that was my--church was irrelevant.  That was my mother's thing.
Speaker 1: So that was about 1956, I guess, that you--,
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --stopped going.
Story_ID: 15505
Speaker 1: Tell us about school.  What school did you--what grade school did you attend?  Or were there different ones?
Speaker 2: I went to a lot of different schools.  I went to, an elementary school.  And I don't remember the name of it in North Richmond.  Then we moved to South Richmond, and I went to Nystrom [Elementary] School [Richmond, California].  I believe it was continuing, I was still in elementary school.  Then I went to middle school.  So when I left North Richmond, I must have been around 11 or 12 because I--that's when I quit the church.  I started working at 13 and then we moved.  So I moved to a middle school.  It was called Roosevelt Middle School on the south side of town, which was a better side of town. So we moved to another house.  We moved to a lot of houses.  I don't remember all the houses quite frankly.
Speaker 1: So you graduate from Roosevelt Middle School?
Speaker 2: From Roosevelt Middle School.  And then I went to--.
Speaker 1: This is like '57 [1957]?
Speaker 2: Probably, yeah, about '57 [1957], and then high school.
Speaker 1: What was the name of your high school?
Speaker 2: It was Richmond High School [Richmond, California], and I graduated in 1961.
Story_ID: 15506
Speaker 1: Were there any special teachers or mentors for you in high school [Richmond High School, Richmond, California]?  Well, in middle school [Roosevelt Middle School, Richmond, California], grade school [Nystrom Elementary School, Richmond, California], middle school or high school?
Speaker 2: Well, I remember Mr. Patroni.  He's an Italian man, who also--he was wonderful.  He was my, history teacher.  And he was so wonder--he was funny, and he would just crack jokes about historical figures.  And he made us--he made them funny.  He made them real people.  So I just learned to love history.  He ran a doughnut shop so, of course, I loved him even more because I got free doughnuts.  Every time I got good grades, he would say, "Come by and get a box of this--" what would be Krispy Kremes, something similar to that.
Speaker 1: Were they warm doughnuts?
Speaker 2: Ms. Patroni made them warm, yes.  I could watch them being made and stand there.  You know, I worked on my grades now.  I got those good grades.  So Mr. Patroni was great.  And I had several teachers in high school--I'm trying to--I'm, having difficulty with the name and another history teacher who was Ms.--I think her name was Ms.--it was something.  She was a Jewish lady, Ms. Goldstein or someone, but she was incredible.  She just--she made us sometimes dress up and do a lot of role-playing of historical scenes and made us think through who we would want to be.  And so she went beyond history really into helping us to dream about the future.  So that history, you know, just passed, so you can be part of history right now.  So she was just incredible.  I had a number of really good teachers.  I had some negative encounters.  I remember my--I remember the counselor in middle school when I was supposed to get tracked for college, and told me that I couldn't go to college because I was quote 'a Negro' and I couldn't, certainly couldn't be a lawyer because, you know, Perry Mason [lawyer in a television drama series] was like, you know, 'the man.'  And I wanted to be lawyer, and she said there were no Negro lawyers, you should go to home ec [economics] or whatever and just save yourself some time and heartache or whatever"  And I remember running home, literally running as fast as I could to my mother [Katherine Williams].  My mother was home and my mother didn't say a word.  I got a lesson in how to handle, resolve conflict.  Miss Connelly--.
Speaker 1: This is in high school?
Speaker 2: I was--no this is my--this is middle school when you're being tracked for college.  You have to start in middle school with the courses, pre-college courses, if you're gonna go to college.  You can't wait until you finish middle school.  So I'm supposed to be in a track.  It was either pre-college, business or home ec [economics]/shop; home ec for girls, shop for men.  And she told me to get into--she didn't even say business.  She said home ec even though I had E.  I had top grades all the way through elementary school.  I'm like coming into her school as a top student.  She tells me I can't do college, so I know that she's out of order.
Speaker 1: Did you change?
Speaker 2: No, I went home and got my mother.  My mother came back to Miss Connelly and said, "Ms. Connelly--" (laughs) and my mother didn't have an appointment, and they like really, you know, you couldn't just walk into the school.  And my mother said to the receptionist, "Miss Connelly really needs to see me." (Laughs).  My mother taught me how to get into any place.  I think it helped me much later to get into the White House [Washington, D.C.] and other places.  But she said, "Miss Connelly, now you're white, and as long as you're going to be white, you're gonna be right your whole life.  Never, ever discourage a child, a black child, a white child, a brown child, a red child, a yellow child, any child is entrusted to your care.  It's your job. Let me tell you what your job description is.  Is to help them dream and help them find a way to carry out that dream, whatever it is.  If they want to go into business, if they want to be in home ec, if they want to be in college.  Now, what did this child tell you?"  And my--she's trembling.  (Laughing)  My mother is like eyeball to eyeball with her.  My mother was fearless.  She'd walk past, walk up to gang leaders and just say, "What's your mother's name?" (Laughs).  And so she said, she was trembling.  She didn't know what my mother was gonna do.  My mother never raised her voice.  And she said, "So, now, let's you and I get busy and help this child dream.  Now, where are those college materials you have?"  Miss Connelly's trembling.  She goes and get them.  "Now, let's sit down here and let's have a meeting.  And let's plan her next six years."  (Laughs)  She sat there and got scholarship material and everything, shook the lady's hand.  "Now, thank you for being a good team member and helping me educate my daughter.  You know, my job is to educate her, your job is to assist me."  Left, and that was the end of it. The best lesson I ever got in conflict resolution.  She left the woman with her dignity, but she got what she needed.  Anyway, that was sort of a negative positive.  Everything else was like I was a very good student and I never really had to be encouraged because this was like my passport to freedom and liberation.  But I had some teachers who made it really exciting for me.  My French teacher, for example, was incredible, you know, talked to us about being in other countries and Africa. I never even got into Africa, but African, French-speaking African countries.  She just took us all over the world to how the French had pervaded, you know, the whole, and infiltrated the whole world.  So I was, encouraged incredibly.  I mean, I knew I was on my way.  There was no stopping.  It was just a question of where was I gonna go to college, not whether I was gonna go.  I knew that from the time I was like a little kid.
Story_ID: 15507
Speaker 1: How was Richmond High School [Richmond, California]?
Speaker 2: It was not really very--I would say Richmond was not the most intellectually challenging place.  That's why I had to do a lot of reading outside of that because I remember our school was heavy into sports and we were like all-city, all-state, and in all the sports.  But I don't remember, like I remember struggling to make sure they had a debate team.  They were like, gonna cancel the debate team.  And I wanted to be on the debate team, having to fight for the science fair to be part of the science track.  But, you know, for, what they offered--I mean what I found is that, what you want, you have to go after it yourself.  So I got everything they offered, and then my mother [Katherine Williams] would always say, you know, "Find what you need from there and then go other places."  So I spent a lot of time in the library, trying to, you know, get what I couldn't get there.  But, I just remember it as being heavy into sports and not really heavy into academics.
Speaker 1: Were you involved in high school activities?  Or did you run for high school office or any of that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.  First of all, I was on the track team.  And I loved that, and I was very--I was very athletic because I found in sports the energy and the motivation I needed to do, you know, what I'm doing in other areas, other intellectual pursuits.  I ran for office, and I lost (laughter).  I ran for class president and I came in second.  And after that, I decided I wasn't gonna run for office anymore (laughter).  But it was an exciting--I remember my campaign slogan was, 'Get a Job'.  And I had that song, you know, 'Get a Job.'
Speaker 1: Da-da-da-da-da.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: (Laughs)  And I--my slogan--I was gonna help every student who wanted a job to get a job.  But my opponent, she offered food.  And I (laughing), so she was better than I was in finding out what people really needed.  But I remember that was a great experience.  I was always involved in student leadership, even into and at law school.
Story_ID: 15508
Speaker 1: I was always the sort of the go-to person behind the scenes.  I never liked being out front, even to this day.  I never--I've never seen myself as a quote 'leader'.  I see myself as a servant.  And I--if there is leadership ability in me, it's that I lead by serving.
Speaker 2: Now, you run a leadership institute (laughter)--.
Speaker 1: I do, I do.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so we have--,
Speaker 1: But I lead by serving.
Speaker 2: --to bear this in mind--,
Speaker 1: Yes I do.
Speaker 2: --what kind of leadership (unclear) (simultaneous)--.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I believe in, not in the classic concept of a leader whose out front, whose visible, who have people at their beckoned call and command, but rather a leader who is helping people succeed, a servant leader, in the spirit of Jesus Christ.
Speaker 2: So you wouldn't be at the point of a wedge leading people.  You'd rather--you'd be some place--.
Speaker 1: I'd be in the back, directing, coaching, guiding, facilitating.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: I see myself as a facilitator.  I know where a lot of resources are.  So, I know what--people tell me what their needs are.  I help direct them to that.
Story_ID: 15509
Speaker 1: When you were in high school [Richmond High School, Richmond, California], the Civil Rights Movement [1955-1965] was heating up, even in California, you know, where people have fantasized there's no problems, but when you're really there, there were problems, the same kinds of problems that were in the rest of the country.  And there's a lot of organizing activity I know going on around the Oakland [California] area and San Francisco [California] area.
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly.
Speaker 1: So were you aware of any of that when you were in school?
Speaker 2: I was very aware of that.  Once I got to San Francisco State [University, San Francisco, California] there were people like Amiri Baraka and LeRoi Jones, but he became Amiri Baraka.
Speaker 1: Now, let me stop you for one second and just ask you, how did you end up at San Francisco State?  Is that where you went to college initially?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.
Speaker 1: Well what happened?
Speaker 2: Well, I--we didn't have any money and I didn't want to leave.  I was helping part-time, you know, through part-time work, helping my family.  So I didn't want to go far away.  So the best thing for me was a school close by.  And I went--at that time, I was interested in social work, sociology.  San Francisco State had a very good program.  So I decided on that for that reason.  It was right across the [San Francisco] Bay.  I'd never been to San Francisco.  And so it was far enough to be away from home, but close enough to be able to get home all the time.  So I applied and, of course, you know, got accepted.  So that was easy.  Once there, there was a parallel track of civil rights organizing in San Francisco through people like Will Usery and others.  U-S-E-R-Y.  And the Bank of America was not hiring African Americans during that time.  There were eating establishments like Mel's Drive-in in Berkeley [California] and in San Francisco [California] that did not serve African Americans.  So I got drawn into that.  Not only that, even on our campus there were problems.  I was part of the Black Student Union at San Francisco State and a leader in that movement.
Speaker 1: Now, was it called--it wasn't called that at that point?
Speaker 2: It was BSU, Black--.
Speaker 1: It was called Black, it wasn't a Negro--?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, Black was--.
Speaker 1: Even in 19--.
Speaker 2: No, it was BSU at that time.
Speaker 1: Ok, because we're talking about '61 [1961].
Speaker 2: When I got there--.
Speaker 1: There weren't a lot of them.
Speaker 2: No, black was--we, for us to use the term 'black' was really like revolutionary.  I was one of the first black student unions.  In fact, Maulana Karenga helped us to get started.
Speaker 1: But '61 [1961] is really early to use that because I know people would still fight you if you called them black.
Speaker 2: Well, but we had--there were people out there, [Dr.] Carlton Goodlett [journalist and founder of 'The Sun Reporter' newspaper] and others who were very astute readers of what world politics were.  And they connected with the black world, worldwide and told us not to use the word 'Negro', that it was a throwback to slavery.  So even, we had problems even having--some of the people didn't even want to be in our group because they didn't want to be called black, you know.  So it was a big battle all the time.  But--.
Speaker 1: So was that group established when you got to San Francisco State or was it formed after you got there?
Speaker 2: It wasn't really formal.  I remember when we first--when I first got to San Francisco State there were African American writers and poets who used to come and talk to us about African American history.  There were leaders like Ron Dellums who became the member of [U.S.] Congress, who used to provide guidance and counsel for students, helped us to understand our connection to the struggle in the South.  So it wasn't a formalized, but we called ourselves, you know, black students, really to the consternation of many.  It wasn't until I got to UCLA [University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] that the Black Student Union, later in the '60s [1960s]--this was like maybe '68 [1968], got established because that was after Stokely Carmichael, you know, used the term 'black power' and black became more formally used.  But I remember being asked to go and do service work in places like Hunters Point where there are lots of black poor people.  I did tutoring in Hunters Point [California] for every--almost every day after school.  I'd take students with me.  So it was the beginning of my commitment to give back.  And I would take other students there on the belief that we were privileged to be in college and we had to--we were standing in the place of many who would never make it there.  So I remember there were teach-ins, not a formalized black student union, as there was maybe eight or ten years later when it was just fully established in places like UCLA where I went next.  After I graduated from San Francisco State [University, San Francisco, California] in '65 [1965], I went to UC Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] for several years in the School of Social Work, and then to UCLA.  And then ended up with a degree, a master's degree in social work and then with a law degree.  But all that time, there were a lot of us quote 'West Coast'--we called it 'West Coast Civil Rights Activities' where we were doing sit-ins and teach-ins almost every night in somebody's house, almost like a church would have gatherings.  And we would be either raising money to send to the South, sponsoring people who were coming to talk to us from the South or actually identifying and targeting areas that were known racist establishments that we could go and picket.  So I got very involved during that time.
Speaker 1: Okay was there a active youth chapter of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]?
Speaker 2: There was an active youth chapter.  I was a member of the NAACP.  I remember that started even when I was in high school because my mother [Katherine Williams] encouraged us to be part of that.  My mother got involved in a lot of political campaigns of different people, even when I was in elementary school. I remember my mother finding people who were either--whether they were white or black--if they were, you know, committed to the community, she would have us passing out leaflets, going door-to-door, raising money through our church with bake sales or whatever.  So I got involved very early.  I always understood that, if you were on the planet, you were on here to make a difference.  And I didn't have the luxury of going to college to get a good job to live a good life.  It was always go to college, stand in the place of people who'd never make it so that everybody's life would be better.
Speaker 1: Now, did you know students that went to the South to participate in the [Civil Rights] Movement because I know students from all over the country were--some, you know, some had a chance to actually go in the South and work with the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee [SNCC], and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: There were a few, but I think most people chose to stay in California because they felt that California, though it had a very, very small African American population--Oakland [California] had a large African American population.  The police were racists to the core.  The Berkeley police were racists.  People were getting shot and killed.  And I think the general belief was don't go South.  This was up North, instead of down South.  This was up North.  This was another version of Louisiana and Arkansas and we should stay there and fight.  And, so I don't believe--I don't remember a lot of my friends choosing to go South.  Most of us thought, we lived there.  We should make our mark there.  I remember Dr. Martin Luther King [Jr.] in 1967 came to UC Berkeley when I was there.  That was a real turning point in my life.  I didn't get a chance to formally meet him.  I was just part of a crowd of people who were there with him, but I remember his message about one person making a difference.
Story_ID: 15510
Speaker 1: Oakland [California] is a--the Oakland area, and I guess it would include Richmond [California] too, has a history of being a very, a strong black community.
Speaker 2: It's a strong black community.  It was also the beginning of the Black Panther movement, which I got involved in, indirectly, never formally joined thanks to a praying mother.  But I believed in their social philosophy, certainly the feeding program and used my apartment and my legal resources to help raise money, you know, for some of the things that they were doing.  Melvin Newton was [Black Panther Party founder] Huey [P.] Newton's brother--was a former--was a colleague of mine in the School of Social Work.  So I was involved in the very beginning of that movement and watched the rise and fall and demise, you know, of that movement.  But certainly, in the early days, they were, like standing in the gap, when there weren't other leaders out front, challenging the police, you know, not to brutalize the African American community.  And I was in solidarity with them.
Speaker 1: Okay, what do you think--there's been a tremendous amount of literature written about the [Black] Panther Party, and its demise, I mean its rise and its demise.  And what's your assessment of the Black Panther Party on the West Coast, because it's a little bit different from what happened in the Midwest or on the East Coast in terms of--?
Speaker 2: Well, I believe that violence begets violence.  I would define myself as a passivist in the spirit of [Dr.] Martin Luther King, Jr.  I believe that that was the beginning of the end, that at the--at least you have to understand your enemy.  And I think their language--to use the language of violence without the means to back it up, was counterproductive, and it was the beginning of the end for them.  That's number one.  Number two, the inconsistency between the moral character of the leaders and their message, their moral message, was part, the second part of their demise.  I believe a leader has to live the way they speak.  Not that they do not have to be perfect, but there has to be integrity.  There has to be--I have to live the same way that I talk.  I have to talk east and walk east.  I can't talk east and walk west.  When I saw that, I knew the Panther Party was not long in being.  I loved their feeding program, their children's feeding program: the breakfast program.  I thought their social action message was very powerful, but I think the character of the leaders, many of the leaders, the more visible leaders, the moral character had a lot to be desired.
Speaker 1: Yeah, there have been stories written about various members of the Panther Party being involved in drugs and prostitution and a lot of different things.  So, if not when they formed it, along the way somewhere, and other things.  There's also been--as a black woman whose close to that movement, there's also been a strong critique about the way black women were treated in the Panther movement.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  Well, that's--I think that's not inconsistent with the way the Civil Rights Movement dealt with women.  When Stokely Carmichael said the position of women in the movement is prone, I mean that was just an insult to all women of all races, and not different from the way women are treated in the church, where many churches today will not ordain a woman no matter how much formal theological education she has.  So it's not--I think it is part of the African American culture.
Speaker 1: That's a good point.  The Panthers came out of popular culture.  It is just a reflected of the culture they came out of.
Speaker 2: No, they're not different from the church, they're not different from politics where it was a surprise that Shirley Chisholm could run for president even if she was the most qualified at the time.
Story_ID: 15511
Speaker 1: Talking about the cultural dynamics of the black movement (unclear).  I wanted to ask you about the Us Organization that fell into conflict with the [Black] Panther organization in California and the rivalry between those two organizations.  What were your observations on that rivalry?
Speaker 2: Well, I believe the racism was so blatant in California, though not as well known and documented as in the South that it was tragic that the energy of these, you know, brilliant advocates for social justice would be spent in conflict with one another.  And that's really all I thought.  I thought just how tragic it was.  They each had a different role to play and were greatly needed and made a great contribution too, of self-understanding as a people.  I thought it was just tragic that we would spend our energy fighting one another when the battle was so much bigger than all of us.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think subsequently, it was shown that the FBI's [Federal Bureau of Investigation's] COINTELPRO program-- [FBI counterintelligence programs].
Speaker 2: Was actually spying on all of them, yes.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Manipulated and all that.  Now, so your activities during the '60s [1960s], you were like a helper to a lot of politicians--,
Speaker 2: I am what I am today--.
Speaker 1: -a facilitator.
Speaker 2: I am a facilitator.  I've always seen myself in that regard.  I've always identified leaders who were out front.  I remember George Wiley who was a leader in the Welfare Rights Movement in the--in the '70s [1970s], late '60s [1960s] and early '70s.  Whenever I saw an effective leader, out front, visible leader, whether it was [U.S. Congresswoman] Shirley Chisholm or [U.S. Congressman] Andrew Young or [Rev.] Jesse Jackson for his [U.S.] Presidential campaign, I always saw my role as a facilitator, you know, as a behind-the-scenes person who helped to make their vision become reality.  They dream the dreams.  I never--that's--I define myself that way to this day.
Speaker 1: Now, when you were, in those days in California, the black intellectual activity seemed to be blossoming in a number of different directions.  You have the writings of the Panther [Party] leaders.  They had a paper.
Speaker 2: You had Nathan and Julia Hare--,
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --with the Black Scholar Movement and many others, yeah.
Speaker 1: And Robert Christman [chair, Africana Studies, Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan] and Robert--I can't think of the other one now.
Speaker 2: I know who you're talking about.
Speaker 1: Allen.  Robert Allen [educator], Robert Christman and Oba T'Shaka [writer and educator]--,
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --in the [San Francisco] Bay area, quite a few.  Nathan and Julia Hare [educators/authors].
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: This is--Carlton Goodlett [journalist]--.
Speaker 2: Carlton Goodlett was very much a part of that with his own newspaper at the time.  It was a lot of intellectual dialogue, teach-ins and an effort to contextualize the social justice struggle, to define the African American role in the continuing battle for liberation.  And so I was so--I was a beneficiary of all of that and saw myself as really shaped in many ways by that you need to always have the intellectuals defining the movement while the activists are dealing with the mass involvement and the like.  The Civil Rights Movement had the same thing.  You had, you know, numbers of persons who were like the intellectuals, you know, while others were involved, you know, in the street in the mass movement. But California in the '60s [1960s] and up until the early '70s [1970s] was a seedbed of intellectualism.  I thought that was the most powerful part of my early growing up and shaping of my own ideology, my own understanding about who I am and about my role in the world.
Speaker 1: Did you have any ideas, any thoughts as to why California, and in particular, the Bay Area was such an intellectual, I guess, center, you know, for the rest of the country.  I mean it wasn't the only place that had a high level of intellectual activities going on, but a lot of it was going on.  I mean a lot of--you had Angela Davis [educator and political activist] there--,
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly.
Speaker 1: --and so many people there who were really--.
Speaker 2: I think when you are disconnected from the East Coast by three hours, you know, you're three hours ahead--you're behind the time three hours, and by the geographic distance, the search for meaning, the search for connection to the struggle I think was even greater.  I believe some of it came out of that.  In other words, not that there weren't--there wasn't activism, but I believe that California as a whole, California, and certainly with the universities there: University of California Berkeley [Berkeley, California], and San Francisco State [University, San Francisco, California] and University of California Santa Barbara [Santa Barbara, California], University of California Long Beach [Long Beach California].  These were places that hired--where African American scholars were hired.  And it created an environment that allowed African American thinkers and philosophers to develop writings and to teach through teachings, and a lot of publications took place.  I think it was because of the environment of California itself.  It happened in the white community as well at UC [University of California] Berkeley and through San Francisco State.  Even in the white community, there's a large bed of writing, a repertoire of writing that defined the anti-war movement, the student nonviolence movement, that wouldn't happen in other cities.  The nature--it's California.  It's like Minnesota.  Certain states have developed an ethos.  They develop an ethic and the people are attracted to that.  So people came to California because they could be surrounded by intellectuals.  That's the place where Howard Thurman [black theologian] lived and did much of his work and his writing.  I think intellectuals attract intellectuals.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So during this period, you were basically absorbing this information and helping to facilitate the dissemination of this information.
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly.  I saw myself again, as both the student of the social justice movement, and always a student, and then at strategic times, as an activist behind the scenes.  And that probably led to, you know, my connection to the Congressional Black Caucus.  It's not an accident that I would end up being the first female director, executive director of the Congressional Black Caucus during its most active years, you know, in terms of social justice, during the Shirley Chisholm and [U.S. Congresswoman] Barbara Jordan years.
Story_ID: 15512
Speaker 1: Now, how did you get involved with the Congressional Black Caucus? There was no Congressional Black Caucus in the '60s [1960s].  And before--
Speaker 2: No, there was not.
Speaker 1: --the early '70s [1970s] Ron Dellums from your area was very much a part of that.  How did you get involved?
Speaker 2: I got involved because when Ron Dellums ran for office, he asked me to come to work for him.  I had just finished law school.  And (unclear) was his first--one of his first chief of staff.  So I got connected with the African American members of [U.S.] Congress.  When I came to work for Ron Dellums, the Congressional Black Caucus in 1971 was just forming.  They had just been rejected by--[U.S. President Richard] Nixon refused to meet with them.  And it just absolutely angered them and gave rise to, you know, their organization.  The belief is that we have to be organized to be heard.  And so Nixon actually did African Americans a favor, I think.  And as a matter of fact, being in that environment, getting to know the Congressional Black Caucus when they needed an executive director, they came to me and asked me to take that job.  I was by then known as a behind-the-scenes, you know, facilitator, organizer, a problem solver, a person who could get things done, a person who could be trusted with leaders.
Speaker 1: And now, you had just scored a major victory.  In Ron Dellums's campaign, Ron Dellums ran in a district that was not all black, I mean it was--.
Speaker 2: It was 28 percent African American.  Piedmont [California] was in his district.  Oakland [California] was in his district.  Oakland was African American, but we had Piedmont and Alameda [California] and, you know, parts--a large number--parts of Berkeley [California] and large numbers of conservatives were in his district.
Speaker 1: So that wasn't easy?
Speaker 2: It was not easy at all, but I believe that Ron Dellums is so brilliant and so capable as an orator and as a articulator of the pain of people who had a kind of a transcendent message, that white, blue collar people could see themselves being shafted by a government that didn't care any more about them than it cared about the welfare worker, as it raised their taxes and gave to the rich, you know.  So he was able to help people to see their connection on the planet.  And, of course, his anti-war message at a time that, you know, America was in great pain, having lost fifty thousand Americans in that war, gave voice to that anger and that pain.  And he was able to beat a twelve-year liberal incumbent who had a strong labor record, Jeffrey Cohelan, and the rest is history.  And he stayed there for thirty years.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, how did you do it?
Speaker 2: Well, when--.
Speaker 1: Not just you, but I mean, you were, you know, in a strategic spot.
Speaker 2: Yeah, when I was back at San Francisco State [University, San Francisco, California], I remembered going--Ron Dellums was the only person I knew who had a masters in social work.  I had a B.A. in social work, and I was considering getting a masters.  So I went to talk to him.  I found out he was working at Hunters Point [California] as a case--he was a group--he ran the Hunters Point, kind of like a social house, a house for people who were in need.  And I talked to him and as a result I started taking students over there.  I found out that he had a great need for students who could--young people couldn't read and who were struggling with school.  So after school, I took, oh, a busload of college students.  We're sitting around playing cards.  I said we could go over there, and we could make a difference.  So, I learned, you know, I learned how to get people to do something.  I wasn't even thinking about politics.  I was just thinking about serving.  Years later when I was working on a project with Ralph Nader [activist and politician], I was an intern with a project that he was involved in.  And in my second year of law school, I came to Washington, I was kind of bored with law school, and I didn't want to be a lawyer.  I just wanted to understand the law for the sake of helping the poor and helping to deal with injustices in the law.  Someone called me and said Ron Dellums was running for office and would I organize his trip.  He was gonna be here for two weeks.  He'd never been to Washington [D.C.].  He wanted to make all the mucky-mucks on Capitol Hill, all the--Senator [Edward M.] Kennedy and all these congressional and Senate leaders and African American leaders and the like.  And here I was an intern (laughs).  I didn't really know that many people here.  I wasn't from here.  I was only here for a semester.  And I said yes because I wouldn't turn down a challenge like that.  And I remember how kind he was, you know, to us and how helpful he was in giving me advice about getting my master's degree, and he was kind of like a mentor to me.  So anyway, I organized and facilitated his going to meet all these people.  I talked my way into every place, you know, and had a great schedule for him.  And he's 6 [feet] 4 [inches] and he's in my Volkswagen.  I'm the chauffeur and I'm the advance and I'm the secretary.  I escort him to the meetings and help get his schedule together and brief him on all the people he's gonna see.  And when we got to the airport as the trip ended, he was ready to go back, he asked me if I would come to work for him.  He said, "I like the way you work, and would you work for me?" I said, "I hate Washington, I don't want to be here. I'm going back to California.  I have one more semester in law school, you know, I have to finish."  This is like September--he had won.  So this is maybe the end of the previous year.  So I had one more semester, and I would not graduate until June, even if I said, yes, " You need somebody right away."  He's gonna take office in January.  So anyway, the short version is, I ended up being his chief of staff.  And I've been here for thirty years as a result of that.  Well, while I was--after I was in his office for two years, there was a vacancy at the Congressional Black Caucus, and I was asked to the be the executive director, first female director of a caucus that was very much divided over the [U.S. Congresswoman] Shirley Chisholm campaign [for President of the United States].  And I was always seen as a peacemaker and, you know, a hard worker.
Story_ID: 15513
Speaker 1: What was the essence of that division [within the Congressional Black Caucus], the Shirley Chisholm campaign?  Why, I mean, who was divided and why?
Speaker 2: Well, I think most of the [Congressional Black] Caucus members with almost no exceptions, voted for George McGovern, supported--put their support behind George McGovern.  I think that was--.
Speaker 1: Who was running for [U.S.] President in 1972.
Speaker 2: Yeah, this was--exactly, and the feeling was a black person could not win the presidency. So very few people were looking at the historic impact of this, that it was a building block to something that could happen.  But rather, the easiest thing was George McGovern, you know, and so--.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what you're discussing, for those who are gonna be watching this and don't have any idea--.
Speaker 2: In 1972, Shirley Chisholm put her hat in the ring to run for [U.S.] President.  [U.S. Senator] George McGovern was also a candidate.
Speaker 1: And Shirley Chisholm was a [U.S.] congresswoman--.
Speaker 2: Shirley Chisholm was a black congresswoman from Brooklyn [New York, New York].  She was known as being a very outspoken advocate for justice, for liberation, for women's rights.  She was a no-sense, unbought, unbossed was her title for herself.  And she was very angry that many of the, you know, Congressional Black Caucus members, for their own reason decided to not endorse her campaign.  Here she is an African-American woman.  She's a member of the Congressional Black Caucus.  They supported George McGovern.  So, of course, this would divide the Congressional--this would cause great division in the Congressional Black Caucus.  So she--so at that point they obviously needed--they needed somebody who was more low key, who could work behind-the-scenes to help, you know, bridge some of those gaps.  And that was the role.
Speaker 1: And McGovern at that time was seen as the most liberal senator--.
Speaker 2: He was very liberal and that probably made it even more difficult because he was, you know, committed to every issue that the Congressional Black Caucus was committed to.  And maybe as a white male, you know, more likely to win than a black woman, the first black person ever to run, well, actually Dick Gregory [comedian and political activist] ran in earlier, years.
Speaker 1: As a write-in candidate.
Speaker 2: As a write-in candidate, yes.  As the write-me-in candidate.  But here she is formally a campaign.  So that would cause a lot of division.  And it did.  So I was--I became--I took that job at the end of 1974.
Speaker 1: So she didn't consider this as symbolic?
Speaker 2: She did not consider herself symbolic.  She considered that she had as much to give to the country, that was very divided over [U.S. President] Richard Nixon and his, you know, anti-poor, anti-minority, anti-female, anti-everybody, but the rich, kind of dogma.  And she felt that the country needed a person who was committed to social justice for all people and was very upset about not getting their support to say the least.  So I took that job at that time.  So I--that has been a very important role that I was able to play at that time.  And I loved working with the Congressional Black Caucus members, even to this day consider many of them, you know, very good friends.
Story_ID: 15514
Speaker 1: At the risk of putting you on the spot, I mean, who were the major movers and shakers behind the Congressional Black Caucus?
Speaker 2: Well, the organizers for the Congressional Black Caucus were Charlie Diggs, Charlie Rangel, Bill Clay.  I mean those were like the--and Louis Stokes.  Those were like the ones I remember.  I know John Conyers was there at the time.  So was Ron Dellums and, you know, in the beginning, Shirley Chisholm came right after Ron Dellums.  But in terms of the focal point of putting that Congressional Black Caucus on the map and organizing, it's Charlie Rangel, Charlie Diggs, Louis Stokes and Bill Clay.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Yeah, because I know everybody was not necessarily--and a lot of black organizations were forming around professions, not everybody--everybody might join at a certain point.  They may join at a certain juncture, but they're not necessarily the initiators of it or feel comfortable in it.
Speaker 2: Oh, exactly, but you always need pioneers.  Every movement has to have people who are willing to take risks, people who see a vision.  That's what leadership is.  It is seeing a vision.  It's being able to capture it in your mind's eye before it exists.  And then doing your level best, using every resource you have, to make it come to pass.  And that's what they saw.  They saw the Congressional Black Caucus, though only thirteen at the time, now thirty-nine, representing every African American, that whether you were in Alaska or you were in Maine or Seattle [Washington], and you didn't have an African American member of [U.S.] Congress, you had one when the Congressional Black Caucus was formed, if you were an African American.  And, indeed, the Congressional Black Caucus represented white people and Latinos and others as well.  But their major constituency was representing the legislative interests, the policy interests of African Americans in the Congress.
Speaker 1: Now, African Americans at that time were similarly situated in the United States, at the bottom of the economic ladder--,
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --educationally and in healthcare, you name it, pretty much.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Yeah, with a few exceptions, maybe American Indians were in worse shape in a couple of areas, but for the most part--.
Speaker 2: For the most part, we were at the lowest on the totem pole in all of those areas, in a country that was increasingly wealthy, one of the richest nations in the world.  And you had pockets of severe poverty all over America.  We were looking at foreign missions as our major, you know, focus of dealing with hunger, and we had hunger in parts of cities throughout our own country. Well, the Congressional Black Caucus's job was, and they saw it as their mission, to focus on those areas.  That's why I was so excited about the Congressional Black Caucus, and I still am, of course.
Story_ID: 15515
Speaker 1: What were some of the major issues the [Congressional Black] Caucus dealt with in the beginning, other than trying to hold itself together, I mean, you know, that was one issue.  But what else?
Speaker 2: Well, the Caucus was formed during the time that [U.S. President] Richard Nixon waged an all-out assault on the war on poverty.  I mean he waged a war on the war (laughs) on poverty.  His attitude was there were no poor people in America, you know.  And he actually--with the exception of Head Start [early childhood development program] targeted every program, every community development program, every program to be ended.  And that's--those were the days when people like Gus--Augustus Hawkins, who was a member of the Congressional Black Caucus, decided to rally the nation and African American people against that.  So that was very important.  We were able to save many programs from his ax, his budget ax.  I would say that was probably one of the biggest victories of the Congressional Black Caucus during those days.  And, of course, the Congressional Black Caucus dealt with other issues, women's rights, other social justice issues.  Affirmative action was right around that time.  Remember the Bakke case in 1972 [ref. to Alan Bakke's pivotal U.S. Supreme Court 'reverse discrimination' case against the University of California Davis Medical School] when there was an all-out attack on affirmative action, which was, actually evolved under Nixon with Art Fletcher, an African American who was involved with the [U.S.] Labor Department.  That was [Assistant Secretary of Labor] Art Fletcher's baby, the concept of affirmative action.  And Richard Nixon was President during that time.  Well, by 1972, he was ready to put that, you know, an ax to that even.  And so there was a lot of battles the Congressional Black Caucus had to wage around maintaining affirmative action.  Believe it or not, that continues to this very day.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, we just had a rally this past spring-
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --on the steps of the [U.S.] Capitol [Washington, D.C.] concerning affirmative action.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: The big case as we speak, still I guess, is at the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan]-
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --was a case to hit the [U.S.] Supreme Court this year.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  And, and the belief of the Congressional Black Caucus is that we already have an affirmative action program for white men, I mean people in power.  There's a 90 percent affirmative action program.  There's an old boy network, an informal network that ensures that white men will stay employed, okay.  And that what we're really talking about is 10 percent, not a quota, but ensuring that no American who wants to work and who wants to go to college and who wants to gain skills would be locked out of the system.  That seems like a very American idea to me.  That seems very connected to what our flag is about.  It's about justice for all.  But that's how they saw affirmative action, not as a set-aside just for--not a quota system, but a way of ensuring that the flag had meaning in the lives of all people.
Story_ID: 15516
Speaker 1: How long did you stay in this position with the Congressional Black Caucus?
Speaker 2: I was with the Congressional Black Caucus until 1981, when I got married to Tom Skinner.  He made me a better offer.  And marriage was better than working twenty hours a day.  But Tom Skinner, when he and I got together in 1981, I left the Congressional Black Caucus formally as a staffer, but continued part-time on the board.
Speaker 1: Now, Tom Skinner was a reverend and here you had quit the church at age twelve.
Speaker 2: (Laughs)
Speaker 1: How did you end up with an evangelistic reverend?
Speaker 2: I think this is God's joke on me really.  You know, God has a sense of humor.  I guess he looked at my letter, tore it up (laughs), and said, "I'll deal with you later."  But Tom was not just a reverend, he was a very revolutionary young man.  He grew up in Harlem [New York, New York].  He was a gang leader and he was very angry about poverty in Harlem.  He lived in an area where four thousand people on one block.  He grew up in the days of really Malcolm X you know, in Harlem.  And he was very angry about the church.  So we shared that in common, about the church that focused more on the structure and, you know, benefits to, you know, to the leaders than to caring for the social justice issues, and preaching a social gospel.  He was upset about that.  And so he began a very strong, social gospel, kind of a message, that got him put out of a lot of black churches.  He talked about Jesus and the dispossessed, you know, back from Howard Thurman's [theologian] concept that that's the historical Jesus because Jesus is not somebody with, you know, manicured fingernails and blonde hair and blue eyes.  But Jesus is black to black people and Native American to Native Americans and Latino to Latinos.  And he's a woman to women and he's a--he's there for the dispossessed.  He's there to pick up those whose--whose lives have been shattered in every way.  And that's how Tom saw himself, you know, as an evangelist.  And so when I met him, he was the chaplain to the Washington Redskins [professional football team].  And I must say, I've never talked to a reverend who sounded like Tom Skinner.  And I think there--we had a lot in common in terms of our commitment to social justice.  So I was able to look past my attitude about God and the church and to see that God comes in many forms.  And I think God came to me in the form of Tom Skinner.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, his analysis of what role religion should play, did--I mean usually the black church discusses getting Jesus to help you and all that, but your main reward is gonna be in heaven.  Did he--he was a little different?
Speaker 2: No, Jesus is--that's not the word of God.  The word of God is that the kingdom of God is in you now, that Jesus showed up and said, you know, "Repent now.  The kingdom is at hand.  I'm here.  I'm here right now as an advocate to the homeless and the helpless and the dispossessed and the orphaned and the widowed."  And Jesus' whole life was caring for people as he was teaching and preaching about eternal life and salvation through believing in Jesus Christ. He was saying, "I'm gonna feed people."  And so he fed the five thousand while he's talking about eternal salvation.  It's a both and.  It's not a by-and-by gospel. It's caring for people now, their physical bodies now and also dealing with their spiritual and eternal lives for a later period.
Story_ID: 15517
Speaker 1: How did you meet [husband] Tom Skinner?
Speaker 2: I was working on Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.] with the--I was running the Congressional Black Caucus, and I had organized a job training--a job finding, a job search, job bank, you know, for--there were very few African Americans working on Capitol Hill in the offices, other than policemen and the food service people when I came in 1971 so--to work for [U.S. Congressman Ron] Dellums.  And then I'm back, you know, running the Congressional Black Caucus in '74 [1974].  And so I said, rather than just fight the members of [U.S.] Congress about it because they said they were, actually--the law didn't apply to the Congress, you know, the laws against job discrimination did not apply to the Congress that made the laws, which is absurd.  So I said, okay, rather than battle about it, just, let's just start a job bank.  And that's what I did.  And there was a young man who came looking for a job.  I didn't know all this.  But anyway, he--I gave him several referrals.  I liked his resume, and I would find out--I made friends with white, black members, anybody who had a job opening, maybe--whether it was the Library of Congress or other offices, other than congressional offices on the Hill, committees of the Congress even.  And he--I gave him referrals.  And when he got my letter, he said he and his wife began praying for me by name, that God led him to pray for me.  Now, I don't know any of this, okay.  Now, the fact is, my life was really in shambles about that time.  I mean, you wouldn't know it.  I looked very successful on the outside, but at that time, for reasons related to other issues that were going on in my life and the pressures and all, I became rather suicidal.  And then nobody knew this because I'm like, you know, able to put on the makeup and the clothes and really--I was feeling very disconnected, just from life.  And I was at the state of kind of depression through there.  Anyway, you know, God is nowhere in the picture.  I have dismissed him.  I fired God and so forth, so a long time ago.  So my--at that point, this man is praying for me, I don't even know him.  Anyway, a year later, he comes to my office and leaves a message for me to call him.  I ended up calling him.  Short version of the story, the man was just phenomenal.  He said, "I want to be your friend for life."  Well, who wants a friend in Washington?  You want a friend?  Get a dog.  You cannot trust anybody here, okay.  So, you just cannot have friends.  You know, you--that's what I learned early on.  I wouldn't say that today, but that's how the environment was, you know.  You didn't know who to trust.  People wanted what you could give them, but they--you never knew if they really were interested in just being your friend.  So you'd keep everybody at arm's length.  Anyway, this man and I ended up talking.  And he and his wife just kept coming back and showing up.  And they'd bring cookies and do the strange things, things people don't do, just, you know, kind of show interest in you, but they didn't want anything.  I found this to be very strange.  Anyway, about a month into this, he said, "There's a man you really need to know."  He was sharing with me about--I said, "Well, what motivates you?"  He said he was modeling his life off of the life of Jesus without all the religion around it, without all the stuff around it, just to be loving and consistently caring and serving.  Well, that sounded very strange too.  So, I never heard that before.  So he talked about, you could have a personal relationship with God through Jesus Christ.  And you could have, be forgiven of your sins.  Well, I certainly needed to be forgiven, all the things I had done.  But I still didn't believe it.  Anyway, he said, "Well, there's a guy I want you to talk to.  He's very persuasive, more than I am.  And, anyway, he's probably at your level and knows the people, the kind of people you know," and so forth.  And that was Tom Skinner.  So, here at the Mayflower [Hotel, Washington, D.C.] in 19--July, 1978, I had dinner with Tom Skinner.  And he--and I didn't like him.  He didn't like me.  It didn't--it was a--it was really a terrible first meeting (laughs).  Anyway, I didn't like the way he dealt with the ordering and all that.  He pulled out this wine card, and I thought he was trying to impress me, out of his pocket, and so forth when the wine chef came.  And like, so I'm like, oh, this is over.  But anyway, this man spoke about, as we got to know each other, about Jesus as a person who cared, not as, just the head of a religion that gave people a title and a reason to feel holier than thou, that he really cared.  He demonstrated, he gave, he served, you know, he healed.  He didn't just talk about, you know, the kingdom of God in the future. He talked about now, being in you, and manifest through your love for others.  That was the most profound thing I had ever heard.  Anyway, we developed a relationship out of that.  And he was so brilliant.  He could talk about anything.  He could talk about poetry, philosophy.  I've never been able to--I had not been with anyone who is truly intellectual, since leaving California.  You know, a really scholarly person who was very practical and kind of down to earth.  And it was so refreshing in Washington where everything is Democrat, Republican, you know, left wing, right wing.  Everything is either, you know, you're for us or against us.  And people don't really talk long and don't debate long about issues, that all of a sudden I could talk to someone about, you know, anything.  And it was just so refreshing.  And I think out of that we developed a friendship that led, of course, to our marriage.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then our working together.
Story_ID: 15518
Speaker 1: When you met him [husband, Tom Skinner], he was a chaplain for--.
Speaker 2: He was a chaplain to, not only the [Washington] Redskins [professional football team, Washington, D.C.], but also the [New York] Yankees, the [New York] Mets [professional baseball teams].  He was running his own ministry, which was Tom Skinner Associates.  He had a prison ministry.  He was based in New York.  He had a radio ministry, and he was preaching and teaching all the time.  He was a phenomenal speaker.  You know, he could be with Billy Graham one day, and he, of course, people called him, you know, like the black [Rev.] Billy Graham, which I thought it was really that Billy Graham was a white Tom Skinner--.
Speaker 1: Did he attract big audiences when he was speaking?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Oh, yeah, thousands of people.
Speaker 1: Who was his mentor, you know, his mentor?  I mean who got him started?
Speaker 2: He got started, you know, as I said, he was on his way to a gang rumble, and he heard this old, very uneducated-sounding minister on the radio that interrupted his rock and roll program.  He was on his way, he was head of the Harlem Lords.  There were five gangs on one side and five on another, going to do a real, like whoever won this rumble was gonna take over, you know, that whole territory.  And he said he was getting his maps and strategy together, and this guy broke in while he was organizing his stuff to go meet his boys, and said, you know, if any person is in Christ, they are new creation.  The old has come, the new--the old is gone, the new has come.  And he said, if you want a new life, you know, give your life to Christ now and place--put your faith in him.  He thought this is the most stupid thing I've heard.  Why is this guy interrupting my program?  But he couldn't get out of his mind that you could become a new creature, that you didn't have to--your past didn't have to be your future; that if you made lot of mistakes and you hurt a lot of people, as he had, from being in the gang and being so violent in his mind, and he was so angry, so enraged about his conditions, that he hurt other people.  He thought, I want to change. I want to be transformed. I want to be a different person.  And if this Jesus Christ could do that, you know, I'll give my life to him.  So, I thought, you know, this is a man who I could, you know, I could relate to.  I could really believe in and I could, support.
Story_ID: 15519
Speaker 1: After we got married [to Tom Skinner], I left the Congressional Black Caucus in 1981 and went to work as part of his ministry, which was really strange and different, you know, leaving the government where you have a definite set, you know, income and you have a business card and people--you can open any door and people are impressed with your title and position.  And all of a sudden, you're in a ministry and people say, ' Well, what do you do?" (Laughter)  And you say, "Well, I help people."  So it was a very difficult transition for me, but it's the most rewarding thing I've ever done in my life, and I don't know what I would be doing.  It's like I've always done this.  It's very consistent with where I started in my early childhood of serving and facilitating and, you know, being the behind the scenes support and problem solver.  So God has been following me all along, and just let me have my period of being disconnected, and only to bring me back to my roots.  So I don't see this as a revolutionary change from my past.  I see it as just a continuum.
Story_ID: 15520
Speaker 1: What are the activities of the ministry and--?
Speaker 2: Well, there're three areas that we work in.  And all of--the vision of the ministry is to produce a new generation of leaders who are both technically and morally excellent.  That's the key, technical and moral excellence.  Many leaders are technically excellent.  They're the best at what they do, you know.  They are the highest--they have the highest standard of workmanship, they're competent, they're sought after for, you know, for the, whether it's literature, technology, science, music, poetry, whatever.  But they're not morally competent.  They lie, they cheat, they steal.  You can't count on them.  They're unreliable, they're self-centered, they don't care about others, they don't care who they hurt.  Or you have people who are morally excellent, but they don't even know who's President of the United States.  They don't know, they don't vote, they're not registered, they're not really connected, they're not the best in their jobs.  So our vision is that, for a leadership to deal with the problems of this age, the leader has to be both morally and technically excellent.  And that's really what we work on.  And we do it in three areas.  One is we work with current leaders.  We go alongside leaders who are making a difference for our people, you know, a Coretta Scott King or a Maya Angelou or, you know, people are maybe not as well known but who are making a real difference, mayors of cities and congressional leaders and business leaders, who are committed to social justice, but who need to connect with other leaders.  So that's why we do the--the leadership retreats and seminar, bringing leaders together to bridge the gap, to break down walls, to create a more coherent, you know, kind of impact.  Leaders who know each other and who trust each other are better able to work together more effectively for African Americans.  Many times causes fail just because leaders don't come together, very important causes that could make a difference in our community, our economic, our social, our political lives.  So, facilitating people coming together and building trusting relationships, we consider a very important part of that social justice movement.  So that's the first thing we do.  Secondly, we have full-time work at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] where we work with student leaders who are the next generation of leaders.  We help students connect their faith to their intellectual pursuits and their career kind of pursuits and dreams.  And we help them define more clearly what it means to be morally excellent and technically excellent, through all kinds of activities, you know, fun activities to seminars, from Christian homecoming and pizza parties to seminars on Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.].  We've taken them to Wall Street [New York, New York], to, you know, to understand what money is and how does money--what is a biblical concept of money, a biblical concept of leadership, you know, of relationships, of power.  How do you handle power.  The students who want to become a law student in an environment and a profession that's filled with greed and immoral activities: how do you penetrate that, the law on the side of justice and still make a good living, you know, for yourself or students who are interested in medicine.  How do you deal with the medical profession that is corrupt and is milking people through these insurance companies?  How do you enter those fields as a person with a godly character?  So that's what we do.
Story_ID: 15521
Speaker 1: There's a tremendous job here, even though the majority of African Americans are nominally Christians on some levels, I mean the vast majority, many denominations and as a--you know, we have black Episcopalians--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and Lutherans, and Presbyterians and--.
Speaker 2: And have sixty-five thousand black churches in America.
Speaker 1: And so many, you know, the majority--,
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --overwhelming majority being Baptist-
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --of one kind or another--.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Most of them are--have come around to an activist point of view on some level, but it used to be that the Baptists were split between those who thought you should just pray for your soul to go to heaven and those who thought you ought to do something about what's going on--,
Speaker 2: While you're here.
Speaker 1: --while you're here.  The Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] and [Rev.] Joseph Jackson split.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Then you have the Muslims, of course. You have the Elijah Muhammad Nation of Islam Muslims --,
Speaker 2: [Nation of Islam minister] Louis Farrakhan.
Speaker 1: -- and the old Nation of Islam Muslims and the more orthodox Muslims-
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --that were--gained through the ascendancy of Wallace Muhammad--,
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And now who are kind of homogenizing all the black Muslims together--,
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: and those who believe in the Ahmadiyah brand of Islam from Pakistan, you've got--,
Speaker 2: The Sunnis [Muslims].
Speaker 1: --you've got different kinds of Hebrew Israelites, to the ones that have the colony in Israel, who run the health food stores around our community-
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --to those who are--consider themselves black Jews and dress like the Hasidim [Orthodox Jews] you know.  And you've got black nationalists, who many of them have no formal religion whatsoever, but have a code of conduct.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: You have people that believe in ancient Egyptian religion--,
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --Kemetic religion.  You have the Assera (ph.) (unclear) Society.  They incorporate a new age thing into their--.  There's so many expressions of black religion, I mean how do you--are you able to work with all these kinds of people, especially on a campus like Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] when I would think that students are experimenting and trying to make up their mind about religion.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: How do you bring them all together in a room?  I mean you've described like bringing [Dr.] Maulana Karenga [philosopher, author, and educator] into this fold, as well as others,
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --of other religions. How does that work?
Speaker 2: It works by helping people see that they have more in common than they have differences. That philosophy is not the only measure of how we work together.  We have an equal concern about social justice.  We have concern about our children, about the future of our community, about the fact that we're not registered to vote in the numbers that we--if we voted, we would--we would have a great deal more power.  We could--we could impact the schools in our district.  Poor schools exist because African Americans let them be poor and decide that we're not gonna challenge the powers that be, whether they're black or white, that you can't do that divided.  And that if you're concerned about the future of the African American community, your philosophy cannot be the decisive factor of whether you work together or not.  So students on the campus of Howard University [Washington, D.C.]  are equally concerned about the kind of world they're gonna inherit.  A world of where war is being waged on so many continents that they're gonna have to pay for it, that their children's children--like this Iraqi war where we, you know, have been asked for an absurd additional, almost ninety billion dollars from the [U.S.] President [George W. Bush] with so many schools crumbling in the nation.  These students, whether they're Muslim students or Christian students or, you know, or Catholic students, they are going to have to pay for that.  And so for them to be able to come together and talk about how does our faith call us to social action, that's a common question.  And when you create forums and symposiums that allow them to have that kind of discussion, they come because they're wrestling with those issues.  How do you translate your relationship to the divine into concern in your career about changing the community, about getting people like you to vote.  How do you challenge the powers that be on taxes and the other issues?  In other words, what is your responsibility to be a change agent in the community?  That transcends your faith tradition, and so we're able to help them to see that they have a common cause in that?
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's a philosophy of our ministry.  We work with people of all types because the bigger issues that affect us, affect all of us. And if the planet is polluted, it doesn't matter that you're Catholic and, you know, and I'm a Muslim, or if you're Jewish and I'm Baptist.  We're each gonna be polluted.  We're gonna be affected by the price of gas that rises because the war doesn't end, okay.  So we have more reasons to come together than to be separated.  And that's the role--the relationship-building role that Skinner Leadership has played, whether we deal with students or we deal with current leaders or we go on a high school campus.  And we do the same thing.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, but if I was a Muslim or a Hebrew Israelite, would I be comfortable coming to a retreat or to a training where it was Christian training or a lot--I mean is there a heavy emphasis on religion in this or how does it--?
Speaker 2: It depends.  I mean if--,
Speaker 1: How do you keep from offending?
Speaker 2: --if we're having, a prayer session and we're not praying to whom it may concern.  Young people are praying to, you know, the God of Jesus Christ, but if we're having a symposium, if we're having a seminar, if we're having a social gathering, that's not a point of proselytizing necessarily.  That is a point of trying to bring people together in a greater understanding and awareness of their common cause.
Speaker 1: Do you have Muslims or Yorubas coming to those?  I mean have they ever showed up?
Speaker 2: Yes, we've had Christian Muslim dialogues and very few people do.  But we have done that, and we continue to do that because I think the things that affect us, affect us no matter what our faith tradition is.  And there are times when, you know, when Christian students want to be with Christian students to talk about Jesus Christ.  And if they're not, they're not closing the door to Muslim students, but they're not, they're unapologetic about that gathering.  Just like when a church group meets, they're advocating for their own faith.  I've gone to Muslim gatherings.  I've gone to Savior's Day at the--with the Nation of Islam and been on a panel as one of the few Christians on the panel.  And I understand that when they stand up and do their break for prayer, they're not praying to Jesus Christ.  I am.  But I feel that their concerns about racial profiling are the same as mine.  And I can work with them.  I can work with [Nation of Islam minister] Louis Farrakhan on ending worship, racial profiling.  I can work with him on the issues of racial injustice.  So, I focus in the ministry of Skinner Leadership Institute focuses on the areas that unite, rather than the areas that divide.  And we think those are greater.  I believe that if I live like Christ, I will attract people to Christ.  But if I just talk about Christ and I don't live the love ethic of Jesus Christ, I'm not gonna persuade anybody anyway.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think you should live your faith, more than talk about your faith.  People know who you are.
Story_ID: 15522
Speaker 1: You went back to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] and earned a degree in divinity, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I did.  I went to--I got a master's of divinity in 1999 and a doctorate in 2000, a doctorate, a doctor of ministry in 2000.  And one of the reasons I wanted to do that is because I had been out of school for twenty-five years.  My last schooling was in 1971 when I graduated from law school.  And what happens when you're in the social justice movement, you're an activist, but you're not necessarily thinking.  I mean a lot of work you do, you don't have to think a lot about.  You do it.  You know, you organize a meeting.  You don't have a deep intellectual discourse about how to organize a meeting.  You just do it.  But I find that my brain needs to be stimulated a certain way.  And because I'm very, I'm very committed to understanding the things of God, I thought it'd be great for me to be, you know, in the academy.  And I missed being in the academy.  And I loved it.  I enjoyed it.  I did that full-time and worked full-time.  It's the hardest thing I've ever done, but it's the most rewarding thing I've ever done.
Story_ID: 15523
Speaker 1: Who were some of the teachers or people who influenced you at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], when you were working on that [doctorate degree]?
Speaker 2: Well, actually, I was gonna go to Wesley Theological Seminary [Washington, D.C.] because it's in the area.  It was not too far from where I am downtown a lot.  But I started reading more and more about the work of Cain Hope Felder, who wrote, 'Troubling Biblical Waters.'  And I've gone to white schools my whole life, you know, that, mainly--well, the high school was mixed, but colleges were UCLA [University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] UC Berkeley [University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, California], and San Francisco State [University, San Francisco, California].  And I thought, you know, if I'm gonna go--if I'm in an African American church, Metropolitan Baptist Church, I preach to and teach cross-cultural audiences.  But I need to go where the African contribution to theology is not a side course, but it's the central.  And since the Bible originated in Africa--since the people--it's certainly recently proven that the human species originated, you know, somewhere around Ethiopia. That it seemed, it stands to reason, if I'm concerned about things theological, then I should be where people are gonna major in the African contribution to the biblical tradition.  And so reading Dr. Cain Hope Felder's [theologian] work, and this brilliant man who's given his life to this pursuit, I decided that there was no place for me to go except Howard [University School of] Divinity [Washington, D.C.]  And I'm so grateful for that.  There were others.  My systematic theology professor was a brilliant woman, Dr. Kelly Brown Douglass, who wrote, 'The Black Christ' and she wrote about sexuality in the black community.  She's a womanist theologian who writes about, not feminism, which is, we think about as white women and their quest for social justice, but womanist is from Alice Walker's, you know, 'The Color Purple,' the concept of African American women asserting themselves in the world, where much of the theology that's been developed in the African American community through people like James Cone and others, was focused on African American men.  And so the social justice issues were focused on the concerns of African American men and racism.  And so womanist theology is an area that has been opened up recently through a lot of writings.  And so Howard Divinity has been a very defining place for--that furthered my own self-understanding of myself, as both an African person and as a human being.
Story_ID: 15524
Speaker 1: In terms of the dynamics of black women and the black church, traditionally, I guess, up until quite recently, women have been seen as--well, they have traditionally and still are probably the backbone of the church.  They contribute the money, they're there the most.
Speaker 2: That's true.
Speaker 1: The pews are filled with black women.
Speaker 2: True.
Speaker 1: And they cook the food--,
Speaker 2: True.
Speaker 1: --the fried chicken that people are going to eat--,
Speaker 2: There would be no black church (laughs).
Speaker 1: --they sing in the choir--,
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --they do all these things.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: But the minister has traditionally been a black male who is in a position of king of the kingdom--,
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --as described by Ella Baker when she went down South to volunteer for SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference].  She said everybody's a king, not just a Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] but everybody's a king.  When she came to the office, she brought all these skills, organizing skills that none of these men possessed.  And yet, she was asked to answer the phone--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --and type letters. You know, she was saying, I'm surrounded by these--everybody thinks he's a prince or king here.  You know, so this is a relationship, of course, you know, women of the church have been typified as, at least the single women, in a struggle to see who can get the pastor, you know, if he's not married or even if he is.  And so, things are--recently things have changed.  I mean the issues of black women have been brought forward in the church, I guess under the womanist philosophy.
Speaker 2: Well, not, I mean not really, not in the mainstream African American church.  I'm talking--I was telling you about the exciting exposure that I had to womanist theology that dealt with African American women's self-assertion and their search for God at Howard [University School of] Divinity [Washington, D.C.]  That has nothing to do necessarily with changing this very backward culture.  And I call it just what it is.  Anything that diminishes one human being from doing--being the best that God has called them to be, is backward, whether it's white racism or black male, you know, theological misunderstanding.  If Jesus could have women around him, the first, you know, the last people at the cross with Jesus, the first to hear about the resurrection and to announce it, always ministering to Jesus, always in Paul's ministry, despite some of Paul's teaching attributed to him.  People were--the people around Paul also that he depended on, were women.  It is absolutely absurd to preach this gospel of Jesus Christ who as a liberationist and involved women, and to say the only people who can mount the podium and be in the pulpit are men, there is no theological basis for it, period.  And I would defy anybody to tell me where it is.  Where would they find that?  They might find one scripture, but the Bible makes it very clear that you have to compare scripture to scripture.  And that the Bible tradition itself is replete with the contributions of women, women as a judge, Jesus' mother as a woman,  you know, the woman at the well, the evangelist.  I mean there are so many strong women, you know, in the biblical tradition.
Story_ID: 15525
Speaker 1: We were talking about the position of women in the church--,
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and how that's changing.
Speaker 2: Well, in my class at Howard [University School of] Divinity [Washington, D.C.] we were overwhelmingly female.  And I believe in most of the schools today, seminaries are overwhelmingly female.  In the future, the church is going to look around with leadership vacuums and discover that some of the best-trained people, theologically, and as far as preaching skills and ministry skills and counseling skills, skills that the church today desperately needs with people hurting at so many levels, will be female.  So I think the church is gonna be forced to either change or die.
Speaker 1: Do you think--what difference is it going to make to have more females in the ministry?
Speaker 2: I think women bring a certain compassion and a sensitivity to the hurting.  It's just like African Americans, you know, when we enter certain leadership positions, because we've come out of a tradition where there's been some real challenges, sometimes that creates a real strength when African Americans, male or female, enter certain professions, whether it's medicine or law or business or computer science or whatever, we just bring that struggle.  We don't collapse at the first sign of trouble.  We don't just jump out windows if the business goes sour.  We'll try it again, we're used to starting over.  Women bring that commitment to details.  Women are very detailed and are good listeners.  People are hurting today and they don't necessarily want you to solve their problems.  They just want a place to go to be heard sometimes.  I think women are gonna bring an uncommon compassion that comes out of their own rejection in a society that's not prepared for women, that's gonna make a difference in--it's gonna make ministry, ministries of compassion a lot more readily available in churches that are filled with people who have drug and alcohol or problems, problems of spousal abuse, of child abuse and many other issues, the women are gonna enrich these ministries.  Not that the men cannot do those things.  Don't get me wrong.  I have benefited from male leadership, both in the church--my own pastor, Dr. H. Beecher Hicks has been, is still my spiritual mentor.  But I'm saying women bring a compassion consistent, generally, with the kind of struggles that they've come out of that will enrich ministry overall.
Story_ID: 15526
Speaker 1: There's new scholarship now available about the origin of the Bible, the origin of Christianity as well as Islam and every--,
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: --every other religion you can think about.  There's a new analysis being applied to traditional African religion and [Dr.] Maulana Karenga just wrote about five years ago a book on the Ifa--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and the Yoruba--,
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and the moral content of that traditional African religion that has been typified, you know, by people as being the flipside of Christianity, evil, you know, other side of the record, you know--,
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --in movies, you know, you've seen the movies where the voodoo, hoodoo and all that sort of thing--,
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --is the reverse of the loving, Christian, you know, way and all.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: People sacrificing, you know, and the tradition in the black community where African religion is seen as somehow debased and people--we should be lucky that they enslaved us to get us out of there, you know, my father used to say that, you know, and other people.  I've heard people say this, you know, and you, I'm sure you have too.
Speaker 2: Yes, heathen, rescuing the--rescuing the heathens.
Speaker 1: We were dancing around fire and somebody--,
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: -- needed to get us out of that, you know, even if it was through slavery.
Speaker 2: Yeah, these are the people who invented, you know, medicine and mathematics, of course.  We, somehow missed that and that misstatement of culture.
Speaker 1: And then there's the rediscovery of ancient African culture in Kaman and Nubia and other places--,
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --with high levels of civilization, not to mention the medieval Islamic cultures which were-
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --black and African and different from what we've been taught they were in terms of their accomplishments and-
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --so forth; a huge library now being discovered in Timbuktu [Mali]-
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --and Northwestern's [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] gone over there to read thousands of volumes, but how does all this new research affect the Christian message today?  I mean there's even been a discovery of the, you know, gospel of Joseph and how that's different from what we've been taught in terms of Paul.  How does all that affect what you do today?
Speaker 2: I don't think it affects it at all.  I think the centrality of the gospel is that Jesus died for human sin, period, to rescue people from a state of sin; to live liberated lives; to live free; to be redeemed from the past, period.  Now, how--what you build around that in terms of the, you know, the cultural tradition and the like can only enrich our understanding of the interrelatedness of culture and religion.  For example, it's inconceivable that the origins of the Bible could be in Africa, and that the culture of the Bible not be affected and the stories of the Bible not be affected in some way, you know, with that culture.  In other words, there is no pure culture.  When they talk about the people coming out--just take the story of the children of Israel coming out of Egypt, going into the promised land.  If the children of Israel were in Egypt, and Egypt is in Africa, don't you know that the interpretation, the biblical interpretation is going to--and they were there for four hundred years.  It's conceivable that many of the stories were impacted, the biblical stories as we receive in the Bible, right, were impacted by that tradition.  Just as African Americans who've been in this country for, what, three hundred and some years, we can't say we're pure African.  We can't say that we haven't been affected by the flag.  We haven't been affected by American culture, it's inconceivable.  So it's likely that if we develop a religious tradition, it's gonna be affected by everything that we are because we're gonna interpret it from what?  Our social location, from our social tradition?  So I--I think, A, it doesn't affect the centrality of the social gospel, of the gospel of Jesus Christ, the gospel of the Kingdom of God. But, B, it's great to see the richness and breadth, you know, of the biblical tradition that's been affected by African culture.  That's what it says to me.
Speaker 1: Well, is it conceivable--?
Speaker 2: See, that's, that's different from, from this American belief that is so skewed and so distorted that you have white people who were, you know, all--the Bible is filled with white people which is inconceivable, that Jesus, being a Palestinian Jew, would be lily white, okay.  But let's say that, and that somehow white people rescued black people from a state of heathenism.  That a distorted culture that we've all bought, that meant, too many of us have been--we've been bought, we've either bought it or we've been socialized in it.  Now, what's--the uncovering is how ridiculous and how insulting and how asinine that, received, you know, that information has been.  And now the truth is emerging.  Does that affect our understanding of the gospel of the kingdom of God now and in the future?  No, I don't think so.  Does it help us to understand that we as an African people have always been part of God's earth and all that's in it and the tradition and culture of the Bible?  I think it raises the esteem and the role of African people, yes, in a country that's so demeaned and marginalized, the role of every non, you know, white person.  But does that change my relationship to the God who created me and whose called me to a life of righteousness?  No, I don't think so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because I'm still called, no matter, I mean no matter what I know about myself as a valued person whose created in divinity, you know, and in the image of God, yes, that enriches me.  But I'm still called to be loving, to be honest, to be truthful, to be caring, to be consistently ethical, to have integrity, to be committed to, and compassionate to the helpless and hurting.  But am I enriched by knowing that African American people have always been part of the, you know, of the biblical past?  Oh, of course, but am I any less committed and responsible for obeying the word of God?  No, I'm not.  So I'm saying at the core, it doesn't change my responsibility before God.  But it does enhance my own self-understanding and the way I'm able to assert myself in a world that has marginalized my person, the person of people who look like me.
Story_ID: 15527
Speaker 1: In an age where there's a lot of research going on and a lot of new studies emerging, old texts being discovered and Cain Hope Felder's [professor at Howard University School of Divinity] been involved in that process--,
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --what do--would you say the word of God is a fixed word and between two covers or is it a moral position?  Or what is it?
Speaker 2: I would say the word of God is not the totality of the revelation of God.  See, what you're talking about, people are discovering other ways in which God has been revealed.  And it's inconceivable to me that the God who is timeless, who's from eternity, who we can't even fathom, there are no human words to define God.  No matter what we say about God, it's only part of who God is. That we could contextualize and say, "God only fits this faith tradition."  It only fits, you know, these words.  So, it's not conceivable--I guess I agree with you that it's not a fixed thing.  But do I believe the word as I understand it?  Yes.  But are there other ways and are there other texts and are there other manuscripts and is there other research likely to be discovered about God?  Possibly.  I mean just like we didn't know about the Qumran--w [where the Dead Sea Scrolls were discovered] we didn't know about the people who existed, about, right after the time of Jesus, you know, who were part of--and we didn't know that there were other texts like the 'Psalms of David' that were unearthed in some of the caves, you know, in Egypt and other places in 1948.  Could that happen in the year 2005?  Of course.  Would that change the central relationship that I have for God and my faith in God?  What I'm saying to you, my faith in God is not based on Genesis to Revelations or in the sixty-six books in the Christian Bible.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's what I'm saying.
Speaker 1: And that's been, you know, one of the--in black Christianity, at least, and one of the questions you hear old people always ask, they say, "Boy, do you believe in the Bible?"  Or, "Girl, do you believe what's in the Bible?"
Speaker 2: The issue is, do you believe God?  Do you believe in God?  Do you believe--is your faith in the God who created you?  And is it translated in the way you function in the world?  God--you can know the word very well, and I'm concerned about people who use the Bible to beat people up politically.  And they, you know, you've got to be biblically correct and politically correct.  And they hate people.  And they are divisive.  And they're--and they don't deal with their own families.  They don't care about people. They're racist and bigoted.  I'm more concerned about the consistency of a life that reflects the love of God.  Now, 'Genesis' to Revelation is what I understand is the Bible.  That's what I grew up, and I was socialized to believe.  Now, that was canonized as the Bible is, you know, as they say, that's the way it was structured and organized at a certain time and place.  There was a time when the Bible was oral, when it didn't exist before publications, before written documentation.  There was a time when it was--it was a received tradition from one mouth to another.  So the issue is still, what is your relationship to your creator, to the one who created you?
Story_ID: 15528
Speaker 1: Now there's an intense movement amongst extremely conservative types called, 'The Family' [also known as 'Children of God'].  And there was an article about it in 'The New York Times' [newspaper] about two months ago where they have Christian retreats in Virginia, you know, they have a whole community where young men, in government service, go there and they live this intense Christian experience.  And the teachings of Jesus are basically sort of boiled down to fit a business ethos or something.  It's hard to explain.  Have you heard about that or do you have any feelings about that?
Speaker 2: Yes, but again, human beings will--have from the beginning of time attempted to downsize God to fit their particular value system, particular lifestyle.  And that's always gonna happen.  I mean there are people who have the word of God distilled down to ten things that you have to vote for, that if you, if your member of Congress doesn't vote against abortion, for school prayer, against programs for the poor, against affirmative action, for the war, you know and there may be three others that I missed, okay, then that person is biblically incorrect.  That is patently absurd.  And that is the most unbiblical teaching I have ever heard.  I don't mean that God is--that abortion is right or wrong.  I'm saying that there is a whole life perspective that you have to look at with the Bible that is cradle to grave.  And you can't just say one vote against abortion, okay, makes you okay with God, when you hate the poor, when you voted to take money out of the mouths of babies.  So, or you can vote for a candidate who, you know--who is against the poor, but they're for the war which wipes out the poor, you see.  So, or if the person who is for the death penalty, you know, but they're for saving human life, you know, I mean therefore, you know, they're against abortion because they want the baby to be born.  The issue is that, we're talking a God who is for all of life and you have to look at the whole life.  You can't distill the word of God down to five easy lessons or ten things to vote for.  It's the whole life of a person, and it's the consistency.  Am I the same--integrity, the word 'integrity' means--it's from a word, means integer.  It's like a whole number.  It's being consistent.  It's you being the same in the dark as you are in the light.  You're the same in private, when no one sees you, when you are in public.  So what God is looking for is a life of integrity.  So the issue is not just one vote or one issue, but what is your whole life like?  And can you be counted on to be consistent?  Are you consistently caring or attempting to be?  And ethical and moral and do you--are you courageous?  Or do you take risks on the side of Arab Americans who are being discriminated against, and you're a black American, Christian, and you know it's wrong because you have experienced that.  But all of a sudden, you're silent on Arab Americans, not terrorists, but people who pay taxes and are citizens just like you, see.  Being, to me, for God, means being consistently for human beings, no matter what color or background they are.  And it can't be distilled down to like, you know, a little business card.  So I'm saying, the group, could be that it's that group, it's a women's group or it's a political group. There're many of them.  It's people's way, I think, if downsizing God.  Instead of living up to God, they want to downsize God to fit their ethic instead of living up to what God's ethic is.
Story_ID: 15529
Speaker 1: Black people seem to be divided in the South on the latest incident around--involving the Supreme Court of Alabama and the installation of the Ten Commandments in the lobby.  You saw black people out there saying, you know, "Keep the Ten Commandments in the lobby" and, you know, on the side of the judge.  It seemed to be a very, you know, I don't know.  There's a--some black people, you see in this situation being allied with someone that they probably wouldn't have been allied with otherwise--,
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --if it wasn't for religion.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Do you have any thoughts about that?
Speaker 2: Well, I think the issue with the Ten Commandments is that it seems inconsistent to be able to sell condoms in the school, but, you know, take the Ten Commandments out at a time when young people seem to lack a moral compass.  We have a generation now that's not necessarily churched, whether they're white or black or, brown or red or yellow.  And so I think a lot of black people feel that, you know, if you want to take God out of the public square, the feeling is where will the reminder of justice be?  These, I think the sense is that, at least with the presence of the word of God in the public square, in the courthouse that's supposed to be connected to justice, maybe it'll remind justices who have done, you know, discriminated against African Americans, you know, that there is an authority higher than your authority.  Now, the fact that there're allied with someone who might have been, I don't know what this person's total background is, but maybe not supported affirmative action or being against issues that they are concerned, we're always able to coalesce with people like that.  African Americans, particularly, in the South, I'm always impressed with how clever they are, you know, at being able to deal with whites and white racists or whites who may not be consistently committed to their cause.  You know, we're able to select out that we're not just for all Democrats, that there're Democrats who are against black people and for black people.  We are not, you know, across the board against Republicans.  We are able to select out those Republicans who are for our issues.  They found a man who believed what they believed that God is in all of life, and how can you take out this important symbol of the moral order of a people and just toss it out and put everything else in there.
Speaker 1: Would you be in favor of putting religious reminders in the courtroom?
Speaker 2: They're already there.  They were already there.  See, I think that the issue is that--.
Speaker 1: Well, was that right in the beginning?
Speaker 2: I believe that the country, whether we believe it or not, was founded on a set of beliefs written into our constitution, that we have--we've hardly lived up to, but they're nevertheless there, that this is a country of people who believe generally in God, okay.  Imperfect--.
Speaker 1: But there's a difference in the founding fathers, George Washington, Thomas Jefferson and Thomas Paine who was a--I don't know if you'd call him a founding father, but he set the tone.  They were Deists. And they weren't Christians--,
Speaker 2: They weren't Christians--.
Speaker 1: --and they spoke of God in a general sense of creation.
Speaker 2: But Abraham--but Benjamin Franklin was, you know, certainly talked--,
Speaker 1: He was a Deist too.
Speaker 2: --but talked about a country--well, we're not talking about this being a Christian nation as such, but it's a country--.
Speaker 1: But that's what the Supreme Court of Alabama is talking about.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but the issue is, when you talk about founding fathers, that these are people who believed that God had something to do with nations, that God is the founder and creator of the whole world, and that includes nations within them.
Speaker 1: But not God is conceived by Christianity, as such.
Speaker 2: Whether we like it or not, Christianity is a part of our nation.  Now, I'd rather not focus on Christianity.  And you don't hear me talking about Christianity--you haven't heard me talk about Christianity because I've talked more really about Jesus.  See, I think the issue is some people don't understand that Jesus didn't talk about a religion.  He talked about a relationship.  So I'd rather focus on the relationship that makes me one with you than the barrier of a faith tradition that puts me at immediate odds with you. I think we specialize in the institutional religion that separates us.  You're CME [Christian Methodist Episcopal], I'm AME [African Methodist Episcopal], I'm Presbyterian, you know, and you're Unitarian, divides us.  But if I say that I believe that a relationship with God connects us on the planet as humans, then that is more likely to bring you and I together.  That's my philosophy.  So the flag is a symbol, you know, that has one nation under God in it.  I'd rather have one nation under God than one nation under the devil.  I would have--I think the Ten Commandments that reminds us to obey our parents is a good thing at a time when kids are killing their parents.  I'm saying, moral order, I don't care who put it there, is good thing, and that a reminder for a generation that's more committed to, you know, it's the MTV [Music Television] and BET [Black Entertainment Television] generation that is not necessarily committed to any moral order, is--it's important to remind people that they were created by something other than the Gap [clothing stores], that they are--this is not a fast-food generation.  If that defines you, what you wear and what you eat and what you drive, then what makes you a human?  What makes you a person?  And I think the reminder that you--to respect other people's property and to obey your parents or at least to respect your parents, is a, certainly a good thing in a nation that is so divided.  And I believe, I'm absolutely for it.
Story_ID: 15530
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: My concern is leadership.  My concern is leadership led by God, and leadership that has integrity, leadership that's consistent, that is risk taking--that calls a spade a spade.  It says to the black community when it's out of order, when we do something in the African American community like kill one another, that we're just as likely that that leadership would say, that's just as wrong as racial profiling.  That we would be willing to say to African Americans, don't talk about racism when you're spending all your money, you know, and not saving and investing. You have enough money, your six hundred billion dollars or whatever, to build our own colleges, to sustain our own colleges, to build our own institutions, to support the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and the [Congressional] Black Caucus and the Urban League, and organizations like the King--the Martin Luther King Center [for Nonviolent Social Change].  I'm concerned about a leadership that is willing to inspire African Americans to excellence in every area, particularly, our young people.  I'm concerned about a leadership that's willing to cross the generations and spend as much time with young people.  People like Tom Joyner and Tavis Smiley [radio broadcasters] and others. I applaud their leadership where they spend--even [Nation of Islam minister] Louis Farrakhan, with the hip-hop generation, to spend time with our young people and listening to their vision and their pain and their hopes for the future.  I'm concerned about that kind of transcendent leadership, but mostly a leadership that is led by God, that is morally and technically excellent.
Speaker 1: Okay, can you tell us some of the, I guess some--a story, or a couple of stories about your experiences in trying to develop leaders.  And you don't have to name names if you don't want to, but can you tell us some of the more profound stories?
Speaker 2: Well, before I say that, I would say one of the other issues I'm concerned about is reconciliation.  I guess I'm very concerned that there's not a lot of emphasis on racial reconciliation today.  There's a lot of indifference more than hatred, you know, and I'm concerned about leadership that--.
Speaker 1: And reconciling black and white--.
Speaker 2: People.  Blacks and whites, Hispanics, Asians, and even Native Americans that would be--.
Speaker 1: How can that kind of reconciliation or how do you see that taking place?
Speaker 2: Well, I think the tradition of Gandhi, of Mahatma Gandhi, the non-violence tradition of [Dr.] Martin Luther King, Jr., of Archbishop [Desmond] Tutu, of [former South African President] Nelson Mandela, speaks volumes for the power of building bridges with people who may have injured you in the past, and that there's strength in that for, for all people that the nation as a whole is going to be better when we're able to create an environment where white people and black people and brown people and red and yellow people can hear one another's stories and get to know one another as people, not as categories.  That there's not a lot of focus on that today.  There's really the assumption is that as long as we're not having race riots, there's no problem, when, in fact, you and I know that we're as divided, if not more divided.  Our schools are resegregating.  Our housing has never been integrated really, and that we're a nation divided.  We're as divided now as we were in 1968, after Martin Luther King's death, and following the Kerner Commission Report [1968] that we're a nation that is separate, and still unequal.
Speaker 1: Is it easy to get--probably, I would guess, and I know it's pretty much true that it's easier to get black people to come to a table for reconciliation than it is white people?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.
Speaker 1: Well, certain kinds anyway.  I mean liberal whites show up, and they'll apologize for slavery and everything, but the ones that really were a part of it, I mean when do they show up?
Speaker 2: Well, they really don't.  And this is part of the problem.  I think the issue is power, that if white Americans are, you know, they are in charge of the--all the major institutions, all--every major institution in America, whether it's education, business, sports, entertainment, law, medicine, is run largely by whites.
Story_ID: 15531
Speaker 1: I'm very concerned that reconciliation for the most part has meant for African Americans to stop being angry about slavery and to spend time, you know, going to wherever whites are.  It's been translated, you know, as, or either where, as you say, white liberals will come and say, you know, we're sorry for slavery now let's just move ahead.  But the truth of the matter is that the brokenness in the spirit and in the families and the repair work, the psychic damage that's taken place over centuries in African Americans because of slavery, that the residual effects of that is still there.  Not only that, the economic problems are still there, okay.  So that's why I think at some point, when I talk about reconciliation, I automatically have to talk about reparations.  You know, at some point, when you talk about reconciliation.  In the Bible, when it talks about reconciliation, we talk about restitution, that if you steal something from somebody or you break something of somebody's, you have to make them whole.  And that's how you bring people back to wholeness.  The goal of reconciliation is to restore the wholeness to friendship or to a whole time.  When we talk about reconciliation in America, we talk about singing, 'We Are the World' and, you know, holding hands and swaying and nothing has changed in the economic and the social structural injustice in America.  And I think that's the kind of leadership that we need on all sides.  We need white leaders who are willing to follow African American leaders, who are willing to deal with the unequal kind of resources that whites have over African Americans.  It's not because they were smarter.  It's because the system has been set up that way, and that this--underneath all of that is an anger, is an antagonism that keeps us divided, even in the church.  And the church has not played a very healthy role because the church is so segregated.  So I'm saying that this is a continuing problem into the 21st century that, for which new, morally excellent, technically excellent leadership, and hopefully, in my view, will be raised up to address.
Story_ID: 15532
Speaker 1: Off-camera, we were discussing the relationship between Africans from the continent and African Americans.  There's a--that's another source of division, I guess, in the black community, if you want to--if we can conceive of a black community with Africans and African Americans in it.  How do you address that?
Speaker 2: African Americans, unfortunately, were socialized by the same people who invented slavery to see Africans in such a distorted way, as heathens, as people who needed to be rescued, who were barbaric, when just the opposite was true.  I mean we don't have to do a whole history to understand that African people were the originators of so much of what we call civilization and culture--when Europeans were not even thinking about civilization, the originators of art and music and culture and history and medicine and mathematics and the like, in Africa, okay.  So to me it's really a tragedy that African Americans were cut off from the most powerful, rich part of their own tradition by this distorted teaching that also enslaved them, from their enslavers who sought to keep enslaved mentally by giving them distorted pictures of their own heritage.  Therefore, African Americans and African people, for the most part, do not see themselves as even cousins or distant cousins.  We are just basically disconnected.  And we had--the worst of it has been the perpetration of that picture, the barbaric picture of Africans by white Americans, in such cultural depictions as 'Tarzan.'  And we bought and too many of us in this country have bought into and have continued to buy into the kind of barbaric notion of African, that have African Americans to say, "I'm no African."  And that was the reason why calling ourselves African Americans was such a struggle for so many black people.  So I would say that there's a lot of work to be done.  Thank God for people like Randall Robinson [founder of TransAfrica Forum] and the work of TransAfrica and the people like Danny Glover [actor] and the connection to the South African, you know, movement to free South Africans, anti-apartheid movement. People like Archbishop Desmond Tutu and others who tried to bridge that gap.  [Rev.] Leon Sullivan, Andrew Young and many others who continue to try to bridge that gap.  But that gap is still there.
Story_ID: 15533
Speaker 1: When you look back at the things that you've done, and you're still relatively young, you know, we usually interview eighty and ninety year olds--.
Speaker 2: (Laughs)
Speaker 1: We have, you know, but what would you consider at this point as your legacy?
Speaker 2: My legacy is in the young people that I continue to touch and instruct and inspire and attempt to pass on the legacy of leadership, excellence of servant leadership in the spirit of Christ and out of the background of and work and training with [husband] Tom Skinner.  I think, I have always worked with, and I continue to work with young people, including at the high school because I think when you touch the future, you touch all of life.  And through young people, you touch a future that you will--you may not ever see--I may never see that future.  But I am shaping, through my investment at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and Ballou High School [Washington, D.C.] and other places.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is encouraging, this interaction?
Speaker 2: I'm very encouraged by the future, not because of what's happening currently, but because each one of us has the opportunity, each parent, indeed, has the opportunity to shape the future through their own children.  We often, you know, diminish the power of parenthood.  Mothering and fathering are probably the two most important jobs--not probably, are the most important jobs on the planet, that you shape whether the world is gonna be a peaceful or a violent one.  One where there's coexistence or annihilation.  And I've never--I've not given birth to children.  I have two wonderful step-children and many grand-children and god-children, but I have many play-children.  And I have many other young people who are--have always been part of my life in all of my work, everything I do.  In my own--in the ministry that I'm engaged in, involves around me, I hire young people first.  I connect to people, you know, who in my generation, but I'm always looking to tap into the brilliant minds of young people and the energy of young people and the hopefulness of young people who are teachable and who are anxious to make a difference. And that energizes me and that keeps me going.
Story_ID: 15534
Speaker 1: What do you think about the mega-churches that are so popular now?
Speaker 2: Not a lot, not a lot.  You know, I think Jesus would be very much of a failure by the standards of today's churches, so many--you know, really, with the exception of feeding five thousand and four thousand here and there, mostly, he preached to two and three people.  Most of his encounters were with very small groups.  And I'm not against bigness if the church grows, but the idea of lifting up a mega-church as a standard for churches is a mistake because it suggests that ministry to one hurting person is irrelevant, that until you're on television, you're not doing didley.  And that would make Jesus a total failure.  That would make even people--you know, [Dr.] Martin Luther King  [Jr.], we see at the March on Washington [D.C.], but a lot of Martin Luther King's work was with small churches in the South.  Churches that were not, you know, the size of even some of the churches that we see today.  I think it's a big mistake, and I think it--to me, it suggests that we can exploit the people's pain, rather than absorbing it.  And by absorbing it, I think when you're with people, you can reach people.  When the pastor knows the names of all the people and knows the families and have buried and married and counseled people, and they know him or her, then that's a family.  That's an extended family.  And I think that takes up for the kind of mobility that makes people strangers today.  But when the church is you almost have to take a number, you know, you don't even know the people around you because the church is so big.  What would be better, quite frankly, if a church gets over a certain size, to spin off into, you know, sister churches, spin off into, you know, congregations that could still be under the leadership of that, you know, dynamic, top leader.  But I just--I think there's so much obsession with the mega-churches today that is very unhealthy.
Story_ID: 15535
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you would do differently at this point than you've done already?
Speaker 2: I would probably spend maybe more time writing.  I have three books on--in--I would say in the oven, that are on my, in my computer, that I'm working on right now.  And I would spend more time marketing in a positive way, the legacy of [husband] Tom Skinner and that's what I plan to spend the time going forward doing.  But other than that, I'm very excited about the work.  I'm inspired about the work.  I'm happy about the way that God has allowed me, you know, to work and to transcend so many different cultures and so many different kinds of people.  I can be with a black group today and a white group tonight, and an Asian group tomorrow, and an African group, you know, the day after that and feel at, at home in every one, with all of them.
Story_ID: 15536
Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As a reconciler, a bridge builder, someone who was a servant-leader, who helped people succeed.
