Story_ID: 244250
Speaker 1: Good morning (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My name is Regennia Williams and I'm the interviewer for The HistoryMakers.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: The videographer today is Scott Stearns and we have one observer, [HistoryMaker] Mr. Donald White.  I just wanted to state his name for the record.  But I wanted to begin our discussion today by asking if you would please state your name, first, middle, and last, and please spell all three?
Speaker 1: My name is Dolores Rae White.  And it's spelled D-O-L-O-R-E-S, Rae is R-A-E, and White is W-H-I-T-E.
Speaker 2: And [HistoryMaker] Professor [Dolores] White, would you also please state your occupation?
Speaker 1: Well I would say I'm a composer, a pianist, and an educator, those three.
Speaker 2: And also Professor White, would you state the location for the interview today?
Speaker 1: The interview is at Mr. and Mrs. Donald White's residence here on 15681 Wyatt Road and that's East Cleveland, Ohio, 44112.
Speaker 2: And also would you state for the record today's date?
Speaker 1: The date is January 1st, no January 13 (laughter) 2005.
Story_ID: 244251
Speaker 1: And I would also like to ask what we refer to as People magazine-ish type questions, there are about five of these.  And the first one asks, what your favorite color is?
Speaker 2: Oh my, orange I would believe, sort of a rusty orange.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, [HistoryMaker] Professor [Dolores] White, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Oh wow.  Gosh, let's see, hmm.  Well I do like oh, such a variety of food I can't say that I have really a favorite food, gosh, let's see.  I love a lot of soul food for sure, greens (laughter).  I like beans, white beans, red beans, rice, I would say so, they're some of my favorite foods.  I also like Japanese food, (laughter) yeah.  Not, not sushi but I do like teriyaki and (unclear) things like that, chicken teriyaki, you know, beef teriyaki, those kinds of things.
Speaker 1: And, Professor White, do you--
Speaker 2: (Unclear) (simultaneous) a wide range actually.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a, a favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Fall, I would say.  And that's, might seem strange but because of the music season starting in the fall that's basically, you know, why I like it.  Most of the concerts and programs start and it's always very energizing at that time.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Well I've been to Cuba (laughter).  And I guess since it's been restricted in, in the United States I have enjoyed going there, I've been a couple of times and I've enjoyed myself quite a bit.  I have traveled quite a bit.  I have also enjoyed going to Africa.  I've been there several times too.  So, I really enjoyed those.  Although I've been Europe.  And I've never really been to the Far East though, not really Asia, so no.
Speaker 1: And finally for this set of questions, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Boy, gosh, that sort of stumps me (laughter).  Probably you should ask my husband [HistoryMaker Donald White] that one (laughter).  Gosh, I would probably say noncommittal on that (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 244252
Speaker 1: For this section of the interview, I'd like to spend most of the time talking about your early life.  So can you please tell me when and where you were born?
Speaker 2: I was born in Chicago, Illinois on the South Side of Chicago.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That I'm very proud of.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your birthdate with the year?
Speaker 2: That (laughter) I can tell you the month and the date but not the year (laughter).
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: No, I don't usually tell my age because I'm still trying to succeed in the world so (laughter).  I'm, I was born in June though, June 17th (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  And can you tell me about your parents and, and state their names, please?
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Lillian [Marie] Dumas and she's living still in Chicago, Illinois.  And my father's name was Raymond Miller [ph.], and he has, he is not living now at this time.
Speaker 1: Were they both natives of Chicago?
Speaker 2: No, I, my father was born in Atlanta, Georgia and my mother was born in Indiana.  And gosh, Louisville [sic. Evansville, Indiana], I believe.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did your parents ever tell you any stories about how they met and eventually ended up on the South Side of Chicago and decided to raise a family there?
Speaker 2: Well I know more about my mother's story but I think that they were brought to Chicago with their parents to try and make a better living for their family.  And so that my mother was, my mother's, my grandmother [Rosa Barnett] came to Chicago looking for a better life and, and better living possibilities and my father probably came there too with his family.  He came to Chicago in sort of the early 20th century.  And in search of a better life as, as many African Americans came to Chicago as the place that was sort of the migration valley to the South, to Chicago to the North to find better living conditions, find better jobs and that's how they happened to come to Chicago.
Story_ID: 244253
Speaker 1: How did they [White's maternal and paternal families] happen to settle on the South Side [of Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Well that was actually the area that that the, the majority of African Americans were living and still live in Chicago, Illinois.  I would say that my grandfather worked very, very hard in Chicago.  As I know of he was actually doing three jobs to survive but my grandmother did not work, she was a homemaker.  She had two children, one was my mother [Lillian Marie Dumas] and the other was an aunt.  And she insisted on, education was very, very strong with her.  They were very religious, Baptist.  And my grandmother, they were definitely, she was very bent on education of which my mother and my aunt got very fine educations and both taught, they were both teachers but that was not their only interests.  My aunt was definitely interested in acting so that was, I think from, she says from the time she was three she was giving, you know, narrations and talking in church for the longest because that was the central place certainly in the beginning for, for you to be discovered (laughter) in other words by the, by the church audience.  And my mother loved dance so she was very much into that and she used to teach dancing lessons.  But they both went on to college and my mother later, went to college, she got married.  My aunt finished teacher's college in Chicago, Chicago Teachers College [Northeastern Illinois University, Chicago, Illinois] and she also went to Northwestern University [Evanston, Illinois], and from there she went on to New York [New York] and she's been in many, many plays, and she was our spearhead out of Chicago.  In fact, my, basically my mother remained in Chicago but my aunt just, you know, lived in New York for a long, long time, married a producer, off-Broadway producer, and got to see some of the world.  And remained in, in New York, she loved New York, of course, that was the world of theater, so she was very much into that.  But when she was in Chicago and she was teaching, she taught in public school but she did children's theater and she did a lot of, a lot of children's theater.  And she worked with Lorraine Hansberry and was one, actually one of her students and it was just.  It was a wonderful world because she was very much interested in poetry and, and readings and she was in the black theater group in, in Chicago that was very outstanding.  And so the interests in the arts really sort of was from my parents, my mother, and my aunt.
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Professor [Dolores] White would you like to state your aunt's name because we have a close relationship with the public schools in Chicago and maybe some of her former students are teaching in Chicago now and they might remember studying with her?
Speaker 2: Well she's been away for a long, long time.  My aunt is ninety-five years old and her name is Brunetta, Brunetta, and her last name is Bernstein [Brunetta Barnett Bernstein].  But when she taught in Chicago, let me see, I think her name was Brunetta Muzan [ph.] (laughter).  But she lived in New York for about twenty-five years.  She lived in California, she was in plays in, in Los Angeles [California].  And she lived also in Rhode Island (laughter).  She lived a, a while in, in Paris [France] so, she lived quite a few places.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And that's your maternal aunt?
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Your mother's sister?
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did you state the names of your grandparents, your maternal grandparents?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were Robert [E. Barnett] and Rosa Barnett.
Speaker 1: And how about your paternal grandparents?
Speaker 2: You know, I never knew my grandfather on my father's [Raymond Miller (ph.)] side, and gosh, I would have had to look up my, my father's mother's name (unclear) but I did definitely know her.  I can't think of it, is Miller was the last name, I don't remember her, her first name and that's not good (laughter).
Speaker 1: Professor White, do you have sisters and brothers?
Speaker 2: No, I'm the only child.
Story_ID: 244254
Speaker 1: Can you share with us some, some thoughts of your earliest memories of growing up on the South Side of Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Well it was, it was the only world that I knew at that time and like I says we all are, are young and it was very exciting really.  I came from, we were not wealthy by any means but I wouldn't say that we were poor, so it's a middle-class neighborhood or at least middle-class thinking basically certainly aiming, certainly desiring to, to the middle class sort of standards and living.  I was given dance lessons.  I loved ballet lessons and also piano lessons.  But I was from very young child I was very interested in classical music.  I used to, my mother [Lillian Marie Dumas] worked, my parents were divorced early, when I was three, so I spent a lot of time with my grandmother [Rosa Barnett].  And she was, as I said before, she was very interested in education, so there and she also encouraged me in the dancing and the music lessons and piano.  So I, I feel that I had a very rich and certainly enriching background, actually.  And encouragement to go forth and to do, certainly to achieve in the arts.  And that was my interest from the very beginning 'cause I used to listen with my grandparents in the bed to symphony hour (laughter).  And my mother used to wonder why did you get an interest in this music?  And actually it was early in the mornings we used to listen to symphony hour, it was on the radio, this was even probably before, you know, too, too much significance in television.  So listened a lot to, to radio, and I would always turn to the classical stations.  And my mother was a (unclear), modern, you know, and she loved to dance and basically it was to popular music at the time or jazz and things like that, and I was more interested in the classics.  And it was on my own really because I think that I heard, well I know, I heard a lot of the music in, in, in the dancing lessons and the ballet lessons because they use a lot of [Frederic] Chopin, they, they used a lot of Chemin [Robert Schumann] and they used a lot of the pieces, there was always a pianist playing for it.  So that was also my inspiration, something I heard a lot of.
Story_ID: 244255
Speaker 1: So you were exposed to different styles of music and then focused on the classical (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I did, I, yeah, I, it seemed that that was more of my interest.  I, I think, you know, looking back in that particular period, African Americans, especially middle-class African Americans had a tendency to want to certainly achieve in, in whatever field that that they attempted to go in or whatever field that they had skills in or had gained skills in and so they were seeking for what they considered or what they were told was the, the apex or the best so in other words.  And when you went to college and if you went to, if you went to study music in a college there was no such thing as studying jazz at that particular time in pop music.  So we've really done, you know, as far as our culture is concerned and, of course, American culture is concerned, just done an about face, I mean, jazz was a no-no in, in music colleges.  In some it's still that but basically it wasn't, it was sort of seen as a, pop, you know, music that word, that word was not used at that particular time when I was coming up, but it was used, it was, it was not for you academically.  And so that you sort of reached and you sort of reached and you went into, to studying what was really supposed to be the, the better things in life so basically so that's why I went mainly into the classics.
Speaker 1: Can you remember the names of any of the, the teachers, either the ballet teachers or the piano teachers?
Speaker 2: Well I remember that it was the Hessner Studio [ph.] and I believe she was either Russian teacher and this was in a big gym.  The Rosenwald [Apartments; Michigan Boulevard Garden Apartments] in Chicago [Illinois] at that particular time which is an area of 47th [Street] and Michigan [Avenue], was a big center for middle-class professional people.  They lived there and they, I used to take piano lessons there and because a lot of professional people lived there.  It was a, sort of an elite place to live and my aunt [Brunetta Barnett Bernstein] lived there when she married.  And it provided a lot of different activities and as well as social activities but also provided a lot in the arts because the, in the center of 47th, also 47th and, and was the, the area of where they had the Regal Theater [Chicago, Illinois] where a lot of jazz artists came and performers came like Billy Eckstine and, of course, many of the jazz artists.  You know, with, and I used to love to go to the theater when I got to be a, a teenager.  You could go to the theater at that time and, and you could, you would see a picture and a stage show and that was really quite exciting.  And then on 50th [Street] and South Park [South Parkway; Martin Luther King Jr. Drive], it was called, was the drama, a big drama theater for, for a lot of African American, well would-bes or (laughter) really very, very fine training for, for African American actors, so.
Speaker 1: But we hear so much about the, the Chicago [Black] Renaissance of the--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s] and [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham.
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I was wondering as an aspiring dance when, when you were studying was there still much talk of her influence?
Speaker 2: Well, oh yeah, definitely.  My aunt knew her personally, very, very well.  And then my mother [Lillian Marie Dumas] wanted to study with her, I, I don't think she did but we knew her.  Yeah, my aunt was a friend of hers and actually she hasn't, you know, she hasn't talked to her for a while but definitely she was known in the family.  I knew Frank Neal who was a fine dancer in, in New York [New York] that went from Chicago to New York.  And so my aunt was very much into the art circle there in literature and theater and in dance.  So I, I grew up in, in somewhat that, that climate in Chicago in the '40s [1940s], '50s [1950s].
Story_ID: 244256
Speaker 1: Are your piano and dance lessons starting before school or are you doing all those things at the same time that you're in elementary school?
Speaker 2: Well I was doing, yeah, I was doing dance and piano.  Well I, well my, my grandmother [Rosa Barnett] played the piano, she played church hymns and things and certainly we had a piano in the house.  And, and, you know, the piano has a history in this country anyway, you know, the pretense to being middle class or pretense to being upper class if you, if you have a piano in the house that gives you some (laughter) status.  And my grandfather [Robert E. Barnett] was a big trustee at, at the church and he also had a paper called, he published a paper called Our Churches [ph.] in Chicago [Illinois].  So we were quite an active family, you know.  They lived right next door to Joe Louis' trainer, black, [Jack] Blackburn, I think, at one time, yeah, so.  (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you remember the name of the church that was so--
Speaker 2: It was Greater Bethesda [Missionary Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Greater Bethesda Baptist Church, you know, which is still there.  It's on 53rd [Street] and Michigan [Avenue], um-hm.
Speaker 1: And for your formal education, at least the elementary school years, were you pretty much in the same school and if so what's the name of that school?
Speaker 2: I went to Willard Elementary School [Frances Willard School, Chicago, Illinois] which was like, gosh, I know it was on Forest [ph.], Forestville or something like that [49th Street and St. Lawrence Avenue].  I was about, you know, walk to school in general in those days, you know, (laughter) it wasn't terribly far.  And so I did go there.  I started off though, my mother [Lillian Marie Dumas] started me in nursery school and that was some, and then I went the first two years in Catholic school, St. Anselm [School, Chicago, Illinois] but my grandfather had a fit and he didn't want (laughter) his granddaughter in a Catholic school at all, he was very Baptist so he didn't like that, and so I was changed after two years.  And it was a little ways so my mother gave in and (laughter) she said okay, she can go to.  So I went to elementary to Willard Elementary School.  And then I went to Lindblom [Robert Lindblom Technical High School; Lindblom Math & Science Academy, Chicago, Illinois] and that was way out of the neighborhood, way on the West Side and supposed to have been a very, very good school but and I was in the DuSable [High School, Chicago, Illinois] area but my parents decided that, didn't wanna send me there, so I was allowed to go to Lindblom Technical School but actually it's technical now but it was just called Lindblom High School.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it still exists, (laughter) it's still there.
Story_ID: 244257
Speaker 1: It's always been a very good school.  But there were very, very few, I think when I was there it was about fifty blacks at that particular time and I lived out of the neighborhood so and there were, there were, there were programs that you could not participate in, blacks at Lindblom but Chicago (laughter).  Chicago is a very interesting city and has a very interesting race history.
Speaker 2: Was that official school policy or was it just understood?
Speaker 1: Well, well things like the choir and that blacks could not participate in.  And I believe on certain, there were certain clubs within, in the school [Robert Lindblom Technical High School; Linblom Math & Science Academy, Chicago, Illinois] that that had certain days that they would wear uniforms and certain dress that you couldn't participate in but, but some, you know, I was in the orchestra I wasn't interested in the choir at all.  I played the cello that was actually where I started playing cello and how I really got interested in cello playing.  And I was just wonderfully amazed when I met my husband [HistoryMaker Donald White], (laughter) yeah, 'cause you didn't, didn't find too many.  But we also had a string orchestra at my church at Greater Bethesda [Missionary Baptist] Church [Chicago, Illinois].  And most people joined the choir, you know, at church and I was in the string orchestra from I would say probably thirteen or so on.  And I played cello and studied cello, actually minored in it, you know, at Oberlin [Conservatory of Music, Oberlin, Ohio].
Speaker 2: Okay.  And from either elementary school [Frances Willard School, Chicago, Illinois], middle school, or high school days--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --were there any teachers in the schools who were especially supportive of your interests in music and dance or, or just teachers that you remember--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --for various reasons?
Speaker 1: Well, you know, I always remember, well in, not really in connection with music in elementary since my aunt [Brunetta Barnett Berstein] was a teacher, of course, she knew certain teachers so I remember a Mrs. Lemon [ph.] who I believe was a science teacher.  That was in elementary but, of course, in, in high school my, my love was the orchestra and I remember his name, his name was Mr. Lingbe [ph.].  And we'd have orchestra concerts and I got a chance to read some string quartets (laughter) and it was just wonderful, wonderful to be in the orchestra, I loved that.  As far as academics, I can't say any particular teacher stuck out.  But I think that many times in my teaching career when I ask students, you know, some of the things that they look back in high school and generally if they were in the choir or the orchestra they say, oh those were just great times for me.  And that's why I think music is so very important for children to be exposed to it and to participate in different, you know, organizations within the school.  If it's a theater group or if it's, you know, if it's the choir or whatever, I mean many schools have many choirs now and which is great and orchestra and band or combos and whatever.  It makes great, you know it, it really helps you to be balanced and, and helps you to, to get a better understanding of history and just of the world in general with people and things, getting along, being able to, to, you know, associate with all kinds of people and, and shaping your life, so it's really nice, great.
Story_ID: 244258
Speaker 1: It's fascinating to young people to see stage shows and, you know, to see a big band up there playing.  And, you know, this was certainly with Lena Horne and she would come and it would be the Bud Billiken's [Parade and] Picnic that was the big event, you know, in the summer in Chicago [Illinois].  And you would go out and you'd see all these, Dorothy Dandridge and Lena Horne and all these people, all beautiful.  And, and then going and seeing like Dizzy Gillespie and all these people and that would come, Miles [Davis] would come to the Regal Theater [Chicago, Illinois], and you can be entertained very cheaply, you know.  But I don't know, there was tendency I think to downgrade, you know, these, these musicians and, and, you know, just jazz in general or the blues in general.  I mean it took a long time for jazz to get a standing and it's taken a long time for the blues to get a standing.  And so that I would, you know, say the, the basic ideas of, of and the basic lifestyles of middle-class black in, in say the '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s] were, you know, to, to go into classical music definitely and to, to sort of downgrade their own music.  And, and certainly church was a very, I mean not downgrading church because that was essential, I mean that was just and it's always been a very essential part of the black family.
Story_ID: 244259
Speaker 1: We would take our grandfather [Robert E. Barnett], who didn't drive all the time, my, we had to pick him up every day from, he worked down at the Illinois Central [Railroad] where he was sweeping, you know, floors down at the Illinois Central Railroad and he, he would wash windows downtown in the morning and then he would, we would pick him up and take him down to Illinois Central.  So, you know, I really didn't know what he was doing at first.  You know, I mean so you didn't have the understanding of, of the difficulties or the, the meaning of some of the jobs.  But anyway he, he was really sort of custodian actually down there but, you know, in those days if you worked at a railroad (laughter) center or you did certain things of, that was upgrading a little, us a little bit in the black community.  But and we would always pick him up so that that was sort of a regiment in, with my grandmother [Rosa Barnett] and I.  Yeah, 'cause my mother [Lillian Marie Dumas] was working and she was not teaching at that time, she was working like insurance places.  And she went back to school when I went back to college, when I got in college she went back to school because she, she started, she started Wilberforce [University, Wilberforce, Ohio] actually and then she was only there for a short time and she got married, she, she when she wanted to marry my father [Raymond Miller (ph.)], so that was that, you know.  And my grandparents were very, very upset about it, (laughter) you know.  But anyway, but she did go back to school and I give her tremendous credit.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Then she started teaching and she taught for a long time in the public schools in Chicago [Illinois].
Story_ID: 244260
Speaker 1: Well, [HistoryMaker] Professor [Dolores] White, we have a saying here in Cleveland [Ohio]--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --that the city is our classroom and it seems the same was true for you in Chicago [Illinois]--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --with the Regal Theater [Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and the [Greater Bethesda Missionary] Baptist Church [Chicago, Illinois] and--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and all the other wonderful things you described.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was really.  (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But I'm wondering with all of those various and wonderfully diversified influences, how you decide as a high school student [at Robert Lindblom Technical High School; Lindblom Math & Science Academy, Chicago, Illinois], student, that a career in music a conservatory trained musician that that was really what you wanted to do?
Speaker 2: Always.  I had no doubts ever, never that I, from very young, really very young.  I was an only child and in many ways, as I said, my mother [Lillian Marie Dumas] worked and so that my routine was pretty much with my grandmother [Rosa Barnett].  And the routine, as I said, was picking up, you know, him [White's maternal grandfather, Robert E. Barnett], but I always knew, picking up him from these different jobs and my grandmother would do that but then there was also the regiment of my practicing because I liked it, I mean really did.  She sat at the piano and many times you tend to wanna do some of the things that your, your parents do.  And I saw her, you know, playing and, and then I, as I said, I listened to programs.  I always knew from, from very early that I wanted to go into music when I knew that that was a possible career.  I always wanted to and I used to hear sometimes even [George] Gershwin music and I would love to hear piano playing and I said, you know, basically that was what I wanted to do.  And then, of course, you know, I performed in church.  My grandmother would go through, you know, she was the head of this and she would present a recital for my granddaughter (laughter).  And so wherever you succeed, you know, and you get approval, that's generally where you feel as though that that's the direction you really wanna go in and that's what I love.  And I love the cello and I loved being in the orchestra from high school, it was great.  I loved the, the students that I work with, and it just opened up a new world.  And definitely from elementary school [at Frances Willard School, Chicago, Illinois] I think I probably played on the, on the graduation program and I did so and also in, in high school.  So, I always knew I wanted to be in music.
Speaker 1: Well how old were you when you first started taking piano lessons?  If you're that focused--
Speaker 2: Probably about six or so (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) yeah, yeah, (unclear) yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: So if you're convinced even before you get out of elementary school--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --that you want to be a musician, were you convinced by high school that you wanted to come to Ohio and study music or when did that decision--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yes, actually when I went to high School, I, I, you know, it's a question of realizing that this, this particular field is open to you and where your talents are and many times your, your teachers direct you too, I mean have sort of a say so in that, and, and certainly will encourage you to go into definitely and, and see to it that you do go into that area.  I was always in recitals, lots of recitals in Chicago [Illinois] and they'd have recitals maybe downtown at the [W.W.] Kimball [Company] building or at the American Conservatory [of Music, Chicago, Illinois] and things like that.  So that was my whole world.  I mean like, you know, recitals and things.  We had recitals with ballet I mean, you know, they had like one huge big program every, every year and then maybe a couple.  So, I, you know, definitely was introduced to it really early, so, you know, that was, that was my, that was my liking, that was sort of my abilities and skills and I liked the world.  And telling me basically the arts were in, in our world because we knew artists.  And as I said, my aunt [Brunetta Barnett Berstein], you know, she knew [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham, she knew, God I got, [HistoryMaker] Margaret [Burroughs] the artist that started the African American museum [DuSable Museum of African American History, Chicago, Illinois], Margaret Burroughs, yeah, she knew her.  And we knew Horace [R.] Cayton [Jr.], who was a writer.  We just, you know, and, Frank Neal lived across the street and was a dancer and an artist, so, so we had a community that was very active and very fine.
Story_ID: 244261
Speaker 1: So I'm sure there were folks in that circle then who were aware of Oberlin College [Oberlin Conservatory of Music] here in [Oberlin] Ohio and it's--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I heard of.
Speaker 1: --it's history of, of training outstanding--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --African American musicians and welcoming women and minorities from the 19th century forward.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I wanted to go to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did they steer you here?
Speaker 2: Oberlin, I wanted to go to Oberlin.  I don't really know, I guess maybe I was taking also in my high school years [at Robert Lindblom Technical High School; Lindblom Math & Science Academy, Chicago, Illinois] I was taking at the American Conservatory [of Music, Chicago, Illinois] and I think the teacher probably encouraged me but at, my mother [Lillian Marie Dumas] wanted me to have the experience 'cause she had gone to Wilberforce [University, Wilberforce, Ohio], she wanted me to have the experience of an Afro, of a black college and so I went to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] for two years actually.  And so basically because of her, that my mother insisted and she was pretty strong about these things (laughter).  So I went to Howard University of which I've never really regretted.  I never was a, a social person.  The Chicago [Illinois] society is a strange phenomenon.  But anyway, (laughter) I was never really interested in that too much.  So more, really more interested in the arts, in practicing because that had been what I did.  And when you practice you're by yourself an awful lot and I was an only child so I pretty much, you know, think that's been my life pretty much.  And but I'm very glad that I went to Howard.  And I, I mean Cecil Cohen had gone to Oberlin and he went along with that.  And there was the, Vaughan Jones I think he was a violinist.  I was in the orchestra there and he, you know, encouraged that to, so.  Yeah, I think he had gone to Oberlin too so.  You know, the, the, I still got this encouragement from really wanting to go.  I didn't find very many people to go to concerts with and it's just so social, yeah.
Speaker 1: Is that in [Washington] D.C.?
Speaker 2: (Nodding).
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: And I was in the music school then, although you had to take, you know, certain academic courses and everything.  Actually, I made Delta [Sigma Theta Sorority] there but it was through my mother.  I was with Cecil Cohen (laughter) she just insisted 'cause I wasn't getting done, but she insisted so.  And, you know, I, I'm really very glad that she did.  Being the only child, you know, I, she put all of her energies into things that she really wanted me to do and she thought would be beneficial to me.  And it's, it's really proven very fine.  I mean, I, I loved the, the campus and, and mainly was fascinated by the, by the sororities and fraternities.  Mainly the singing of the, the Omegas [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity] and the Alphas [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity] and things and coming to the dorms and huge chorus of guys, you know, coming to serenade and, and to just, oh, it was just, it was great.  It was really good to, to experience that.  But at that time Washington [D.C.] was so prejudiced, quite prejudiced downtown, couldn't go downtown and go to the show (laughter) and things like that.  So, so pretty much stayed on the campuses.
Speaker 1: Well you described, in spite of the racism a very exciting life it seems to me--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah it was.
Speaker 1: --in that campus community at least Howard University in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 2: Well yeah--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 2: --it was, it was, it was a thrilling time.  The Howard Players I think had, had just come back from Europe and it was, it was really quite exciting.  And the music school was quite active, it was small and at that particular time.  But I was very energetic and I, I really look back with, with wonders, (laughter) a great experience for me.
Story_ID: 244262
Speaker 1: Well I'm wondering did you come home over breaks--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the, the spring break and the--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --the summer breaks so you were back in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was back in Chicago.
Speaker 1: And holidays?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, and, okay.  Can you tell me what holidays were like--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --for your family in Chicago?
Speaker 2: Well I mean we had just the traditional holidays being in, being in, in, my aunt [Brunetta Barnett Berstein] being in theater, being in, she used to give readings at the library there on 46th Street or something and Michigan [Avenue].  She used to read a lot of Paul Laurence Dunbar, his poems and things.  And she was, she was very active, she used to give plays and I was in one of them, 'Popo and Fifina' Fifina (laughter) by, by Langston Hughes [and Arna Bontemps].  And so her world was really exciting.  And then my mother's [Lillian Marie Dumas] world was exciting too 'cause mother liked to dance, I mean she, she didn't like ballet but she, (laughter) and she just was more into sort of the, the modern and, and then she just loved to go to dances.  So it was, and she belonged to clubs and the [Original] 40 Club [Chicago, Illinois].  And at Christmastime, oh God, there were just loads of parties and things to go to and I had to go because she was like any, (laughter) and it was quite, quite interesting.  Thrilling on the, it was middle class, you know, and we had balls and things like that and coming out balls and (laughter) all those kinds of things.  And looking back on it, um-hm, it was really a wonderful experience.
Story_ID: 244263
Speaker 1: Now did you say your mother [Lillian Marie Dumas] was also a member of Delta Sigma, Delta Sigma Theta Sorority or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, she's not.  No, she's not.
Speaker 1: Oh, but she wanted you to pledge?
Speaker 2: She wanted, yeah, she, she didn't stay at Wilberforce [University, Wilberforce, Ohio] long enough to, you know, become a, when she went there she, she just really, she said that's the kind of world I wanna get exposure to, you know, and this kind of thing.  And then she divorced my husband, I mean my father [Raymond Miller (ph.)], my father at three and she married an artist, Cornelius [W.] Johnson and he was a commercial artist and also he did murals and everything.  So I came up in a very artistic world (unclear).  He used to work for the [Chicago] Defender, yeah.
Speaker 1: Chicago Defender newspaper?
Speaker 2: (Nodding).
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Yeah, he was the artist on staff.  And, and then he used to teach at Englewood High School [Chicago, Illinois].  I think he was the first black teacher there or, or art teacher, I mean, first black art teacher there.  And so we were, it was, it was an exciting time for us.  So I, I would say that I had a really enriching experience.  He came from Minnesota, actually Cornelius Johnson and he was given an art, a scholarship to the Chicago Institute [Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], or Chicago Museum of Art [sic. Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] because they didn't want him in Minnesota, a black person to be, to enter the art school in Minnesota.  So they gave him money to (laughter) to come to Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: You mean Minnesota?
Speaker 2: (Nodding).
Speaker 1: Gave him money?
Speaker 2: That's right, yeah.
Speaker 1: To go to an out of state institution?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well that's what they do, you know, in the South and everything so they did that rather than integrate.  And so that's how he happened to be in Chicago.  And his sister married a big black judge in New York, I can't think of his name now but anyway.  So our world was very middle class although I didn't really have the middle class social mentality because it was very bias actually, color bias, yeah, particularly.
Speaker 1: You mean within the race?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, there was a lot of colored bias in Chicago, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Society.
Speaker 1: And for, for folks who might view this interview, this videotape and, and not understand what you mean about color prejudice within the African American community could you explain that (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well basically it, it's preference for, you know, light skinned African Americans in preference to darker skinned African Americans, regardless, well, especially for the women more so, yeah.  And then for professional people it's like a class, it's like a class discrimination in a sense.
Story_ID: 244264
Speaker 1: As you were growing up, were both your father [Raymond Miller (ph.)] and stepfather [Cornelius W. Johnson] a part of your school days or your growing up years on the South Side of Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You were in touch with your father even after the divorce (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All the time.
Speaker 1: Oh, good.
Speaker 2: Yeah, all the time.  Yeah, I always see, he would always, came by, I always knew, you know, where he was.  My father was a twin, fraternal twin.  And my father was always in business of a kind, he had cabs, he had taxi cabs, and he ran the business.  And then he got a bowling alley at one time so, you know, that was the place to go.  And then he, gas station.  He was always, I mean, he was a policeman, so he a lot of different careers.  And he died in '75 [1975].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So were there other aunts and uncles, you said your father had a twin (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And then, yeah, uh-huh.  Well, pretty much like his twin was in the businesses with him.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah.
Speaker 1: And twin brother?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  They (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous0 Your uncle's name was?
Speaker 2: Hmm, and Waymond [ph.].  And Raymond [ph.] and Waymond.  (Laughter) And we called him Boots [ph.] (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And one interesting thing though, was Waymond had, I was the only child that my father had and Waymond had actually four children and, I believe it was his second wife, I'm not sure whether the second or first wife, but anyway I had a first, I had three first cousins and this was very good for me because I was the only child and I always loved to play with them, that was very close and it was my first cousins.  But up until twelve I was able to play with them and then they just disappeared and they just completely disappeared off the face of the earth.  I went down one time to their house and, or to their apartment and there was nothing, it was empty (laughter).  And the, the mother of, or they had run away with [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones' father [Quincy Delight Jones, Sr.] (laughter).  I mean this is crazy really, you know, I don't, I don't know whether, Quincy has a book out, of course, and he mentions Elvera [Jones] and that was her name, my first cousin's [sic. aunt] at the time.  And I mean, it was very interesting because I didn't see them for about ten years or more and then I learned they were living in Seattle, Washington and that's where he had taken them, Quincy Jones' father had taken them.  So my first cousin came up, I guess, she was like in a teenager with Quincy Jones and, and his brothers and things.  And I didn't know any of this until for about ten years or fifteen years later (laughter).
Story_ID: 244265
Speaker 1: We started to talk about your postsecondary education, the great experiences you had on the campus of Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. But I'd like to ask now about that transfer to Oberlin College [Oberlin Conservatory of Music, Oberlin, Ohio] when you decided that was what you wanted to do and talk also about your experiences here in Ohio in the conservatory.
Speaker 2: Well I think that, you know, when you're a performer that, and when you've gone into music and most people go into music with the idea of being a performer and not so much of being like a music educator (laughter) you are but I mean most of the time you, you want, especially if you started really early, you wanna be a performer and you wanna be a concert artist, you know, these kinds of things.  And I, as I said I wanted to go to Oberlin from high school [Robert Lindblom Technical High School; Lindblom Math & Science Academy, Chicago, Illinois] and, you know, my mother [Lillian Marie Dumas] said, no, try Howard, you know, go there for the experience and so I did.  But I always wanted to go to Oberlin so then I did go there which is a completely different world.  I mean Oberlin is a campus that is separated, a very small city.  The campus at that particular time the students on Oberlin's campus was larger than certainly the community in Oberlin, so the basic focus was there.  And it was just a completely different environment in everything, of course.  And there were, the majority of the students are not black, I mean they're white.  Although at that particular time we were given basically all black roommates unless you came with an idea but generally I mean with, I mean for a roommate or so, but generally black students were given black roommates at that particular time and, you know, it certainly stopped after a while.  When I went, first went to Oberlin, of course, my father [Raymond Miller (ph.)] and my mother both took me and we could not find a place on the road to stop, you know, motels, and they would say well they were vacant but when we got there it was not, so we had to come all the way to Cleveland [Ohio] to spend a night and we stayed down on 55th Street in a hotel and, you know.  And, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was it a black (unclear)--
Speaker 2: --you know, Oberlin makes, makes wonderful climbs and they did and it's, it's a wonderful college, it's a fantastic.  It was, it was a great training and everything but, you know, black people did sit in back of the room and things in Oberlin College and various things like that, so.
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Speaker 2: But it was.
Speaker 1: I do wanna, to focus on Oberlin but you said you stayed at a, a hotel on East 55th in Cleveland?
Speaker 2: Yeah I think, I've forgotten the name of it, you know--
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  (Simultaneous) Majestic.
Speaker 2: Was it the Majestic Hotel [Cleveland, Ohio]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, I think so (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, this is a pretty special place in black history in Cleveland--
Speaker 1: At that time, yeah.
Speaker 2: --so I just wondered.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It was, you know, we did, we stayed there, um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And so--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) now are you suggesting, perhaps, that Oberlin (laughter) may not deserve all the credit that it gets for being a liberal community in regard to race relations?
Speaker 1: No, I'm, I'm really not--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --I'm just saying that there are things that remain unspoken--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --to a certain extent that, you know, that I, that, that you find that were a little inconsistent with, with the, the marvelous credits (laughter) that's given that's all--
Story_ID: 244266
Speaker 1: But I am still saying that's a very fine college [Oberlin College, Oberlin, Ohio], I mean an excellent academic college and you get good training there because you got a tremendous student body that are well equipped and the challenges are fantastic.  And so that, that was, you know, what I wanted.  I, at the time I wanted to really be serious and concentrate.  I didn't really want any social life.  And, and so, you, you really do get that.  I, I had a wonderful roommate from, Dotty Prince [ph.] and she was an English major, she was black and she was from South Carolina in fact, and so we just had a great time.  She was wonderful to me.  And but I was strictly in the conservatory and, you know, you practiced most of the time and that was practically all my life, and that's really what I wanted.  And I had time, difficulty in Washington [D.C.] with, with that.  Not so much, not, there were just a lot of things going on and certainly there were a lot of things going on in Oberlin but the social life was so dominant in, in, you know, Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] that you couldn't find anyone to go to concerts with (laughter).  I mean, downtown Washington, I wanted to go to the symphony and things like that, I, I couldn't find any.  But I was in the orchestra, you know, and, and the, the, the college orchestra which was good.  But I, I really wanted to, to, to concentrate more, you know, on music and I felt that that probably I could be challenged and more.  But I really enjoyed Howard and the music school, they had marvelous recital series, their artist series, which was great and I liked my teachers very much so.  I can say, I, I got a good teacher at Oberlin [College; Oberlin Conservatory of Music, Oberlin, Ohio].  He was very encouraging too.  And, and you do definitely need these things you, you definitely need somebody that's supportive and, and encouraging and understands your skills and to work with.  And I was lucky both places to get that at Oberlin and Howard.  And, and understanding and things like that.  But you, you know, a lot more challenging as far as students, more students that were in music, I'm saying, not more students but more students in, in music and serious really, you know, very serious.  That, I mean we had some good students at, at Howard music department but certainly more at, at Oberlin.
Speaker 2: You know, in, in teaching history I find, and maybe that's a bias because I'm a native of the state really fine musicians who have been trained at Oberlin. I'm thinking R. Nathaniel Dett [Robert Nathaniel Dett], first and foremost--
Speaker 1: Um-hm, that's right.
Speaker 2: --early on and then [HistoryMaker H.] Leslie Adams--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --who's a native Clevelander--
Speaker 1: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 2: --you.  So is that just a Cleveland [Ohio] bias, is that why I'm sensitive to that, or is that true in [United States of] America that there are some great musicians--
Speaker 1: That have come out of Oberlin.
Speaker 2: --who've come out of Oberlin, African American (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, well I had some contact, you know--
Speaker 2: (Unclear) African American musicians.
Speaker 1: --had some contract.  Oh yeah, there, there was, yeah there were, there were, there, there's been an, an awful lot of African American gospel musicians that have come out, that have either, that were there at Oberlin, maybe they didn't finish, but they also they went to Oberlin, so.  Yeah, it's a good school in training, music wise, the conservatories definitely have that reputation.  And so everybody, you know, when you have a reputation, everybody wants to really go to that particular school.  And so yeah, a lot of African American people, you know, musicians will come out of there.  And with a, with a lot of good training 'cause there's no, you know, you don't fool around (laughter).  But yeah, you basically, mostly you go there with the intent to be a serious musician, to come out, to be, you know, you wanna either be in the top of your field or so, and so you feel with this behind me I can.
Story_ID: 244267
Speaker 1: Can you, you tell me about your, your senior year, was there a special senior recital?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you always have to have a recital and a junior recital and you have to, to give two recitals, yeah.  I mean, depending on your major, you know, like in if, if an instrument is your major then you give a senior recital and, and a junior recital, one being more extensive than the other.  And so generally when you finish, you know, and you've got this from this very elite so called, you know, basically as far as music is concerned, conservatory then you feel as though, well gosh, as a tremendous sense of accomplishment and so you feel here I'm ready for the world and I can be hired and.  Generally, you know, people will start thinking about jobs at that particular time when you've, when you've finished.  And there was, Oberlin [College; Oberlin Conservatory of Music, Oberlin, Ohio] does have, you know, a career office and things and I was, I could have gone to I think Southern University [and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].
Story_ID: 244268
Speaker 1: But I wanted to go to New York [New York] (laughter).  And I didn't wanna teach right away; I wanted to perform or I wanted to continue my education or I just wanted to be in that whole environment.  My aunt [Brunetta Barnett Bernstein] lived in New York at that time and she lived in the village [Greenwich Village, New York, New York] and it just seemed like the perfect world again, so that's where I wanted to go.  I managed to get to the Columbia Teachers College [Teachers College, Columbia University, New York, New York] and I was also taking from a, a teacher, (unclear) who taught it [The] Julliard [School, New York, New York].  So it, I was, and I had met [HistoryMaker] Donald [White] when I finished, when I finished Oberlin [College; Oberlin Conservatory of Music, Oberlin, Ohio], you know, because we were on a talent scout show together (laughter) in Chicago [Illinois].  And actually the talent scout, was it at DuSable [High School, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Yep.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It was in DuSable High School.  And it was during the summer and it was, anyway, (unclear) I, well it was, it was just very interesting.  We did not win (laughter) neither one of us won, it was a singer that won, of course, many a singers will, with all the thrills and, and the costumes and everything they usually are the winners.  But, but anyway I did meet him and that started a really wonderful relationship.  And I was, so I had said I wanted to meet an African American that played a string instrument (unclear) and especially if they played cello, and here this was and I said, ah this is incredible.  That, that's just the way I thought and I thought music all the time and that was just my world.  And so it, we started the relationship.  And actually I, we, I met him in the year before I graduated and we graduated and he went to New York also so that was also (laughter) another invitation (unclear).  And, and, what, but when I went to, he was in New York first and then when I went to New York he, he got a position in, in Hartford, Connecticut so that was far (laughter).  So (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So all of this is happening mid-1950s?
Speaker 1: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay.  With the activities in New York, you, you meet Mr. White in Chicago?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: He goes to New York first and then you follow.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And then as you say he's appointed to a position in Connecticut?
Speaker 1: Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 2: And you follow?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  (Laughter) Yeah, that's why I didn't finish my degree there, so I followed--
Speaker 2: Okay.  So the marriage takes place in what year?
Speaker 1: In Chicago, right?  (Laughter) I guess, we've been married since, and he'll probably tell you, '56 [1956] actually, that's a long time (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nineteen fifty-six [1956].  I just wanted to make sure that I have the chronology right--
Story_ID: 244269
Speaker 1: Now living in [Hartford] Connecticut?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we were at school.  We were at Hartt College [The Hartt School, University of Hartford, West Hartford, Connecticut], we both worked there, but he [White's husband, HistoryMaker Donald White] basically was on the faculty, he was also in the faculty quartet.  Of course, he'll tell you but he was also working for his master's degree and he was in the Hartford Symphony [Orchestra] and oh, he was doing billions of things and lots of jobs within Hartford.  I was on preparatory faculty at Hartt College so I taught piano.
Speaker 1: And in what city is it in in Connecticut?
Speaker 2: In Hartford [Connecticut].
Speaker 1: In Hartford?
Speaker 2: Connecticut.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But it's Hartt College?
Speaker 2: It, it was the Hartt College of Music at that--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --particular time, now it's the Hartford University music school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Hartford University music school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Wonderful.  And what was life like for African American in Connecticut during the '50s [1950s] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well it was, it was exciting.  I mean when you're in music I mean you, you always want a chance to play and perform.  And he was so involved, you know, really so involved.  And being at the college there you met all kinds of people and you have recitals and you worked towards your recitals and you met all kinds of interesting young people, so everybody was doing their thing, you know, (laughter) and, and meeting and it was very exciting.  At the time he was in the Hartford Symphony and I got to go to the concerts, you know, and taught at the school, got to meet the faculty, and it was just a very exciting time.  We had, well I had lots of friends but in connection with, most of them were, were, you know, white but we had a few black friends.  One was a bass player, Ortiz Walton, who the same year we came here went to Boston [Massachusetts], in the Boston Symphony [Orchestra], so.  It was, it was a challenging time because we knew a lot of fantastic performers.  And actually it was my first time there meeting and, and listening a lot to child prodigies on the violin (laughter).  They had a lot of child prodigies that came up there from New York [New York] and different and, and surrounding Connecticut area that would come up and that just played fantastic (laughter) we couldn't believe it (laughter).  So I did get to hear many young, young, like talking 10, 11, 12 year olds that were so fantastic on their instrument so.  It was, it was just full of recitals, it was full of all kinds of music programs.  That that was the only thing, we had no social, I mean we, you know, we socialized, ate and, just at musicians' homes or something like that--
Story_ID: 244270
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Professor [Dolores] White, when did you decide that you wanted to add motherhood into this long list of activities (laughter) that you're involved in?
Speaker 2: It wasn't until we came here [Cleveland, Ohio], you know, we came in '57 [1957] and our first child was born in, in '59 [1959] then, and Darrow [White] is my son.  And so and then I kept going, you know, I used to, to here, when we came here I always wanted to be active so I worked at Karamu [House, Cleveland, Ohio] for a while.  I was a piano teacher, I was also at one time I was sort of, I guess, the director of activities (laughter) especially with young girls and boys, you know, boys clubs.  And this was young, you know, elementary age and up until, I don't think we had a, a lot of teenagers but anyway, I was there and that was very exciting because I got to meet some of the actors and everything it was really great.  I enjoyed my stay at Karamu House.  And I also taught at the Settlement, Cleveland Music School Settlement [The Music Settlement, Cleveland, Ohio] for ten years.  And so our, our time here, plus the orchestra was, was just, I mean, we were just all in, engulfed and we were just really in, into the music world and that was all we knew (laughter) quite frankly.  And sometimes I felt sorry for our kids 'cause that was all they got a chance to experience, and they had to take lessons and everything else.
Story_ID: 244271
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Professor [Dolores] White, can we talk just a little bit about that transition from Connecticut to Ohio, very different (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah.
Speaker 1: --parts of the world--regions of the country.  But you said [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Donald] White was playing with a symphony orchestra there in Connecticut?
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, and what was it about the Cleveland Symphony Orchestra [sic. Cleveland Orchestra] that made you think maybe this would be a good move?
Speaker 2: Well it was one of the, the best, you know.  Like Hartford Symphony [Orchestra] was a good orchestra and he was, he'll tell you he was an assistant concert master which was, you know, very active for him as far as playing and he played in the faculty quartet so you didn't get a chance to see him an awful lot so I was always trying to stay busy.  And wanting to come to Cleveland [Ohio] because it was one of the five, it's still considered one of the, the five great orchestras of the world actually, so that was, you know, you always wanna go up in your field, you always wanted to reach the top if you can.  And so that, coming back to the Cleveland Orchestra and then since, you know, Oberlin [College; Oberlin Conservatory of Music, Oberlin, Ohio] and Cleveland Orchestra used to come down and give concerts and it was just really fantastic.  And they make trips to Europe and they make trips to Asia and everything, so this was outstanding for us.  And this, he was the first, so he got VIP, you know, just huge wonderful treatment, you know, he was treated like a tremendous celebrity when he came here (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now when you say the, the first, the first--
Speaker 2: He was the first in the Cleveland Orchestra, African American to, to be in the Cleveland Orchestra.  And actually, well, I believe, he was the first one, certainly in the, the Midwest orchestras 'cause there's five, there are five great orchestras they say.  Like and it, and it is New York Philharmonic, Boston Symphony [Orchestra], Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], Cleveland, and Chicago [Illinois].  And at that particular time they didn't have any African Americans.  So, so that same year our friend, Ortiz [Walton], who was from Illinois actually, went to Boston [Massachusetts] so and, and we came here so it was a tremendous achievement, it was tremendously gratifying.  It was the, I think the same year of Little Rock [Arkansas] and there was a lot of things happening.  And so but we, we came here and since they had never had an African American, you know, it was like, like, you know, it was just like a completely horrendous thing, you know, so, he was interviewed and treated royally (laughter).  It was incredible.
Story_ID: 244272
Speaker 1: But for you as a composer--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --did you find that there were lots of opportunities for you to work here in northeast Ohio as well?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well actually I hadn't done a lot of composing, you know, then so 'cause basically it was the focus on performance, you know, and we performed together and so that was definitely was sort of like a team performance, a lot of the [Cleveland Music School] Settlement [The Music Settlement, Cleveland, Ohio] in different places where we were asked and then at, at Severance [Hall, Cleveland, Ohio].  So it was, the focus was there was really on, on performance and, and playing.  And so when we came here, it wasn't until I went to, for my master's degree that I really sort of went into composing and that was at the [Cleveland] Institute [of Music, Cleveland, Ohio] and with the teachers there.  And, and a relaxation and, and well it's just in knowing more about the contemporary world 'cause knowing more about modern music and things like that and, and see the whole concept of [Johnann Sebastian] Bach, [Ludwig van] Beethoven, and [Johannes] Brahms being the only geniuses in the world (laughter).  Sort of, you know, opened up eyes to me, 'cause you really get that to, very much in the symphony orchestras and things see are the European masters, even the American composers were not considered too, too extensively anyway, and still not (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, [HistoryMaker] Professor [Dolores] White, did you say you majored in composition at Oberlin [College; Oberlin Conservatory of Music, Oberlin, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't.
Speaker 1: Oh, you didn't?
Speaker 2: I majored in piano.
Speaker 1: Piano.
Speaker 2: Yeah, (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And did you have a minor at Oberlin?
Speaker 2: I had, yeah, the cello, actually was my minor.
Speaker 1: Okay, minor in cello.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so, you're, you're teaching piano then at Karamu [House, Cleveland, Ohio], you said you were there for ten years?
Speaker 2: No, I wasn't there at--
Speaker 1: Didn't get (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) Karamu, I was at the Cleveland Music School Settlement for ten years.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, thank you.
Speaker 2: I taught piano there.  No, I was at Karamu for couple, off and on, you know, I was there for, I was there, I think, I was full time but then I was full time was just sort of like activity director.  And, you know, it would be sort of like from twelve to maybe eight or so something like that.  And that was a couple of years.  And but at the same time I was, you know, at the settlement because you, your teaching schedule, you really don't start until after the kids get out of school or you're on Saturdays, so like that.  So I was at both places.  And then actually then while I was at the settlement I was also at community college, Cuyahoga Community College [Cleveland, Ohio] part time.  I was at community college for, for about eight years before I was full time.
Story_ID: 244273
Speaker 1: I wanted to, to ask about your experiences at Karamu [House, Cleveland, Ohio], it has such a, a wonderful history, as far as black theater is concerned.  And there is always a lot of talk about the glory days at Karamu usually before the late '60s [1960s] and then--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --things changed quite a bit.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: But I wondered was at the time that you spent there, during the, the heyday of Karamu as this great--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --black theater.
Speaker 2: Well the Jelliffes [Russell Jelliffe and Rowena Jelliffe] were alive still, you know, when I was there.  And they had, Reuben Silver was actually there at that time.  And also there was a opera director I, (unclear) German, do you remember his name?  But they used to do--
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  I don't remember his name.
Speaker 2: You know, it was Elmer George [ph.], who was in like 'The Medium' and 'Telephone' [ph.] or 'South [Pacific]' [Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein] one of those plays at Karamu.  So they used to have opera, you know, at Karamu, small in the arena theater, and so I was at sort of maybe the last of that.  So there was, there was quite a bit going on, you know, at Karamu at that particular time.  Oh God, I can't, oh, God, Clayton Corbin was there at that particular time who's now dead, he went to New York [New York].  And also Minnie Gentry and things like that, people came through.  And I think I met the, the late, the guy that just got Shoe [sic. 'Super] Fly' or so, I can't think of his name though.
Speaker 1: I know--
Speaker 2: Met a lot of people.
Speaker 1: --Ron O'Neal.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yes, Carol Mulan [ph.] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think I met him there but he was, I met him, you know, he came back--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --to play there.  So I always loved Karamu and I loved seeing the plays, you know, 'cause, 'cause it just brought back memories of my aunt [Brunetta Barnett Bernstein] and things in the theater. So I've always loved, I've always loved the arts.  I was always exposed to them and, you know, I love the arts.  And so it was just a, just such a tremendous, well I would say (unclear) relationship, you know, with that sensitivity.  A lot of people, a lot of musicians don't have really an interest in the arts, I would say my husband's [HistoryMaker Donald White] not visually and not, not interested in visual arts but I am and especially contemporary art, shapes, figures, and, and designs and materials and things like that, I love, I love that.  And then I liked craft arts, you know, I like original art pieces.  So I loved to go down to, you know, we just came back and I went down to the Puerto Rican craft, you know, with, were, (unclear) the original people, yeah, and made out of woods and all kinds of things like that.  And then I have pieces that I have written dedicated to, you know, to the black artists, yeah, yeah.  So we knew, I knew Charles Sebree who was, I mean, I just loved him, we spent time with him, I mean, in New York with my aunt was a good friend of his so I had time to (unclear).  He used to take me out (laughter) and I mean just talk, I mean I was a little younger but, yeah.  So I, I met a lot of them.  And then my stepfather [Cornelius W. Johnson] was an artist, you know, so, we I came up in that, in a really great world, thinking back and, you know, when you come through it, you don't think so much of it and but, you know, thinking back on people that are now dead or, you know, some have gotten much older.
Story_ID: 244274
Speaker 1: Now you said, that decision to study composition at the Cleveland Institute of Music [Cleveland, Ohio] was--sort of opened then another door of opportunity for you.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it did.
Speaker 1: Can you, and you said you dedicated a lot of your, your compositions to visual artists but--
Speaker 2: And I also (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Can you tell us--
Speaker 2: --to literature too, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And, and other artists.  But can you talk for a while about studies at the Institute of Music, which is also quite--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --a well-known in the world of music for training great musicians as well.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well that, you know, I was lucky enough to, to go to Oberlin [College; Oberlin Conservatory of Music, Oberlin, Ohio] and, and also the Institute, the Cleveland Institute, because well, of course, at the Institute, teachers, there are so many in the orchestra so, so that, you know, a lot of the teachers now there.  So the close association with the [Cleveland] Orchestra was definitely there.  And I always enjoyed the University Circle [Cleveland, Ohio], it's just always meant so much because I worked at the [Cleveland Music School] Settlement [The Music Settlement, Cleveland, Ohio].  I love the settlement too because we performed an awful lot there and with the students.  And then, of course, working at [Cuyahoga] Community College [Cleveland, Ohio] and working at Karamu [House, Cleveland, Ohio], so I had the, you know, really privilege of, of working with some of the finest institutions in the, in the city here at Cleveland [Ohio].  But it was thrilling for us to come to Cleveland especially at sort of the top.  You know, really it was, what could you ask for that was better, I mean we weren't in New York [New York] but we didn't wanna be in New York though (laughter).  We enjoyed it so much.  [George] Szell was considered fabulous, you know, conductor and so it was great.  When, when I went to the institute, I met Donald Erb and, of course, he was the big composition teacher there.  And Eugene O'Brien was who I had for composition who was also composition teacher there, he was the younger one.  And they were very, especially Eugene O' Brien, who was very encouraging and even though I was studying the piano, but they were encouraging, you know, with, with composition.
Story_ID: 244275
Speaker 1: And I learned that, you know, you could also write and have a lot of talent and not be like [Wolfgang Amadeus] Mozart or [Frederic] Chopin or [Ludwig van] Beethoven or these are fantastic giants yes but you, you got an, an insight into a lot of American composers and the music.  And, and also you get an insight into, you, you at Oberlin [College; Oberlin Conservatory of Music, Oberlin, Ohio] in theater, in music theater everything was so strict, you know, it's so conformed, you know, it was, you had to conform with certain rules and everything.  I mean 'cause it was just that period where in the '50s [1950s], late '50s [1950s] were so that you, and '60 [1960], well when I went to Institute [Cleveland Institute of Music, Cleveland, Ohio] that was in the '70s [1970s] so.  It was, it was, it was a relaxation in a sense of some of the, it was certainly a little bit more freedom as far as writing was concerned and who was accepted and who wasn't, a little bit more freedom for people to write their own opinions and ideas and to bring forth their, you know, ideas.  So I listened to a lot of contemporary, you know, music.  And I liked it, yeah, I liked it.  So I mean because of, in the first place there was, there was a shift on to the percussion area, you know, and the rhythm area, so it was much more open and not the strict two, four, three, four, four, four rhythms that you were used to, you know, struggling with (laughter) and everything, that actually, which was really rather confining so that.  And then also a world of, what opened up was also a world, other, other countries music, you know, like Middle East music which is the, the rhythms and folk music and with the music of other countries and other music and things so.  When you hear that, and different instruments opening up not just the violin and the cello and string instruments or wind instruments or playing it.  There was much more freedom involved.  And there was an easing, certainly jazz was coming more into its own and, well music beginning to, you know, take hold and everything and people listening too, and the opportunity to listen to and also teaching.  I used to teach a class at [Cuyahoga] Community [College, Cleveland, Ohio] in world music.  And, and then traveling also.  It was (unclear) we got a chance to go out to Europe and I went to Spain and also South America and then I went to Africa, and all these things are just so opening, they open your experience up, if you're really willing to, to have it opened.  And you see other people and you experience their lifestyle and, and you find out, gosh, all these things that I've been told are not exactly always true.  So or it just expands your, your, just your life thought and ideas and brings in more and takes some out (laughter) which is good, I think.
Story_ID: 244276
Speaker 1: You mentioned the birth of your first child--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did.
Speaker 1: --of your son, 1959, I believe?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, and then you said later, I feel sorry sometimes for our children so there's someone else involved.  Can you tell me about all of your children, their names, please, and--
Speaker 2: I have two, my first child is a boy, was, and is (laughter) Darrow is his name, Darrow Edward White.  And he at this time lives in Boston [Massachusetts] in Malden [Massachusetts] and he went to school in the east.  And my second (laughter) is a, a girl and her name is Diana Rose White and she says Diana Rose White-Gould, and she's married and she's very, they're actually in both of my children are in music (laughter) so 'cause we really didn't give, my mother [Lillian Marie Dumas] says you didn't give 'em a chance (laughter) to do anything else.  They had to take lessons, yes they, they did.  And we instilled in that but our lives were so full, all the time, either practicing and going to concerts or being at concerts or going here and there, just completely engulfed in music.  And so they really didn't have a chance to do anything else.  My son was, he did go to Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] and we did want to have him get actually a degree in something else besides music so he did get a degree in economics but he still wanted to go into music, so his master's [degree] is from Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts] in music and he's still working on his doctorate (laughter) there.
Speaker 1: Also in music?
Speaker 2: Yes, because he, well it's been like a, ten year, twelve years, (laughter) twelve year process for him to, and hopefully he'll get it.  And so he started off in music, yes, and since he's, he's had some trouble physically with, you know, he was a violinist and so he's had some really serious problems with that, you know, with physical problems with his arm and things so he had to go into teaching but he was planning to go into an orchestra to just like, you know, [HistoryMaker] Donald [White].  And Diana, well she went into piano like I said, well (laughter) if you're not gonna be interested in anything else you gotta go to Oberlin [College; Oberlin Conservatory of Music, Oberlin, Ohio] and, and do piano and so that's what she did.  I, you know, it was, it sounds like it was very dogmatic but it really wasn't, I think--
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --I said that you have to decide, you know.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear)
Speaker 2: Yeah, our son was in the Boston [Symphony Orchestra] (unclear) orchestra, a couple of years, yeah, three years.
Story_ID: 244277
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Professor [Dolores] White, we talked about, a little about your studies at the [Cleveland] Institute of Music [Cleveland, Ohio].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now I'd like to talk about your, your graduation from the institute and working as a composer.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, one of the things they, they say about choosing your school and choosing your college and is it, that that school has a very good reputation in the communities and things.  And so in that sense it does help you to get jobs or to project a career when you're out there because they are looking for people in specific fields and the, the school does help in many cases because of alumni or because of all kinds of things so that there and so certainly with the institute and being here in Cleveland [Ohio] (laughter) it was very helpful.  And the different groups, you know, that you belong to that's also very helpful in your career.  And so I've, the institute was a, was a big, it's a big name in music and so the graduates are, you know, certainly have that prestige in the sense of, of, for, you know, continuing their career.  When I was going to institute also I was at [Cuyahoga] Community [College, Cleveland, Ohio] too, so I was, you know, helping to go up the ladder there at least getting assistantship or so, getting a professorship there and I loved teaching there.  I liked teaching at community.  It was a very, very small, you know, music school (laughter) in that way. I think there were two of us really and, you know, full time in the music department then we had part-time teachers and I was a part-time teacher for a long time so.  I, I can only say that I, I really appreciated the years that I taught at community college, it was tremendous experience and enriching and also I was able to do develop enough a lot, you know, there as far as knowing, you know, in the classroom and, and helping. Evelyn [P.] Boyd was the, was the head of the music department at Metro [Cuyahoga Community College, Metropolitan Campus, Cleveland, Ohio] when I was there and so she, she and I worked under her and she was very helpful just really, really (unclear).  And Nolen Ellison was there (laughter) when I was there.  I mean, I talked to Donna [Moore] Ramsey who I know she's, she was also at, at community for many, many years and so now I think she's the assistant to the head of the campus, Kent [State University at Geauga] Campus, at Burton [Ohio].  But anyway she was at, at community also when I was there and she said, you know, she thought I, she said, Dolores, I was in heaven with Nolen Ellison and all these Afro-Americans in high places, you know, (laughter) kind, kind of really made a difference.  And so you had a lot of opportunities and to, to advance and to, just to, just to develop, you know, your skills and to use and to start things.  I gave an awful lot of recitals at community for the students.  I love working with students, you know, I love working with them.  Just, you know, it was, I thought the exposure to music and I was basically interested in that, the exposure to all kinds of music not just jazz and now specifically it, it's jazz, you know, at Metro Campus.  And I was fighting that for a long time because I thought that, you know, that students should really be exposed to a, a wide variety of music.  And I didn't want it to be confined down to one even though I know that, you know, jazz is a, is a tremendous art form and, you know, that it's, certainly as far as African Americans are concerned they really have some fantastic artists and, and, and everything so.  It was hard, it was really hard to sort of try and, and constantly there trying to keep it but I know where my skills were so, you know, I had to, to go where my mine was.
Story_ID: 244278
Speaker 1: And of course, with the Institute [Cleveland Institute of Music, Cleveland, Ohio] I was, as a background I could always, you know, have people from the institute to come over and talk or speak on and then it gave you a prominent presence and as far as credit or credentials and things like that are concerned and you always need that, your credentials are very important.  So it, it was going to the institute I'll never regret it.  I met a lot of great people there, helpful people and, you know, very serious minded, very fine fantastic musicians there.  So that's, you know, pretty much been my world.  And to be able to express these things, to share them, you know, with students.  And I always wanted, you know, I had a recital every quarter and some people said why do you have that?  But I just loved for them to get the experience of performing.  You know, you, well then you'd have to be certain you were going into music by any means but we had all different ages there.  I was, I was working with sometimes in class piano and classes are beginning of the, shall we say, introductory courses, basic and what I sort of concentrated on.  And I wanted people to be exposed to, to music and to all kinds of music.  And I found that it was, I mean, it balanced their life regardless of what they were going into, whether they were going into nursing or they were going into computers or whether going into, to, you know, culinary, whatever field that they were going to go into maybe after [Cuyahoga] Community [College, Cleveland, Ohio] or maybe not, just for them.  And I, you know, still have lots of pictures of recitals.  That was the name of the game they had to participate whether they had never taken up, played an instrument or anything, they would give a recitals.  And, and, gosh, it was in theater all the times and that, and but it changed and times changed and I did have a long time at community, so.
Story_ID: 244279
Speaker 1: When you were teaching at Cuyahoga Community College [Cleveland, Ohio] at the, all those years you said you had a good time.  I, I am aware that you were teaching a course on black music.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was.
Speaker 1: Yeah and--
Speaker 2: Afro-American music.
Speaker 1: And it, it included all different styles.  Can you tell me how you go about putting something like that together?
Speaker 2: Well no, I, I taught, you know, with the, well we've come through many different cycles and many different periods as far as music is concerned and as far as American culture is concerned or as I said when I started off then especially for the training of, you know, for my training basically you never thought of as European training music.  But then, you know, in the '70s [1970s] and with the black experience being very, very strong Civil Rights Movement and everything in this, in this country and then also having visited Africa and everything then I really expanded, you know, wanted to expand my interest in knowing more because I really didn't learn a lot about black history at Oberlin [College; Oberlin Conservatory of Music, Oberlin, Ohio] or even in my high school [Robert Lindblom Technical High School; Lindblom Math & Science Academy, Chicago, Illinois] .  You know, some, some if I had gone to DuSable [High School, Chicago, Illinois] I would have learned more and my aunt [Brunetta Barnett Bernstein] keeps telling me that 'cause she said (laughter) but anyway the, the, I didn't so.  And, and as a professor at community college you have the options, as I said, of selecting some of the courses that you would teach and if you wanna introduce new courses and everything.  Well with the jazz idea I was teaching jazz for a little while, (laughter) I did teach jazz for a little while because as a full-time teacher you had to expand, I mean especially at, at Metro [Cuyahoga Community College, Metropolitan Campus, Cleveland, Ohio] there was, there was the Western campus and the Eastern campus and I was strictly at Metro.  And certainly was the, you know, predominant so African Americans students at Metro and you wanted to teach, you know, courses that had a little bit more meaning and significance to them.  And so, I taught Afro-American music up to a particular period, you know, I didn't wanna get into the jazz era, so passed the '35 [1935] or so I didn't go into that--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --you know, pretty much.  But, but at one time I was, you know, teaching jazz too so that was before the course of African American music came forth.  I taught Afro-American music.  I also taught world music a little bit.  But these are all introductory courses so and I was learning also (laughter) as I was teaching so this is the amazing thing.  And I found it just so enriching, just really so enriching.  And, you know, it's all a part of culture and my trips to Africa, my trips to the Caribbean, and also to Cuba was just very enlightening, you know, very enlightening to me to find out so much about the about well, about African music and then about the, the whole African experience in this country--
Story_ID: 244280
Speaker 1: Basically what we did in the course was I used, gosh, I got [HistoryMaker] Bernice [Johnson] Reagon's tapes.  I think she came here to Cleveland [Ohio] she was on the radio and everything and she made a whole series of tapes.  I mean I, I used a lot of them, the, the gospel tapes, I used the, the spirituals--
Speaker 2: Is that the--
Speaker 1: --and the spirituals from, she had, has, she had marvelous tapes of colleges, of black colleges singing spirituals on a different find, wonderful, beautiful choir, choirs singing, you know.  So--
Speaker 2: Excuse me.
Speaker 1: --the spirituals were introduced.
Speaker 2: Is that the 'Wade in the Water' series?
Speaker 1: 'Wade in the Water' series.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I just wanted to be certain.
Speaker 1: Yeah, definitely, yes.  And that was, that was the extent of my course, (laughter) you know, really 'cause she had about four tapes with that and it's so expanded from that.  But yeah, I, I definitely used that.  So this was supposed to be precursor to jazz, you know, of course, and we would talk, I think we had gotten to ragtime in, in the course.  And we'd talk about the black religious experience and, and just, you know, black music within slavery time and things.  And I wanted, you know, that to be brought in as well as the jazz and everything.  So I wanted that to be known.  And then with world music, we went a little bit into the Indian, you know, experience with the sitar and with the tabla and various things like that.  And I would go to a lot of the things that, you know, when they started the world series but they would have tabla players or they would have sitar players at the, at the museum sometimes.  And then, of course, we got our vice president was when, what's her name [Dr. Jerry Sue] Thornton (laughter) became president she brought her vice president, Sindian Tadd [ph.].  He's not here anymore but he was and he used to bring Indian players and performers to [Cuyahoga] Community [College, Cleveland, Ohio] and I think they still do some (unclear).  So I was, you know, I wanted to, to definitely bring African American history there besides jazz, I mean, music outside.  I wasn't so much into gospel music but I was interested in, in the church music before and, and some of the practices, you know, before.  And so I wanted that definitely in the programming so and I brought that into, into the class structure.  I brought that into the scheduling and everything there.
Speaker 2: And, [HistoryMaker] Professor [Dolores] White--
Speaker 1: Yeah, world music and Afro-American, early African American music.
Story_ID: 244281
Speaker 1: Even when you were in the conservatory at Oberlin [College; Oberlin Conservatory of Music, Oberlin, Ohio], jazz was a no-no. And so did you find when you were teaching that there [Cuyahoga Community College, Cleveland, Ohio], you had to really search to find the, the scholarly works and the materials to share with the students?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And so was there a textbook at that point or are you putting one together?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't actually, I, you know, really when I started teaching the jazz course, and I started teaching that because I was the second, you know, there were only two of us, two professors there, and I knew he was not really into jazz.  I mean he, he was in music education, he was a trumpet player, Thom Horning, but he had started the [Tri-C] JazzFest and everything that was his big, big claim.  But there was, I can't remember, I think it was Reggie [Reginald Buckner], Reggie something, he was from Minnesota but he was a, a black instrumentalist jazz person that came and gave Horning the idea of the JazzFest but he's died before but I can't think of his name though but it's been many years.  But anyway, that was sort of the foundation for the JazzFest series.  (Unclear) educational and he taught out of Minnesota.  But he was constantly pushing that because that was his, I guess, he had played some jazz, you know, but he was not noted and never has been noted as a, as a jazz player really and I think he had to stop playing trumpet after a while.  But, but his interest was in primarily in that direction and so he stopped teaching the jazz course at one time and he was going to give it to another part-time teacher who had gotten her Ph.D., I might say she was white, and, and I knew she didn't know any more about jazz than I did (laughter) and, and so I said no, no this can't happen (laughter).  So I said, well I'll take the course and so, of course, I was learning.  And I was using the, the book that Joe Howard [Joseph E. Howard] used that, he's there on the campus, on Western campus, which had very few blacks in it.  And I couldn't believe it, you know, (laughter).  I didn't believe it, that he was doing this and he was teaching, and it didn't really have very many black performers in it.  It might have had Duke Ellington in it.  And it had, I'm, I guess, maybe Miles [Davis].  I mean, but, but it was a limited number of blacks and generally when I thought of jazz I thought (laughter) maybe strictly all African Americans.  So here is this book and so I wanted to find another book.  And then this guy here in Cleveland [Ohio], I can't remember his name now, (unclear) played flute, but he wrote this book on jazz which I used, he came down and brought it to me and I don't like, there have been so many years.  My memory isn't too good either but anyway I started using his book which was a very, much more extensive and good, you know.  But still that wasn't, I didn't really feel that was my forte so I, you know, started teaching that and that's when I changed to like, I wanna do some study of Afro-American early music and, and then I also went into world music a little bit but these were all introductory courses.
Story_ID: 244282
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Professor [Dolores] White, a couple of years ago I heard an African American sociologist talk about, he was lecturing on race and ethnicity in America and this idea of the other.  He said, in the academy, he teaches in California, that you have American studies or you have American history or world history then you have ethnic studies and that's everything that not European, a certain part of Europe, and then you go to the conservatory and you have music courses, the great European masters and you have one course in ethnomusicology and that's everything that's not European and so it's always unusual--
Speaker 2: That's true, that's true.
Speaker 1: --on the outside--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's very true.
Speaker 1: --looking and I'm wondering--
Speaker 2: That's very true.
Speaker 1: --if during your teaching career you saw any shifts, any changes even on the horizon or are we still--
Speaker 2: Well, yeah.
Speaker 1: --there with ethnomusicology or world music or are we making progress?
Speaker 2: Well in, (laughter) it depends on the colleges, I guess, it really does because there, yeah, there are shifts in, in different colleges true.  But that was some of the reasoning, you know, the shifting from the ethnomusicology or at least everything being in the, in the classification of ethno music.  They say, actually when I went to college there was no such thing as ethnomusicology, you know.  So the ethnomusicology basically is really about maybe forty, fifty years, maybe not that that new, I mean, that that old.  But certainly it wasn't in the '50s [1950s], you know, there was no course in ethnomusicology.  There was no courses in black music, of course, there were no courses in, in any other music, it was all Western, it was all European music, you know, when I went to school so that was pretty much all you taught.  And even with, you know, even with ethnic courses or ethnic music or anything that was outside of European music it was, you know, it was considered less significant, you know, this kind of thing.  There, I, as I said it depends on the, on the colleges really.  But I thought that always that community colleges were the place that you should get a balance in, in world music, I mean, and then really get a, in other words, you should be able to expand your horizon on music.  And, of course, there are a lot of people that are, that go to community college, they really don't want to expand, I mean they're interested certainly with the pop world, the pop world has extensively taken over American culture.  And that most of the students that come that's all they hear, it's on radio, radio, you know, TV has taken over everything, computers has taken over everything.  So then that is the lifestyle.  I know when I was teaching down at Kent [State University at Geauga, Burton, Ohio] and, you know, all the kids wanted to hear was rock, all kinds of different rock music, and I'm not into rock music, you know, so it's very difficult.  And, and a lot of professors will tell you that, you know, the beginning courses like they used to have introduction to music or music appreciation and these music appreciation has changed to maybe let's see, I was, sometimes it, it's still music appreciation but there are various other terms that are used, I mean, they, they say maybe they will in some, in some colleges they will say introduction to European, you know, classical music or they'll say maybe an introduction into American music or there are a lot of courses in rock music, there are a lot of courses in, in different, in pop music, and there are courses and certainly now in, in jazz, you know, the study of jazz and history of jazz and things.  But there, there wasn't anything like that, you know, in the '50s [1950s].  Maybe at some, I don't, I don't, I don't think that were probably there--
Story_ID: 244283
Speaker 1: And still I think it's slow, it's been very slow in changing, very slow in changing, yeah, really the course structure.  And I think it's up to the teachers, you know, really 'cause I was asking what books would you prefer and different publishers come to you and say what books do you prefer, and really the teacher should be the ones that suggest, you know.  And if you don't have this book, it's just the same as having, including black in Afro-Americans in pictures or including their experiences or their, the, the, you know, scientists or, you know, so that, so that students actually know that there are black scientists or that there are black musicians or black composer or black in, in all the fields that you have to really be inclusive.  And the teachers are the ones that actually have to do this because the publishers do come to them.  And I used to tell them I'm not gonna use any book that doesn't have any reference to any black or African Americans in them or pictures or anything about, you know, black music and you have to fight for it, I mean 'cause it's committees, you're in billions of committees, you know, that you can be on.  I mean, even in hiring and everything else that's why I said that, you know, with Nolen Ellison.  And, and, and when, I was there when [Dr. Curtis] Jefferson was there, you know, and this was fantastic because you had a chance to make mistakes, you know, and still be kept on but a lot of, in situations you're not.  I mean, you're not given the opportunity to do this like every, everybody else does, you know.  You're human, you're only human.  So it makes a great difference like and when you have, you know, black caucus or, you know, faculty that, you know, the black groups and things like that and you need them desperately and you still do (laughter) (unclear).  You still need it because otherwise the chances for advancement, you might not even know about, you know, when does it come up for you to get to be a full professor and get all of your, your, your information in for, for, you know, progressing up the ladder or just the opportunity for you to attend certain conferences and all kinds of different things like that where you depend on who's, you know, in charge or who is the (unclear) the dean or assistant dean or anything (unclear) that's really open.  Because many times people select people they know or who they communicate with or who they go out with or who they participate and socialize with and things like that, and many times they're not African Americans.  So it's, it, the, the only way that you really know about things is through the different groups that you associate with at that university, at that school.  And they have to pull for you and, and fight for you in every, every kind of a trial you get.  And even then sometimes when you're sitting on the committee and you're the only black and you've got about seven or eight or nine of the others and it's very difficult.  And so it's, you know, I don't, I don't feel that the colleges have made a great stride in, in really hiring African Americans.
Story_ID: 244284
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Professor [Dolores] White, if we take a long view of music history, say from the, the turn of the 20th century up until now, the, the beginning of the 21st [century], there's a, some ray of hope, even perhaps, (laughter) maybe it's fair to say--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --because there's ethnomusicology now--
Speaker 2: Yeah, definitely.
Speaker 1: --maybe that's sort of a sign of progress (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Well, not just that course but I mean I think society is changing, I mean, American society is changing.  I mean, we have so many, you know, immigrants here from all, all over and they, you know, they're moving and so they bring their life, their country, their, their lifestyle, their language, their food and everything else.  And, and then, of course, the close contact in the, the lab and the computer and television, everything, where people got to see even if not with, you know, not just with people coming here immigrants but you got to experience 'cause this country is full of small, different, segregated societies, you know, really cultures, ethnicities, it's full of it actually.  It's not really integrated, it's not.  And the whole idea of integration and democracy in which, which we preach, is really not quite here (laughter) in this, in this great American country.  But it is, you know, definitely it is.  I won't say that it's the only country, you know, a lot of times we hear this is the greatest country as far as immigrants are concerned and coming here and getting ahead and say there are opportunities, some wonderful opportunities here, yes.  And, and maybe, maybe more so than I, I don't even know, I wouldn't say that there's possibly, it depends on your field but there's, there's certainly a lot of opportunities to advance here.  And now there's so much material out there and when I was starting, there wasn't.  You know, you couldn't get a lot of books that included African Americans and you didn't know about, you know, the history.  I had a girl that was attending Oberlin [College; Oberlin Conservatory of Music, Oberlin, Ohio], a black student that was attending Oberlin, and she wanted to go in composition and she brought me up to [Cuyahoga] Community College [Cleveland, Ohio], I had her come up and talk to the students, she brought me a whole list of black women composers, you know, a huge, a list, and I said oh my God, I didn't know, you know, all of these.  And some, you know, were very insignificant but that written, you know, but, but had written and so she had, you know, tremendous (unclear).  So the libraries are containing so much more now and, and we're also as a race beginning to value our culture so much more than we used to.
Story_ID: 243249
Speaker 1: When did you officially leave the university, the college [Cuyahoga Community College, Cleveland, Ohio], and then have more time for composing?
Speaker 2: Well, I left in 2000 and I actually didn't want to go right into not doing anything as far, or just even composing.  I mean, I certainly wanted to continue my composing field but I liked teaching and these new areas were just, just exciting to me like, you know, teaching African American history and also world's music so or just introductory courses.  And so I went to, that was the year that it came out, that was the year that actually I, I was asked by Josephine [R.B. Wright] to do her course down at Wooster [The College of Wooster, Wooster, Ohio] so I traveled down there and taught her course in Afro-American music and--
Speaker 1: And this and professor at--
Speaker 2: At Wooster.
Speaker 1: --Wooster what's her full name?
Speaker 2: Josephine Wright.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, Professor Josephine Wright, she's written a couple books, you know.  And, and so I spent a year there, commuting (laughter).  And then after that I still wasn't, you know, wanting to sit down so I went down to Burton [Ohio] which was Kent State [University at Geauga] campus and I was teaching two music courses down there.  And it, and those were introductory courses because these were not, I was not in the music school at Kent, you know, down at Kent State so this was a branch and so they had, did the one music course, you know.  And but at, at Wooster I was in the music department so there was a music department there so.  Made completely different right, 'cause the students were, even though they weren't music majors they were very vitally interested in the course.  And it was a campus so that made a, quite a difference at Burton.  Most of the students worked pretty, you know, full time and they're coming there to take courses to, to elevate, you know, elevate or to, to start their careers and maybe in some kind of computer science or maybe education but they had to, to go on so that music was like very definitely an elective.
Story_ID: 243250
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Professor [Dolores] White, you spoke earlier of your travels to the Caribbean and other parts of the world and I'm wondering as a composer, do your travels to various places around the world inspire you to compose certain, a certain style of music or where does the inspiration come from?
Speaker 2: Well the inspiration actually as far as my composing is concerned, actually comes from my, my background really.  And I've had a background and I've been interested in classical music for a long time so that that is certainly a part of what I write.  I mean, my music is not religious although I've written several, you know, set psalms to, to music but it's definitely secular in content.  And I really, some of my, the people I, I love as, as composers, my inspiration really, I would say was, it was, you know, from the classical world like [Igor] Stravinsky, like [Sergei] Prokofiev or [Cesar] Franck.  I like even William, Bost [sic. William] Bolcom, I like Donald Erb, I like Duke Ellington, I like Miles [Davis], those, but I don't write jazz specifically.  I write with inspiration, like I've written a piece for trombone and piano that reflects on Romare Bearden, some of his pictures on jazz musicians and things like that.  Because the, jazz is basically is a, a wonderful art form that has a tremendous energy and shows tremendous vitality and, of course, you have to have that in your music anyway.  And so even though I'm not really a jazz writer, I've been inspired by, by the, the symbols of jazz and the thinkings and, and the ideas, the shapes, and the figures of jazz musicians, you know, and their instruments and how that relates musically, which is sort of jaggered [ph.] and, and not, you know, not, you know, conforming and, it's, it's sort of rebel in a sense I think of it in that way.  And no, you know, really straight lines.  I like to think of abstract, and, and certainly in some of the paintings.  And a lot of, of artists, black artists, have painted jazz musicians and just the freedom of movement.  And, you know, music is about movement and so these, these kinds of things and the freedom of it and not, not the conformity of it, not the, not, you know, it doesn't have to be balanced, you know.  Whereas in classical everything had to, if you're going back to the classical period and to the renaissance period and then to, on the romantic period is a broadening, you know, of, of ideas.  And so, so that music has, has had its evolution, you know, from, from the rigidity, the rigidity of the classical period but then, of course, [Wolfgang Amadeus] Mozart is, is just, you know, he's a wonderful composer but I mean he is from the classical period--
Story_ID: 243251
Speaker 1: I do like the music to, to represent, you know, the period.  And I, I think that the period, that the 20th century and 21st century represents such great things and, you know, historically.  And that, but I'm, well, I won't say historically I mean the innovations of those particular periods like the computer, like the, like rapid transits.  I mean, or you, trains, I mean, on being in a subway and the noises of the subway and, and all of the energy that the new, the 20th and 21st century which is different sounds from the 19th century and the 18th century.  So you have lots of different sounds that, that have come into the world since then that you recognize and that you are allowed to listen to, the freedom of, of hearing these sounds, that, and music is about sounds.  And then I love different sounds, I mean, I, you know, so entrenched in just the basic classical and the romantic sounds which are, and Americans are so accustomed to hearing, and Europeans are so accustomed to hearing.  But if I'm going to hear well, you have to encompass the, the, the sounds of the century which change all the time.  Life changes all the time and so you hear different things and different, and we've got the atomic bomb and we've got all these things that are going off, you know, and they have sounds to them, and they have horrors to them and life isn't always, you know, idyllic, I mean, life isn't, it's full of, you know, tragedy and drama and all this and you wanna bring that in to your music with 20th century, 21st century sounds and so I, I like that.
Story_ID: 243252
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Professor [Dolores] White, I wanted to ask you, because you mentioned the advent of the computer and the difference that it's made in our lives, I know we have a professor at Cleveland State [University, Cleveland, Ohio], I believe his name is Eric Gould--
Speaker 2: (Laughter)
Speaker 1: --and he teaches electronic music, computer music and I'm thinking, my goodness what is that.  But I wanted to ask do you use the computer at all to compose or--
Speaker 2: Well, I tried that, yeah well, you know, when you use the computer to, to write your music 'cause it's much easier and faster to do.  I'm not very skilled at it.  So I mean Eric's pretty skilled at it.  It, I'm of the age that I, some of it's a loss and so I'm fortunate enough to have a copyist but and (laughter) (unclear) those things.  But yeah, the computer age and to experiment with it and then, of course, now you can't get through with your degrees without using it and having it and it's just definitely a requirement that you do.  But I didn't come from (laughter) quite that period but the computer was definitely in there and you had to, you know, use it.  So I experimented some with it but I am not, I really prefer not to have computer music.  I like some tape, you know, where, where I have some pieces that, that that I, I call myself saying that I've expanded the sound and so, you know, a tape can run faster than you can play and so I've, I've, I've experimented with that, you know, and running a tape and, and making certain cycles, you know, making it go faster and faster and faster maybe taking one particular idea or phrase and then, you know, playing it and then sending a tape, making it.  I've experimented that way with, with music which is really interesting (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, Professor White, I'm fortunate to have a number of friends who are musicians and I, I know there is software available for folks who don't even read music if they can play by ear the software can notate the music and, so--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's true.  Yeah, they can.
Speaker 1: --it at least appears that it's not necessary anymore to know how to, to know the technicalities of composing music in order to, to get sheet music so that--
Speaker 2: That's true.  Yeah, I mean, it's, it's really mind-boggling that you can, you can put down, you don't have to have any, you know, technical facility at the keyboard, you can put it down, you can play it, and then it will come out and, and it looks fabulous, you know, really on the, the printouts and everything really great.  So, yeah, this is, this is all.  But, but see even all of this, (unclear) the printing out process has a sound to it, you know.  And we don't think of these things, you know, as music because we, we've really had a very narrow description of music.  Before it was always music that sounds that were pleasant, you know, but it's not anymore. Now it's the organization of sounds and time, really.  So that encompasses everything.  So, you know, really, so everything has a, has a, has a sound to it which is music because it has space and it has, it has a time that it happens within and then there is definite sound.
Speaker 1: So the-
Speaker 2: Whether you like the sound or not is immaterial really because that is a conditioning kind of thing really and we're, as to whether you like it or not because dissonances are, you know, really what we thought of as dissonances at one time are not dissonances anymore because we're so used to hearing them.  So and when we were engulfed, music is all sound, you know, organized sound and organized sound, anything that's organized is basically all sound that's organized.
Story_ID: 243253
Speaker 1: I wanted to, to ask also about your concerns, if you have any, about issues of our time in addition to the music of our time, but issues of our time and how they are impacting the lives of people in general but African Americans in particular, are there any issues of--
Speaker 2: Well I--
Speaker 1: --great concern to you?
Speaker 2: I think one of the, the main well, (laughter) as I said, I was really very upset with, you know, with our campus [Cuyahoga Community College, Cleveland, Ohio] actually going all jazz because I've, I feel that it's a two year college and it was, you know, the first chance for many students to come, it actually is an introduction into music, and so I just didn't feel that this was, not that they don't have some of the introduction courses there but basically the focus was going to be on, on, on jazz and I tried very hard and they didn't want my input there, they wanted specifically.  And I can understand the viewpoint but I thought a community college should, should not be focused that way.  But anyway, my concern is that there is a lot, there, there isn't enough flexibility with a lot of Americans and a lot of, of people that that really to experience all kinds of music.  I mean, every ethnic music is part of the culture, you know.  And so every, everybody has it.  You have it from birth, I mean, you come in the world most of the time, I tell my students you come in as a baby, we know that you are alive because you start crying and most people don't think of that as music but it is sound.  So we know you're alive and as long as you live you are, you know, conditioned in particular ways.  And I think that the American experience many times is too narrow, you know, I think it should be more balanced.  I do feel that, you know, and, and a lot of people don't go to really to try, I mean, educated people don't really try to have a balanced life and especially include the arts in their life.  (Unclear) there are a lot of computer fanatics, computer people, that have jobs and, and are making really fantastic, I mean, probably CEOs, they never go to a concert or never go to, you know, maybe they, maybe they get into a rock concert, I don't know.  But I've found that, and that's the same thing with, with gospel too, there are a lot of, you know, I think there are a lot, a lot of Afro-Americans.  I, I single them out because I've had that experience but I'm sure that there are many ethnic groups that don't expand their, their experience.  And I'm speaking musically but it could be in literature, it could be art, it could be dance, it could be foods etiquette, because this is all the culture of a, of a, of, of people.  And you really have an insight into the person when you really know something about their culture which is language, literature, you know, music, art, dance, just, you know, every, every, and that's all engulfs, and the religion to.  So it's all included in culture to me.  And I found that, that as Americans, I don't really think that we look and, and we say that, well we certainly have a, a tremendous, you know, population here of ethnics or, or just in general people from all over the world and but I think that we do have too much rigidity in, you know, feeling comfortable, I guess, in your own community and not really, not really interested, you know.  I mean, not that you have to go to another community and, you know, experience theirs.  And, and there are opportunities here 'cause, you know, there are festivals.  And I used to say well there are a lot of ethnic festivals and you got ethnic trash, you got ethnic language, you got ethnic dance and everything else.  And, and, you know, of course, the, it, Americans are really not too interested or we want them to go back, they're immigrants don't, you know, especially some immigrants are specific about that.  But I do think that we should make an, an effort, to, to know more about people's music, dance, you know.  And not that that we have to, you know, live it or anything like that but I think also be open to it and I don't think that we are as society.
Story_ID: 243254
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Professor [Dolores] White, as we approach, perhaps the end of our discussion--
Speaker 2: Oh gosh (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) we're moving in that direction, I, I know that your music is available in print, it's available on CDs, thanks to Eric Gould and other folks, you're on the Internet--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's right.
Speaker 1: --but if the day should day come, (laughter) you know, when you're not composing anymore, what do you hope that your legacy will be to your composition students, to other folks, what do you hope your legacy will be?
Speaker 2: Well that's one of the things that I would definitely advise that you have a curiosity.  I think curiosity as one of the great things in life, to just to have more knowledge, to understand, to use the opportunities to experience other avenues regardless of what the avenues are, expand your life and don't be rigid, be flexible.  Don't, I think that's really one of the things that I would definitely say.  Curiosity, flexibility, of wanting to expand, wanting to always to seek knowledge and, and know more about things because I think I've tried to do that.  In my experiences, I (laughter) certainly, I certainly, well, I, I would say I would certainly stay away from fields that I have not, (laughter) not really delved into but I, I, which is some of the sciences and things.  But as far as the arts, literature, drama, music, dance, and education too, I think those are fantastic fields and I think everybody should know as much as they can about it and if, and whatever field they are in, just know as much as you can about it, be persistent about it, be, have a lot of tenacity and continuously grow.  That's all.  That's what I would say, grow and develop.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Even when you're ninety, a hundred, whatever.
