Story_ID: 35333
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: I'm Lieutenant General Willie James Williams.  That's W-I-L-L-I-E, J-A-M-E-S, W-I-L-L-I-A-M-S.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My date of birth is September 27, 1951.  And I was born in Livingston, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you've stated your rank in the [U.S.] Marine Corps.  And, now can you give us--now, can you confirm--now, you're the third ranking Marine officer in the United States?
Speaker 2: Right, in the United States Marine Corps.  I'm a Lieutenant General.  Of course, the rank structure within the Marine Corps is like, with all our military, the highest rank is a Four-Star General.  I'm a Three-Star General.  And so, and as the Chief of Staff for the Marine Corps, you know, we have the commandant of the Marine Corps, the assistant commandant of the Marine Corps, and then the chief of staff, which again is by designation by ballot destination.  So, I've become the third senior, most senior, officer in the Marine Corps.  And so, I've been doing this about four years now.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  And, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is September 11--not September 11, it's February 11, 2013.
Speaker 1: Alright.  And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: You're in my office at the Pentagon in Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia].
Speaker 1: Alright.
Story_ID: 35334
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --that we'll get through pretty quick.  They only require a short answer, but we ask them of everybody.  The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite food?  Chicken.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite color?
Speaker 2: It's gold.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Well, I haven't taken a lot of them, but I would say my favorite one is the Gulf Coast in Alabama, down in Orange Beach, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know that I have a favorite one, but I have a, certainly a number of them.  And one of my, one of the ones that I like to use is that, "We should not allow others to dictate our destiny."
Story_ID: 35335
Speaker 1: Alright.  Now, I'm going to ask about your family history.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side and your father's side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about them separately, so that we don't get them mixed up, and then we'll put them together.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, can you give us first your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: It's Ella, E-L-L-A, Mae, M-A-E, Hill, H-I-L-L.  And her maiden name is Bolden, B-O-L-D-E-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her date is June 1, 1929, and she also was born in Livingston, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them, and what were they doing?
Speaker 2: Well, I think I can trace it back, personally, I think to really my grandmother, Betty.  Her name is Betty Bolden.  And she died early in my life, but I remember her from those times.  But, and I don't remember her working or anything like that.  I mean, we were basically from farming--initially, more of a farming type of family, you know.  In some cases, even sharecropping, I think that went on down in Livingston.  But, and so, that's really about all I remember of her.  And I remember when she was moved from Livingston to Moundville, Alabama.  And I remember going up there to visit her, but I don't remember a whole lot about her.
Speaker 1: Okay.  As far as you know, is your mother's side of the family from Livingston?  I mean, is that the--far back as you--
Speaker 2: As far back or--it's a little adjacent community there in Livingston.  I think it was called Boyd.  I think that's where my grandmother was from.  I think she was from Boyd, and that's--I used to hear them talk about it.  But that's about as far back as I can go.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 35336
Speaker 1: Okay, now, sir, are there any stories from your mother's [Ella Mae Bolden Hill] side of the family about life in, around--about Boyd, Alabama or Livingston [Alabama], or Moundsville [Alabama], or--
Speaker 2: Well, in Livingston there's certainly--because where I think I used to spend time down there in--.  Because we had the--my mother's family was kind of like my family. There were brothers and sisters and half-brothers and sisters and, you know, on different sides that grew up.  And so, you know, we--the story that I always remember was my Uncle Henry.  When I used to go down and--and I used to go down and live with him a lot during the summer, just to--because he had a farm where he raised, you know, lots of different crops, that he then would take in his truck--not his truck, in his car, in the trunk of his car.  And he would take it to the market.  And I used to help him with that.  And he could, I mean, he could raise some of the largest watermelons and crops of anyone that you could imagine.  And the unique thing that was so intriguing for me, was that Uncle Henry couldn't read or write.  I mean, he could not read or write, but he was one of the smartest men that I first came to know.  In fact, he had rigged up--because back there where we grew up, there was not, there was no electricity or anything like that, or running water in the house.  But he was able to, you know, to rig up some sort of piping and system that he could have oil that would come into the house and into the fireplace that he could--.  And so, it was almost like he had, you know, heating oil that came in, even when he didn't have--even when we didn't have--but he, through the use of gravity, he was able to figure it out, you know, just on his own.  And he did that.  And his cars--he had cars that he would just maintain them himself, like I said, without the ability to read and write.  But he was just able to do some very unique things.  Some of the funny things though, I think that happened is that he would be in trouble with the law from time to time, you know.  And he, because he would--I think he would drink a little moonshine, and he would drive pretty fast around through the little country roads.  And every now and then, the law would get after him.  And they would often tell us about this one time that the law stopped him, and was going to give him a ticket or something, you know.  He was going to give him a ticket.  And I don't know how much it was, or whatever it was.  And allegedly, Uncle Henry told him, "Well, you might as well give me two, then."  He said, "Well, why is that?"  He said, "Because I'm coming back the same way that I'm going.  So, you might as well go on and do it now." (laughter)  But so, but, that was when I used to go down there just to spend time with him out there in the country, which was always just a very enjoyable time for me as a young boy growing up.  And my daddy [Herman Jones] also lived in that same area.  So, at the time, I would visit with him as well during that time, you know, when I was down there.
Story_ID: 35337
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were there any stories in your family that go back to Emancipation and slavery?
Speaker 2: No, not that I, not that they ever shared with me, that we were able to ever, to get.  I know on my dad's [Herman Jones] side--and we started awhile back--some of my sisters, my half-sisters and their family, they started an effort to try to capture some of the history.  And I think they were able to get some, but not--it was really unclear as to how it all happened, and we really never did finish.  One of those efforts were somewhere within the family--some family member--and they were talking about how they were--the individuals ended up being sold, you know, during one of the, during basically sold into slavery, at least during the slave trade.  And then as we--we kept trying to come forward with that, you know.  Again, we never got it real clear.  And then we found out that at some point and time during that--you know, our family--my father's family--you know, they ended up owning land.  They owned a good bit of land down in Livingston [Alabama].  And so, and how that came about--you know, we, you know, we just hear stories of legends, legendary type stories, nothing we could see.  Because apparently, one of the family members either was--I don't know if he was fathered by, you know, really a slave owner, or a white man.  And so, in some part of that process, you know, they ended up with land and stuff in the family, and so forth.  But again, we don't have that.  It's all real sketchy, and we don't have all the information.
Speaker 1: It's interesting.  After doing over a thousand of these, I've heard enough stories to know that's a pretty common story, you know.  That's how land--well, one of the ways, or one of the principal ways, land was acquired by black people after the [American] Civil War.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Their relationship to white people that owned land.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.  And that's, and that's what we were able to get to.  And we could see--we had a picture, I don't have it.  But I know they had a picture that, you know, you could tell that one of them--and this was probably great--this was on my father's side.  And it would have been--probably after Granddaddy--probably great-grand, or something like that.  And then one of them in there was--you could tell that there was a mixed race in that particular, on that side.
Speaker 1: That's true.  That's true for so many people.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean, that land can be traced to that kind of relationship.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Story_ID: 35338
Speaker 1: But, let me finish your mother's [Ella Mae Bolden Hill] side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And then we'll go back to your father's [Herman Jones] side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Now, did your mother have a chance to finish school in--
Speaker 2: She did not.  She, she got to, I think it was the tenth grade.  I think she got to the tenth grade.
Speaker 1: Now, did the school go any further than tenth?
Speaker 2: It did, but I think she--you know, she got pregnant and then had a child.  And I think at that time, she came out of school in order to start to take care of the kid.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The reason why I asked about the school going any--some of the schools didn't go any further than tenth grade.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: So, you had to go to another town and finish.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and she would have had to go.  But I think there was one that was close enough by, that went to the twelfth [grade].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now did your mother share any stories of growing up with you--things that happened to her, that you remember?
Speaker 2: Well, we used to certainly talk quite a bit in my later years.  And probably most of the things that she would share with me were that--even some my older brother would share with me.  A lot of it was just her--sometime it was her struggles, if you will, to, her struggle to raise the five [children] at that time--. Well, it was five of us, but she really had a total of seven.  Two passed early, so I never knew the two that died.  But, and so, a lot of the time it was just her struggles to raise her five kids, which is one of the reasons why I think--even the main reason, that there was a lot of moving around early in my childhood.  It's that we would go to where family could, would support family.  In other words, whether it was in Livingston [Alabama]--and I was talking about Uncle Henry and other family members there.  And then we were in Epes [Alabama] one time.  And she was--we were living with another man which she was living with there in Epes, Alabama which is where I started school at.  And even then we would go back and forth to Livingston, because Uncle Henry would be giving us food and stuff like that, to take care of us during that time.  So, I think that was most of time, that she--was the story.  So, she did, she basically did maid work, domestic work out of peoples' homes.  But she was a determined lady, though.  She was very determined to give us a better life than what she had.  And I think that was kind of the thing that she, that drove her to do the things that she did, and the way that she did them.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 35339
Speaker 1: I'm going to go your father's side.  And then we'll--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --we'll put them together.  Can you give us your father's full name, and spell it?
Speaker 2: It's Herman, H-E-R-M-A-N, Jones, J-O-N-E-S.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: He was also in Livingston [Alabama], and I really don't know his actual date of birth.  I'm told it was January of '29 [1929] as well.  It was the same year as my mom [Ella Mae Bolden Hill].  But that's about all that I know.  I don't--.
Speaker 1: Okay.  1929?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And well, what can you tell us about your father's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: I've seen and talked to--it goes back to my great-grandfather.  So, that was, would have been back in the--probably 18--in the late probably 1800s to early 19--that's basically when it goes back.  And I get that from some of the, at least one of the tombstones that's out in the local graveyard back there.  So, I go back, we usually can trace back to that one a little further than I did with my mother.  Because, again, they--because he and his family, they all lived on this land pretty much that was there.  And they're still there.  They're still, I still have--now, my sisters, they live down there on the land and so forth.
Speaker 1: Now, is this the land that, that was your great-grandfather, the--
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: --offspring of probably a white man?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.  And I don't know if it was the father or if it was his mother, or if it was some way within--as to exactly to which one was the offspring.  I would have thought that it was one of the girls, the ladies, who actually had the land.  And whether that was my grandfather's mother or--I think that's the way it was.  I think that's the way it went.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, the land was, is in--where would you say--
Speaker 2: It's in Livingston.
Speaker 1: In Livingston.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's the Jones, again, the Jones family land now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 35340
Speaker 1: Now, are there any stories on that side of the family [Williams' paternal family] about life down there in Livingston [Alabama]?
Speaker 2: Ah--
Speaker 1: Well, let me ask you this.
Speaker 2: Yeah?
Speaker 1: What would be the difference between having your own land and, you know, sharecropping in Livingston?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, I think, I think the difference--what I--was that--because Dad, because Dad and them had their own land.  And so, when they would raise whatever they would raise on the land, whether it would be, you know, cotton or corn or whatever that was--.  Then they themselves could sell that product, you know, for just basically themselves they would sell it.  And, as opposed to--if you're sharecropping then you're really, you know, you're raising it and providing it to the landowner who then, really never paid you, really.  I mean, but they, you know, you just--because you were living on the land--.  So, what you really did really paid for, paid the rent or paid for whatever food you got from the stores, and things like that, you know.  So, but when you, when you own the land, then basically he raised and he sold whatever it was that he had.  And mostly they did was, which some of them still do.  I mean, they do timber.  They're in the logging business.  And even now, some of my--I think at least one, maybe even two of my nephews down there, they still do that kind of business.  And so, although they--and they--so they still cut timber off the land and take it to the paper mill, and do that sort of thing.  So--.
Speaker 1: Now, is it mostly pine?
Speaker 2: No.  There was some hardwood down there as well.  So, it was hardwood, yeah.  I used to--as a matter of fact I used to do that a lot when I used to go down to visit with him.  I used to work in the logging business with him, and helping him to log.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's hard work, to--
Speaker 2: It's hard work.
Speaker 1: --cut down wood.
Speaker 2: It's hard work, especially when you had--as my dad [Herman Jones] did.  When they, they did not necessarily have the--you didn't have the modern technology of the equipment that you have today.  And so, we ended up, you ended up carrying a lot of the logs on your shoulder.  And, you know, and there's a process for loading the truck, with somebody up--one was a pick and one down below it.  And I did that from the time I was a young kid.  I mean, we used to go and do that a lot.  And so, it is hard work.
Speaker 1: But it was a big advantage having your own land, as, you know--
Speaker 2: It is, it's a huge advantage, I think.  And I think it allowed, and we just--you saw on one of the pictures, my dad riding in the old car.  So, he always had a, you know, transportation.  Now, most of the time it was the truck, you know, his work truck, his logging truck.  But he always had some sort of a transportation there, you know, because, again, he owned his own land.  And so he worked his own land, and he did a lot of that to acquire the things that he needed.
Speaker 1: You were saying your maternal uncle, Henry, had a truck.
Speaker 2: Uncle Henry had, he had cars as well.  Again, because he was on his land, you know.  And he worked his land and raised his crops, took them to his own market as well.
Story_ID: 35341
Speaker 1: Now, did your dad [Herman Jones] have a chance to finish school?
Speaker 2: I don't think so, I don't think so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I really don't--I was trying to think back when you asked that, of who within my family did finish.  I know they all went to school.  I think some of my, one of my aunts may have graduated.  But most of them did not finish school.  They got, like I say, maybe sometime it was ninth grade, tenth grade, something like that.  But I don't remember a lot of them talking about graduating from school.  I know that I was the first in my family to go to college.  I was the first one, first generation college student out of that family on either side, on either side.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, is there--was your father satisfied with what he was doing, or did he have any ideas of leaving Alabama?  Because a lot of people were going north.
Speaker 2: No.  I think he was, I think Dad was pretty satisfied with his life.  I mean, I think he was--as most would say, he was--I guess by those standards he was fairly successful at his business.  I mean, he made enough to, as they say, keep food on the table and keep a roof over the heads of the family, you know.  So, I think by that standard, he probably was.  He didn't, I never heard him talk about, you know, wanting to leave or go do something else.
Story_ID: 35342
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, is there a story about how your parents [Ella Mae Bolden Hill and Herman Jones] met?
Speaker 2: No.  Just--they grew up together.  I mean, when you grow up down in Livingston [Alabama]--And it was really not a town.  It was out in the countryside there.  And again, being the same age and--I mean, all--a lot of our families from this little home, this little town--I don't even call it a town, because it wasn't a town.  But in this area that they grew up in, there was only, there were certain--I would say a limited number of families in that area.  And so, and so there was not a lot of moving around, you know, in and out.  So, the families that were there was kind of the families, you know, who were there.  And so, and you'll find that, you know, there was, you know, one married into one family and the other, you know, married--And that's kind of the way--. I know my aunt--for example, my dad's wife, who he eventually married--so my dad's wife is the sister of my--I would say my uncle, is the sister of my uncle.  So, in other words, my mom and my aunt, you know--so they both--again, there was the Green family and the Bolden family.  And so, you know, so it was that--so they, you know--.  One--you know, again, my aunt, she married the brother of my daddy's wife.  I mean, so, you know, it was--.  So, I think they were all--they just grew up together, and that's where they eventually--.  Some married, and some didn't.  Like my mom and dad, they did not marry.  They was never married.  Because I think my dad was--I don't remember when he got married, but I know that it was like almost as if he had two sets of families, two.  Because by his wife--I have a sister that is, she and I, we were born the same year, maybe about four months apart.  And my brother, who's also--you know, my father is his father.  Where my brother--and he also by his wife has another daughter, that my brother who's older, and the daughter who's a little bit older, they were born the same year.  So, there were two of us that were--four of us, I think that were born in the same year group.
Speaker 1: Now, was the sibling that was born when your mother was in school, is that your father's--
Speaker 2: No, it's not my father's.  Yeah, by my father, there are--by my mother and father, there were two of us.  And that's--again, one, his name is, that's Willis Williams.  And I'm Willie Williams.  And he's about three years--I think three, '48 [1948]--yeah, he was born in '48 [1948].  He's about three years older than I am.  So, there's two of us by my father.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then she had two older ones by another man, and then one by another man.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, growing up, so--well, what year did your parents get together, I guess?  In about what year?  It would be about--
Speaker 2: It would have been probably '40--
Speaker 1: '48 [1948] or something?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's when the first--but I would probably--even a little bit before that.  But yeah, it was around, say around the '47 [1947], '48 [1948] timeframe.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 35343
Speaker 1: So, alright, so your parents [Ella Mae Bolden Hill and Herman Jones] got together around 1948 or so?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But at that time, was your father already married to somebody else?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  Yeah, from when I talked to my stepmother--she and I, we talked all the time.  And she was, she was much younger than my mom or my dad.  But--you know--and I'm going to have to correct something.  Because I mean, there's something that didn't sound right, just now when I said it.  Because I think my--I think my mother was also much younger than my dad.  And I had said that I thought they were born in the same year.  But that's not true.  I think he--as a matter of fact, I know he was.  Because she used to say that he was much older than her, maybe ten or twelve years, I think, older than her.
Speaker 1: That makes a difference.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You gave the year '29 [1929] for him.
Speaker 2: No, that's my mom.  I know that, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's your mom, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so--
Speaker 1: And your father then would be--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so it would have been--
Speaker 1: If it's ten years, that would take you back to 1919 or something.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: 1918, 1919.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And that probably would been a little bit closer, I think, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You said hers was '27 [1927] in the beginning.
Speaker 2: No, no.  My mom?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: My mom was '29 [1929].  My mom was June 1 of '29 [1929].
Speaker 1: Alright.  And your dad was probably 1919?
Speaker 2: Probably was, yeah.
Speaker 1: At any rate, so, but your mother had to raise everybody herself.  Is that what--
Speaker 2: Right, yeah, yeah.  And she--when she, and she raised pretty much us by herself.  Now, she at times--that's when she'd move around.  I mean, you know, if she--although she didn't marry--but if she began to live with another man, some other man, then we would move to that area.  And the earliest I remember of that, was after we left Livingston [Alabama], we moved to Epes, Alabama.  And there was a gentleman there that she lived with.  His name was Mr. Lawson.  I don't remember his first name, but he was Mr. Lawson.  And we, we stayed there for a few years, because I know I went to school there.  I started school there, and I started first and second grade.  I went there in Epes.  And I--
Speaker 1: Okay.  I was just thinking about this.  I guess in those days--I guess in that situation, if you're a sharecropper and you don't have a man--the man is the guy that's going to do the, most of the heavy farm work.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, how can you even get a place to live?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Unless you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (simultaneous) unless you go--
Speaker 1: Because if you're a woman raising kids, where are you going to live?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's--
Speaker 2: Yeah, because she--when we were born, I know that most of us--as a matter of fact, probably all of us--were born in, I want to say either in Uncle Henry's house, I think.  I think that's where we--because you know, we were born with a midwife, and all of that sort of thing.  And I think it was in Uncle Henry's house.
Story_ID: 35344
Speaker 1: And I think the only time we'd be--and I know we moved--I remember moving to another place there in Livingston [Alabama].  And I think at that time--either before--and maybe it was right during the time we, during the time we were born, or something--but my mother [Ella Mae Bolden Hill], that's when she married.  She married a Williams.  And that is where we got our name from, you know, the Williams name.
Speaker 2: How old were you at this point?
Speaker 1: How old was--
Speaker 2: Were you when she married Mr. Williams?
Speaker 1: You know, I don't know, because I've always had the name.  So, that's why I say I don't know if she married him before we were born.  She may have married him before we were born, or after we were born.  We just went back and--we just went back now, and we're going to get our birth certificates.  And my brother [Willis Williams] was telling me, my brother was just telling me just a day or so ago that, you know, he went back because he's getting ready to retire.  And he went back to the county, I mean from the state--to the state capitol to get his birth certificate.  And when he first filled out the form for his birth certificate, he put down what we know, just like what I gave you.  I mean, her name was Ella Mae.  And then we said Bolden, which is her maiden name.  And so, we just automatically assumed that that's what would be on the birth certificate.  And so, we still have an aunt who--my mother's sister--who is, I think she may be just a year next to my mother.  And so, my brother said he called her, we call her Aunt Honey.  So, he called Aunt Honey and said, you know, they couldn't find any record.  And he needed it, because he was getting ready--you know--of the birth or anything.  And she said--so, she told him to have them look under Williams.  And her name was--and so her name when he was born--I guess the rest of us that was on, that's on record, is really is Ella Mae Williams, not Ella Mae Bolden.  And so, it was Ella Mae Williams.  And he put that in, and they was able to locate it.  So, either she took the name prior to any of us being born, or they were married prior to any of us being born.  So, and so I just did mine and sent mine in.  So, I put the same thing on mine to see if I can get one, because I don't have one either.  I think the younger--when she had already--my mother had gotten the younger brother [Ellis Williams] whose--she had gotten his birth certificate.  And but because--yeah, so we thought that was--but we thought that was the way to go.  So, I think even trying to piece that together, I think she may have--either she married him before, or she lived with him and took the name Williams when we were born.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 35345
Speaker 1: So, that does seem like a tough situation, you know, to be in.  So, she [Ella Mae Bolden Hill] had to take care of five kids and then try to figure out, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --how to live and provide for all of you, with the help of the family, I guess?
Speaker 2: Right.  It was--
Speaker 1: Your uncle [Henry] and other people.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  Because when we would go--I mean we moved--especially early in our lives--we moved, as I say, from there in Livingston [Alabama] I remember we moved to another place.  And then we moved to Epes [Alabama].  And then we stayed there for a couple of years.  And then we moved to Theodore, Alabama down in Mobile County.  And we stayed down there for a few years.  And that was, when we moved down there, that is when she was just on her own, you know.  So, that's when she was no longer with him.  So, we moved down there really next to one of her sisters, one of my aunts.  Again, with family.  And so, we always was kind of tied to the family.  If we had family somewhere, that's where we moved.  And then she would--and I remember her getting a job down there working, again, in domestic work--housecleaning, you know, and washing and ironing and that sort of thing.  And that's kind of the way we began to make ends meet.  So, we stayed down there for about three years before moving to Moundville [Alabama]. (Simultaneous)
Story_ID: 35346
Speaker 1: Now, I just want to ask before we get too far into your growing up.  When you think about your parents' [Ella Mae Bolden Hill and Herman Jones] personalities--their dispositions, how they walk and talk, what they look like, what they're interested in--who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I think the most--I think is my mom, I think.  I take a lot from my dad but, I think, the most from my mom.  My mom had a saying that she used, because she always, she was always stressing education for us.  I mean education, education.  And she pushed us hard there.  And she always told me that I could, basically, that I could do anything I wanted to.  And her saying was that kind of, "If Man could do it, then you can do it.  But if it's something that only God can do, then you need to leave that to God to do it."  And so that is--and that really helped shape me, helped mold me.  As you say, those that I do.  Because I figure if it's something that--if Man could do it, then I can do it.  You know, you set your mind to it.  Go back to it.  You prepare yourself and you commit yourself to doing it, and you'll be successful at it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 35347
Speaker 1: You grew up in a lot of different places [in Alabama], but what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, I think--I go back to Moundville [Alabama].  I go back to Moundville.  I remember, because that's where I spent most of my childhood.  Because when we arrived there, I was in the sixth grade.  And I stayed there all the way through the rest--through high school, which is the longest that we'd ever lived in any one place.  And I tell you, the thing there that was always just kind of a fun time for us, was sandlot baseball.  I mean, that was always big there.  Every little town had their baseball team.  And you know, and they was--as we all say, out in the cow pastures.  It was really where most of the diamonds were.  I mean, there was no ballpark.  And literally, I think, just about every one--except for ours in Moundville--because we had that park there where the Indian mounds and stuff was.  That was kind of a little park there that we had, had diamonds there.  But that was--
Speaker 1: Now, that wasn't segregated or anything?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was segregated.  We had our own little, we had our own area there, and we just played there.  And then we--then there was a number of little towns in and around Moundville--a little place called Havana, or Tusi (ph) Town, or little places like that.  They would also have ball teams.  And so, we would travel to those little towns.  They would come there and, you know--.  So, we used to, those were the fun times.  So, I always remember that as some of the good parts of growing up, some of the fun times of growing up, you know.  You got--and then also in that same area was our Sunrise Service that we would have on the mountains.  Now that was, that was put on, that was not segregated.  It was put on by the local church.  It was a white church that put it on.  But we would often go to it.  So, our thing was to--you would stay up all night, especially once we got to be a teenager.  So, you stay up all night.  Saturday night--if you were out partying or at the juke joints as we called them--.  And then we would go over to the park, you know, with blankets and everything else, that early morning while they did the Sunrise Service which was, I thought it was always very well done.  I mean, just the way--with the lighting and everything, with the tomb, you know, and the rolling of the stone away.  And then the cross up on one of the high mountains, you know, and all that, how they acted that out.  So that was, that was always--and that was a big thing within our community.  We lived there because we were, you know, across the tracks there.  But we could, and we could just--you could go there and just watch.  You didn't necessarily participate, but you could go there and watch it, and watch that.  And that was always a fun time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Any other sights, sounds or smells?
Speaker 2: Well, the--because you know, you always got the--you smell the, the little restaurants that you had there, you know, with the fried fish and, you know, and the grease smells that you got.  And the other--but probably one of the--so, that was always there.  But the other thing, that from where I grew up, is--and I think you'll see a picture in there of--.  It was three of us who basically grew up together, from the time I got to Moundsville, three close friends.  I mean, we became really like brothers.  And we, and two of us still are.  One has died.  But two of us, we still are.  And so, we always had some sort of old car that we, that we would fix.  We would, I mean we would do all the repairs ourselves, I mean, to include--.  You know, if we had to take an engine out without even having the tools--or taking the transmission out.  We could out in the back of where we was living and under the shade tree.  I guess that's why we call it the shade tree mechanics.  And we would, and we would do our own repairs and all that.  And so there was always this, these old cars that was down there.  But there was, but there was--so it was always this, you know, these old cars around that would, that we would be fixing on and riding in, and so forth.  And so, it was always a lot of fun times with those guys doing that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 35348
Speaker 1: Now, what about church?  Was there a family, a particular family church you attended?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.  Yeah, and the guy is still there today, as a matter of fact.  He's still there, that my mom [Ella Mae Bolden Hill]--.  It's the First Baptist Church of Moundville [Alabama].  It's a Missionary Baptist Church.
Speaker 1: First Missionary Baptist Church?
Speaker 2: Of Moundville, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, well, tell us about church.  Did your family spend a lot of time in--.
Speaker 2: Initially, my mother did not spend as much, when I was younger.  She did later on.  But there was always the church connection.  Again, my uncle who was there--he was there.  He was a deacon in the church.  And again, later in life when my mom was there, she would sing and stuff in the choir.  So, there was always church.  But I always was in the church, and active in the church from the time I was a youngster until I was a young one.  And you know, whether it be Sunday School, you know, what we call BTU which is Baptist Training Union, we'd go.  So, Sunday was pretty much a day of churchgoing for us.  And the church is still there.  I still go back there, you know, and the family is still there, still in the same church.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 35349
Speaker 1: Now, well, you started school, that's right, in the first grade?
Speaker 2: Right, in Epes, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Were there any particular teachers or activities that you remember from, you know, the school in Epes?
Speaker 2: Yeah, probably my, my remembrance of--if not so much the teachers per se, but just, again, where we grew up.  We, when we moved up there to go up to live with Mr. Lawson, we basically was living in a, it's a two-room house.  And I always remember that, because there was a place where the kitchen and the stove was.  There was a bed that was over in the, beside the corner of that.  And I think there was a couple who stayed in there.  And I think in the--it wasn't called a living room--but in the other room, I think there was two beds in there.  So, my, you know, my mother [Ella Mae Bolden Hill] and Mr. Lawson's room.  And there was a couple more in the other one.  And then I think one of our--I think the oldest daughter, the one who my mother--she didn't live there with us.  She lived with another family member still down in Livingston [Alabama], I think that's where she was.  So, yeah, so I always remember that two-room house that was there.  And the schoolhouse, what I remember most about it, was it--I think it was like three rooms.  And it went first through sixth [grades].  But it was one of those multi-purpose buildings.  Yeah, the first grade was what would be, could be viewed as the dressing room behind the stage.  And that's where the first grade was.  The second grade was really up on the stage of the building.  And so, they were there.  And then the third grade would be where the--let's see--third and fourth grade, I think it was.  Maybe it was the third grade.  It was, it would be where the audience was if you were sitting in an auditorium.  And then there was a, there was a partition that they could pull that could separate--let me see, third and fourth from fifth and sixth.  And that was--but I don't recall a lot of the teachers though, when I was there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  They're all black teachers?  This is days of segregation.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, it was all segregated.  During that time, even when we moved to Moundville [Alabama], your teachers were--and some kids, they lived in the--they came into the community.  They became--they boarded, you know, they boarded with some of the families there in the area.  And I recall in my first few years there, there were a number of them that was doing it.  And they were out of college.  As a matter of fact, most of them were from Stillman College [Tuscaloosa, Alabama], where I came from.  They would--you know, which was the closest.  And they would--and so they would come down and they would be, they would work there and board there during the week.  And sometime they would go back, to home, on the weekend.  So, they were pretty much in the community.  But I think that was--that was what I, what you saw even at Epes--the same thing.  You know, when they got there--.  They weren't over in the area where I was, but they lived in and around the school, and they lived with some of the families who was in and around the school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you say most of them were young?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh huh.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Just coming out of Stillman?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  There was a number of them who--.  I know when we got, when we got to Moundville there was a number of them that was--yeah, it was a couple who had been there for a little while.  But a number of them, you could see they were just coming out of school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 35350
Speaker 1: Now, did you like school in those days?
Speaker 2: I did.  I always, yeah, I always enjoyed school.  I was--school came pretty easy to me.  And I think--but it just, it did.  I didn't have any issue with the courses.  I usually--always an honor student, all the way through, really all the way through college.  I was usually always on the honor roll, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You say in the early days there weren't any particular teachers that stood out or anything.  So, you were in Epes [Alabama] for first grade through--
Speaker 2: First through--first and second [grades].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this would--am I calculating this right?  This would be 1958, I guess, when you were in the second grade, or what?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: '59 [1959]?
Speaker 2: Ah--
Speaker 1: It would be '59 [1959], wouldn't it, yeah?
Speaker 2: It would have been 50--yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But that was--yeah, most of the teachers that--and even like I said, maybe at the time--because I didn't stay there as long.  But most of the teachers that I remember and the ones that had significant impact on me, I think was once I got to Moundville [Alabama].  I think that's when--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, where did you go after Epes?
Speaker 1: I went to Theodore [Alabama].
Speaker 2: Theodore, okay.
Speaker 1: Theodore, yeah, down in Mobile County.  Went to--
Speaker 2: Now, is this near the Gulf [of Mexico]?
Speaker 1: Uh huh.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Uh huh, uh huh, uh huh, yeah.
Speaker 2: What was the name of the school there?
Speaker 1: It's Mary Weeks Burough, B-U-R-O-U-G-H [Mary Weeks Burroughs Elementary School].
Speaker 2: Now, was she a black educator from down there?
Speaker 1: Uh huh, I think, yeah.  I think that's exactly where that came from.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Was it bigger than the one in Epes?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, it was.  There were, there were--this was, this--again, this little--Theodore was a little larger town that Epes was.  I don't know how many students, but you had--and you--because this was just a, Mary Weeks Burroughs was an elementary school.  So you went, it was the same as Epes was, as well.  And I think they, I think whether you left Epes or whether you left--like down in Mary Weeks Burough there was always another high school that you went to somewhere, that you would go.  And because I remember my, some of my older brothers, they went to, down in Mobile [Alabama].  I can't think of the name of the school, but they went there.  They would go to that.  And I do remember the one from Epes, they would go into Livingston [Alabama].  And they would go to high school in the town of Livingston, in the actual town of Livingston, not where we grew up at.
Story_ID: 35351
Speaker 1: Now, considering that Theodore [Alabama] was in Mobile County, and this is 1959--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And they're so many great baseball players that came out of Mobile--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you hear about them growing up?
Speaker 2: I did not--
Speaker 1: (unintelligible).
Speaker 2: I didn't, no I didn't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because Theodore, I mean I probably, I would say out of the three years that I was there, I don't remember even going into Mobile.  I think I remember one time they, some of the family members took us to Dolphin Island, you know, kind of to the beach sort of thing.  That was, but I don't remember going to Mobile hardly at all at that time.
Speaker 1: Billy Williams [also a HistoryMaker], when we interviewed him, he was talking about all the ball players that came out of there, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Hank Aaron [professional baseball player] and his brother [Tommie Aaron]--
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: --and him and his brother, and he just started naming them.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Lots of them, they came out of Mobile.  Now, you know, they gathered from the surrounding area, too, you know.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So I just wondered if--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Because you mentioned sandlot baseball.
Speaker 2: Sandlot baseball, yeah.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: It was, it was.  I mean, but I don't, again, I don't remember from that time being exposed to much of it down in Theodore at all.
Story_ID: 35352
Speaker 1: Now, did you have a TV at that point?
Speaker 2: No.  No, we didn't have, we didn't have TV.  I don't--we didn't have TV.  I used to go--I remember a neighbor had a TV, and there was some time, you know, when we could go next door to them to watch something, like Lawrence Welk's show [The Lawrence Welk Show] or something, you know.  I mean, (laughter) that was about it.  I mean, it was--.  Yeah, no, we didn't, we didn't have any--.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: I (unclear) think Lawrence Welk had but one black tap dancer on his show.
Speaker 2: That's probably about it, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: At any rate, but so, you were saying earlier that your [material] uncle [Henry] didn't have electricity out where he was.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: For a long time.
Speaker 2: Right, that was, yeah, down in Livingston [Alabama].  But see, I don't think we had--I don't think I ever, in my family, we ever had either electricity or running water until we got to Moundville [Alabama].  And I think we--until we got to Moundville--.  Initially, when we got to Moundville, I remember having electricity, but we didn't have running water, initially.  Then, but prior to getting out of high school, I remember we actually had running water.  And my mother [Ella Mae Bolden Hill] may have, I know we had a radio.  I used to have a little battery radio.  I used to use that when I was in high school.  But I don't know, I don't recall, we may have, I don't even think we had a television while I was--probably until maybe my last year in high school, or after I was in college did we get, get my mother one.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, the news would come basically from the radio, I guess?
Speaker 2: The radio, yeah.  I used to have this little radio that I used to use.  That's pretty much where you got it from.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you get like newspapers in the house a lot?
Speaker 2: No, no.  We had, you know, at school of course we would--.  Again, that's when we got to Moundville.  At school you would have papers there, and could read the newspaper and stuff like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 35353
Speaker 1: So, you said like school was easy for you, you were saying.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Was there, I mean, did--now, school had to be like a major source of information, I guess?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was.  I mean, that's where you got it.  Again--
Speaker 1: It should be, but--
Speaker 2: Right.  And that's where your educators were.  I mean, so your teachers--and so that really is, it was a big source of information.  That's where you got it from.  And again, and that, that's why I keep going to Moundville [Alabama], is that the community there--the community as a whole--to include the teachers, to include other elders in the neighborhood--,  They really, I think, put their heart and soul into the young folks, you know, to raise the young folks right and to encourage them and, you know, and helping them in any way that they could, in order to--in order to make it.
Speaker 1: Now, do you remember when you were in elementary school ever meeting a black person who was in the military?  Or anybody that was in the military?
Speaker 2: Yeah, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.  No, it was just--I think that's where--when I got ready to go into the military, it was kind of strange even for me, because I had--there was no one in the family that was military.  There was--I can't think of anyone even in the neighborhood that was in the military.  I think when I was in junior high--I think it was junior high.  I remember one family in Moundville where an individual was in the [U.S.] Army.  And I remember him coming home just once.  So, I didn't see him much, but I heard that he was in the Army.  And that would have been probably around the '67 [1967], '68 [1968]--maybe something like that--'68 [1968] timeframe, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 35354
Speaker 1: So, when you were growing up [in Alabama], what were you--did you have to work, growing up?  I imagine in a rural community, you had to do a lot of work.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  As a matter of fact, I, as long as I can remember back then, I was working doing something.  In some cases, it was just what my mom [Ella Mae Bolden Hill] did.  I mean, in some cases it was, I mean, it was doing domestic work, where I was cleaning folks' houses.  You know, I was kind of a maid service.  So, I was cutting grass or doing things like that early on.  As a matter of fact, even now--in the time I was in--the early years when I was down in Theodore [Alabama], I mean we used to, I remember we used to go down to Bellingrath Gardens [garden estate], which is--.  And we used to, you know, we used to help tend the flowers and stuff, where we'd be tending the weeds and grass and stuff.  I didn't--I did that.  We shook pecans.  You know, we used to pick up pecans for them, you know, help to harvest pecans, and doing things like that.  And that was early on.  Those days was probably more in Theodore area days.  It was three years.  And then in Moundville [Alabama], early on it was really picking cotton.  You know, I used to pick a lot of, we used to do that or tend the cotton fields when we was growing up.
Speaker 1: Is that what you call chopping cotton?
Speaker 2: Chopping cotton, there you go.  See, so you got to, yeah, you used to do the chopping, you know, during the early part.  And then I used to pick the cotton until later on in the fall, once it was ready.  So, I did that.  And then when I became old enough to maybe kind of get at least a job that was controlled by laws, by minimum wages and stuff, then I went and I did janitor work at--well, really even before then, I was doing janitor work at like the little supermarket there at the time.  I used to go in at night and stock shelves and clean the floors, doing that.
Speaker 1: Now, how old were you when you started doing that?
Speaker 2: Probably 13, 12, 13--11, 12, 13 [years old].  Yeah, because I, because by the time I got sixteen [years old], then I had what you consider a regular kind of job, you know.  But the earlier ones were more domestic--farm, you know, cotton picking and stuff like that was the first three years.  So, from the time I got there and then--and then I worked at a textile plant where I was--more janitor work, but also beginning to cut some patterns and things like that.  And then, yeah, and then during the summer months we'd do more field work, until I became older.  Then I remember the first, probably the first paying job was at the Veteran's Hospital there in Tuscaloosa [Alabama].  I think I was sixteen.  And they was doing, you know, they used to do summer hiring, just like a lot of the government workers, government offices, do now.  And they--and so I got a regular job there, if you will, where as, again, cutting grass and de-weeding and lawn service, I guess.  And I think I did, I went back at least two summers, I think, and did that.  Maybe even three, but I know I did take a couple of summers doing that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then--because during the school year we just, we just, we would go and--again, after school--until all the cotton was done--after school you would--the truck, the guy would come around with his truck and pick us up and we'd go out and pick cotton from the time we got out of school until dark.  And then (unclear)--.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 35355
Speaker 1: Now Moundville [Alabama], when you moved to Moundville, you were in the sixth grade, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And this is--so this is like, from what I hear you saying, it was like kind of a turnaround when you went to Moundville?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  Yeah, that was kind of it.  I mean, I recall--because even there, there's a lot of very positive things beginning to happen in life, to include, like I said, my mother [Ella Mae Bolden Hill] and her working.  I think she--at some point in there I think she even had a job up at the--I can remember the time at the University of Alabama, where she was doing, you know, maid work.  I mean, and that.  So that was, that was good.  And then--but that was--and we had a couple of uncles who was right there.  I mean really right in the same, on the same, a couple of houses just one way or the other there, and their families and stuff.  So, we, so it became a much more stable family environment.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 35356
Speaker 1: So, did you have a favorite activity when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Probably early on, it was just playing ball, playing ball.  And then later on it was fixing on old cars.  And that was kind of it, too.  But after I became sixteen [years old] and got my driver's license and did that--and that became my favorite thing that we used to love to do.
Speaker 1: I think cars last longer in the south than they do in the north.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, we had--
Speaker 1: Save more on parts and stuff.
Speaker 2: We did, we did.  We had some--we, of course, at the time I mean, they would last.  It wasn't very--yeah, I guess they were in pretty good shape.  I mean, you know, they--but you know, you get what you pay for.  So, the most I paid for--I think my first car was seventy-five dollars, you know.  I bought it and it lasted me for, I don't know, a couple of years.  And then I think the next one, I think I paid $120 for it, because I bought it in Detroit [Michigan].  And it--mechanically it was good--because it was, the salt and stuff was eating on it.  So, but then I went up and got that just before coming back to college, because I went there and worked between my last year in high school and my first year of college.
Speaker 1: Did you have relatives in Detroit?
Speaker 2: No, but I went with my buddies.  There was three guys.  There was the three of us.  They both had--some of their family had gone up to Detroit, again, working in the auto industry, and that sort of thing.  So, they were there.  And so, so we decided that we were going to go up there and work to make some money, so that we could come back and go to college.  And so, we could make a little bit more there.  And so, we took off and went up there and worked for three months, and came back.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you were active, doing a lot of things.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 35357
Speaker 1: Now, did you have a favorite subject in school, in Moundville [Alabama]?
Speaker 2: I was--I used to love math.  I was a math--I used to love math.
Speaker 1: What was the name of your school?  Now, you start off sixth grade there.  Were you in a junior high school?
Speaker 2: No, it was Moundville Public School.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So it was, and it went to, it was, went from first through twelve [grades].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, this is still segregation, right?
Speaker 2: It was still, yeah, it was segregated, yeah.
Speaker 1: So this is, you were in the sixth grade, what, in 1965?
Speaker 2: No, it would have been before that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It would like been like '62 [1962], '63 [1963].  Yeah, because I graduated in '70 [1970].  I graduated from high school in '70 [1970], so it would have about--it would have been, maybe it was--
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's about right--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, that's about right.
Speaker 1: About '65 [1965], I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I'm trying to calculate based on my age, because you're two years younger than I am.  I'm trying to figure out--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --figure out like--.  Yeah, but that's--
Speaker 2: Well, see the the--
Speaker 1: '63 [1963]--
Speaker 2: No, it would have been '63 [1963], yeah.  (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: Because it would--because I, I mean, I was born in '51 [1951], and so you figure if--.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: At any rate, so the same school took you all the way through?
Speaker 2: Took me all the way through from the sixth grade--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --all the way through to--
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: --to the twelfth [grade].
Speaker 1: And once again, I guess some of your teachers were from Stillman [College, Tuscaloosa, Alabama]?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, oh yeah.  That was--and again, they were teachers who was very instrumental.  And really, they, it was because of them that I ended up at Stillman.  Because coming out of high school, again, I did not see that I had the resources to go to college.  So--
Speaker 1: But you were an honor student, right?
Speaker 2: I was an honor student, you know.  But again, as far as what I was exposed to, and what I thought that I was going to be able to do, I didn't see--I didn't see that.  So, me and my other two, my two buddies, we decided that we were going to--we were going to join the [U.S.] Air Force.  So, we was going to enlist in the Air Force.  I mean, that was--.  We was going to do something--and--but we was going to enlist in the Air Force.  So--
Story_ID: 35358
Speaker 1: Now, what did your brother do, Willis [Williams]?  Did he--
Speaker 2: He just went in the job market and he worked his way up through, just through work.  He didn't go to school.  He just worked his way up through--.  None of them [Williams' siblings], again, they, none of them went to--I was the first one to go to--.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --to go to college.  But, and it, you know, he was quite successful.  He manages--well, I think he's getting ready to retire now, but he was managing one of the local factories there in Tuscaloosa [Alabama].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 35359
Speaker 1: But you thought, you thought that you weren't going to go to college, and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, because I--so, I was going to--we was [Williams and his friends] going to enlist in the [U.S.] Air Force, and so we did--the three of us, again, those same three.  We'd been together since we were in the sixth grade, sixth or seventh grade.  And so we decided that we would go up to Tuscaloosa to join the Air Force.  And so, we went up and went to see the recruiter, and said we was there to take the test to join the Air Force and, you know--because taking the test wasn't the issue.  You know, the scores wasn't, there was no issues there.  And so, we knew we'd do it.  But what happened once we got back, the principal as well as the teachers [at Moundville Public School, Moundville, Alabama] heard about it, you know.  And so they, they wasn't having any of that, you know.  Again, because of--here we were, probably within the school--we, you know, again, we was honor students.  We were either all--either a student government president or a vice president.  We was in leadership positions.  And again, we, you know--and the black males in there, we was doing it.  And then we decided we're not going to college.  And so, so they wasn't having any of that.  And so, so they called us in, and held kangaroo court on us.  I call it a kangaroo court, because they, (laughter) because of what they did.  They basically put us in front of the classroom and put three chairs up there.  And the teachers, they was sitting back there.  And they began to quiz us as to why is it we were not going to college.  I mean, why is that we were not going on to, going on to school?
Speaker 1: Did they provide any formal counseling for you all before you made that decision, or did you kind of make that decision before they counseled you?
Speaker 2: I think we made that decision before they counseled us, and so--
Speaker 1: So they had to do an emergency--
Speaker 2: They did, they did.  And they did.  I mean when they asked us--and I was the only one that, in their mind, that had a legitimate excuse for not going, you know, for not going.  Because I didn't--again, they knew my situation.  You know--welfare kid, you know, single parent, you know, who was struggling just to make ends meet.  And so, so they kind of--they said okay, we got it.  We understand, we got that.  And then when they asked the other two, who were, you know, living with their mom and dad--and I think their mom and dad was probably both working.  At least they had--they were better off--or they had older siblings who was better off--that when they just asked them about why it is they were not going--well, you see, they would just say well, we're not going because he's not going.  (laughter)  You know, and, you know--so they, like I said, they basically had an emergency session there, I guess.  And they do--what I have to come to learn was that they took my excuse away.  And they asked, "Okay, if we get you some help, will you go to school?"  So, well, if the reason I wasn't going was because I didn't have the resources, and now you say you're going to get me some, so you've taken that excuse away.  So, that has become one of those things that I think has helped me, is that we do, we look to take away excuses for failure.  And we do that, you know, we should do that as much as possible for those who are in need.  And that's what they did for me.  They took away my excuse for failure, and they--and so they got me.  And at graduation they, I was accepted.  I got some scholarship and some work study, you know, a kind of grant.  You know, and they pieced together whatever they could piece together to get me in.  And that's how I ended up at Stillman [College, Tuscaloosa].
Speaker 1: Well, who were they?  I mean, we can name them, this is history.  So--
Speaker 2: Yeah...
Speaker 1: Was it, it was the principal and--
Speaker 2: Well, the principal, yeah.  One was the principal, Mr. Cephus.
Speaker 1: That's C-E--
Speaker 2: C-E-P-H-U-S--Norman.  Norman Cephus, he was the principal.  Miss Long, I think she was my, at the time she was probably our high school, probably my class teacher there, for our class.  Then we had a, there was a Mr. Kennedy.  I remember Joseph Kennedy.  He was like the coach and, as well, I think he taught biology.  And seems to me there was one other one in there.  But those three, I remember those very, very distinctly, you know, calling us in and giving us the going-over pretty good.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 35360
Speaker 1: Now, I've neglected to ask you up to this point.  Now this is 1970.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But we're going back a little bit.  When you were in middle school and the first years of high school, Alabama was like a civil rights bull's eye.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: I mean everything was going on.
Speaker 2: Everything.
Speaker 1: So, did you, were you aware or touched by any of the civil rights activities?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean the governor was George Wallace and--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We was touched by, we was touched by all of that, really.  I mean, of course, we used to have--because [Dr.] Martin Luther King never came to our town directly.  But some of the other leaders from the Southern [Christian] Leadership Conference [SCLC], they would come.  And we used to have our mass meetings at the church and all of that, when we was trying to get, you know, voter's registration and those sort of things.  So, you know, so they would come to the churches and we would, and they would have the meetings where they would begin to try to get folks--.  Now, at the time we were there and hearing it, it wasn't--because we wasn't the target of them.  But we would certainly be there, because you know what happened in Birmingham [Alabama] right up the street.  So, we were--which is not too far from there.  And so, we were, we were very much aware of what was going on, because Montgomery [Alabama] is the county seat, and all of that.  And so all, all of those activities were going on around us.  And, because when we would have--you know, we would have our meetings.  I mean it was no, I mean it was no secret as to that those meetings was going on.  And also it was no secret that there were lots of folks who was either driving by and, you know, saying things that, you know, that was not kind to the people who were there.  And again, we were going under the leadership of what Dr. Martin Luther King, which was non-violence.  I mean, it was just the way of, you know, the whole--just to get folks registered to get them out to vote so you could exercise your rights.  And that's what that was.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did, and did your neighbors get a chance to vote before you graduated from high school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, they did.  As a matter of fact, we, that was, that was, especially in those--I would say in the last year or so--because again, our teachers, they were a big help.  They was a big help in the community because, you know, again, people having not been exposed to it, or having not kept up with everything that was going on--.  And we probably didn't do everything we could have, because I think we probably could have, you know, helped with transportation.  Because most people didn't have cars or anything like that.  So that's where, you know--.  But because I think we may--I know we had some registrations.  I remember in some of the churches there was registration drives.  So, we would so some registration.  It's just that I don't remember if we actually had voting booths in the church.  Probably not.  They probably was in that little town, but I do remember them being able to do that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, there wasn't any real white retaliation, other than the name calling and stuff like that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  Wasn't no major riots or anything that I can actually recall.  I mean they, you know, there was always individual type flare-ups.
Story_ID: 35361
Speaker 1: I mean, again, because you had--you know in '68 [1968] when [Governor George] Wallace was at the University of Alabama [Tuscaloosa, Alabama] and, you know, he was standing in the door and, you know, and he continued to preach that throughout the whole area.  So, I mean, so he had, he had followers as well, you know, on segregation.  Because we still--.  I think even up to the time that even when I left there--.  You know, as you said, the one restaurant that was in the town there--I mean, I think it was still white only, even when I left there in '70 [1970].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: If it was not, it was understood.  It may not have been--you know, the writing may not have been on the door, but it was understood that we didn't--that we could go in to the counter and buy something, or we could buy something and pick it up at the back door, or something like that.  But we could not go in and sit down and eat.  We didn't do that.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  So it still, the town [Moundville, Alabama] was still segregated.  Did, were the signs up in the town, I mean?
Speaker 1: I don't, I don't recall the signs being up.  I think there were, again, I think it was just understood.  But I don't remember the signs being up.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Because it costs money to make the signs, I guess.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I guess.
Story_ID: 35362
Speaker 1: So, now Stillman College [Tuscaloosa, Alabama].  Now, that's, is that close by--
Speaker 2: Moundville [Alabama]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Moundville.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's, yeah it's about twelve to fifteen miles.  It's, and Stillman is the same--because it's in the same city as the University of Alabama.  It's just that one's on one side of the town and one is on the other side of town.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And that's in--
Speaker 2: Tuscaloosa.
Speaker 1: Tuscaloosa.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And I never thought about where the University of Alabama was.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's in--
Speaker 1: I always thought it was in---but it's in Tuscaloosa?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's in Tuscaloosa.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It's a university town.
Speaker 2: It is, it is.
Speaker 1: Alright.  So, well, had you been on the campus before?
Speaker 2: At Stillman?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had not.
Speaker 1: Well, was it kind of fascinating to be at a place that was close by, but you had never been to?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was, it was.  It was fascinating.  I mean, it was, it was that.  I mean, there was just a whole lot.  But now, the good side of it is I told you there was the three of us [Williams and his two friends], so we went to school together, too.  So, we, so we were together.  No matter what it was that we were going to do, we were going to do it together.  So, we went to, we went to Stillman together as well.  We pledged in the same fraternity, you know.  We, again, like I said, we went away to work during the summer months together.  We did a lot of--
Speaker 1: What are the names of your friends?  Did you tell me before?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I may not have told you.  I know we had a picture--but Clifton Bates and Herbert Felton.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: Like I said, Herbert is passed now.  And, but Clifton is still, he's still down in Mobile [Alabama].  And I see him all the time.  We still get together.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But--
Speaker 1: But that is great, all three of you all go together.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And support one another.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, you pledged your fraternity together, right?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.  We pledged Alpha Phi Alpha fraternity.  As a matter of fact, we was on the same line (laughter).  We did it all together.  And as a matter of fact, we, I was only able to go to school for one semester without working.  I mean, you know, the money that I got was okay, but I still, I mean I still needed to work.  So, I ended up--and I think both of them ended up eventually doing some work, but they didn't work as long as I--.  I ended up working my way through the rest of the time.  I just worked at night and went to school in the daytime.  And I think they would mostly work during the summer, during the summer months, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, with a schedule like that, doing class work and working, did you have time for any extracurricular activities?
Speaker 2: Not that much, other than pledging.  That was about, you know--.  And even then, I mean they--they say they had to help me along the way a lot to do that, because it was--.  Because I was--my job required, required forty-eight hours.  It was a forty-eight hours a week job.  And then I had to work, so--.   And then carrying a full load in college--.  And then on top of that, I got married while I was in college, too.  So, I got married in '72 [1972], which I think was probably the best thing that happened to me, because that really--again, you know, it was just stable.
Speaker 1: (unintelligible).
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was all stable.  So, it was good.
Story_ID: 35363
Speaker 1: Now, how did you meet your wife?
Speaker 2: At, where I was working.  I mean, she was, she was working at this same plant.  It was called Olympia Mills, that's the name of the plant.  It was a textile manufacturing company.  And so, she was working there.  She had attended--there was a, I think it's called Shelton State [Community College, Tuscaloosa, Alabama], there in the city.  It was one of the technical schools.  And so, she had attended that.  So she was, she had finished school, and she was just working.  And so I started working there, and then I would see her as I was coming and going, depending on what shift I was on.  You know, because they were, they were somewhat helpful.  They would allow me to--if there was an opening on a different shift--let's say if my schedule, if my class schedule allowed--if I got out, if I was finished, let's say at two o'clock, then I could work 3 [p.m.] until 11 [p.m.], and they would--.  So each semester, or at least each year, they would allow me to change my schedule.  And if they didn't, then I would work 11 [p.m.] to 7 [a.m.], and then go to school from like 8 [a.m.] to in the afternoon.
Story_ID: 35364
Speaker 1: Now, were you involved in ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps]?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: At Stillman [College, Tuscaloosa, Alabama]?
Speaker 2: No.  No, the, the program that the [U.S.] Marine Corps has is called a Platoon Leaders Class [PLC].  And what that program does is that, doing the summer months between your sophomore and junior year, and between your junior and senior year, you can, you can sign up.  And if you're accepted for the program, you come to Quantico [Virginia].  And you come to Quantico during your, during those summer months.  And you do your training during that.  You can either do two six-week programs, if you did it between your sophomore and junior, and you go back for your senior program between your junior and senior year.  Or, you can do one ten-week program between your junior and senior year, which is what I did.  And so, I did.  So, that's kind of your--instead of the ROTC program, you just do those during the summer months.  And then once you get your degree at graduation, you get your commission and then you go back to the basic school.
Story_ID: 35365
Speaker 1: So, they [Stillman College, Tuscaloosa, Alabama] started an affiliation--I don't know if it was my second--at some point there, they did start an affiliation with the [U.S.] Army ROTC at the University of Alabama [Tuscaloosa].  So, you could--although you was at Stillman, you could, you could affiliate with that.  And you could do your ROTC program that way.  But I did not do that.  I stayed with the PLC program.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, that's a big deal for the University of Alabama, because they had just integrated, I guess.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right, right, yeah.  Well, at the university, I mean, they did.  And I think once they got going with it, they moved out, they moved out pretty good with it.  As a matter of fact, they--just this past year--this past football season--the University of Alabama brought me back to the University of Alabama and did a, had an honors ceremony there at the beginning of the first home game in the football season which--you know, out on the fifty yard line.  And they presented a U.S. flag and, you know, they had the bio [biography] on the Jumbotron and, you know, to say about that.  So, I thought that was pretty, you know--not to be a graduate of that, and for them to do that is just--I think it's like you say, they've been very progressive in that, in moving along.
Story_ID: 35366
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now, who were some of your professors or mentors at Stillman [College, Tuscaloosa, Alabama]?  Was there anybody there that really helped?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, of course, the, you know, the--I would say the president, Dr. Stinson [Harold N. Stinson; Stillman College's first African American president].  Yeah, you know, I think he was there for all.  And I think he was one that you could, you know, you saw, and you kind of began to understand a lot of what was possible.  And he was kind of the one that I think--.  And then there was one other, I think, that was very helpful.  And I only--I learned about it later, I think, in life from one of the, one of the, one of my classmates.  Because--and I think his name was Williams, as well.  But he was telling me about there were times when I would, when I would come to class and, you know, because I worked, you know, all night, that I, you know, I'd be sitting up there falling asleep, or you nod.  And you could see that I was pretty tired.  And that he would tell some of the other--at least one of the students, you know, that hey, you know, make sure he gets the, you know, gets the notes and stuff from the class.  And make sure, you know, that he don't miss anything, you know, from that.  And so, and I think that's one of those things that we talk about--folks really, you know, looking out for you along the way, making sure that you was successful, that you didn't have any excuse for not, for failure.  And that was, I thought was very helpful.  Yeah, and I didn't know it during the time.  Probably, you know--didn't figure, couldn't figure it out.  Just, you know--because what they were doing behind the scenes was telling those students, some of my classmates, you know, that they needed to be mindful of that, as well.  It was a big help.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 35367
Speaker 1: Now, let's see.  So, what was your major at Stillman [College, Tuscaloosa, Alabama]?
Speaker 2: Business.  I was in business administration with an accounting minor.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And now when you were at Stillman, too, there, the Vietnam War was going on.
Speaker 2: It was.
Speaker 1: It was the last stages.
Speaker 2: It was, it was in the last stages of that.
Speaker 1: And you chose to be affiliated with the [U.S.] Marine Corps.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Which was in--
Speaker 2: (unintelligible)
Speaker 1: --in the thick of all the fighting.  I mean, what was your thinking?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I think that even without even thinking about it, I mean, I just--I saw that as something that I wanted to do.  And when I reflect on it a bit, it seems that that year back prior to Stillman--even when I went up to join the [U.S.] Air Force, if you will--I mean, there was this thought or this tendency that had me drawn somewhat to the military.  You know, I guess the only thing I can come up with is that that was what was destined for me.  Because I didn't get it from anywhere else except, you know, okay, you play with little soldiers when you're growing up, but that was about it.  But I was always kind of drawn to that.  And so, and so what happened is that in, I think this was early '72 [1972].  And I'm walking down to the Student Union building, and there are these Marines in there, you know.  And they always remember the blue trousers with the red stripes on them, you know.  And that's what they were wearing.   And so, I, you know--and then being somewhat curious about it, I mean, I started--I struck up a conversation with them.  And I was asking them about, you know, why it is that they were dressed like that?  Why they, you know, what is this?  And then it had a band, you know.  That's the only thing I knew--someone with those sort of trousers with red stripes on it, you know.  And then they began to tell me about the Marine Corps.  And they, you know, they sold me on it pretty good.  I think they, and I know they're trained to do it.  But one of the things that they did was, is, was to--is after, you know, getting to know a little bit about me, or at least after sensing a little bit about me, they made the comment that well, did I--?  You shouldn't worry about it, because you probably can't make it anyway.  And well, because that didn't--.  You know, and I said, "What do you mean, I can't make it?  I mean, yes, if I wanted to do it, I mean, I can do it.  I mean, that's why you--"  You know, and they said "Well, we're pretty tough," and all this.  And I said, "Yeah, you know, but I can be pretty tough as well, you know."  So, I think that was kind of to get the conversation going, you know, and we kind of got into it.  But a couple of things that they did was, which was, which interested me a lot, is that--you know, we talked about the fact that--I told them that I was, I was working, you know, working in the day doing, you know, working my way through school.  And they said, "Well--" And they told me "Well, you wouldn't have to worry about that."  They was telling me about the PLC [Platoon Leaders Class] program.  And they said, "Well, you can go during the summer."  I said, "Yeah, but I'm working."  They said, "Well, yeah, but there's laws on that.  I mean, if you go and do military service and then you have to come back, your job will be there when you get back.  I mean, that's the law.  So, you won't lose the job."  And so, it was like, "So, you're going to work anyway."  "Well, yeah, I'm going to be--"  "Okay, so you can work.  You get paid as a, you know, as a sergeant during those summer months, and also you're preparing yourself."  And they said, "And there's no obligation at that point in time.  If you decide that's something that you want to do, then you know, once you try the graduation, we'll come back.  Or if you decide to take a little of the stipend that they give, then you, you know, that's one thing.  But if you don't take that, then you know, there's nothing to--."   So, it really was a risk--it's a risk free sort of adventure for me because I, again, I was going to work.  So, would I work there, or would I continue to do my regular job?  You know, either way it was getting me prepared for the next step, in case I wanted to do that.  And so, and then that's--so I said, okay, I'll give it a try.  And went there and did quite well.  Again, because academics and stuff were never, never an issue, and neither is physical.  I mean physical fitness was never an issue.  So, I did quite well.  I think I was--graduated kind of like the platoon, one of the platoon honor men.  I think I was the guide or something at graduation, and--.
Story_ID: 35368
Speaker 1: And so I came back [from Platoon Leaders Class program in the U.S. Marine Corps, at Quantico, Virginia; summer training], and I think by then, I had the bug.  So, I kind of began to think that this was the way that I, that I wanted to go.  But I still didn't make up my mind until later on, really, because I wasn't quite sure that I wanted to do it (unclear).
Speaker 2: What finally made up your mind up for you on the--
Speaker 1: The, I think what really sealed it for me [to join the U.S. Marine Corps after graduating from Stillman College, Tuscaloosa, Alabama, in 1974]--and it goes back to having this job and working for this company.  And I had worked for this company for basically three and a half years of my four year college career.  And so, I had a good work record and all that sort of stuff, and was doing well.  So, and then I'm, you know--so fast forward, and it's time to come out of college.  You know, I got a business degree.  You know, I'm getting--will have a business degree, minor in accounting, graduating with honors, you know, and what I considered to have set myself up pretty good to go into the business, go into business, enter the business field.  And so, I go and I got an appointment with the personnel office there at the company that I was, that I had been working for for this time, and asking them about, you know, maybe an internship or something within the accounting department, or some sort of thing within the business development or something, to be able to do that.  And at the time, they said well, that they really didn't have anything, anything for me, and that the only thing they could offer me would be a supervisor job on the floor, just on the plant floor, you know.  And so, well, when I looked around at the other supervisors, you know, I--first, I didn't see, I didn't see college graduates there, you know.  And then the ones that, who were supervisors, were mostly white, you know.  Okay, they may have had a high school--but they probably--most of them had a high school, I think.  And some may have had a little bit of a year or so in some other kind.  So, to me that didn't seem quite right, you know, that--.  And so, so I'm talking now--so I'm talking now to the office selection officer, and we're talking about that.  You know, we're talking about whether I'm going to make this decision or not.  And his words at the time was that, "Well yeah, we understand that, but that's not the way of the Marine Corps.  We're a meritocracy, so you, I mean your position, your promotions and all is based on merit and is based upon your performance, not necessarily based on the color of your skin or anything."  And so at that time they said, "So, really, as to how far you go in the Marine Corps really is left up to you, and how you apply yourself, how you perform."  Which, again, goes back to what my mother [Ella Mae Bolden Hill] told me, you know, that I can do, you know, whatever it is that you set your--I mean, you can do that.  And so, I said "Well, okay."  So, and so, you know, the wife and I, we talked about it and we decided, well let's just give it a shot.
Story_ID: 35369
Speaker 1: So, I signed up [for the U.S. Marine Corps] for three years.  And I guess I haven't made it there yet, because I'm--thirty-nine years later and I'm still working on it.  But, so I was going to get out in '77 [1977].  And as we was talking, I was going to get out in July of '77 [1977].  That was, that was my time, was 7/77.  I'll always remember that.  And that was when I was going to, I was going to get out of the Marine Corps.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, you signed up in '74 [1974]?
Speaker 1: Uh huh.
Speaker 2: Right after you graduated?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: You were going to get out in '77 [1977], three years later.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Now, at the time you signed, did you know of any other black officers in the Marine Corps, or did you--
Speaker 1: When I signed up?  No, I had--no, when I was back here at OC--at, when I came back during the summer months at OCS [Officer Candidate School], there were other blacks who was also at Officer Candidate School during that time.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And so I, but again, we were all just candidates.  And I don't, I don't recall meeting--one that I would have, who would have been in already during the time, would have been guys like Cliff [Clifford] Stanley [also a HistoryMaker], you know, and Fred Jones.  But I don't, but I didn't meet them during that summer month while I was here.  You know, I only met them later.  But no, it was like--I can't think that I knew any during that time.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I was just wondering if--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --you knew of any at that point.  But, okay, so when you go in in '74 [1974], that's the last, that's the last year of Vietnam.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: The U.S. is getting out of Vietnam.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So, the last year of the [President Richard] Nixon administration, too, I think?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think--
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't, no.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: It wasn't the last year of Nixon, but he was--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  As a matter of fact we--one of the first jobs, if you will, or meaningful jobs, I think--once I got in the Marine Corps after going to supply school and arriving out at Camp Pendleton [California] as a brand new Second Lieutenant, was to go out to the refugee camps that we had there on the, on Camp Pendleton.  And we would have to put teams together.  And we'd go out and issue gear to feed some of the refugees who were out at--I think it was called Camp Talega of Santa Ana--Camp Talega, out there.  But yeah, they were, at the time, you know, we were bringing them back, bringing the Vietnamese refugees back.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, they would stay in the camp for, well, until they got cultivated to the--
Speaker 1: Until they got--right, until they--and then they would get them positioned in different places.  And then I think we--when we closed--I think when we closed down the one at Camp Pendleton, I think they went to Indiantown Gap in Pennsylvania.  That was the largest camp, or one of the largest camps.  Yeah, but we didn't go there.  We just--once we finished whatever our mission was, whatever number we had--once they would relocate out of the area, then we'd move on.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 35370
Speaker 1: Now, so you went to supply school, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now did, is that because of your business background?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, that's exactly what, that's exactly what it was.  Because I was going to--again, I was going to do three years.  So this was--in my mind it was--I could get experience in the business, if you will, in the business world, and kind of get some, get started in my business career.
Speaker 1: So, what happened in those three years that made you extend?
Speaker 2: It was, it was the people.  I went to--after--well, really, back at Camp Pendleton [California]--and I spent a couple years at Camp Pendleton.  And you know and, again, began to meet people there.  And you begin to meet individuals of, individuals of character, you know, of quality character--folks that you just, you enjoyed being around.  And then I got an opportunity out of there to go to Japan.  I mean, I went to Iwakuni, Japan which again is--again, for a little boy from a segregated town in Alabama--and then all of a sudden you're traveling around the, you know, around the world, so to speak.  And that was good.  And then I--
Speaker 1: So, this is prior to '77 [1977], you went to Japan?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.  As a matter of fact, I went in '77 [1977].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because what happened is that I had to, I got to Camp Pendleton in '75 [1975].  So, after my schooling and stuff, I got there in '75 [1975].  And then by--they had what we would call an augmentation process.  Because when I came in, I came in as a reserve officer.  Then we have this augmentation process.  And again, you submit for augmentation and, you know, you're coming back into Quantico [Virgina].  And they go through your records and all that, and what endorsements you got.  And then you could be offered a regular commission.  And in this case, I was.  I was offered a regular commission.  And I was offered that after I'd been out there a year, offered in '76 [1976].  And so, I let it sit for awhile.  I let it sit for awhile and, you know, and I eventually decided to accept the commission, to accept the regular commission.  And then once I accepted that then I, you know, I was good for orders.  And then I got one year orders over to Iwakuni.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And when I arrived--and getting there--.  And now, there were a good number of--I mean it was a very small place, but it was a good number of black officers who were there with me.  That's why I said--and the people--.  I mean, there were--between the warrant officers as well as the lieutenants--and this is when I think we was all, we was all lieutenants--some second, some first.  I was a first [lieutenant].  And the warrant officers--and I think that is really when a lot of it began to turn around.  I was talking to one of them named Bob Purnell.  I was talking to him a couple of days ago.  And we was just reflecting on the fact that I'm about getting ready to retire, and all this.  And I was telling him just, you know, what an influence he had had even on me being there.  Because Bob used to, he used to inspect us.  I mean, I think he used to inspect me every morning, you know, when I'm coming out to go to the chow hall.  I mean, he would inspect me and make sure my boots were shined and that my trousers was creased, and all of this.  I mean, he, because he had been in--he was from Vietnam.  He had been in awhile.  He was a warrant officer, and he had--but I--.  And that was all part of making sure that we, that us younger ones, that we grew up right and that we was doing it.  And he began to teach us about, just about being in leadership, about being a leader and all that.  So that, so he was probably one of the first that had a real positive influence on me prior to some of the more senior ones.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Bob Purnell?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 35371
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about Japan [Williams' regular commission with the 3rd Force Service Support Group of the U.S. Marines].  Now, this is Iwakuni [Japan]?
Speaker 2: Iwakuni.
Speaker 1: And where is that in relationship to Tokyo [Japan]?
Speaker 2: That's, it's, how long did it take us?  It took us about, I don't know, maybe forty-five minutes to an hour or so, like that, to get to Tokyo from Iwakuni.  So, it was very close, you know, and you could get up there pretty good.  As a matter of fact, that was one of the places we used to go--again, when we began to be exposed to different things, and began to understand a little bit about some of the different cultures and things.  So, we used to go to Tokyo, probably even when it would be for the nightclubs and other places.  We used to go there, not every weekend, but we would get up there maybe once or twice a month.  We'd do that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now how--maybe this is just shallow thinking on my part, but I never thought about the [U.S.] Marines being, you know, stationed in a post--in a country we're not at war with, you know.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: I always think of the Marines being--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: --hitting the beach or being the first ones there--
Speaker 2: Uh huh--
Speaker 1: --for fighting, and that sort of thing.  But is that, is that common in--do they have like Marines, say, in Germany or Belgium or Japan?
Speaker 2: No, I think you have, you got it about right. I mean, our being stationed there was a result of World War II, I mean.  And so that's, you know, with [General Douglas] MacArthur and everything else.  But we was--Okinawa [Japan] was where we, you know, we were mainly in Okinawa.  But then with the treaty that was signed as a result of that, I mean, we ended up--we ended up in Iwakuni, I think mainly because you had some of the [U.S.] Navy.  And there was an air station there, and so we ended up there.  But usually--you're right, I mean usually we would end up in Okinawa, which probably really is the main base for Marines.  And again, it goes back from the war days.  But we've tried to move some off of Okinawa, you know, as a result of some of the recent negotiations.  Because if you find us in Germany or places like that, it's really a small number that that is there on one of the other service bases.  We don't have our own installation there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Just then the presence in these places--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --to ensure that--
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 35372
Speaker 1: Now, well, just kind of--just kind of continue to explain like the relationship of [U.S.] Marines to the other branches.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, the, of course, you know, we--I always say we're the smallest.  But then the [U.S.] Coast Guard, they say now they're the smallest.  But for the longest of time, you know, the Coast Guard--and it still is not within the [U.S.] Department of Defense.  It's within the Department of Transportation, you know.  So, but anyway, so but we being the smallest within the Department of Defense--and it, we like to think of ourselves as, and we are, we're an expeditionary fighting force that's, that crosses, that fights across all domains.  We don't have a single domain that we fight in.  When you think of the [U.S.] Army, you think of a land, ground--so they operate in the ground domain, you know.  The [U.S.] Air Force in the air domain.  The sea, you know, it's the [U.S.] Navy and its domain.  Well, the Marine Corps, if you look at the way we're structured, we operate on all, we operate across all of those domains.  We have, we have aviation; we operate on ships, on Navy ships.  And we sort of have our ground force.  So, we operate on all--we just operate them in a more, what we consider to be expeditionary--more of a lighter footprint, if you will.  Strong enough if you really get in to, as they say, to kick the door down, if you will--to take the beach head, if you will, if we need to do that.  Or, to do other sorts of things that we do going in, but light enough to get there quickly, but with enough staying power to carry the day once we arrive.  But we're not, we don't consider ourselves to be a major land occupying type force that the Army would be.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, being a supply officer for the Marines would be about trying to get a limited number of supplies to a place fast, I guess?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Is that correct?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that is correct.  I mean, it's, initially--because initially, you start out as, it's just that early in your career, you're a supply officer.  And that's really what you do.  You provide we say beans, bullets, and bandages.  So, supply the food; you supply, you know, the ammunition; you know, and the medical support that they need.  And so, you supply that to those forces that are engaged with the enemy.  And so, you know, transportation--all those sorts of things that you need in order to carry that.  That becomes your mission.  Then as you, as you move up in rank, if you will, you take on a more senior position.  Your focus then becomes more on--I like to call it operational logistics.  You're more about sustaining the force.  You know, you may be running those major maintenance facilities that repair and rebuild the stuff that you provide to that supply officer who issued it, you know--whether it be those trucks or whether it be the tanks.  But you begin to run those maintenance facilities that do that.  So, you go into more a sustainment type of operational sort of focus on that.  And then, as you go on and become even more senior in rank, you know, you maybe take on like a logistics command.  You take on the entire logistics portfolio for the Marine Corps.  And that includes running the depots--pre-position war reserves out in places, you know.  You do everything but buy.  So, that's kind of the way--so it moves from the time you're a supply officer to the time you become what's considered to be a logistician, operational logistician.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 35373
Speaker 1: In '77 [1977], you were with the 3rd Force Service Support Group?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you were an officer in charge of inventory?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And that's--
Speaker 2: The ICP, the Inventory Control Point.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  And, so, any stories about Japan?  Now, this was your first time--now this is your first time out of the United States, right?
Speaker 2: Uh huh, yeah.
Speaker 1: And, not that everybody gets a chance to go out of the States.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  But it was, it was a very rewarding tour.  It was one of those that allowed you to, again--to expand your horizons, to learn things, to see things, you know, differently.  I mean, you know, because you can remember small things such as--. Now, I mean, I'm a short--short in stature, but I can remember walking in a sea of Japanese, and I'm, you know, towering over them, you know.  I mean it's just, just little things you begin to--. And then you begin to understand different cultures and different languages and, you know, taking some languages, and things like that.  And, but it was--but the--you know, interestingly enough, when you--.  Although there were differences in our cultures and stuff, you never felt--I never felt any, any prejudice, you know, any racial type prejudice from the Japanese.  You know, you just never felt that.  I didn't, anyway.  I mean, I felt that you was received as a human being, you know, of equal among them, which--.  You know, at some point you would have thought of it maybe a little different, but it wasn't.
Story_ID: 35374
Speaker 1: Alright.  Now, in '78 [1978], you came back from the tour [with the 3rd Force Service Support Group of the U.S. Marine Corps, as the Officer-In-Charge, Inventory Control Point] in Iwakuni [Japan] to San Diego [California], right?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.  Yeah, I came back, came back from Iwakuni.  And you know, was assigned out to Marine Barracks on North Island.  And down there I was, again, went down there as a supply officer and worked there as a supply officer for a couple of years.  And then was selected to come up to be the executive officer for the, for the barracks.  An interesting tour there because you--as the, I was not only the supply officer for the barracks, but was the supply officer for what we call the Ship's Detachment Supply Officer, Pacific Oceanary.  It's one of those long titles.  So, for every ship that was afloat in the Pacific with [U.S.] Marines aboard, I was the supply officer for each of them.  So, I think I had at the time, seems to me--fourteen kind of sticks in my mind.  So, it was fourteen different ships--some in Guam, some in Japan, you know, because up and down the coast.  And they had Marines aboard.  Well, those Marines, even though they were small in numbers--but I was, they would call it ship's detachment.  And I was the supply officer for them as well.  So I served, basically, it was kind of dual.  I had it initially, and then became the XO [executive officer; Barracks Executive Officer].  So, that was another one of those--very rewarding--to a long, my overall development, you know.  I thought it was good as an officer and as a leader.  And my, I had a gunnery sergeant there who was my supply chief, Eddie Aguon.  He was a little Guamanian.
Speaker 1: How do you spell his name?
Speaker 2: A-G-U-O-N.  His first name was Eddie--Aguon.  He was just a super Marine, a super leader.  And, again, by that time I was a captain.  I'd been made a captain.  And then Eddie really began to continue to help mold and shape me and mentor me into becoming one of those, a leader.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, this is all in San Diego, right?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.  I stayed there for, I stayed there for four years; I stayed there for four years.  Because I extended there to, in order to take that, to be the XO I think, for that last year, I think it was.  Because it was an opportunity there to, again, to get a command level position, you know, as the XO.  And so, I agreed to stay there and do that.  And also, it gave me an opportunity then to, for selection for Amphibious Warfare School, which was back here in Quantico [Virginia].
Story_ID: 35375
Speaker 1: So, after my fourth year there, and then I came back.  I came back here [Virginia] and did the summer hire program where I, I want to say a platoon commander at OCS [Officer Candidate School] prior to going to school, prior to going to Amphibious Warfare School [Quantico, Virginia; renamed as Expeditionary Warfare School (EWS); U.S. Marine Corps].
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, this is 1982, right?
Speaker 1: '82 [1982], yeah.  Yeah, so I got down to the barracks [Marine Barracks, North Island, San Diego, California] in '78 [1978] and stayed there from '78 [1978] to '82 [1982].  Then I came back here and did the school.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  So, let's see.  So okay, so you went back to Japan--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Went to Okinawa [Japan; 3rd Marine Division of the U.S. Marine Corps] in '85 [1985]?  Is that--
Speaker 1: Yes.  What happened is that, let me see, it was '85 [1985].  Yeah, yes, after I went--when I came back, I came back here and did the school, did Amphibious Warfare School--.  Did, again, did summer hire, OCS; did the Amphibious Warfare School; graduated from Amphibious Warfare School in '83 [1983]; and got assigned to Mountain Warfare Training Center up in Bridgeport, California, which is where our cold weather--that's where our cold weather training is, up in that area.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well, I guess what I ought to dwell on--Amphibious Warfare School for a minute, because--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --you said the Marines operate sea and land.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So, were you given instructions like about how that is coordinated?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  And that's what it is.  Amphibious Warfare School at the time--they just changed the name.  But that was, really it takes you from--it takes you as a captain--and that's where they just select you--you're selected as a captain.  And it began to take you through all the operational aspects of the Marine Corps.  And you begin to, begin the teachings and you get training--your field training and all of that--leading in combat as well as a lot of the history.  You know, you learn a lot about that.  It is, and one of the reasons I think it is significant is that it really is, because it's selective.  I mean, you just don't go because you want to go.  I mean, there's a board that selects you to go.  And so, and then, so you're there with all, with your peers, who've also been selected to there.  So, you may consider them to be the, kind of the cream of the crop, if you will, that are there who are there together.  And so, you get to live and play and do a lot of things together.  I mean, and you learn from each other, and you just get to know each other.  And those, some of the same ones you meet there, I mean, are the same ones that you then continue to grow up with in the Corps.
Story_ID: 35376
Speaker 1: Well, back in Okinawa [Japan; 3rd Marine Division of the U.S. Marine Corps; 1985] again.  Now, so, you were--this time what were you doing in Okinawa?
Speaker 2: Well, after the, after the Mountain Warfare Training Center [Bridgeport, California]--because I went two years--.  And so, just a little bit--two years up there in the cold weather training center--.  And basically, I volunteered to waive my overseas control date, because I didn't necessarily have to go back.  I had just come from there, you know.  And so, but I--but I enjoyed it when I was there.  I mean, I--and so, I opted to go back.  And this time I wanted to go back with my family.  So, I went back and I took my family with me.  And we went back in '85 [1985].  And I became the division--this was for the--I became the division supply officer, the assistant division supply officer for the 3rd Marine Division.  And so, and that, you kind of--again, you have different units out there and different supply officers, and they're running the account.  You kind of help to oversee and coordinate things.  You're more of a staff, it's a staff job.  But the the significant assignment--while I was there--as you can see there, I stayed there for four years also.  And I stayed there for four years, because I opted again to extend that to the fourth year, because an opportunity came up where I could, I could deploy.
Story_ID: 35377
Speaker 1: I could deploy and go to the Persian Gulf for the Earnest Will exercise [Operation Earnest Will; American military protection of Kuwaiti-owned tankers from Iranian attacks in 1987 and 1988, three years into the Tanker War phase of the Iran-Iraq War. It was the largest naval convoy operation since World War II].  I was the logistics officer, and therefore a continuous MAGTF [Marine Air-Ground Task Force].  And I was a continuous MAGTF 3-88 in the Persian Gulf.  And so, I was able to, again, through the support and encouragement of a guy named Bill, Colonel Bill Johnson and some others, but him mainly, you know.  We was able to get this time, Major General John Admire.  He was Colonel General Admire at the time.  And he had been tasked to put together this team, this Marine air- ground task force to go into, to go into the Persian Gulf, and began this re-flagging effort.  And so, I was able to put my name in the hopper to do that.  And General Admire, Colonel Admire at the time, he selected me to be his logistics officer and go out there.  And that was--.  And I credit that assignment a great deal to moving me on this whole operational logistics path, that I've stayed on since.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, you went over in the Persian Gulf in 1990, is that it?
Speaker 1: No.  I went over in--.  Before that, before that part of the war, there was--it was, the title of the mission was [Operation] Ernest Will.  And what that was, is that, as you--we was bringing oil out of the Persian Gulf.  And the Iranians were--in order to try to close off the gulfs, which is some of the stuff they even talk about today--.  They would run these little speed boats out from the island.  They would attack the tankers and they would shoot, shoot the tankers.  Well, the United States, you know, our mission was that we would, we would re-flag those tankers coming out of there.  We would put those tankers under a U.S. flag that was bringing the oil out of the Gulf.  And so, and then, now if Iran was to attack a U.S. flagged vessel, that would be an attack upon the U.S.  And then we would, we could, you know, we could respond to that.  And so that's what we were out there for.  We were out there--we had people aboard some of the gas oil platforms.  We had some of our shooters, and things like that aboard.  But there were some issues there.  So, we were--and so we was putting different MAGTFs out there.  And so, we were like 3-88.  So, that was the number, during '88 [1988], the third force that we had put in there.  So--
Speaker 2: What does MAGTF mean?
Speaker 1: Marine Air Ground Task Force.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Again, because the Marines--we have air; we got ground; we got logistics; we got all of that.  So, we call that a Marine Air Ground Task Force.  Because, again, we operate across all those domains.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  So, this [Operation Earnest Will; American military protection of Kuwaiti-owned tankers from Iranian attacks in 1987 and 1988, three years into the Tanker War phase of the Iran-Iraq War. It was the largest naval convoy operation since World War II] is pre-war [Gulf War], right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  It was combat.  It was a--
Speaker 2: It was still-
Speaker 1: It was in combat, but it was fought prior to the Desert Shield/Desert Storm [Gulf War]--prior to Desert One, and all that.  But yes, it was kind of the precursor, if you will, that led into that.
Speaker 2: Is there--I mean, you know, well, it sounds like it was some serious business here.  It was somebody, you know, attacking--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: And that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: You know, this is prior to the Gulf War when Iran invaded Kuwait.
Speaker 1: Right, yeah.
Speaker 2: That was, was that--that was like '91 [1991], right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, when Iraq came in, when Iraq came into Kuwait.  I think--
Speaker 2: Iraq came into Kuwait.
Speaker 1: Iran--and you know, but Iran is always--is always there.  They was always a part of it, through whatever means they was doing.  But yeah, that was, it was prior to then.
Speaker 2: Ten years before that, the hostage crisis with Iran.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: The hostage crisis, so--
Speaker 1: Right, yeah.   It was always, yeah, it was always something with them.  And they were--I mean, they would, they would run those speed boats out and they would, they would shoot the [oil] tankers [coming out of the Persian Gulf].  And then, you know, we would either respond to it, or get the call.  We didn't do, we didn't have a lot of--I mean we had a lot of action, but we didn't have a whole lot of kinetic action.  I mean, I recall one of the ships coming through.  You could see that it had been hit pretty hard, you know, and all.  But the captain of the ship, you know, if they were okay, they would just tell us.  They let us know they were okay.  And then they would continue to go on and see if they could get it repaired.  But none was, they didn't sink any or anything like that, but they just took some hits.
Story_ID: 35378
Speaker 1: Alright, so when the war [Gulf War]--did, now, did you stay over there once the war started in 1991?
Speaker 2: No, I came back [to the United States].  See, I came back in '88 [1988], early '89 [1989].  So, and then I went back to school again.  That's right, that's what, yeah.  So, I went back to school again in mid '89 [1989] to early '90 [1990].  And after that school--because that was--I went to Armed Forces Staff College.  And then after that school, I was assigned to a joint assignment.  So, when the war started, I was on a joint assignment.  And as a matter of fact, I was over at 400 Army Navy Drive [Arlington, Virginia], right here in--across where I was assigned to, the [U.S.] Department of Defense [DOD].
Speaker 1: Now, what did you learn in Armed Forces Staff College, I mean that's different from--.
Speaker 2: That, when you get to that one, you, you learn about all the services.  This is, it's a joint, it's a joint school.  And you get--which you know, you begin to operate at a, at a different level of war now.  And so, so you're looking at how, you know, these are all the instruments of national power, all the services.  It's a joint school.  You've got students from all the services, to include foreign students who are in class with you--you know, some coalition partners.  So, more of a joint flavor.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 35379
Speaker 1: Alright, so, what happened when you finished Armed Forces Staff College?
Speaker 2: Well, when I finished the Armed Forces Staff College, again, I got assigned to the Office of the [U.S.] Secretary of Defense [U.S. Department of Defense (DOD)].  I was assigned to the DOD, to the IG's Office, the Inspector General's Office.  And again, you know--now you've got training in the joint aspects, and all the services and stuff.  So, within that DOD IG [office], I began to inspect some major joint programs, you know, for the Secretary of Defense.  So, a lot of the combatant commanders inspect these, and go out and do inspections and write up reports.  So, it didn't have a whole lot to do with logistics.  It probably had, some of it had some logistics flavor, but it really was--.  It is the sort of program that was a, that crossed all the services.  It was a joint type program.  It could have been mortuary affairs, I mean, it could be other acquisition programs.  And so, we would go out and inspect those, and put a team together and go out and inspect those, and come back.  And so, I did that for three years, which is the extent to which that assignment was, before going back to school.  So, I did that.  And then I went back to school, went to the Industrial College of the Armed Forces next.
Speaker 1: Now this is in '94 [1994], right?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so I did--so, well, '93 [1993] to '94 [1994].  Because I did the DOD IG from '90 [1990] to '93 [1993].
Story_ID: 35380
Speaker 1: And then I went to Industrial College of the Armed Forces from '93 [1993] to '94 [1994].  And then in '94 [1994], I go back to Okinawa [Japan] again.
Speaker 2: Now, the Industrial College of the Armed Forces is to prepare you for executive--
Speaker 1: That's right.  That's a more strategic level now.  You, so if you watch the PME [professional military education] that I was just talking about, from the time you was a captain through that level, to major at the Armed Forces College, was another one--.  And now, you're strategic.  Now, we're at strategic level.  You got all instruments of national power and national interest, you know, and how--the actions that you're taking in response to that.
Speaker 2: So, you're now a major, when you're--
Speaker 1: No.  You're a lieutenant colonel now.  At the Armed Forces Staff College--I mean at the Industrial College of the Armed Forces, you're a lieutenant colonel, or some colonel.
Speaker 2: Okay, alright.
Speaker 1: You know, at Armed Forces Staff College, I was a major.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 35381
Speaker 1: So, you're in it [the U.S. Marine Corps] for the long haul, now.  I mean, you're really--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I guess you were awhile ago.
Speaker 2: Well, up until, until then--I mean, there was, I was right then coming out of Armed Forces Staff College [Industrial College of the Armed Forces?].  And you got it right.  I was right at that juncture of my twenty-year mark, and what I was going to do.  So, coming out of that, I was selected for, I was selected for command.  And so, which again is something that I wanted to do.  So, I wouldn't necessarily turn that down.  So, I accepted that command tour which was again, just a wonderful, wonderful assignment, a very rewarding assignment.  So, I was selected for that.  So, it's almost as if at the very time that I was going to retire or when I was going to get out, there was something else that would be, that would be offered that would cause me to have second thoughts about, you know, where I was going.  So, I took that command with the MEU [Marine Expeditionary Unit] Service Support Group [31st Marine Expeditionary Unit], as the commander for that on Okinawa, and did for that for--.  And there's a--commands are usually a two year assignment.  And so, from--I did it from '93 [1993] to '95 [1995].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 35382
Speaker 1: How were you being treated throughout, I mean in terms of--I mean, there were very few black officers in the [U.S.] Marines Corps--
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: --and just in general--how are you, your wife, and your family being treated?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  The, for the most part, I think, you know, I thought we was treated very well.  I didn't--there were always--of course, I think wherever you go there is individuals that in some cases will either not treat you the way you think, with the dignitary respect that you may deserve.  But usually they are small in numbers, if at all.  They are certainly the minority.  So, the institution--and I have, over my time, is I have separated those out.  I've separated out the actions and the behavior of the institution as a whole from the actions and behavior of individuals within the institution.  And so, from an institutional perspective, I'd say that we have been treated, we've been treated, you know, just like everyone else--I mean, you know, from the institution perspective.  There are individuals in the institution, I think, from time to time, that you can sense--and I don't know what it is--but you can sense some indifference, you know, by certain individuals.  And I go back to something I mentioned to you earlier, is that my approach to that is I will not allow these individuals with that type of mentality, to dictate my destiny.  So, I don't allow their actions to cause me and my behavior--whether it be my performance, whatever it is--I don't allow them to cause me to behave in such a way that would cause me to mis-channel my efforts, and therefore interfere with my destiny.  I just--so, sometimes you just don't dignify some of that stuff with--because it's not worth it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I know people--I mean, you get the sense in popular culture and on the radio and TV--and anywhere you see the Marines presented--whether in a movie or whatever, of a group that's tighter than the other military branches.
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: More fidelity.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, in fact, that's one of the mottos.
Speaker 2: That's right.  (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: No, you're exactly right.  So, I think from an institutional perspective, that's what you get when you get to go.  You do get a, it's a very tight group.  And it's like a, it becomes like a family.  I mean it started--like I say, for me, I think it started back when I was--well, really it even started back from the very, from day one.  I mean, I can recall that we would--guys--and again some of them from the time I was Second Lieutenant to this day--.  And of course as you can imagine, when I first got to my unit, I was the only black officer there, I think.  And I think one more came in later, or something like that.  But I was probably the only black officer, for the most part, in the unit.  So, all the guys that I hung out and, you know, played sports with and did things with were all white, they all are white guys.  I mean, that's who the officers was.  And we--and to this day, I mean, there are friendships that were built then that remains to this day, in a number of them.  So, you know, we, the wife and I, you know--we felt that we have been, we've been treated exactly who we would want--equal treatment by most.  Again, we had individuals--.  Now, I tell you one of the reasons that--you may not have picked up on it.  But when I was in, when I went to Mountain Warfare Training Center, you know, I stayed there for two years.  One of the reasons I left there was, again, it wasn't so much the institution, but it was the environment that I was in.  I mean, this was up in, I would say in the hills of Nevada.  And so, as a matter of fact, I--
Speaker 1: This is in the early '80s [1980s], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  But this is up in, up in--like up near Carson City, Nevada and up in some of those places.  And there was definitely, in my view, you know, prejudice and biases there and racism that I--.  As a matter of fact, I refused to even take my, I didn't take my family up there because of that.  Now on the base itself, again, a small base, you know, you didn't have this.  So, that was all good.  But once--but off the base, outside the base--and then--so, I left my family in San Diego [California].  And then that's when I opted out of there in two years.  I said I can, I'll just waive my overseas control date.  That way, the family and I can get, you know, can go on and do things together. But, so--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 35383
Speaker 1: Now, okay, now the--okay in '94 [199], you assumed command of the 31st Marine [Marine] Expeditionary Unit.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And so, what does this kind of mean, in terms of the scope of--
Speaker 2: That is--our Marine Expeditionary Units, they are considered our, really our most--they're four of the deployed, most ready force that we have there on, usually on station, all the time around the--we have different ones around the world in different locations.  And you stay basically on the cutting edge at all times to be able to respond.  And that's why it's called "expeditionary."  It's an expeditionary unit, because they're the ones that will go, usually right off the bat.  And just like--and it's a MAGTF [Marine Air-Ground Task Force] as well.  So, it being a MAGTF--that means it has the ground unit, it has an aviation unit, and it has a logistics unit.  And so, I was the logistics unit for that expeditionary unit.  And I supported the ground unit, and all that.  And so, maybe--we were always--it's always on the move, it's always on the go.  We deployed throughout the Pacific.  You know, you name it and we were there, either through just your exercising with your other nations, you know--deploying into various locations and things.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you did that for--you were--were you still commander of the Expeditionary Unit when you went to Japan in '97 [1997], back to Okinawa [Japan]?
Speaker 2: Well, when I--when I went over--I commanded there from '94 [1994] to '96 [1996].  And then after that, I still stayed in Okinawa, but I was promoted to colonel.  And I went, became the--we call it the G4, if you will, which is the, which is on the general staff of the Force Service Support Group.  So, I was the staff officer for the CG [commanding general] of the 3rd Force Service Support Group [Assistant Chief of Staff G4, 3rd Force Service Support Group].  And I did that my final year, between, from '96 [1996] to '97 [1997].  Is that right?  Four, five, six--Yeah.  Yes, from '96 [1996] to '97 [1997], yeah.
Story_ID: 35384
Speaker 1: Alright.  So, anything significant happen in Okinawa [Japan; commander of the 31st Marine Expeditionary Unit] when you were on that tour of duty?
Speaker 2: No, no.  After the--except for, after the MEU--that was after the Marines Expeditionary Unit, which again, that was just a tremendous assignment there, we moved around the Pacific.  The G4--when I was on the general [commanding general] staff as the logistics staff officer for that one year, from '96 [1996] to '97 [1997], not really any major issues there.  Let me go back to the--I just thought of one though, that--when I was with the MEU Service Support Group, with the 31st Marine Expeditionary Unit, one of the significant pieces there is that we, we hit--like I say, we hit lots of countries and stuff.  And one that was a significant one for me is that I got to take my unit into China.  And we got to go, actually into China and spend some time there, just doing some engagement with the Chinese.  And that was somewhat significant for me, because when I was at ICAF, when I was at the Industrial College of the Armed Forces [ICAF] back before going over to Okinawa, I had the opportunity then to visit Russia.  And so, so it was almost enabling me now to round out some areas that I otherwise would not get to visit.  So, while I was there as a student, we went over, we took a group over from the Industrial College of the Armed Forces.  We had--spent a good bit of time--not a good bit, but a few days, a good number of days there in Russia.  And so--
Speaker 1: Now, what did you do--what did you do in Russia?  I mean what did you do in--?
Speaker 2: Well, we were at the--in Russia, again, now we're at the strategic level looking at industrial, the industrial base and all those sorts of things.  So, we were kind of studying what--even what had happened, or what Russia was doing as they was coming out of the Cold War.  I mean, you know, they had this big, you know, industrial machine that was geared for nothing but warfare and making--.   So, now that the Cold War is ending, how are they transforming this whole industrial base now, to be something that's, can more support their citizens?  And how do they, you know, turn--take factories and just making irons, you know, or making, you know, teapots or something like that.
Speaker 1: So, it was kind of like a fact-finding mission for high level officers and--
Speaker 2: It was.
Speaker 1: --and with the cooperation of the Russian government.
Speaker 2: Right, it was, yeah.  I think the, the Russians took it a little bit differently.  They saw it, I think as an opportunity to--for them to say to their public is that, okay we have these, this think tank, if you will, from the U.S. that's coming over that's going to--.  They thought--they saw us as more coming over to help them think through their situation, as opposed to us just coming and learning from them.  And so, it was maybe a little of both.  But that was, that was it.  But, so that's where, so I did that.  So, then when I had the opportunity then within the 3rd Force Service Support Group to go to China.  And again, I certainly looked upon that as being something very unique and different.  That one was more of a, there was not any major engagements there.  There was some with just the military.  But it was, it was almost viewed as kind of a diplomatic mission, you know.  We planted a tree in the Friendship Garden, you know.  And I was a senior [U.S.] Marine officer there, so, you know, with the senior [U.S.] Navy officer who was an admiral, who was aboard.  So, you know, we would get with the military of the Chinese military.  So, it was more of a diplomatic friendship type of tour.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that--and so that--that and you know, some Australian visit.  But that was a different reason--that was training.
Story_ID: 35385
Speaker 1: So after--so after that--and after '97 [1997] was when I, when I came back to 1st Force Service Support Group at Camp Pendleton [California].  But again, and just as you were talking about, now I was--I came back there to be the G3, which is the operations officer for the group.  And this was prior to me taking command, again, of the Brigade Service Support Group.  So, I got to go from the MEU [Marine Expeditionary Unit] Service Support Group, did a little bit of staff time, and then went back to command of Brigade Service Support Group, which is larger.  This is a colonel level command.  Now, I'm promoted to colonel.  And now, I'm commanding the Brigade Services Support Group.
Speaker 2: Okay, this is 1998?
Speaker 1: '98 [1998], uh huh.
Speaker 2: Okay, alright.  This is at Camp Pendleton?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Alright.  So, you did that for two years?
Speaker 1: I did it, yeah, usually my commands have been two years.  But, and it was, again, a command that was the first to go.  I mean it was the Brigade Service Support Group, again, in support of the first out the door to go to, you know, to go fight.  So, we did a lot of, lots of deployments.  One of my favorites was the deployment to Africa where we, I took a unit in and we did, did some major operations--what we call, we call MEDCAP, DENCAP, and VETCAP.  But anyway, basically we go in.  And we went in the villages and provided medical support, dental support and veterinary support to local villages that were out in the areas that, you know, vehicles just couldn't go.  So really, they was just way out in the, in the hillsides.  And you would take helicopters out and treat a number, we treated just a number of individuals out there.  And we also built some clinics, built clinics which was just--  Again, so, it was--built clinics, did hospital work, repaired--hospital work.  And so, we did a lot of that while also training with some of the forces there.  So, that was rewarding, very rewarding.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, where in Africa were you?
Speaker 1: We was in a town called Malindi--so, in Kenya.  So, yeah.  Not--well, I was going to say not too far from Nairobi.  But everything--I mean, it just takes a while to get to different places there.  But--
Speaker 2: Now, Malindi, is that out on the coast?
Speaker 1: It is, it's on the coast, yeah.
Speaker 2: Indian Ocean?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's on the coast--beautiful, beautiful Coast.
Speaker 2: That's one of the towns that, those ocean towns like Kiawah [ph.].
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, it's beautiful.
Speaker 2: Now this is--is this, this is after the U.S.--I mean, the U.S. base I think was bombed or something, by Al Qaeda?  When was that?  When was the Al Qaeda bombing in Kenya, when they bombed a--[1998; American Embassy bombing in Nairobi, Kenya]?
Speaker 1: Oh, oh, oh, I'm going to think of it in a minute.
Speaker 2: Seems like it happened around this time.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but I don't think it--. Yeah--.
Speaker 2: Well, at any rate, whoever's watching this can look it up, I guess.  But it's just--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: It was around that time I think, that that happened.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: In the late '90s [1990s], or 2000, or something like that. [1998]
Speaker 1: It was, it--
Speaker 2: It was prior to 9/11 [September 11, 2011 terrorist attacks in the U.S.].
Speaker 1: As a matter of fact one of my, I want to say a friend of mine--one of the MEUs--one of the MEUs had to respond to that.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, alright.  So, but this was, this is good work.  This is work developing communities.
Speaker 1: It was, it was one of--I mean it was great work, very rewarding work.  I mean, I enjoyed the people, just enjoyed sitting out talking with them and, you know.  And you just--you know, and you learn.  Again, you was always--I was always learning, you know, trying to learn things from them, and to be able to see exactly how things were.  The people lived different.  But they were out making the baskets in some cases, with what they had, and using what they had to better their families.  So, it was good.
Story_ID: 35386
Speaker 1: Now, is there a factor, is there a fear factor with people in other countries when the [U.S.] Marines are present doing these kinds of things?  Even though they're doing something that's not threatening, I mean--.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean, just the aspect that it's the Marines, who have a reputation for showing up and hitting hard, and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Right.  I think a lot of it depends on a lot of the upfront work that you do.  It requires, it does require the diplomatic side of things to also work at the same time that your military is working.  So, you know, I mean there were a lot of--I know we had to do--and they did for us--.  You know, there was lots of fliers that had to be delivered.  I mean a lot of village, village elders and village leaders--you had to engage and talk to and make sure they understood, because they're the ones who would, you know, sort of advise in leading their village and things.  So, I think it just requires, in any of those aspects, requires some of those diplomatic pieces to be in place before you go in.  But for the most part, they was very, very receptive to it.  And it was, it was very--not only rewarding to see, but it was very encouraging to see the behavior of--in this case, the Kenyans, while we was there.  And because of the work that had been done upfront, the diplomatic work that had been done upfront, and how they communicated it out to all--.  But when we would fly in, and we'd get into an area--and we would go into wherever they was going to have us set up for.  Now, there being people who probably who was lined up--and probably had been lined up for hours and hours, you know, waiting for us to get there, you know, or had walked miles and miles in order to get there.  But they were, they were the most orderly--they stayed in line where they were supposed to be, and they moved to where it was no--.  Basically, there was no semi-rioting, you know, trying to get in to get treated or whatever the case was.  They stayed, and they just did what they were supposed to do.  And if we had to leave--.  The one day because we didn't finish--or we ran, we didn't get through.  And I don't know how they did it--but the next day we come and, you know, I guess whoever was due to be seen would be back in line.  And they would be coming through.  So, it was just, it was encouraging just to see that, and know that these people really appreciated what it was that we was doing.
Speaker 1: Did you have a, did what you saw--I mean, did what you actually, you know, experience there--did that change any of your notions about what would happen in Africa, or what African people were like, you know?  Or did you have any pre-conceived notions?
Speaker 2: I don't think I had any pre-conceived notions.  So, I don't know that it changed me in any way.  I--no, I don't think I went in with anything except that these were some people who, you know, we wanted to help.  We were there to help them as best we could.  And they were, they were there, again, to receive us.  And it they was very gracious in their reception of our help.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I know how excited people in Africa are--in South America, and other places, with President Obama being--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --an African-American.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Were they excited to see you, in a command position?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yeah, yeah, they were.  I mean, and when we talk about--when I was mentioning about just talking to the people--.  I mean, there were times when just outside of my command post or outside on the stoop, if you will, of the street, I was, you know, I could just sit out and talk with them.  And they would stop by and they just, we would just chat from time to time to time, about it.  So, I think they were, they were pretty excited about it--seeing someone, again, with the same skin color as theirs, you know, in a leadership position.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 35387
Speaker 1: Now, I think this is too, around the time that, it had to be around the time, within a year or two of the Black Hawk Down--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, in Mogadishu [Somalia], yeah.
Speaker 1: --in Somalia--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Where the rocket shot a Black Hawk helicopter down--.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: The Somalis had been pirating--
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: --because of the lack of a central government.
Speaker 2: Right.  Yeah, I think it was right after--it was right after we left there, or not too long after.  But during that, during that, those earlier years, during the time that--.  But again, we didn't, we didn't have--we didn't have any--I think the--I can't think of any issue that we had.  I think we had one that was a false reporting of something, you know, that somebody was trying to stir up public opinion or resentment toward the U.S. or something. So, there was some false reporting of our guys doing, having--doing something.  But again, the local leaders, once they got into it, they knew exactly what was going on.  And they put it down, you know.  It's just that--I don't know if they were--and probably were--If they could, you know, could get it to where it was recognized as some sort of a, of an international incident--.  Sometimes, you know, we have to do compensation and such.  So, I think that was what it was about.  And maybe they can get some compensation from the U.S. government, you know, if they could prove or if they could get someone to believe that we had committed some sort of crime or something.  But it didn't go anywhere.  Other than that, I think it was only one.
Speaker 1: Now, the U.S. having a command in Africa [AFRICOM; United States Africa Command], I guess--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Is it largely there because of diplomatic obligations the U.S. has with other countries, or to protect U.S. business interests in these countries?  Or what does it, what is the major reason?
Speaker 2: The--I think when we initially stood it up, I think it was, it had somewhat of a two-pronged focus.  I mean, the diplomatic one was exactly as you say.   They was--as a matter of fact, even the organization, we was going to have a major diplomatic arm in there as well, because of all the countries there and the countries in Africa.  And the other one was going to be more of a military arm.  And part of that, certainly, is to train and to cooperate and provide cooperative engagement with--it was various African nations in their military, to help train them.  Because you know, again, just like what we're doing in Afghanistan, you need to get them to--.  So, you need both.  You need diplomatic, as well as they need to have a military, a strong military that can protect human rights for defense of the people.  And like you said, as well as business--whether it be U.S. business or whoever's in there, so they can provide--.  So, I think it was a little bit of both.  Really, I know there was both.
Speaker 1: Of all those things.
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 35388
Speaker 1: Okay, so 2001, you served as commander general of the [U.S. Marines] 3rd Force--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Support Service Group.
Speaker 2: I went back to Okinawa [Japan] again.  As you notice, there's that theme there, of back and forth to Okinawa.  Because I was--typically I was in Okinawa in the '70s [1970s], the '80s [1980s], the '90s [1990s] and the 2000s.  For each of the last four decades, I had been, I had spent time in Okinawa.  So, in 2000--really in 2000 is when I first went back.  And I went initially as the commanding general for the Marine Corps Base, Camp Butler, which is--and that's where I started at.  And then the year after that is when I went down to become the commanding general for the 3rd Force Service Support Group.  So, all those other entities that I talked about earlier, whether it be the MEU [Marine Expeditionary Unit] Service Support Group, whether it be the G4 and the FSSG [Force Service Support Group]--.  Now, I'm the command general for the, for all of that.  I mean, for all that provide support for the largest unit, which is a MEF, which is a Marine Expeditionary Force which is commanded by a 3-Star [general].  So, which is basically by size.  So I--so I go back there to command that.  I did the base for a year, and then I'm going to command the 3rd Force Service Support Group for two years, from 2001 to 2003.  And again, you know, it's a tremendous assignment--doing some neat stuff--deploying again around, throughout that area.  But a lot of that, you also have units that are providing support.  And they're located throughout the area.  So, you get to go out and oversee those operations.  Because they had a unit--with that unit--the 3rd Force Service Support Group has organizations in Hawaii.  You have organizations in Iwakuni [Japan], throughout--organizations down in Korea, and certainly throughout Okinawa.  So, you had a lot of subordinate units throughout that whole AOR that you saw their efforts.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 35389
Speaker 1: Now how did--now you know, September 11, 9/11 [September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks in the U.S.]--how did that affect what you were doing, you know, from your perspective?
Speaker 2: Well, it really had a, it just had a major impact on how--what we were focusing, how we were focusing on it, and what we needed to do in response to what was going on in that--with really with terrorism throughout.  And so, and you know, I was--at the time when it happened, matter of fact I was en route.  I was in the airplane coming back from Okinawa [Japan].  I was coming back into the U.S. to--I think I was headed to a conference in Jacksonville, North Carolina.  So, as I'm--as we're flying and we, just as we're about to enter U.S. airspace, the pilot or whoever comes over the radio there, and basically said, well we're going to have to land.  He said we have some sort of an issue or something we need to--with the plane, or something like that, you know.  And so, so that's all, that's what we knew, until we--.  And just as we was landing, one of the businessmen on the plane--I guess he was calling his office to let them know that he was not going to make whatever appointment he was due to make--.  And that is when he was told that, "No, there's nothing wrong with your plane.  I mean, the airspace has been shut down."  And he told us--and so as we was sitting there--so he said, no, he said, you know, "The [Twin] Towers have just been bombed."  And then the Towers and the Pentagon.  And then, because you know, how the--then they didn't know if there was another one, whether it was the White House, or was in Pennsylvania, whether it was--.  But those were the two.  And so then we, we couldn't come into the, we couldn't come in.  So they sat us down and then we, we ended up taking a bus.  And they brought a bus into Seattle [Washington] where we got--.  And then we, and then we just had to hang out for a few days, because there was no flight and no arrangement.  And then we eventually made our way back.  I think we got a military--there was a flight going--and we was able to jump on it, some of us, and get back.
Story_ID: 35390
Speaker 1: But what we--and then what we began to find is that we were beginning to focus more and more on terrorists and Al Qaeda [after the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks], and that sort of thing.   We began to understand how some of those activities was happening in other parts of the world.  And of course in the Pacific, we ended up down in Mindanao, down in the Philippines, you know.  So, we had to put a unit, sort of had to put a unit down there to begin to do things, you know--trying to build roads to help, so we can move in and out and get a good air strip in so the forces could come in.  And that was all with--.  Because the Pacific command had put a unit in, and we was kind of the support arm for that.  And so, we got to do that.  I think I put a lieutenant--I think a lieutenant colonel, either a major or a lieutenant colonel.  It was a, you know, a small unit.  And we would go out and do some very basic, very basic stuff in support of that whole effort.  But that was interesting, that was very interesting--what all we had to go through in order to do that, in order to try to support that whole effort.  Because you still had--I mean they were still out in the hinterlands, and you know, running around.  And they would be on motorcycles taking pot shots, you know, or coming out of the bush and taking shots and, you know, going back in the bush.  And then we had to have reaction forces to try to contain them and stuff.  So, I think, as you said, during that whole tour, that became--you know after 9/11, that kind of became the major--some major focus of our area, of our efforts over there.  Still did all our training, still staying connected with our coalition partners.  But that became the, a major piece of what we needed to do in that area to try to help promote stability and peace in that area.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 35391
Speaker 1: Now, speaking of 9/11 [terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001], your office is actually located in a part of the Pentagon that was actually destroyed by a plane.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.  It is.  I mean it's, and every--you know, when I look out and look out across the Memorial Garden out there--. And you know, each of those benches, you know, and you can--which accounts for the number that was killed, whether it be on the plane or in the building, that was killed--.  I mean it's a constant reminder of the times that we're in and just, you know, what--even what the current war is all about.  I mean, sometimes it's difficult to understand how something that's happening so far away can impact what we consider to be our freedom here in the homeland.  But you're sitting in here and you're looking at that everyday--.  You certainly see how that is certainly true, and something that we always have to be mindful of, that, I mean, that it can happen.  But we didn't think it could happen, but it can happen.  And that's proof that it does happen.  And it could happen again, if we're not careful.
Story_ID: 35392
Speaker 1: The U.S., they put troops on the ground in Afghanistan, and then in 2003, the invasion of Iraq, actually.
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: Do you--I mean, I think the first move, everybody seemed to agree with that, you know, or most people.  But the invasion of Iraq, some people had second thoughts about it.  Now, do you entertain those kinds of thoughts, as a general?  Or do you--
Speaker 2: No.  I mean, I did not.  I mean I, you know, we, when we look at the situation--and we look at, you know, what our commanding chief has--or what our nation requires of us.  And then we say okay, that's the mission.  I mean, that's the mission.  We've had--our leadership has looked through that and decided that that's in our national interest for us to do that.  And so, once that decision is made, then from a military perspective, you know, our obligation is to say okay, if that's--.  I mean we always say we elect people and put them in leadership positions, and especially our Commander-in-Chief.  When they--he said, that's what it is.  And we, so that's what we follow.  So, I never get into, I never get into debating whether that's right, wrong, or indifferent, or anything else.  But, okay, that's the mission.  And again, based upon the things that we've seen--that I've seen personally--whether it be the attack on this building [Pentagon], the attack on Twin Towers [New York City], you know--.  And then when you begin to understand all the dynamics, which I don't understand all the dynamics of--as you say--of Iraq, of Iran, Al Qaeda, you know--all those, how that's all intertwined.  But you just have to, to know that, okay, that's what we need to do, that's what where we need to be.  Because you know, some would say, they said--I don't think Afghanistan.  That doesn't seem to be questions there, I guess, just because of what we see.  I guess we see more there than folks saw in Iraq.  But some of the stuff that we all--who have ever been there--have seen in Iraq--and let you know that, well, you still have some, there were some major issues.  So, I don't question that, I don't question that decision at all.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, is there ever a time you think it's appropriate for a general to question what, you know, what his superiors are, you know, telling him?
Speaker 2: Well, I think the--whether it be--it's, I don't know if I would say a time for questioning it.  But there's certainly a time for any general officer, we all do, I mean, when we have those discussions with our bosses.  I mean, we talk to our bosses.  I mean, we have give and take.  And just like when we're--when you're discussing a mission, when you're doing things, I mean, there is that time for you to discuss.  But once you--but then, see, you get beyond that.  And you know, and the boss may end up going with what you recommend.  And okay, and then once--as we say, once the door opens and you walk out, I mean, it's you know, that's the decision, and that's the way you go on the mission.  So, and so maybe questioning is the right word, maybe questioning is not.  But there's certainly always time for a discussion of issues associated with the mission.  And I, and the bosses, they allow that.  I mean the Commander-in-Chief allows that.  Because I don't discuss it with him directly.  But via the chain of command, you have the opportunity to discuss that.  My commandant goes to the Chairman and the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the SecDef [U.S. Secretary of Defense].  And the SecDef goes to the president.  Their voices are heard, and again, and in some cases he comes over and he discusses it with them directly.  So--
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 35393
Speaker 1: [In] 2005 you were back in the United States as Commander of the Marine Corps Logistics in Albany [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Right.  Yeah, that's the, that's right.  That's the [U.S.] Marine Corps Logistics Command.  And that's the, that's the logistics command for the entire Marine Corps.  So, if you walk through that career again, (laughter), it was, you know, from a supply officer at the basic unit.  Then you, then as a supply officer for a continuous MAGTAF [Marine Air-Ground Task Force] out in the [Persian] Gulf.  Then you go to a MEU [Marine Expeditionary Unit] Service Support Group.  Then you go the Brigade Service Support Group, and then you go to the Force Service Support Group.  And then now, the final, the pinnacle of the logistics assignment is the command for the logistics for the entire Marine Corps.  And that is that operation of strategic level of logistics, that is what that is.  And that, you know, you have depots that rebuild and repair all your ground equipment.  You know, one depot is out in Barksdale, California.  One depot is out in, down in Albany, Georgia.  You also run all the pre-position equipment for the Marine Corps.  You got ships that's out around the world with equipment loaded aboard.  You got, you got caves in Norway with equipment that's in that.  And so, you manage the entire, that whole infrastructure, and the supply depot as well.  You issue all the supplies to all the units.  And you manage the distribution network that supports that.  So, that becomes, that's for the entire Marine Corps.  And I did that for, again, I always seem to be stuck on four years, you know.  So, I did that for four years as well, you know.  And so, and that was--and that was, when we put forces in Iraq, we had to put a logistics unit there, we put one there.  We had to, we stood up a unit--well, it was kind of the same unit.  But once we moved to Afghanistan, we stood up a logistics support unit and put there, as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you did that for four years.
Story_ID: 35394
Speaker 1: So that brings us to 2009.
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: So, is that when you came over to the Pentagon?
Speaker 2: That's when I came here, yeah, to this job, yeah.
Speaker 1: Alright.  And your position here at the Pentagon is?
Speaker 2: It's Director of Marine Corps Staff.  Most folks refer to it as the Chief of the Marine Corps staff.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh huh.  But if, by [U.S.] Congress I guess it's called the Director of the Marine Corps Staff.  And you have, each of the service, you get a director.
Speaker 1: So this is, this position, you're the third ranking [U.S.] Marine in the country, right?
Speaker 2: Uh huh, uh huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you think you're going to be around long enough to be the first?  (laughter).
Speaker 2: (laughter)  First 4-Star?
Speaker 1: Yeah, the first 4-Star.
Speaker 2: No, no, no, the first African American 4-Star.  But that--no, I'm not.  I've been serving now for almost thirty-nine years, and so I said that's about time for me to hang it up, about time for me to retire.  We don't say retire, we say transition.  It's about time for me to transition, really, to the civil sector.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Do something else.
Speaker 1: Now, what are some of the issues in this job that you have to deal with?
Speaker 2: This, as a Chief of Staff for the Marine Corps, it's one of those jobs that--it really entails coordination, lots of coordination, on really every issue that comes to the commandant.  So, in the way it's structured, with other 3-Stars who has functional responsibilities--and you have a number of them.  You have one with functional responsibility for logistics and installations.  You have another one with function for aviation, and one who functions for operations, you know.  So, you have these other 3-Stars in manpower.  You have those with functional responsibility--where the chiefs, we, I don't have a functional responsibility.  So, I ensure coordination across all functional areas, and then coordination with all your outside agencies--such as the OSD [Office of the Secretary of Defense] staff, Secretary of the Navy staff, you know.  And then the other services and joint staff.  So, this kind of becomes the hub for coordination of all those activities prior to things going up to the commandant for a decision, and so forth.  So you advise him, advise the commandant, advise the assistant commandant.  And once you've done all, once you have all that, now you have all the inputs and stuff that you need.  And then you advise him on the major issues.  And those issues range, you know, again, across the board.  I mean, everything from financial issues to women and service issues to, you know.  We had this recent one.  We had, we used to call it "Don't Ask, Don't Tell."  I mean, that was a major issue.  Now we got same-sex benefits that's coming out.  I mean, we have issues, legal issues, that--.  So, there's no--that's one, you know, no day is like any other day in this office.  I mean, except one thing is certain, that there will always be something new that keeps coming.  And you just keep rolling through it.  But it's a great, it's an interesting job.  But it's one that's busy and one that the time goes pretty quickly.
Story_ID: 35395
Speaker 1: I would think that at no previous time, when there's so many--I guess issues in terms of women in the military--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: The "Don't Ask, Don't Tell" [policy] thing.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We call them--a lot of, you know, like I say, social issues.  And that's right, that's not--I don't think there's been a time in history when you've had so many coming all at the same time.  I mean, you know, because you have your typical--okay, that's--budget fights are always there.  Equipment, you know, okay, that's always been there.  You got to do that, you know, training and stuff that you have to do.  But those are, those are kind of the norm, if you will.  But these--and now you--and of course, you know, we now have a different, a different rule set for things we need to focus on.  Because, you know, with the war, now you have the PTSD [post-traumatic stress disorder]; you have an increase in suicides.  Or well, at least they're not coming to the front.  Maybe they're associated, maybe they're not, you know--.  The sexual assaults that seem to be coming up that we have to deal with, and that we've been dealing with, and that we're working--.  So, there's a number--all of those issues, again, become personalized, and we--
Speaker 1: Seems like it would be really tough to try to manage--I mean on one level, you know, [U.S.] Marines who got to be super aggressive--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And then on another level, you don't want them to be monsters--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and to come back as a monster.
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: So how, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  There is--you know it comes--we understand that, and we try to craft it in such a way that--. You try to package it, I guess you'd say, in such a way that we can all understand and can all begin to appreciate.  And one of the things that we say when we, especially when something comes down to some of the more social issues.  A lot of time it comes down to dignity and respect, you know, treating everyone with dignity and respect.  I mean the dignity and respect that you deserve, whether they be, whether it be a race type issue, you know.  Whether it be women, you know, how you treat--whether it be a gay issue.  I mean, but if we can get to the point where everyone is treated with the same dignity and respect that we each would like to be treated with, then it's kind of that--You just go back to the Golden Rule, you know, which at the time we think that's really where we need to...  And that's kind of what we, you know--even when we did all, you know, you do all the studying and everything.  And we, you know, you come back to this, how do you treat--.  I mean, we're brothers and sisters.  So, how do you treat your brother and sister?  You don't, like I said, you don't become a monster and do something, you know, heinous to your brother or your sister.  And that's really where you have to try to get that mindset, you know.  And it is tough, it is tough, because, again, we draw from people from all segments of society, from all walks of life.  I mean people from all backgrounds and some, and they come with--some, we say, lots of baggage, that sometimes we each bring.  Well, we each bring some baggage.  I mean, we all have baggage that we bring.  It's just, you know, how do you deal with that?  How does what you bring then begin to manifest itself in how you treat others?  And if you can--you can get down to where that treatment is with dignity and respect, then we can get beyond that, but it is tough.  And but, I think that--I like to say that we have some of the best leadership in the world.  And those leaders are going to, going to handle it.  And they're going to take care of it in the best way that, the best way possible, so they can get beyond some of those issues.
Story_ID: 35396
Speaker 1: Does the [U.S.] Marine Corps try to--I guess those other services, too--I mean, is there a balance struck between religion, psychology, or some other means?  I mean to give, provide a sense of justice to what goes on with personnel--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I don't, I mean, I don't know that--.  No, one thing we--some of our, some of the programs that you teach, I mean you do look for a balance.  You know, you look for a balance.  And, you know, across the spectrum of man.  I mean, if you look at--you look for, you know, the emotional, the spiritual, you know, the physical, you know.  You look for that balance, and you try to help, to help all, and achieve that balance by whatever means you can--whether it be through training, whether it be through counseling, whether it be just through various programs that we have, that we try to get them to achieve that balance.  We don't necessarily, you know, preach--if you say, religion, if you will.  But we do talk about achieving balance in life.  And part of that balance is spiritual, it's a spiritual aspect to it.  And that through, you know, whatever that means to you, it's the way we have to approach it.
Story_ID: 35397
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, 2008, the country elected its first African American president, Barack Obama.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But, and some say we're in a post-racial society.  And a lot of people say no, it's really not, it's still not yet.  (laughter)  But one of the--I guess the historical milestones--and you've been, that you've dealt with on some level--is the Montford Point Marines, the first group of black [U.S.] Marines.  I think it was deployed in like 1942?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: So, kind of give us a history of that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and their involvement.
Speaker 2: You know, the--and that was significant.  That was a significant and historical event for me, and being able to work through that.  But I would say that the first, most significant historical event for me was--because it was certainly one that was emotional--was to participate in [President] Barack Obama's inauguration, as you said.  I mean, that was when--and you know, I marched as his component commander in his parade and was--rendered him as, you know, the first salute as our Commander-in-Chief.  And that was, that was significant.  That's why I really did think that was.  But anyway, that's what that picture there is for, on the wall there, is during his inauguration.  But--
Speaker 1: So, you were selected to--tell us how that--
Speaker 2: Well, the, you know--because in each of the parades, there are, there are component commanders who will march in the parade, who will--They lead--the component commanders, I mean he's the commander in chief.  The component commander really leads off the parade.  And one of the first things that you do, is when the president comes off the east step of the [U.S.] Capitol--He comes down, he and the First Lady--I think the vice president was with him as well.  And then that's we the component commanders come by, and we render the first, his first salute.  That's why they call it the first salute.  That was the salute.  And then we kick that off and go down, we go down to the reviewing stand.  And they come down in the reviewing stand, they come down.  Now, how did it happen that I was selected to participate in that?  And it really--what had happened is that the inauguration prior, the [George W.] Bush inauguration, I was here.  I was stationed here inside the, I was facilities in I and L (unclear).  I was the chief facility officer.  And so, when that time came and they was selecting one--either I volunteered, or they volunteered me.  I forget exactly how I got in, but I participated.  And so, I knew the process of what was going on.  So when Barack Obama was elected, I immediately then went to those who I knew was organizing and said, "I want to be the component commander in the parade."  Well, that was before they even knew there was a requirement for that.  But I knew there was a requirement for it.  I knew it was going to eventually come, right, because I knew that it was--because I had just did the first one.  So, they said, "Well, what are you talking about?"  I said, "Well, there's going to be one.  And you have to, we have to provide a team, and I would just like to be the component commander."  So, and I threw my hat in, my name in.  And they said, "Okay, you volunteered for it."  And so, I got it.  So, I got to do it that way.  Because I knew, again, I had been exposed to it before, and I knew what was coming.  And so that was, that was neat.
Story_ID: 35398
Speaker 1: And so, now, back to--and so that was--.  Then back here [Pentagon]--then I came up here, and I began to work this job.  And we, we had--we the [U.S.] Marine Corps had started an effort to recognize--not only recognize, but to bring together the legacy of the Montford Point Marines, and to basically embed that into the legacy of the Marine Corps.  You know, the Marine Corps, we'd been deep and steep on tradition--on legacies, you know--and on our customs, and the whole aspect of being a Marine.  And so, what we had then was--then we had these African Americans, you know, basically 19,000 of them, who had joined the Marine Corps when the Marine Corps was totally segregated, between 19--, when they had a segregated boot camp and all that, between 1942 and 1949, I think, before we closed it.  And in many cases they had gone on to, I mean, to serve this country.  They had gone to war during World War II, stayed on, made a career of it, and then moved on up to--and became really legends in the Corps.
Story_ID: 35399
Speaker 1: But they [the Montford Point Marines; first blacks in the U.S. Marine Corps] were legends only in the Corps on one side of the Corps, you know, just the--but it was not embedded in the overall legacy of the Marine Corps.  So, the Montford Point Marines were known by the minorities in some cases, but not even that.  It was not, even as a whole, not even known by minorities.  It was just, it was just certain segments who was aware of the Montford Point Marines.  We had a, we have a Marine Corps--Montford Point Marine Association.  And they had been trying to get some recognition in the way of a Congressional Gold Medal.  But, and that was up there and it was going, but the Marine Corps was not behind it.  I mean, there was no push from the Marine Corps to get it done.  And so, you know--and so it just didn't, it wasn't moving very forward.  So then we had, we had this effort that got started, that said we've got to, we've got to change this.  We've got to take the, this legacy of these 19,000 who served this country and served this nation extremely well, and we've got to bring that into the Corps.  We've got to bring it into the Corps.  And certainly one way was to get this recognition, to get this recognition by [U.S.] Congress.  And then there was a lot of other things that needed to go on.  So we formed that, we formed an effort, and the Congressional Gold Medal was just one piece of it.  But there were other pieces as well.  And so, the--
Speaker 2: What were some of the other pieces?
Speaker 1: Well, one, education.  I mean, when I came through and when no one else came through--all those schools that I was talking about, you never heard anything about them.  I mean, there was no teaching or anything about it.  So you--I mean we taught a lot of other--we taught a lot of histories of the [U.S.] Marine Corps, of the war fighting, you know, legacies of things and the various war efforts.  But the Montford--but the black Marines who was also in that during that--they was never a part of that history.  It goes back to, you know--you talk about me growing up in the South.  In the history books, there was a lot of stuff that was missing from the history books, you know.  So, you just didn't get that.  So, education was the, is one big piece, you know.  And some of our customs and things that we do with--let's say we have mess nights, and we have other sorts of things.  But you know, we wanted to make sure that within that custom of doing that, there was a place in there that, you know, there would be a recognition of the Montford Point Marines.  So, that every mess night that's held--whether it be a toast or whatever it is--that there will be a mention of that, so that all the Marines now who are growing up in that, will get, will learn that.  We had, we had a couple of other pieces.  But I think the education piece, the Gold Medal--getting the education piece and then moving that out--moving that along, was some of the big ones.
Story_ID: 35400
Speaker 1: So, we got the--so, back to the medal [Congressional Gold Medal to honor the Montford Point Marines; the first blacks in the U.S. Marine Corps].  So, we were able to get sponsorship.  We were able to get Senator--see, well, first they started with Congressman Corrine Brown, out of Florida.  We got her.  She was to help sponsor, to sponsor that.  And then we got Senator Kay Hagan out of North Carolina, which again, was the Camp Lejeune area.  And that's where the base is of the Montford Point Marines.  That's where they started.  So, we got those two to sponsor that, and to write these bills in order to get them, to get them up.  And then they--and they got behind it.  And we, you know, and the association, the Montford Point Marine Association was there.  And then of course, the Marine Corps itself--the commandant--writing letters to everyone on the Hill [U.S. Capitol].  So, they was able to get all those signatures that we needed in order to push it through.  And then the president [President Barack Obama], on the--I think November 23rd, he signed it, and then the bill.  And of course then we went into planning to get the awarding of it, and to get them together--to bind them, to package (unclear) them into to the parades, to bringing them back here to do all that.  And we got that down.  And I've got to tell you--
Speaker 2: Now, is this in 2012?
Speaker 1: Uh huh.
Speaker 2: Or, is this--
Speaker 1: Uh huh.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Yeah, we did, we did, we started it--let me see.  Make sure I got the-- because these years go by.  But yeah, we brought them back here in--So that must mean the president signed it in 2011.  So, he must have signed it in November of 2011.  Because we did the awards ceremonies in, well, in the mess--Basin (ph) Hall.  That one went in, I forget what--the day in May--it's on the thing.  But that, so that happened, and then we had a ceremony at the barracks.  So that would have been 2012, yeah, that would have been 2012.  And we--and so, you know, so that effort has been going, and we got them.  And I tell you, they--to this day--I mean, you go, we go to a function--I was just at one on Friday.  And this is--the significance of them is that those Montford Point Marines who were there and received their replica Gold Medal--.  And we installed them in a way that they could actually wear them, you know.  We put them on a red, white, and blue ribbon and all that.  They are still wearing their Gold Medal.  When they go out, they wear their Gold Medal with such pride.  I mean they, all of a sudden they're involved in it as well.
Story_ID: 35401
Speaker 1: Well, tell me about one figure I think I've seen written about the most, is a fellow named Sergeant [Gilbert] "Hashmark" Johnson.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Tell us about him.  What is his significance?
Speaker 2: Well, I will tell you his significance to me, because he is, as I say, my hero and my inspiration in many cases.  And that's why his photo is over my desk over there.  That's where it sits at.  It's, and just his, I think it's his whole--you look at his spirit, you look at his determination, you look at his drive to succeed, you know, against all odds.  And it's just, it just shows you that those opportunities will come.  And every time an opportunity came, he took advantage of it.  If you look back at his history--Well, first of all, let me tell you that we're from, we're both from Alabama.  We're from a little, both from--our little towns are really, these little counties are really one next over from the other one.  We bump up against each other.  So, and, so that was one connection for him.  The other was that he attended, he attended Stillman College [Tuscaloosa, Alabama].  He attended Stillman College in 1922, '23 [1923], I think about seven years removed from me.  And then the other connection was, is that he passed in 1972.  And that was the year that I signed up to come into the [U.S.] Marine Corps.  So, we've had those connections.  But when I look back and I consider, you know, what he meant to the Marine Corps, what he meant to our nation, what he meant to this whole--the progress of equal rights and racial relationships within the country--I mean, I can't help but think of him.  And you think--when he left Stillman, he left Stillman when--of course, the [U.S.] Army being the first service to integrate, if you will.  So, when the Army opened its doors and he was able to join the Army, he joined the Army.  He joined the Army, and each time when he would join it--he wouldn't just join, he was in for the long haul.  I mean, he was in there to truly make a difference.  And then when the, then the [U.S.] Navy opened its doors, if you will, then he got out of the Army and he joined the Navy.  And then when the Marine Corps opened its doors, or started receiving blacks, he got out of the Navy and he joined the Marine Corps.  Again, he was, he was almost--he was determined that wherever he could make a difference at, and whenever the opportunity came for him to make a difference he was going to take it.  And he was in for the long haul.  That's one reason.  Now, there's a couple of stories as to why he was called "Hashmark."  But the one that--because, you know, we, you know, if you've been in for every four years, depending on--.  So, I think some may be every three.  But for every four years, you get a hash mark on your uniform.  And so here he was, he was a private, but he had hash marks, because he had been in for--I think it was about thirteen years or something that he had been in, all total, by time he--.  Yeah, well, at least ten because he--yeah, about nine or ten.  Because he left Stillman I think in '22 [1922] or '23 [1923].  And then he went to the service, and this is '42 [1942].  So, I mean he had already been in the military a long time, twenty years or so, when he joined the Marine Corps.  And so, he was, if I remember, he was--yeah, because he was like--because, he's--.  So, he was about thirty-seven years old, going through Marine Corps boot camp.  And so, I mean, he had to be very, very determined, and he was.  And he, of course he went on and became one of the first drill instructors, you know, a sergeant major, but I don't know--.  So, wherever he went and whatever he was doing, I mean, he was going to be successful at it.  And so, yeah, he is one of the legends there that means a lot.
Story_ID: 35402
Speaker 1: Just to, I mean, to be specific, too.  I mean, he [Sergeant Major Gilbert "Hashmark" Johnson], when those doors [to the armed services] opened up it wasn't like he just walked in and--
Speaker 2: Oh, no.
Speaker 1: I mean, there was hell to pay, you know--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --in the Army in those days, the Navy--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: I've heard horror stories about the Navy...
Speaker 2: Every one.
Speaker 1: And a pioneer in the Marines, too.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, he's--I don't know what happened to him, or what he endured, but I've heard others, you know, former soldiers talking about him.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he--I don't either.  But I know that, you know, just from hearing some of the things they hear, and some of the stories and things that happened--.  But he was, again, and I firmly believe that--I mean, there was just in him and others, some others like him.  I mean, they were just filled with something that was so spiritual that they could withstand all of that, and knowing that it was for--it was just for a cause greater than them.  And they was not going to allow themselves to fail at that, to fail at that cause that they were on.  And a lot of times I say that about, you know, when I'm--when I look up and I'm at a task or doing something that--it's that I--.  For me to fail, I feel I'll be letting Hashmark down.  You know, I would be letting him down, and all that he's fought for to ensure that I had an opportunity to excel and an opportunity to--.  Although he never knew me and I never knew him personally, I mean, but I just feel that I would be letting him down.  And I feel that way even to this day.  So--
Story_ID: 35403
Speaker 1: You know, historically, black soldiers have felt that--I mean from the [American] Civil War on, even probably beyond that--that their service to the country was the doorway to manhood in the country, in terms of being able to achieve all your rights.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I just--and the [U.S.] Marines especially, even for whites, is seen as this is how you become a man.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, you hear that more than any other branch of service, "I'm going to join the Marines and become a man."
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: What are your reflections on that?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I think, I think you're right.  I don't--I think especially the years past, I think that was exactly right.  Because that was something that you really could, you could get your arms around.  I mean, you know, as a young man or as a young boy, if you will--.  I mean, that was something that you could really get to, you could wrap your mind around.  And you could see that as something that was achievable.  I mean that is achievable, you know what I mean?  You can say, "Okay, yeah, I can do that, I can become a man.  I can get in there and I can do that."  And so I think that early on in life it became, as you say, one of those rallying cries that, "Yes, I can do this, and I can do this because this is what this is about.  This is about getting in and becoming a man."  It certainly wasn't about, okay I can go and be a sergeant major, or I can go and I can become a general, or I could do that.  You know, because that, you know, that was not something that was seen as achievable. I mean, I don't even think it was thought of.  I mean, I can tell you that I certainly didn't think of it, you know, back when I came in, in '74 [1974].  So I don't--but I think you're right.  I think that this, you know, becoming a man--and that was something that was definitely achievable.  So, if it's something we could wrap our mind around, we could do.  Because we've seen that.  You know, you've seen men.  You've seen, you know, through how they became a man.  You've seen a black man, so you know what that kind of looks like, you know, a strong man, what that kind of looks like.  You hadn't seen, you know, like I say, a black general or a black sergeant major, so you probably didn't even know what that looked like.  So, that's a good, that's a good point.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 35404
Speaker 1: Well, we always ask this question.  Now, when you look back on everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider your major accomplishments, or your legacy in the [U.S.] Marine Corps?
Speaker 2: You know, I, and I get asked that from time to time.  And I always, always find it difficult to answer.  I think because I--and it's kind of two parts to it for me, for me personally.  One is that, is that, you know, what I set out to do and what I strived to do, is to, is to achieve the purpose for which I've been put on this earth.  And now the drawback, or the downfall, is that I don't know what that purpose is.  So, I don't know that I, what I've achieved to that purpose, because I don't know that it's been revealed.  And so you keep, so you keep growing; you keep, you know, you go here, you're there.  And you do well at the things that you're doing.  But is that the purpose that you were put here for?  Well, maybe God will reveal that at some point and time.  Maybe He already has, I just hadn't realized it.  So, that becomes one piece of it.  The other piece--.  And I say--if I, if someone said, "Well, okay, but you've done some things, you know.  And I say yes, and I think if I'm most proud of anything, is that I think at some point in time, at some point during my career that I have touched someone in a way that has made them better than what they otherwise would have been.  And that to me is the most significant achievement that I think that I could even hope for.  And now, there will be some who will tell you that there's been a lot of them who's been touched.  Well, I'll leave that for others to define, as to what that is.  But I just, I think that at some point and time that I have in fact touched someone, that has made them better than what they otherwise would be.  And that gives me, it's a crown achievement of my career.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 35405
Speaker 1: And in the same vein, is there any major thing that you would change, if you could back and change something?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I, yes, it would.  It wouldn't be--not with the military.  It would be, it would be with my family, with my daughter.  I lost my daughter, thirty-three years of age, which is a very young time.  I think that if I could go back and change something, it probably would be something to deal with her.  Something--whether it be spending time, whether it be traveling more with her or something.  But I would, I would do something in that light.  I mean, I, you know, you know--whether I would--and I keep, I think about it a lot.  Okay, on that tour that I took to Okinawa [Japan]--I mean the one year unaccompanied tour, should--.  You know, well, was that the right thing to do?  And should I have done something differently?  When I went, when we went back over there--you know, when I went back and forth from time to time--each time in some cases, separated from her.  Should I have--.  I probably would re-look at that.  That's probably the differences that I would do.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, do you have other children?  I mean--
Speaker 2: That was the only child.
Speaker 1: And she passed in--
Speaker 2: 2008.
Speaker 1: 2008, okay, alright.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you're still married, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, forty-one years now, I guess it's been.  Or, coming up on forty-one years.
Speaker 1: Do you have grandchildren at all?
Speaker 2: No, because she didn't have, she wasn't married and didn't have any children.  So--
Speaker 1: Alright.
Story_ID: 35406
Speaker 1: Are you--what are your future plans?  You know, because you, I know you're coming right up on retirement--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --as you were saying before.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, what do you plan to do after this?
Speaker 2: Well, what I'm going to do is, I'll transition in my, I'm going to transition to corporate board, or university college trustee type work.  That's what I think I want to do again.  I want to be in the university college trustee work, and be in a position where I can make a difference in someone's life.  So, I'm going to go to Alabama, which is where I'm from.  So, I'm going to go there and, you know, and go from there and see kind of where that goes.  And I'll probably do some--in the logistics in my business side.  I'll do some consulting, and things like that.  So, those will be the major pieces of my transition career.
Speaker 1: Have you been drafted by any colleges as a potential president or anything?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I've been talked to about one.  But I--I've had an interview but I'm not--.  I hadn't moved beyond that yet.  I don't know yet.  So, that's certainly possible.  I mean, but I'm going to, I'm going to let that work for a while.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 35407
Speaker 1: Now, here's a question we always ask, too.  And I've only got a couple more questions.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 1: This is one is something we always ask.  What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: I would say that there are two major concerns, and then I'll--.  But one of my major concerns is that when I look back at history--.  And I can go all the way back to the, the Niagara Movement and come forward.  At each time in history where we made the, what I consider the most progress as a people, has been a time when we had individuals of opposing views who was involved in intellectual debate as to the way forward.  And now, it all was about going forward, but there was debate about, okay, how do you get that?  And because of that intellectual debate that would take place, I think the best of us would come out, you know, whether it be Booker T. Washington, W.B. DuBois--.  I mean, you know, even when you had, you know, Malcolm X and Martin Luther King.  I mean, you know, whatever it was, there was that intellectual debate that was constantly in the background of everything that we were doing.  It's just, okay, how best to do this, to move the people forward?  I don't see, I don't see that intellectual debate taking place today.  I don't see that we have individuals who are engaged in that sort of a dialog.  And so, and even when we do--even if we have one, the others who would be--let's say leaders or maybe what we would consider leaders, I don't know.  But others, they, all they seem to do is pile on to what the other is saying.  And so, you know, there's no thought that seems to be given to what--there's a different aspect here, there's a different something that needs to be considered:  How do we do this, or how do we do that?  It just piles on to what's being said.  And then we begin to beat the same drum, and so we get the same message.  So, I don't see us--.  So, that's part of, that's part of one of those main concerns.  The other is our young, our young, of course African American males, the boys.  And that's, well, because I think when I look at them, I see that we need, we need some focus on them, and we need to focus early.
Story_ID: 35408
Speaker 1: Now, I say that, because one of the things--and I don't know that it's going to make a difference, but it's trying to.  One of the things that--working with my, with Stillman [College, Tuscaloosa, Alabama], with my alma mater, we're  just, we are standing up a Williams Johnson--as in [Gilbert] Hashmark Johnson--a Williams Johnson Leadership Institute.  And what we're going to focus on, what we are focusing on--we've kind of already started some efforts.  We're focusing on kids, not just male kids, but kids.  And mainly we're looking at kind of student athletes between the age of let's say, five and twelve.  So, we want to start them early.  I would love to get to them before they--and try to make a difference before they decide that they need to paint their bodies up with all kinds of tattoos and everything else that does--that adds nothing to their abilities, and adds nothing to their intellect.  But it's, you know, it's, but it's what they do, and they go through that.  So, I think that--and then when I, you know, I hadn't--I think it was the other day I was reading this book.  When I look at the, you know, the drop-out rates, you know, of kids--.  So, again, part of the thinking is that if we can get to them early, perhaps we can make a difference in them later on, because we've started this.  And maybe, depending on how far we can go with this, I mean, there may be even a sense that if we can get enough support down there, we can almost get to the point of, you know, maybe guaranteeing--.  Not necessarily--but maybe it is guaranteeing--if they meet certain pre-requisites--a scholarship at the end of their, as they graduate or something, to get them started into school.  So, that's part of, again, a concern.  But it is also a hope and the vision that I see of where we go forward.  I met a--and this is another one of those encouraging things, you know, because you can see it, you can see it.  We had--I was in--.  Friday, I was in a mentoring session with a bunch of kids.  And so, and these are, I think these kids, they were, they were a little bit older, you know--ten, eleven.  They was in high school.  And so I passed out a, you know, as each one that I mentored, I'd sit and talk to for awhile.  You know, I gave them a business card.  I said, okay, just, I mean, you know, it's not a, you're not talking about for recruiting.  You're not calling me to talk about recruiting.  But if you just, if you need to talk--if you've got anything that you just, you know, want a second opinion or whatever it is, feel free to call me.  And so, I didn't expect, you know, didn't expect to hear from them.  And that was Friday.  And today, I did, I get an e-mail from one of them.  I mean, a very well-written e-mail that just, you know, just following up on our conversation.  "I want to confirm that I got your--"  That kind of thing.  So that was very encouraging, to say, okay--I mean, here's someone who is really thinking, he's thinking on his feet.  I mean he's got, he's got that, because--.  So, I think that--so, that's a hope in that, as well as it's something that I think is a concern.  But it's, I think maybe a concern in a good way.  I do see some positive things.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 35409
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything I haven't asked you about that we need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: Now, you've talked, we've talked about a lot.  Well, no.  I think we covered probably most of--.  One thing that we didn't get into a whole lot was, again, it goes back to my dad [Herman Jones], on my dad's side.  And that was talking about my siblings.  Because on my mom's [Ella Mae Bolden Hill] side, like I said, there was four--I have four siblings there.  So, it was a total of five of us on my mom's side.  But on my dad's side--
Speaker 1: Well, do you want to name them?
Speaker 2: On my mom's side?
Speaker 1: On both.
Speaker 2: I can't name all of them on my dad's side.  But on my mom's side, yeah, those--.  Betty, you know, Betty Jean.  We call her Betty Jean.  She goes by Betty Jean Hill now.  She was the oldest.  Then we have John, John Edward Williams.  And then we have Willis Williams.  And we have--then I was next.  And then we have Ellis Williams, who's the baby.  But that's kind of, that's on my mom's side.  But when you, like I say, when you get to my dad's side and you--I think when we count it up--when I was able to count--.  If I sit and really think through, I think we come up with about sixteen.  So, it's just dad--.  So, it's no way I can name all of those.  But the, but most, most of them--most of the sixteen--I would say the ones that are by my current stepmother--because my daddy's passed.  But my current stepmother was Carrie.  Carrie, she, you know, those--I can name those, because that's, because we still stay in, I stay in touch with a lot of them.  And that goes from--let's see, it was Geraldine.  She's the one that's the same as Willis.  There's Willis.  And then there was Barbara Ann.  She was, she was my, as they say, my cohort.  And then we have Yvette, and we have Lula Mae.  And then we have Herman, Jr.  Then we have Sam.  We have Walter.  We had Jimmie.  And then I think that's when I begin to get to the younger ones that the other--.  So, that was about the first eight or nine of them.  And then the rest of them, I kind of, I kind of run out of names.  Because--and then the older one was Ernest and Elizabeth.  And they were much older than even I or the other ones.  And so, there was a couple of them.  And, but yeah.  And they all are between--some in Livingston and in Georgia.  So, but I'm still very close, close with them as well.  And I used to stay, because I used to live with them.  I used to go down and stay with them during the summer.  I think I went a semester of school, and I stayed down there with Dad and that family.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you say you're going back to Alabama to live after retirement?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: After you retire?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  So, that piece is in there.  Now, I think that's about it.  I can't--.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 35410
Speaker 1: Okay, well, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I, you know, I go back to just what I said.  I think that's--the way that I would to be remembered is as someone who, as someone who was thoroughly blessed, but also who blessed others.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Thank you very much.
Story_ID: 36705
Speaker 1: Tell us about this photo.
Speaker 2: Okay.  That's, that's a photo that was taken in Tuscaloosa, Alabama at Lake Lurleen.  That's my wife, Bobbie, when we were dating back in 1972; This is a picture taken at Stillman College with my fraternity brothers.  The individual standing directly behind me is one of, is my childhood friend from the time I was in elementary school.  That's Clifton Bates.  So Rod is on the left, and I think James Harris is there on the right;  This is a photo that was taken of my two older brothers.  The one on the right is John Williams, and the one on the left is Willis Williams.  And it is taken right in front of our church there, the First Baptist Church of Moundville, that I grew up in;  This is me and my wife Bobbie, Bobbie Williams.  Her maiden name is Bobbie Woods.  She's out of Cottondale, Alabama.  This was taken at the Marine Corps Ball;  Okay, this photo was taken, I think this was in Kuwait.  I was in--no, that's in Iraq.  That's in Iraq.  I was over visiting some of the logistics there when I was the commanding general for the Marine Corps Resistance Command.  And I went over to visit the forces over there, and take a look at the support that we was providing.
Speaker 1: What year is this?  Do you know?
Speaker 2: I would guess that's 2007.  And again, it's during that same time period--no, that's not during that same time period.  That's when I was lieutenant general.  But that is, that was during my recent visit not too long ago to Afghanistan.  I took a visit over with the commandant, and was out visiting the units over there;  Okay, this was at the ceremony where we awarded the Congressional Gold Medal to the Montford Point Marines.  The commandant called Colonel Stephanie Smith, on the right, and myself out to recognize us for the efforts that we had taken to get that Congressional Gold Medal awarded;  Again, during that ceremony with Congresswoman Corrine Brown of Florida who was, again, instrumental in getting that Congressional Gold Medal Award.  I mean, she's there with the commandant and myself, as well as the major general.  The guy in the suit is Major General Leo Williams, he's retired.  And a couple of other Marines there from the area;  And that's the, that's the Medal itself.  That's the actual Congressional Gold Medal that was awarded to the Montford Point Marines;  Talking to one of the original Montford Point Marines after we had awarded the Congressional Gold Medal, and was just reminiscing on what had taken place; I was down, had just completed speaking to the National Naval Officers Association, which is one of the affinity groups that promote diversity within the Marines Corps and the Navy.  And I had an opportunity to the 2nd lieutenants there;  Within the Secretary of the Navy, there's been a concerted effort on diversity.  And in this case, we had worked to get a display actually here within the Pentagon.  And this was an opportunity where we joined with the Secretary of the Navy, the Chief of Naval Operations, and the Administrative Assistant to the Department of the Navy in cutting the ribbon on the display;  This is where we had the commandant and one of our former commandants, General P.X. Kelly, and then the deputy commandants and the Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps.  We had them in for breakfast, just to talk about some of the issues at hand;  And this was a gathering of them at the Marine Corps Ball.  This was in 2012;  This was, this picture is when I took my first command as a general.  I hadn't, I really hadn't been promoted yet.  It was, I had just taken command of the Marine Corps base, Camp Butler, over in Okinawa, Japan, which I was giving my remarks;  This was the Montford Point Marine Association at one of their functions that I had been participating in, and just taking a picture with the individual there, Mr. Granberry, Mr. George Granberry;  Again, a gathering on the, on the college campus with my fraternity, my line brothers.  We was kind of "pal-ling" around at Stillman College;  This was taken on my graduation day from Stillman in 1974.  I was preparing to enter into the college for the ceremony;  This picture was taken after I was promoted to Colonel, again, in Okinawa, Japan.  And it was taken with some of the, some of our sergeant majors there.  Sergeant Major McMichaels was the first African-American Sergeant Major in the Marine Corps.
Speaker 1: Which one is he?
Speaker 2: He's the one that is on my immediate right.  McMichaels is on the immediate, he's on my right.
Speaker 1: (unintelligible)
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  And Morgan and Wiggins.
Speaker 1: (unintelligible)
Speaker 2: Yeah;  And this was part of the actual ceremony.  That's Major General Wayne Rollins, who's actually doing the pinning.  And my wife is doing the other one;  And this is a photo of my dad.  I don't know when the picture was taken, but I imagine just looking at the vehicle there, it's probably pretty old.  (laughter).
Speaker 1: Can we get his name?
Speaker 2: That's Herman Jones.  That's my dad.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's my mother, Ella Mae, Ella Mae Hill.  Maiden name Ella Mae Bolden;  And that's at Stillman College.  That's my fraternity line.  We're performing at the--as we had just gone over and had just been made Alphas.  The guy singing is Arthur Barnes, and the guy on the guitar is, again, my childhood classmate.  You can probably barely see him, but that's Clifton Bates, and I'm standing next to him.  And then you have, Ira Jollies (ph) in there, Sam Brown is in there, Darnell is in there, Herbert Felton is in, and Sylvester Mims is also in that one.  I can't think of...
Speaker 1: What year is that?
Speaker 2: That's the fall of '71' [1971], fall of '71' [1971];  And that's my, if you can believe it, that's my entire high school graduating class.  There was 20 of us coming out of there that year.  And that's our principal, Mr. Norman Siefus.  And my class, Mrs. Long is our class sponsor there.
Speaker 1: The two people that got you in school.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes;  And that's, that's the family.  That was at my, I think that was at my change of command, when I down to take command of the Marine Corps logistics command as a major general.  And that's my, my daughter on my right, on the left as you're looking at her.  And my wife Bobbie who's there with me, with the flowers.  So, that would have been in 2005, the summer of 2005.
