Story_ID: 20443
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer for the History Makers today.  Our Videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir could you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Okay William Edward Walden, W-I-L-L-I-A-M, E-D-W-A-R-D, W-A-L-D-E-N.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: October 13th, 1954, Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: Okay sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a professor of microbiology and immunology at the University of Illinois, Chicago, in the College of Medicine.  And I also serve now as the special assistant to the provost for diversity.
Speaker 1: All right and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: January 21st, 2012.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are at the History, HistoryMakers interview studio we'll call it, 1900 South Michigan Avenue in Chicago, Illinois.
Story_ID: 20444
Speaker 1: All right, now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we ask, it's sort of a warm-up and they only require a short answer.  First one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I like all food [laughs].  Quite honestly, I, I like interesting food.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Depends on my mood.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I like the fall quite a bit.  I like the colors.
Speaker 1: Okay and do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Not really, but I do go to Florida every winter to play golf.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I, I wouldn't say so.  There are certain phrases that I use often, "I'm fine, I'm okay," but I wouldn't say that I have a favorite phrase or anything of that sort.
Story_ID: 20445
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, well I'm going to ask about your family history.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But separately.  So first can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Lucille, actually kind of--I always get that backwards, it's actually Emma Lucille Powell Walden, Powell being her maiden name.
Speaker 1: Okay and can you spell that for us?
Speaker 2: Emma, E-M-M-A, Lucille, L-U-C-I-L-L-E, and Powell, P-O-W-E-L-L.
Speaker 1: All right and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I don't actually know her exact date of birth.  Place of birth is North Carolina, Gibsonsville or McLeansville, somewhere in that neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Okay and would you guess--hazard a guess as to, you know what year or about what time she was born?
Speaker 2: Somewhere around 1920.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: May have been.
Speaker 1: All right sometimes in the 1920's I guess.
Speaker 2: Right, somewhere around 1920.  May have been like 1918.
Speaker 1: Okay now what do you know about her side of the family?  How far back can you trace them and what were they doing?
Speaker 2: I, I, I know back to on her mother's side, back to her mother's father and mother, yeah her--so that would have been my great-grandfather and great-grandmother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: On, on her mother's side.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I know, I knew my grandfather or her father, but did not know his father or mother and did not, do not know a lot about, about them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Though the family mostly through my sister, is researching all sides of the family; has probably made more progress on my father's side, but is researching all sides and educating the rest of us.
Speaker 1: Okay now as far as you know, do they, they all go back to North Carolina, or--
Speaker 2: They all go back to North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay and the same area where she was born, or--
Speaker 2: Same area is my understanding.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Central North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah I was going to ask you where, okay central North Carolina.  Are there any family stories that are handed down?  For instance, are there stories about slavery or Reconstruction or how they acquired property or if they did?
Speaker 2: I don't know quite as much on my mother's side.  My father, my grandfather, my, my father, my mother's father, his family did come through slavery, but I don't know as much about that, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, did they own their own land at some point?
Speaker 2: That side of the family, they owned some land, yes, but there are--there are fewer details about the family land ownership on my mother's side.
Story_ID: 20446
Speaker 1: Okay did they [mother's family] have a chance to go to school or, or pursue a profession?
Speaker 2: Not really pursuing a profession.  My mother [Emma Powell] did graduate from high school, but that, that was it.  I don't think that education was, at least in that generation or the generation prior to that, education certainly wasn't a major path for many of the individuals.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was mostly moving into agriculture.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Farming and that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: So what did your mother, or can you remember what she said about growing up there [central North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: She grew up on a farm or in a rural area and she talked a lot about having to deal with the farm animals, feeding and chickens and slaughtering chickens and that sort of thing.  And while she had that experience, she didn't particularly relish it as an adult so she was less of an outdoor person than one might have imagined from her background.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now when she finished high school, did she stay in North Carolina or--
Speaker 2: No.  She actually moved to Washington, D.C.  I don't know exactly when that happened, but she did move to Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And a lot of the family on her side moved to Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So there's a lot of family still in North Carolina, but a lot in Washington [D.C.] as well.
Story_ID: 20447
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: George Ray Walden, G-E-O-R-G-E, R-A-Y, Walden, W-A-L-D-E-N.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Again, I don't know the exact date--but it was in the 1930's, around 1930.
Speaker 1: Okay so he was younger than your--
Speaker 2: He was younger than my mother [Emma Powell] and, place of birth was, I guess it would be called Bennett, North Carolina, but he was born on the family land, family property, which is in central North Carolina near--about an hour southwest of Raleigh, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right now what can you say about his side?  I mean--
Speaker 2: We know a little bit more about his side.  The--at least the Walden side of the family.  There were a family of Waldens in Virginia, actually, and there were two brothers.  One of them may have been named William.  The line that we are through, but two brothers that moved to North Carolina and acquired property there and settled in that, in that region--in central North Carolina.  And my sister has developed the story of that side of the family in fact from those brothers that moved into North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay and so is there a story about them that you can tell us?
Speaker 2: To the best of my knowledge, they moved to North Carolina and acquired the land and settled there.
Speaker 1: This I assume was after the Civil War [American Civil War, 1861-1865].
Speaker 2: No it is not.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No it is not, it's prior to the Civil War.  I don't know exactly the date, but they managed to go through that period of the nation's history without dealing with slavery.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They were free blacks out of Virginia. (pause)
Speaker 1: Okay.  That wasn't easy to do in those days, is it?
Speaker 2: No it was not easy to do in those days, but there were blacks in North Carolina that did manage to do that, mingling with the Native American population in North Carolina and developing their own community.
Speaker 1: So are there stories about having the relations that they were Native Americans?
Speaker 2: There are stories that are not completely clear in terms of whether individuals were Native American or blacks; but yes there are stories that certain individuals within the family were--may have been Native American.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it's never been really verified.  One of the things that we've run into, my sister has run into as she's tried to build this history, is the fact that the records are not--have not been kept in the best conditions and there were some that were lost as a result of fires in courthouses and places where records were keep, kept.  This--they, the family settled in Chatham County in North Carolina and the records as kept by Chatham County were not the best.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Especially for blacks and Native American people.
Story_ID: 20448
Speaker 1: Okay so the family [paternal family] settled in Chatham County [North Carolina].
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: And were there quite a while I suppose.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: In the same place.
Speaker 2: Yes. Yes.
Speaker 1: So they were fairly well established.  Did--what did they do?  What did they--other than farm?
Speaker 2: Farm.
Speaker 1: That was--
Speaker 2: That was it, farm.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: So my understanding is the family acquired somewhere in the neighborhood of 600 acres of land in Chatham County, southwest Chatham County and had that and parts of that land are still in the family.  And they farmed it.
Speaker 1: Well that's a lot of land.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: For those days, yes.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Did they grow tobacco or--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Cash crops.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Mostly when I was a child, we would visit virtually every summer.  And that was always the crop that was in the barns was tobacco.  And my understanding--my grandfather, my father's [George Walden] father, passed away the year after I was born, so I didn't know him but my understanding was that tobacco was one of the big crops that he would raise, but they raised crops also and animals for their own living and their own substance, sustenance and so forth, so that was what--how he made a living.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now was he--I would think he'd have to be fairly influential and important in the black community if, if not in both communities with that kind of land and--
Speaker 2: It's hard to say.  I I don't--I don't get the sense that he was the most gregarious person and he was influential from the standpoint, I think the family was influential from the standpoint that their family made up much of the population in that area.  It's not a highly populated area of--was not and is not now a densely populated area of North Carolina.  It is becoming more so, but I don't know of influential from a political or in a sort of a leadership, government leadership type of position within the local area; whether he or any of the relatives had a prominent position in that way.  They probably had a prominent position from the standpoint that they were well established family in the black community there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So no political leaders or--
Speaker 2: Not--
Speaker 1: Church leaders, or--
Speaker 2: They--I mean they basically had their own church in the, in the area.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A lot of people around there were related.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  Most of the people there were related in some way or another.  There were a couple of families that I know of that were in the area, sort of dominated the area.
Story_ID: 20449
Speaker 1: Now what kind of church did they [paternal family]--what was the name of the church, do you remember?
Speaker 2: The church that I know of, that we would visit when we would go there was called Glover's Chapel.
Speaker 1: Now is there a story as to who Glover was?
Speaker 2: Yes there is.  So the Waldens and the Glovers were in the area.  There was inter-marrying and that sort of thing and my understanding is that the church was established by a product of one of those relationships, by a couple.  I don't know if it was a couple, or one of the individuals there, but the church was established by relatives within the family.  And it was the--for a while the church of the family and of both sides of the family, the Glovers and the Waldens.  And eventually the Glovers became more influential within the church.
Speaker 1: All right, now what denomination was it?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure that I ever knew.  I always thought of it as Baptist, but you know I really couldn't swear to that, that it was Baptist, but it seemed to be from the style of worship and the services and so forth.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well were most of the reverends members of the Glover family?
Speaker 2: I I don't--I wouldn't say that, I don't know for sure, yeah, I don't, I wouldn't say that.
Speaker 1: All right, okay I know that--was there a school associated with the chapel too?
Speaker 2: I'm trying to remember whether that was with the chapel or otherwise because one of the things that my grandmother did was to teach school; my father's [George Walden] mother.  I don't remember that being in the church though.
Story_ID: 20450
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so your grandmother, your father's [George Walden] mother was a school teacher.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And, okay and now what did he share with you about growing up?
Speaker 2: (laughs) That it was hard.  He--my grandfather as I said farmed the land, so that was the work that my father grew up doing.  That there were tough parts of growing up in the country, outside of the city without services that we sort of take for granted, but it was a hard life.  And there was a lot of want that you, you always didn't have what--some of the things that we take for granted now.  Meat for instance was something that was more of a luxury.  And a--on special occasions, but most of what he talked about was the hard work which he-- my father worked very hard as an adult, but he didn't like farming.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now is--did he have a chance to finish school?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well he could have probably, but he only went to eighth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now is there--what did he--he worked as a--on the farm basically as a youth.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He worked in the farm as a youth and he actually left home as a teenager and went to Detroit [Michigan] where his his mother's sister had moved and established a family in Detroit.
Story_ID: 20451
Speaker 1: Okay, so he's [George Walden] in Detroit [Michigan] as a teenager, and now is there a story about how your parents got together, how they met?
Speaker 2: Yes there is, but there was a story be-before that also from my--because my father went to Detroit as a teenager and that was just before or just during the war, just before the war.  And he joined the Navy at seventeen, so I'm getting my dates messed up here.
Speaker 1: Yeah I'm thinking, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So we've got him--I guess he'd be in mid-'20s.
Speaker 2: Right, mid-twenties.
Speaker 1: He would have been in the mid-'20s.
Speaker 2: Right, he'd have been born in the mid-'20s.
Speaker 1: But how much older was he than your mother [Emma Powell]?
Speaker 2: My mother was about ten years older.
Speaker 1: Ten years older.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that would push her back to--
Speaker 1: So say he was born in '24 [1924], she'd have been more in 1914.
Speaker 2: Right, somewhere around there.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So he was seventeen.
Speaker 2: He was seventeen when he joined the Navy.
Speaker 1: When he joined the Navy.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And this would have been 1941?
Speaker 2: Right, right around '41 [1941].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Early '40s [1940's].
Speaker 1: So he joined the Navy.  I'd never think about joining the Navy from Detroit [Michigan], but did he --
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Did he--I know they have--the Straight of Detroit there [unclear] all the lakes, so--where did he join, do you know?
Speaker 2: Where did he serve?  I don't know exactly where he joined but he did join.  And he served and his service was in the south, in the Pacific theater, in the South Pacific.
Speaker 1: Okay do you know what islands that he was--
Speaker 2: I don't know exactly what islands
Speaker 1: Midway or Guam or Okinawa.
Speaker 2: He would always talk about crossing the International Date Line and for some reason that struck him as someplace that was incredibly hot and warm.  He would always talk about that.  And I would always challenge him on it.  I said what if he crossed it up near Japan or Alaska, would it be that hot?  Never got a really good response from that (laughs).
Speaker 1: Always a scientist.
Speaker 2: That's right more the parental response for that, yeah.  But he was in the south, South Pacific.
Speaker 1: So the war makes a tremendous--did it make a big impact on the rest of his life do you think?
Speaker 2: Yeah I, I would say so.  For one thing it gave him purpose.  Sort of helped him develop a direction for where he was, what he was going to do with his life and so forth; responsibility and that sort of thing.  I think that it helped in that regard; though he never really talked about it in that way.  You know it's just in terms of hearing him talk about things after that and the kinds of things that he was doing.  He had fun, but he also developed a sense of responsibility through that and subsequent--post-war, things that he got involved in.
Speaker 1: Now what--most of the veterans say, black veterans who served in the Navy in those days, say that the government--the Navy would put them in the galley.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And was he--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes in the galley.
Speaker 1: And you know they--you know some--a man yesterday said even that the Navy was the worst place; you know in retrospect that you can be.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: In the service.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: For a black man during that era.
Speaker 2: That's right because you--as galley cook and cleaning basically that's what you did as a Navy person, but he liked the water.  He's from central North Carolina, but he loved the water.  And so I think that that was one of the things that drew him to the Navy, to join the Navy.  Though he never really--I never heard stories about you know what was the actual event that said go Navy as opposed to one of the other service branches, though it may have been the ability to get into the Navy underage because he was underage when he went into the service.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay so did he have any stories about the islands and--or the people that were--
Speaker 2: No he didn't talk much about that.  He didn't talk about the islands or the places that he visited and I'm not sure why.
Story_ID: 20452
Speaker 1: Okay now when he [Walden's father, George Walden] comes back, what around 1946 or so?
Speaker 2: Somewhere around that time, yes.
Speaker 1: Did he--
Speaker 2: It may have been a little; yeah I guess that's right because my oldest sister was born in '48 [1948].  He may have been back in '45 [1945].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So he comes--does he migrate to [Washington] D.C.?
Speaker 2: Yes--he comes back, he spends a little time in Detroit [Michigan], but then moves to D.C. and there's family there, in particular his one--his mother's brother was--his uncle is there.  And he spends a little time driving a truck, being a truck driver.  But his uncle gave him some leads to get into a government job.  He starts working at--in defense printing in the Pentagon.
Story_ID: 20453
Speaker 1: Now Washington, D.C., he's [Walden's father, George Walden] working for the government printing office, right?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm, right.
Speaker 1: And, um, now how, is it time now for how your parents [George Walden and Emma Powell] met?
Speaker 2: Right so, as I said his, his uncle was there.  His uncle was married to a person who was the cousin of my mother [Emma Powell].  And they met through that relationship.
Speaker 1: Okay do they talk about what their reactions to each other were in the very beginning?  Now she's a little older than he is.
Speaker 2: She's a little older than he is and she's very interested in him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so I think that she as much as, as he were, uh, was, uh, um, I'm trying to search for the word-- I don't want to use the word aggressive, but,  certainly pursued the relationship vigorously.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right so they--what year did they get married?
Speaker 2: I'm really bad on dates, but it would have had to have been somewhere around '46 [1946] or so, maybe '47 [1947].
Speaker 1: Okay as long as that, that's close.
Speaker 2: So in '46 [1946] or '47 [1947] so now did your--
Speaker 1: I think it was, I think it was--it had to have been '46 [1946] based on --
Speaker 2: Now, now was your mother working at the time too?
Speaker 1: She was working at the time. I think it was like secretarial type work.
Speaker 2: Government job too, or, or--
Speaker 1: I didn't, I don't, I don't know.  I, I really don't know whether it was in the government or not.
Speaker 2: Okay so she was doing some-something clerical.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: And when they met.  Did she continue to work throughout her life?
Speaker 1: No, no.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He, he did not want her to work once they got married.
Speaker 2: All right. Did he maintain that, that--the government job or the--
Speaker 1: He worked there for his, the rest of his life.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Well he retired from there.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So this is the--what's the official name, is it U.S.--
Speaker 1: Defense Printing.
Speaker 2: Defense Printing, okay.
Story_ID: 20454
Speaker 1: Now when you consider your parents' [George Walden and Emma Powell] dispositions and their looks, their talents, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Hmm, hard to answer that.  Um, my father [George Walden] was inquisitive, um, and a terrible, terrible perfectionist.  Um, a, a little bit of which I inherited.  My mother [Emma Powell], my mother though was--she was much more organized perhaps and had a discipline about her which you know both of those things I would say that I didn't inherit.  I wish that I had.  Probably the drive though that she had was there is, is, is something that I took from her.  And I wish that I, I had more of her--of that, that drive and that, that real sense that I'm going to get what I need, what I want, what I need to do or I need to have.
Speaker 1: Now, now do you have an example of, of that drive?
Speaker 2: The other thing that she had was her commitment to her family-- meant that she would sacrifice for--her own needs for the, the good of the family.  She often went without things, clothing, even food and that sort of thing so that the kids could have it.  She made sure that her husband was ready for work every day. Excuse me (crying), break a little bit.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Take your time.
Speaker 2: For instance she would be up every morning at four in the morning to--when, when Dad was working days.  She would get up at four in the morning, lay out his clothes, fix his breakfast, and then wake him up, make sure that he was on time and he would go to work and when he got home, dinner was ready.  She made sure that it was there.  She would make sure that everyone ate before she ate.  And normally when we were young, we all ate dinner together at the table.  And then she would wash the dishes while everyone else went off and at the end, you know she might sit down and fall asleep but, she would get up to go to bed and be up at four in the morning the next morning.  If any of the kids needed something unusual, you know to be up at three in the morning she made sure they had everything ready before they left.  She ironed and folded all of my father's clothes, all of them.  And made sure they were ready.  She washed them you know.  So that kind of drive, that kind of dedication, was something that she had strongly.
Story_ID: 20455
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Earliest childhood memory.  Of an event or of activities?
Speaker 1: Either.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And I have, four brothers and sisters, I have two brothers, two sisters.
Speaker 1: Can, can you name them for us, or the order that they--
Speaker 2: Yeah my oldest sister's name is Letha, oldest brother--she's the oldest then my brother George is next, then me, then my younger sister's name is Naomi and my younger brother is named Stewart.
Speaker 1: Okay so five.
Speaker 2: Five of us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We would always, you know we were always together.  And we would do things together when we were small.  One of the favorite things was to take the encyclopedias that were gotten for the family and each kid would have one of the encyclopedias and you would sit there and you would--we called the game "What Is This?"  So we would describe something and the others would have to guess what it is.  That's a fond memory.
Speaker 1: That sounds like a great activity for young people.
Speaker 2: I thought it was fantastic, especially since the encyclopedias we had, were these ones that were really well illustrated.  I mean we got them used, I don't know where my mother [Emma Powell] and father [George Walden] got them from.  They were old. They may have been Old World Books, or--they were not Britannicas [Encyclopedia Britannica] or anything.  They may have been Old World Books.  We eventually got another set of the newer World Book, but they were nothing like those old ones, which had the nice oil painted illustrations and so forth, really, really great.
Speaker 1: That sounds like a great activity.  I mean you know--
Speaker 2: It, it was.  I thought it was really--and so I do have a lot of fond memories for that.  The--around Christmas time was always fond memories because, not because we got that much, because we never did, but just the, the interaction with the siblings was really quite nice around that time.
Speaker 1: I thought, well I thought to ask a question now, who came up with the game "What Is This?"  Was it something that the, that you, uh--the children came up with or did your mother or your father?
Speaker 2: I, I just remember us playing it.  I don't know who came up with it.  I, I don't remember whether you know Mother would have come up with it or not.  It's not the kind of thing that I would have seen my father saying why don't you guys go and do that, but my mother may have had us do that.
Story_ID: 20456
Speaker 1: Now your, your father [George Walden] you said was a terrible perfectionist.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And give us an example of what he would, you know--
Speaker 2: One of the things he would do on the side would be upholstery.  He would--people would hire him to change the cloth on the, on the--their furniture, a chair or a couch or what have you.  And so he would charge them based on what the materials cost plus a little extra for, for his labor.  But he would always go out and buy the material.  They would tell him what they wanted and he would go out and buy it.  And so he would do these, these, these jobs for them and there were a couple of occasions that--and my brother and I will talk about now where he would basically be done and he would be putting the final touches on, around the edges, on the bottom and around the edges.  And he'd nick something so that a thread would be hanging out.  He'd rip the whole thing apart and start over again because it was not perfect.  It had to be perfect.  Cost him, he didn't make anything on those jobs but, but he was not going to--he wasn't going to give something to someone that wasn't as close to perfect as he thought.  It wasn't--if he knew that there was something wrong with it, he, he wasn't--he just couldn't see himself giving that to, to someone and then charging them for it.  So that's one example of it.  He basically--the house we grew up in in this, in the community, they were all basically the same, they were sold by the same realtor and they were small houses with--basically they would, the way they were designed, they were designed with two bedrooms and a kitchen and a living room, which was too small for his family so he added onto it and increased the size of the house twofold.  But that was his labor, he did it.  And that house is still being--my, my younger sister [Naomi] still lives in that house.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 20457
Speaker 1: All right now, now did you grow up in Maryland, or--
Speaker 2: Yes, Maryland.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm, just outside of Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right and, um, you started, uh, school in Maryland.  Now what, what was your first school?
Speaker 2: Brooks Road Elementary School.
Speaker 1: Okay and you were there all the--
Speaker 2: All six years, mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: Yeah that was one of the, one of the few elementary schools that blacks could go to in Prince George's County.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: At the time they integrated schools right after I finished sixth grade, actually.
Speaker 1: And now Prince--
Speaker 2: Actually it integrated slightly before, but our elementary schools were integrated right after I finished.
Speaker 1: And there are a lot of black folks in PG County [Prince George's County] now.
Speaker 2: Now it's--I think it's predominantly--that's the population in PG County.
Speaker 1: Okay, well was, was, Brooks Road, an integrated school?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No it was segregated.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right segregated in the sense that you couldn't go anywhere else if you--
Speaker 2: No, I was bussed by two other elementary schools to go to Brooks Road.
Speaker 1: Okay now, I take it you liked school, but I don't want to assume.  Did you?
Speaker 2: (Laughs) I liked--did I like school.  I can't say that I liked going to school.  I looked forward to summer, but I always liked learning things.   And there were certain parts of being in school that I did like.  I liked, mathematics and I liked reading.  So I liked going to the library and checking out books on different things and I--at that particular time, I really like history and American history and that sort of thing so I would check out books on the Presidents or some part of, of America's history and just read.  So I liked that part of it.  Uh, I didn't like spelling, I still don't.  I struggle with it.  But those other aspects I did like and, and I--you know just learning was, was sort of exciting to me but I--the structure of school, the fact that you got up at a certain time every morning to go to school and you got out at a certain time and there was that structure, I didn't like that.
Speaker 1: Okay now well, well what, what about your teachers?  Did you have--did you think that you had, you know decent teachers and were any of them special?
Speaker 2: You know the, the first grade teacher I remember her and thought that she was, was a good teacher and had a positive experience as first grade.  Fourth grade teacher I liked a lot, and the fifth grade teacher I liked a lot.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh, the fifth grade teacher was the only male that I had in elementary school.
Speaker 1: Okay so you were--I guess about 1960 when you started school.
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty [1960], that's right.
Speaker 1: That was six--did you go to Kindergarten at all or--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, so I, I was eager to go to school when I went into first grade because my older brother and sister were in school so I wanted to do what they were doing, so--and their going before me actually made it easier for me because they, they sort of established a reputation that you know, for the Walden kids, that they were good, good students and that sort of thing, so in some ways made it a little easier in, in elementary school for me.
Speaker 1: Did you know how to read before you went to school?
Speaker 2: You know I can't even remember that, but I think I did.  I think my older--I, I remember my oldest sister working with me at that and so yeah I think I did.
Story_ID: 20458
Speaker 1: Can you--do you have an idea of when you first received some scientific instruction?  I mean to, to the best of your knowledge.
Speaker 2: I, I remember fifth grade and the teacher in fifth grade, you know doing some, you know, very simple type of science demonstrations, making a barometer with a straw and water and that sort of thing and making, showing, --one of the things I felt was always neat was he, he took an empty paint can and filled it with a little bit of water and then heated it, put the lid on, and then poured cold water on it, which just fascinated me when the can just collapsed from, you know the fact that what was in it compressed and created the vacuum that now caused the can to collapse, so, yeah that, that was sort--that was the first examples of real type of science demonstrations that I can recall.
Speaker 1: Okay now is there a time when you first became acquainted with the micro [microbial] world?
Speaker 2: That's a good question.  I don't, I don't remember when I first became acquainted with the micro world.  Yeah it, it--that, that may well have even been in college, I'm not sure.  We probably learned about it in--I'm sure we learned about it in high school when I took biology, yeah but really becoming acquainted with it, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now where--did you show any signs at the time of, of being a potential microbiologist or--
Speaker 2: I wouldn't say so.  No I wouldn't say so.  That's interesting, I mean science was something I was always interested in and one of the things that, I--it's sort of fun to think about.  When we graduated from sixth grade, it's a real graduation ceremony and that sort of thing.  They went around and they asked each of the kids that was graduating what are you going to be when you grow up type of thing and, and I pondered that question for a while because it was--I was going to be a baseball player or was I going to be a scientist.  I was thinking about it then you know.  And I actually decided that I was going to say that I was going to be a scientist and that's what I was introduced as when graduating that, William Walden, he's going to be a scientist when he grows up.  So I always was interested in that kind of thing but I didn't really know what that, what that meant.  I mean we always, you know because we, we were out in a more rural area that we grew up in, we always were looking at things in nature.  We were always going out and catching things and studying them, looking at how they lived their lives and trying to--some things we would try to keep and, and as sort of not really pets, but sort of observe them doing their thing.  Caught a lot of box turtles, a lot of those things.
Speaker 1: Okay so turtles--
Speaker 2: Salamanders, snakes. We encountered lots and lots of bees and wasps on a regular basis, insects a lot, spiders, yeah.  Whatever we could find, we tried to capture and study, birds, yeah.  And so there was always the interest in, in science and my father [George Walden] liked to fish so we were always exposed to the water and fishing and that sort of thing, so we knew what was in, in the rivers.  But the notion of microbiology or microbes was something that, that would have come later.  And I don't actually remember a real event in the high school or even junior high school biology classes that would have said microbes in that particular way.
Speaker 1: Okay was there, was there a paranoia at all about germs then?
Speaker 2: Not really, not really, you know my mother was always very, very strict about what you ate, what you could eat and sharing foods and that sort of thing.  But, but I never had a paranoia about it, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well maybe paranoid is the wrong word, but an awareness that people--that you could catch some--something that you couldn't see.
Speaker 2: Right, well there was the, the, the, and I--I'm not sure that I was really aware, cognizant of the, the, the microbes that were involved in this, but there was the period with the polio vaccine.  When the, when the nation had the, the effort and the--I think it was early '60 [1960], late '50s [1950s], early '60s [1960s] to vaccinate everyone against polio.  And I do remember that period because I remember that was one of the more unpleasant events in my early life of having to deal with whether I was go and get a polio vaccine or not.
Speaker 1: Now did you have much exposure to doctors and--or medicine?
Speaker 2: Not, not a whole lot, no.  You know we were all delivered by the same, OB/GYN person in, in [Washington] D.C.  But I don't ever remember seeing him.  We knew of him, but we, we didn't have a lot of interaction with him and for our own severe illnesses, if it was really severe, then we went to the clinic, the out-patient clinic that was not far from the house.  But for most illnesses, you just dealt with them at home.
Story_ID: 20459
Speaker 1: So, so you played baseball you say, you liked baseball.
Speaker 2: I liked baseball a lot.  As a teenager I played in the summer.  But, I actually--in, in school I actually started running track and didn't play baseball in school.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now in, in high school did you exhibit any of the, anything that would, would lead people to think that you were going to be involved in science in high school?  Were you--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: A typical high school student, basically, or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, just an average high school student I would say.  I don't think I did anything that said to people, he's going to be a scientist.  I took biology. I took math courses and that sort of thing.  I didn't take chemistry. Biology, the biology in high school actually got me interested in the study of insects.  And so, when I decided to, to do biology in, in undergrad, I was thinking that I might study insects and become an entomologist for a long time.  But there was really nothing in, in high school that I did that said to, to the teachers or anyone that this guy's going to be a scientist.
Speaker 1: Okay so you're, you said your grades were average?
Speaker 2: Well it depends on the school, which school.  I mean elementary school I did well.  Junior high which in Maryland at that time was eighth--seventh, eighth, and ninth grade.
Story_ID: 20460
Speaker 1: Okay. You went to-- (simultaneous) Spaulding.
Speaker 2: I did not-- Spaulding Jr. High, yeah, which doesn't exist right now. My sister was telling me that they've taken that down and build a high school now where it used to be. But it was one of the newer jr. high schools in Prince George's County when I went there. It had only been open maybe a year before I went there. And seventh, eighth, and ninth grade, seventh and eighth  grade especially I was just really trying to find out who I was I think, and trying to figure out whether school was really going to be something that I would focus on or not. Part of it was in elementary school I went to a segregated elementary school, it was an all black elementary school. I  had a lot of friends there. I developed a relationship with--but I had done quite well in elementary school. And then I went to, so when we went to junior high they tracked people, and so I was put into classes where there were--and this was an integrated jr. high. There was one other black kid in those classes. All of my friends were in different classes and I really wasn't comfortable with that at that time. So I didn't do well in seventh and eighth grade.
Story_ID: 20461
Speaker 1: So in high school, now did things turn around in high school?  Did you get more--did you get more studious in high school, did you have better grades?
Speaker 2: I had better grades in high school.  Actually the things started turning around in ninth grade and I really attribute a lot of that to finding track because it gave me a purpose.  Something that I wanted to do, I liked to do and in order to do that I had to be serious about school and getting grades and that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: What events did you run in track?
Speaker 2: When I started out in junior high, I ran the 400, and it's sort of a curious story how I started running the 400.  I didn't--my older brother [George] ran track and he ran, he started in junior high and he was the sprinter, you know, would run the short races, the 60 and the 100.  That's what I thought that I would do but when I joined the track team at Spaulding [Junior High] in eighth grade, I really wasn't fast enough to be a participating sprinter.  So I was on the team but I never went to any meets or races or anything.  And in junior high they would have the seventh grade team and then they had everybody else.  The seventh graders had a 400--it was 440 relay at that time.  And I was just goofing around one day and I challenged them to a race.  I always had good endurance.  So I challenged the seventh grade 400 relay team to a race, 400 race and I beat them.
Speaker 1: Wait a minute now, (unclear).  This is--these are four guys handing a baton off, running as fast as they can, running against you.  Just running and you beat them.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, yes you would have been the 400 man.
Speaker 2: So and the reason I knew I could beat them is that there was only one guy on the team that could outrun me, and he was the anchor.  So I figured if I'm far enough ahead when he gets the baton, I'll beat them, and I beat them.  And so the coach who was over working with the rest of the team, I'm told 'cause I wasn't there, said what is he doing?  And he watched it and this was eighth grade, this was towards the end of the season.  He decided oh, you're a 400 man; I'm going to put you into the race for the district meet.
Speaker 1: Now this is for those who are watching this and are unfamiliar with track, being able to run a 400 is considered an accomplishment, especially for an eighth grader.
Speaker 2: Right, yes.
Speaker 1: So you're fast enough to beat the relay team.
Speaker 2: Yes (laughs).
Speaker 1: Okay so this is--this is good.  This is really good.
Speaker 2: It surprised me.  I mean I thought I could beat them, but that I actually did, it surprised me a little bit and--but as I said, I always had endurance and I had enough speed that I could run.  I could run away from the first three guys and then just have to hold off the last guy.  And then I ran the district race and won.  I mean I wasn't in one of the key heats, but I won my heat.  And then the next year I was one of the guys who ran the 400 for the county [Prince George's County, Maryland].
Story_ID: 20462
Speaker 1: Now did you continue to develop as a 400 runner or did you get--did you win any awards or anything?
Speaker 2: I ran the 400 in ninth grade and I won most of the races that I ran in the dual meets and that sort of thing.  But the way the county did it, was they would seed you, but they would only have two heats or three heats or something like that.  So I didn't get into the heat with the top guy.  I had run against the top guy once that year and he beat me because he was stronger, he caught me at the end.  But I thought that I could beat him if I ran a different kind of race, but I didn't get to run him again.  And so I wound up fourth in the county [Prince George's County, Maryland] on that because two other guys were just under my time because I ran in a heat that I didn't have any competition.  And then I went to high school and I decided I didn't run the 400 anymore.  So I started running sprints in high school and ran the 100 and 200 in high school and relays.  And one of the things that probably--you know I don't know whether I could have been better than what I was when I ran or not, but I never had any real good coaching.  The coaches at the high schools where I was were not really good track coaches.  Some of them were good--the high school coach was a good football coach, but he wasn't a good track coach.  And so I didn't have someone to come in and say you know you're not really fast enough to run the 100, you should run the 400.  And I know you don't like it anymore, but run the 400.  And I probably would have been a better 400 and even a 800 runner than 100, 200, but--
Speaker 1: I'm inclined to believe just as somebody observing this from the outside, that an eighth grader that can run the 400 is really special.  So now did you do anything else?  You kind of gave up baseball you said.
Speaker 2: I only played in the summer time.  I would play in recreational leagues in the summer time, but I didn't play in high school, I just ran track.
Story_ID: 20463
Speaker 1: As a high schooler, were you aware of--now I know you hadn't fashioned yourself as a scientist yet necessarily, though you did say you were going to be a scientist in eighth grade.  Did you know of any black scientists?
Speaker 2: No, not really.  I didn't know any personally, no I didn't.
Speaker 1: Well did you know of any?
Speaker 2: Just people that would have been at universities or whatever, but I didn't know of--I wasn't really aware of black scientists, no not at that time, no.
Speaker 1: So you didn't idolize Carver [George Washington Carver] or anybody like that?
Speaker 2: No, not really.  It wasn't that I looked at someone else and said I want to be like that person.  It was just really an interest in the process of learning something, discovering, doing experiments.  I liked--as a young kid I just liked to figure out how things worked.  So I would take everything, you know my father [George Walden], as I said my father liked to fish and be on the water, so he always had these boats with motors that didn't work and that sort--so he would, when he wasn't going to use a motor anymore, he would let me take the parts from it and I would just take them apart and figure out how they worked and put them back together.  That was something that I would spend a lot of time just doing, just sitting outside or in the basement and just taking things apart.
Speaker 1: Now did your brothers and sisters participate in this kind of thing?
Speaker 2: No, I would usually do this by myself.
Speaker 1: Okay and now did--so you didn't have any really a mentor in terms of someone showing you how do to do any of this or encouraging you?
Speaker 2: No not really, not really.
Speaker 1: Now we've asked--
Speaker 2: I mean my father would--was someone who would--he was always doing something.  So he was always building something or trying to fix something.  So I would watch him a lot.  But no not a scientist who I looked at and said yes, that's who I want to emulate, I want to be like.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I still think that game 'What Is This', is remarkable, that children would sit down with an encyclopedia and do that.  Did you learn, you know--did it really inform your thinking as you grew up, playing games like that?
Speaker 2: Yes it did, it did.  I knew about a lot more of the world than I probably would have otherwise and knew a lot about a lot of more exotic things in the world than I would have otherwise.
Speaker 1: What about television now?  Did you ever watch 'Mr. Wizard' or 'Discovery' or any of those science programs?
Speaker 2: I don't remember spending a lot of time watching 'Mr. Wizard' or 'Discovery' or what have you.  We would always watch things like 'Wild Kingdom' and anything about animals or what have you, we would watch that all the time.  My father liked watching those also.  So that was something that he would engage in watching with, on TV with the kids, and always really fascinated with astronomy.  And so anything about astronomy or space or what have you, I would always try to, try to watch even today, try to do that.  And I often say, had I gone to a different undergraduate, I probably would have gone in that direction than what I did, but the notion, the sense of exploration, the sense of asking a question about something that you don't, no one else knows the answer to has always intrigued me.
Speaker 1: Now, the late '60s [1960s], a special time in terms of the space program--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Do you take--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --real notice of the--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --astronauts?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, real notice of the astronauts, of the, of the vehicles they were going up in.  I built models, you know, could get the kits to build the models of the Gemini modules and those sorts of things.  I was fascinated by that.  And I remember we all sat around the TV and watched them land on the moon.  And I wanted to know what they were seeing and what they were doing, yes.
Story_ID: 20464
Speaker 1: Now, what was your, did your parents [George Walden and Emma Powell] and your family members have an attitude about science that was encouraging or did they, 'cause I know in some households, I know we interviewed a particle physicist and he was telling me about how he was in church most every day, you know, and nobody, everybody's thinking was completely non-scientific all the time.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: It was sort of encouraged because it, nature, things having to do with how the world works from a natural sense was something that we all seemed to be interested in, at least my older brother and sister, me and my father [George Walden], but even my younger brother and sister would engage in that as well.  So we all seemed to be very interested in that kind of thing.  The church and the influence of the church is an interesting one because I, you know, we didn't spend days of the week in church, but we did go to church every Sunday.  And, you know, my, my uncle who was very influential with my father and so forth was very active in the church that we would go to.  He was a deacon in the church then.  We were expected to be at church every Sunday, and, but it was something that oftentimes in discussions with my elders, I would have trouble around the church because I would ask questions.  And I would pose situations that really do question, you know, this notion of belief versus what's proof and, and push those boundaries a little bit.  And I got some rather negative reactions from those sometimes, but--
Speaker 1: What was the typical reaction to--
Speaker 2: Well, first, I mean the first response, of course, was, was that you're not supposed to ask these kinds of questions.  God knows ways that man does not understand, and you are "man", so you're not supposed to ask those questions, a lot more extreme with the "I don't wanna hear that talk anymore.  Don't let me hear it."  But never threatening beyond that.  But it wasn't, you know, I didn't, I don't remember ever speaking to any of my family, you know, the larger family, who would sort of engage in that kind of discussion in a way of saying, "Yeah, that's puzzling".  But it was usually, you just don't understand.  You're not old enough.  And you can't appreciate the ways of God and that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, who were your--did you have friends that were interested in the same kind of thing that you were in high school, had common questions or interests?
Speaker 2: No, not really, not really.  I mean the friends, my friends at various stages tended to be more friends around more social activities and having common interests in that regard, not so much common interests in, in science.  I, I don't, I don't have any friends who came up through high school and so forth and went into science also.  That, that wasn't it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 20465
Speaker 1: So Suitland High School [Prince George's County, Maryland] was integrated, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And, let's see, so, did you have white friends at Suitland too?
Speaker 2: I had, I had a few white friends.  They, let's say acquaintances, especially knowing them from the track team and that sort of thing.  But I knew, there were acquaintances that I had from taking classes together or doing things like that.  But I didn't have close white friends, while at Suitland.
Speaker 1: Did you do the typical, go to the prom?
Speaker 2: I did not go to the prom.  Right, I did not go to the prom.  Those kind of events have never been high on my list of activities that I, I gain a lot of pleasure from.  I'll put it that way.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were like a popular kind of guy or that type of thing?
Speaker 2: I, I knew people.  I was, people knew me from the activities that I was in.  I was, as I said, I ran track and people knew that I did that and knew me from doing that.  I, especially, my senior year, I had become active in the black student union, and I knew people from that.  I interacted with people in the high school on a variety of different levels so I knew a lot of people.  But I was never really fond of parties and those kinds of activities to the chagrin of my wife right now, in fact.  I, I don't consider myself to be a real gregarious partier, though I interact with people fine otherwise.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, all right, so on the verge of graduation, did you have any--where did you, did you know you were going to college?
Speaker 2: I knew I was going to college, and I was thinking about this one recently.  Why did I know I was going to college (laughter)?  It was sort of, for me, it was sort of a given.  You would go to college.  My, the expectation of my parents [George Walden and Emma Powell] was that you would go to college, even though neither of them had gone to college.  The expectation was that you were gonna go to college.
Speaker 1: Did your brother and sister ahead of you go?
Speaker 2: My brother and sister ahead of me went.  And so that was the expectation.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was not real sophisticated about it, and they, the consequence was that I took the path that I did.  But I think, if I remember correctly, I applied to three universities.  I intended to go, I wanted to go to Morgan State University [Baltimore, Maryland] because my, my older brother had gone there, but the other thing was that they had a reputation for having a great track team, and I was gonna go there and run track.  My father [George Walden] wanted me to go to the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland] which was, you know, like ten miles from the house.  I could commute.  He wanted me to do that.  That would have been more affordable for the family.  And I did not wanna go to University of Maryland.  And by chance the coach from Princeton [Princeton, New Jersey] sent something to the coach at, you know, the track team at Suitland [High School], and he showed it to me.  I said, okay, I'll apply to Princeton, all over the place, but because I had no sophistication on that.  I didn't really appreciate what I was, what this next step was going to mean.
Speaker 1: Did counselors give you any advice?
Speaker 2: No, they weren't, they weren't helpful at all at Suitland.
Speaker 1: Did they try to discourage you from going to school at all?
Speaker 2: They didn't try to discourage me from going to school.  But they weren't helpful in directing me to a place.  I, it was interesting in, in going to high school from, I told you I, for much of junior high, I just didn't do very well in school.  And I got to high school and after the first grading term, and I don't remember if it was quarters or a semester type of arrangement, but after the first grading term, I wound up on the honor roll, on the Dean's List.  I have to say, I don't know how I got there (laughter), but I wound up on the Dean's List or honor roll.  What that, there were benefits to being on the honor roll.  And one of them was called "Honors Study Hall" in which you could go any place in the school to study, to spend that hour studying so you could go to the library if you wanted to or you could go any place else in the building.  And I really liked that perk.  So I said, I'm gonna stay on the honor roll for the whole time I'm here because I really like this.  And so I think there may have been one grading period where I fell a little bit below, but otherwise, I was on the honor roll the whole time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 20466
Speaker 1: Now, so, I guess we know how you chose Morgan State [University, Baltimore, Maryland]--one more thing before we leave high school, Dr. King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated in '68 [1968].  You were a sophomore?
Speaker 2: I was, I was in the ninth grade at Spaulding [Junior High School].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The reason I know that was that the school shut down for a week or two and was used to house the National Guard because [Washington] D.C. was rioting.  So we didn't go to school that whole time.
Speaker 1: I was gonna ask a question about how it affected PG [Prince George's] County.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: D.C. went up in flames.
Speaker 2: Yes, D.C. went up in flames.  PG County didn't go up, but PG County was mostly white at that time, and they had a very, very aggressive police force.  And so, PG County didn't have any, any trouble from that.  But D.C. was in flames, and they brought the National Guard in.  They housed them at Spaulding Junior High, so we couldn't go to school.
Speaker 1: Okay, and also the other thing was that you had a black student organization, the black student union.
Speaker 2: At Suitland [High School].
Speaker 1: Suitland, yeah, high school.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: This is the era when the high schools were giving black students organizations that had been on college campuses for around four or five years already.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So what was the nature of your student union?  I mean what would they, did you have grievances and demands or what?
Speaker 2: We had, I will say we had misguided ambitions.  And it really was about changing society overnight through any means possible type of rhetoric.  But one of the things that did come out of that was this notion that recognizing that the black community at that time, even at that time, was beginning to fracture and that if, if the black community was going to, to be a strong community, there needed to be some solidarity within the community.  So, there was a lot of that kind of discussion as well, and some efforts to try and get the community at the high school to demonstrate that, which failed miserably.  But part of it was that the leadership in the, some of the leadership in the black student union was not genuine.  And there was more of a self-serving type of leadership than one that was really looking towards these ideals that were being spouted out.  So, that was part of the reason that sort of fizzled, wasn't very effective.
Story_ID: 20467
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right, now, Morgan State [University, Baltimore, Maryland].  So you signed up for Morgan State.  Did you get, did you have any financial issues with going there?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  My father [George Walden] didn't think that he could pay for the full tuition and that sort of thing.  So I went for registration, not knowing whether I was going to be able to actually register.  But I spent most of that day going to the coach, to financial aid and various other places to figure out how I was gonna enroll, and figured it out.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so was your brother still there when you were going?
Speaker 2: No, he had graduated the year before.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were the only family member--
Speaker 2: Um-hum, my senior year, my, my younger sister came to Morgan, and so that year--was it the senior year?  No, maybe it was the junior year that she came to Morgan, and we were both there at that time.  But we were in different parts of the Morgan world.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We really didn't see each other that much.
Speaker 1: Well, did you like Morgan State?
Speaker 2: I did like Morgan State a lot.  I had a, I had a very good time there, for a variety of reasons.  It wasn't big, so it was manageable as a, as an institution.  It wasn't a place where you got lost.  I got to know a lot of the faculty as well as a lot of the student body quite well.  I enjoyed running there mostly.  And from the standpoint of my interests in science and ultimately in biology, it, it, it served me, it served to prepare me.  So, yeah--
Speaker 1: Well, who were some of the students and professors, the personalities that really made the experience at Morgan State?
Speaker 2: When I, when I got there, there was one of my good friends from Suitland [High School] who was also on the track team.  He was a high jumper.  And he was coming to Morgan to be a high jumper as well, and, and so he and I were good friends.  We were gonna room together, and when I got there, he, I, I came in a few days after he did.  And he had already established some other friendships, and he basically, when I walked on campus, he said, "Oh, we've changed the rooming arrangements.  I'm gonna room with this guy.  You're gonna room down the hall."  Okay, fine, no problem.  But through that process, I actually got to know one of my other track teammates, who actually became one of my best friends at Morgan, who was also my roommate for most of the time that I was at Morgan.  His name is Gregory Horn, and we occasionally talk to each other now.  But that was a, a really good friendship that developed there.
Story_ID: 20468
Speaker 1: All right, Morgan State [University, Baltimore, Maryland] and we were talking about some of the personalities.  Were you impressed by the professors on campus or the other students?
Speaker 2: Some of the professors were--I thought were quite good.  When I got there he wasn't chair of biology but he became chair of biology, a professor by the name of Theodore Maul (ph.), he's passed away now.
Speaker 1: Theodore--what's his, Maul?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think it's M-A-U-L.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I wouldn't swear to that spelling.  And he was very energetic, very animated sort of professor in biology who I enjoyed a lot and as I went through biology, I would speak with him about various issues that one would consider if they were going to--depending on what they were going to do as far as a career in biology or medicine, what have you.
Speaker 1: Now had you declared biology as a major at that point?
Speaker 2: I had declared biology as a major at that time.  I'd pondered a long time when I went to Morgan [State University].  It was either going to be biology, physics or chemistry.  And I really sort of wanted to do physics because of my interest in astronomy and that sort of thing, but Morgan didn't have the strongest physics department so I said well it's either chemistry or biology.  Well I think I'd better do Biology because I don't really like chemistry a whole lot.  So I'll do biology.  That's how I wound up doing biology.  All the while thinking that one possibility was that I was going to go and go to graduate school for entomology and become a bug collector or something like that.
Speaker 1: Did that really appeal to you then?
Speaker 2: It did, it really did appeal to me, to study insects.  And what changed my mind was actually having a lab experience at a lab at a Baltimore [Maryland] outpost of the NIH [National Institutes of Health] where I learned something about doing real biochemistry.
Speaker 1: What happened?
Speaker 2: I actually got to do real science.  I went into a laboratory that was interested in ribonuclease inhibitors and--or isolating ribonuclease inhibitors from a variety of different tissues.  And I was allowed to actually dive in and try to isolate an inhibitor and then do some enzyme kinetics on it and really do science; wasn't the laboratory science.  I hate science labs, always have.  As a scientist, I shouldn't hate science labs, but I don't like doing science in which I know the answer.  I like doing science which is real exploration.  I don't know the answer and it is an answer--and the answer to that question is something that people care about, that's what I like doing.  This seemed to be that and I sort of began to understand that that branch of biology, that branch of doing science better than I did from the coursework that I had taken at that time.
Speaker 1: Now this is over the summer of what year?
Speaker 2: This was--I started this the summer between my sophomore and junior year, actually worked in that lab during the academic year of my junior year.
Speaker 1: It says here--is it '74 [1974]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, the National Institute of Health.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And would have worked there between my junior, the summer of junior and senior year but I had the opportunity to go out to California to work at Moffett Field [NASA Ames Research Center].  And I really wanted to go to California, so I jumped on that that was a NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] associated project.  It was supposed to be to do more bio-medically related type of stuff there but it really turned out not to be a well thought out project.  But it gave me an opportunity to see NASA Ames [Research Center] [Moffett Field, California]; to learn a little bit about some of the politics that goes on in those kinds of facilities because there was some incidents that illustrated that.  And helped shaped my future direction as well, so I don't, I don't regret having done that, but it would have been more of a continue--a smooth continuation had I stayed at NIH in Baltimore for that summer and worked on through and then I would have probably worked through my senior year as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that may have put me on a different path as far as graduate school and I might not be sitting here talking to you today.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 20469
Speaker 1: Who were some of the other biology professors that--well were any of them--any of them stand out as--
Speaker 2: Not, not really, not as--not so much as, as, as those that, that sort of motivated me.  One that was, was encouraging in the way that he did his course was a chemistry professor that I had; Dr. Silverstein I think was his name.  And I had general chemistry from him and organic chemistry from him, and organic under him was, was quite enjoyable.  And most people don't say anything nice about organic chemistry, but I enjoyed it under him.  And I liked his style, his, his energy, style of, of lecturing, his energy and that sort of thing.  And the other thing was he would, he would work with the students to make sure that, that they got what they needed in terms of--for me in particular because I ran track, I would always have these conflicts.  Okay do you go to track practice or do you go to this help session or what have you.  And so I talked with him about that and he said well you can come by and I'll meet with you at eight in the morning.  Okay.  Now I hated getting up in the morning.  In fact most of the time I would just go up with my clothes over my pajamas to go up, but he would give me that opportunity and I would, I would do that and that allowed me to balance all of the other activities that I was, was involved in with being able to do the help sessions or have the problem sessions.  You'd go in and, and talk with him about your answers to problems or what have you.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I, I found that very encouraging, and just the way that he, he operated and did things.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 20470
Speaker 1: Now is a--what was the cultural life at Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] for you while you were there?
Speaker 2: In what way?
Speaker 1: Well this kind of like Morgan State, like Howard [University] [ Washington, D.C.] as a, you know a lot of people there from other nationalities, Africa, the Caribbean and new foods are introduced and new, you know there, there's a lot of, just a lot of expansion of--
Speaker 2: It's a lot different now perhaps because at Morgan when I was there, there were no new foods introduced because everything was restricted to the cafeteria system, which was horrible.  It was absolutely horrible, and it was--you knew exactly what you were getting on what day.  And there was--there was never any variety.  And, and actually I would spend a lot of time supplementing my, my meals by going out and grabbing meals out after you know, late at night after studying or something like that.  So that wasn't the experience, but there were, there were a number of--more of the students from the islands, from the Caribbean.  There were a number of them and I got to know many of them.  There were fewer, though there were some, they were beginning to see more students from Africa coming there, but there weren't as many there as one sees at Howard and Morgan now, than at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay and did you, did you take--I mean did you have any interest in electives, you know from some of the professors there on campus?
Speaker 2: I, I mean I took other, other courses.  I remember philosophy class that I took and it wasn't remarkable.  A psychology class I took that also wasn't remar-- I, I wasn't--I didn't find a lot of the courses remarkable.  One of the things that I really did enjoy was--and this goes back to some of the things I did as a, as a child with religion was the--what was it called?  I'm trying to remember the name of it, but the religious house on the campus, god I'm blanking on the name of it right now.  They would have a meal every, I think it was Tuesday night, and I would go there for that and, and I mean the food was better, but the other thing was that the resident priest was there and some of the nuns were there and other--some of the other religious leaders on campus were there.  But you could sit down and I often times would sit down and talk with the priest about asking him some of the questions that I would ask when I was growing up about--just in challenging him on certain things.  And it was allowed.  You were allowed to have that exchange and you would get responses that were thoughtful and giving you the other side of, of an argument as opposed to simply discounting it as you just don't understand.  So that was--that I found quite enjoyable.
Speaker 1: Did you have Dr. Richard McKinney at all?
Speaker 2: No I didn't.
Speaker 1: He's someone we interviewed [unclear] theologian of the--past president of Storer College [Harpers Ferry, West Virginia].
Speaker 2: He was at Morgan?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: What years?
Speaker 1: Gee, Storer closed down in 1960 or so and then he went right to Morgan, so he was still there when you were there.
Speaker 2: He was there, yeah.
Speaker 1: He taught until he was ninety I think.
Speaker 2: I can't remember that name, no.
Story_ID: 20471
Speaker 1: Did you take any history there [Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland]?
Speaker 2: I did take some history.  I did not like the way the history was taught at Morgan.  It was really very, very--too, too dry.  Just a series of facts without delving into a lot of, you know the human side of history that's really the, the part that, you know the why.  You know, why are you, why are you attacking Fort Sumter [South Carolina], not just that you attacked it on this date, but you know what, what, what were the things that led up to, to that?  And from a southerner's perspective, from a northerner's perspective, from you know a black person's perspective at that particular--you know giving you those different ways of looking at that.  We never did that then, but this was more just you know history as a series of facts and that just didn't, didn't thrill me.
Story_ID: 20472
Speaker 1: Now did you--now at a certain point did you sort of see a path, a career path out of what you were doing at Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland]?
Speaker 2: No.  Well yes I did, but it was really quite late.  It was--I, I was a, you know, member of the biology club and very interactive with other biology majors there.  Virtually all of them were planning to go to medical school and so I went through a period of thinking okay, this is what I'm going to do, I'm going to apply to medical school and see if I can get in and go down that road.  And so I was moving in that direction and in my senior, the fall of my senior year as I'm preparing all of these applications, getting ready to take the MCAT [Medical College Admission Test] and all of that, and just one day I stopped and I said why are you doing this?  Don't--the way I put it to myself, which I often times will say to students as they're talking about what they want to do now is you know I really realized that I have no patience for patients.  I, I cannot in my personality; I can't deal with people at that level every day, virtually twenty-four hours a day.  And if I had not realized that and gone down that road, it would have been a very, very different outcome for me now, and may not have been a pleasant or positive one because it's not what I like to do.  It's not what I'm comfortable doing, so why do it?  And so once I came to grips with that, embraced that whole notion, then I could see a career path at that point, but not until.  So it was fairly late then--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That I saw that I wanted to go to graduate school and I wanted to go directly for the Ph.D. I was never interested in getting a master's [degree] and I actually looked at programs for whether they required you to do a master's first and favored those that did not because--and this was something that some of my instructors at Morgan had also pointed out to me was that there, there isn't a whole lot more that you can do with a master's if you want to do research with a master's than you can do with a B.S. [Bachelor of Science degree] if you really want to do research and you want to be more in control of your own path of research, what you're doing, then you have to get the Ph.D., and so that, that sort of crystallized that path for me.
Speaker 1: Okay so control and latitude to do what you want to do.
Speaker 2: Do what you want to do.
Speaker 1: Comes with the, the license is the Ph.D.
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.  That's minimal.  And then, then it is developing the ability to do that and then demonstrating that you actually can do that and you can think of important questions and start working on important questions that people, other people want to know the answers to.
Story_ID: 20473
Speaker 1: Okay, all right now, now how did you narrow down your graduate school choice?
Speaker 2: That actually--I, I benefitted from another person at Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] who was really quite influential.  She, she had originally--I originally got to know her as, I forget what they're called but basically counselors, and she was the counselor that was in charge of the freshman orientation course.  That's a course that everyone had to take your first semester there.  So I got to know her well, her name was Sherry Everett (sp.), and kept in contact with her my whole time there, would talk with her and would talk with her about different issues that may come up.  And when I was applying to graduate schools, she came up to me one day and said you ought to apply to this place.  I said what's this place, Washington University in St. Louis [Missouri]?  I looked at them, they look interesting, you know they won't charge you for the application just go ahead and send it in.  Okay but I don't know anything about this place.  In the meantime I had applied to University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], to Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio], University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland].  I applied to one school for entomology, I had to keep that in my back pocket, I think it was Clemson [University, Clemson, South Carolina] 'cause they had a good entomology school at the time.  No, it was Maryland, Maryland's entomology school was where I applied.  Actually got in and then had to tell them I wasn't coming, but I had visited Ohio State and had talked with some of their faculty in one of their grad fairs and they brought students from many, many of the HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities] and altogether in a weekend and wined and dined and tried to recruit everybody.  And I was in that group and I had applied and I was admitted and I told them yes I'll come.  And in the meantime, I had gotten this application for Washington University, so I sent it in.  And they invited me for an interview, and I said well I've never been to St. Louis, I'll go out to St. Louis, I'll see what it's like and--but I know I'm in the med--in the graduate school at Ohio State.  And I was bowled over by Washington University; just the whole atmosphere, the attitude of the faculty.  I really enjoyed my interviews with most of them.  There was one person that I had a difficult interview with, which is a, an interesting, an interesting event actually.  And then a day or so after I had had my interview, they called me and said I had been admitted.
Speaker 1: I have to go back to the interesting event.  What, what happened that made this interesting?
Speaker 2: It was one of the faculty members who I now know was instrumental in reviewing applications and said we should bring this person in, who gave me a very hard time on the interview because he, he really pushed me on, on facts and and science and I got one wrong.  And he said do you understand this, and I said yes.  He said what is it?  And I gave him the answer and he said no, that's wrong, you know and, and I was just okay, this is all over.  This is really bad.  What's interesting about it is that he's turned out to be one of my biggest supporters ever since then, both at Washington University and he's the person that hired me here in Chicago [Illinois].  And he's, he's always a, a, big supporter and promoter of, of my efforts and my work and that sort of thing.  So as it turned out we were not working in the same area at all, not interested in the same kinds of things when I was in St. Louis, or even when I was coming here.  But our fields overlap greatly.  Now we both were interested in, in metals and biology.  As I've grown in that direction, he's always been, he's sort of a grandfather in that area.
Speaker 1: Okay now what's his name?
Speaker 2: Simon Silver.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah and he's retired now from the University of Illinois at Chicago but he had come here as chair of the Department of Microbiology and Immunology and recruited me here.
Story_ID: 20474
Speaker 1: Okay so Washington University [St. Louis, Missouri] is particularly known as a place for journalists, you know they talk about that.  But it's supposed to be the best journalism school in the country.
Speaker 2: Washington University?
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I've always known it as one of the stronger medical schools in the country and a really top notch liberal arts undergraduate institution as well.  I went there into the--and one of the things that I really liked about Washington University versus a lot of other graduate programs was that it was one of the first to have what we call an umbrella program now, that is students are admitted into the division of biology and biomedical sciences there.  And they have a lot of latitude to move within that, which really is, includes all of the faculty within their medical school as well as faculty that were in biology at that time, chemistry and even some physic--physicists did at Washington University were doing more biomedically related work.  So it gave someone like me who was exploring different dimensions of biomedicine, the opportunity to actually go in and find the niche that best suited me as opposed to going into a microbiology department, or going into a biochemistry department and being restricted to that set of faculty.  So when I went to Washington University, I explored.  I looked at different faculty and I looked at what they were doing.  I became interested in gene regulation, how genes are turned on and off through the studies that I was doing there.  And tried to work to do short rotations in laboratories where people were doing that kind of thing.  But quickly became interested in gene regulation at a particular stage of the gene regulation, which is at the level of protein synthesis and that's what I've been doing ever since.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 20475
Speaker 1: Now as a layman I may have this wrong, but genes turn proteins on and off
Speaker 2: Genes actually lead to the synthesis of the protein.  So you have a, a, a gene for let's say hemoglobin.  That gene is in the form of a series of nucleic acids, nucleic acid subunits, which their particular sequence of those nucleotides, nucleic acid, monomers, will be read by the machinery in the cell to turn it into now--well first it's copied into a--what's called a messenger RNA [ribonucleic acid] and then that messenger RNA will be read by the protein synthesis machinery to turn it into the correct protein based on the sequence of those four nucleotides that make up the nucleic acid.
Speaker 1: So it's sort of like a combination I guess.
Speaker 2: One could call it a combination.  It's more like a, a script.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know it's like you, you read a word.  The word is a series of letters, right, and that means a word, and so the messenger RNA is a series of letters that read in a particular sequence, leads to a particular protein.
Speaker 1: Okay now what particular aspect of that did, did you gravitate towards?
Speaker 2: I was interested and still am interested in how cells control the synthesis of particular proteins (pause).  So my graduate, in my graduate work, I was working how cells control the expression of certain viral proteins, or how the virus would actually commandeer the machinery for making protein.  So I was interested in that aspect of it and as--in graduate, in much of my graduate work began to become interested in how cells utilize the same sort of processes to control which protein it made in any particular time.  As I began to develop my own line of research, one of the areas that seemed to utilize this notion of controlling the synthesis of a protein at the level of protein synthesis was in how cells responded to how much iron was available to them.  And so I started studying the genes that were involved in that, in control of iron metabolism I'll call it, in cells.  And that has evolved now to me trying to understand how cells control iron and the utilization of iron.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As it comes back to now cells are utilizing that process of assimilating iron to also lead to a control or gene expression, those genes that are involved with iron metabolism.
Story_ID: 20476
Speaker 1: Okay I don't know if it's time for that question yet or not, but--
Speaker 2: Which one?
Speaker 1: The question about I asked during the break about what happens--
Speaker 2: What happens if you have too much iron?
Speaker 1: Does, does it regulate the iron properly if you have too much.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so, so all organisms and particularly humans have to regulate the amount of iron they take up.  And humans not being unique, but, but having the, the, the real issue that any iron that you take up you don't--there isn't a mechanism for excreting it.  So the iron you take up is with you until you lose it through dying cells or skin, intestine and so forth.  So we really have to control the amount of iron that we take up into the body in order that you don't get iron overload.  So we do this mainly at the level of the dietary iron uptake.  How much iron we take up from the diet, controlling that at the cellular level in the intestine, the intestinal enterocytes.  But once the iron is taken up into the body, then cells of the body have to regulate how much iron they take up.  And all of this is done by regulating iron transport mostly, but also regulating the storage of the iron when it comes into the cell, so if the cell has too much iron, then it, it turns on storage, shunt much of the iron in the storage and it'll turn off transport.  If it has too little iron then it will turn off storage, turn on transport.  And so it's a nice reciprocally regulated process that happens in cells, which lead to cellular iron homeostasis.  If you lose the ability to control the iron that's taken up from the diet, or cells lose the ability to control the iron, then you can, you can build up unhealthy iron stores which can lead cell and tissue damage because iron is a wonderful catalyst for reactive oxygen species generation, which lead to DNA [deoxyribonucleic acid] damage, protein damage, membrane damage and so forth.  Individuals that accumulate too much iron on a, on a chronic basis, can show increased incidents of, of, of disorders such as rheumatoid arthritis, cirrhosis of the liver, ultimately possibly leading to hepatocellular carcinoma, cancer of the liver.  You can--increase incident of diabetes can, is associated with too much iron.  Increase incident of myocardial infarction or heart disease is also associated with too much iron.  And there are neurological disorders that, that have been associated with, with aberrant regulation of iron within the body.  So almost any kind of disorder that one can--knows about and that humans are maybe subject to, can be a consequence of having too much iron.  And that is, is in fact a common disorder in certain populations, particularly populations of European descent can have it.  It can be quite a high incident.  However, the, the bigger problem for humankind around the world is iron insufficiency, iron anemias that are associated with not being able to get enough iron in your diet and so forth.  So both problems occur.  The bigger problem is not having enough iron in the diet.
Story_ID: 20477
Speaker 1: Now I was a three year old who was puzzled by the fact that I used to pass out because I was iron deficient, I was anemic.  And the doctor would say you need more iron.  (Unclear) how am I going to eat iron?  You know I was thinking.  But I, I, you know, but that was the, you know, I know what can happen if you don't have enough.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So I think it's eating more food, I wouldn't eat for some reason.
Speaker 2: Well it depends on the, on the source of food, and of course the, the best source of iron is red meat.  The iron in red meat, mainly in the form of heme that can be readily taken up by the body, the iron released and provided for heme synthesis in our bodies and red blood cell generation and so forth.  Red meat can be a problem for some people.  There are people that choose not to eat meat and so you need other sources of iron.
Story_ID: 20478
Speaker 1: So broccoli you said is a good source [of iron].
Speaker 2: Broccoli is considered a good source of, of iron.  Certain legumes may be good sources of iron, and then there are efforts made to, to try and engineer certain, particularly soy bean to, to have more iron and that sort of thing.  But--
Speaker 1: Is the incidence of having too much iron amongst Europeans, does it occur more among the Europeans because of their intake of red meat?
Speaker 2: No, it's a genetic disorder.  One of the more prevalent in some of those populations, it can be as high one in eight, one in ten carrier frequency, one in 200 disease and what have you, but the milder form of, of this disease really doesn't show itself until the--later in life.  So typically, men would show the consequences of hemochromatosis at--start about maybe age forty or so as you start developing arthritis, you start seeing some of the heart associated issues, liver associated issues.  But this is from a chronic, through the whole lifetime, an accumulation of too much iron from the diet.  It's stored in the liver, it's stored in other tissues and now you start seeing the damaging effects of it.  The interesting thing is is that the, the treatment for that disorder is--hereditary hemochromatosis, is to bleed the individual and do a lobotomy every, every month.  You bleed the individual once a month.  So women, menstruating women don't have the problem, so it's not as much of a problem in, in women as it is in men who don't normally, naturally bleed on a regular basis.
Speaker 1: Now does this mean that medieval physicians had something on the ball when they--
Speaker 2: You raise a good point, yeah that's right.  The, the, the use of leeches, the use of bleeding and that sort of thing is probably associated with the fact that several of the patients that these medieval physicians were treating would get better because of this.  And therefore okay I don't know what the, the cause of this disease is, but this is clearly a, a cure for it.  Now all people with rheumatoid arthritis, all people with cirrhosis of the liver or, or heart disease are not because of iron overload, but there are a number of, of people out there who, who suffer from these diseases because of iron overload.
Story_ID: 20479
Speaker 1: Okay so when you were in graduate school then did you--were you, you were focusing on this phenomenon [cellular metabolism of iron]?
Speaker 2: Not on this phenomenon, I was actually focusing on protein synthesis.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A particularly different realm.
Speaker 1: Now were you trying to understand new things about protein synthesis.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: In a, you know when you were working on your Ph.D.?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was trying to understand how cells selected particular messenger RNAs [ribonucleic acids] from which to make proteins.  So--and how, how different messenger RNAs were preferentially utilized for, for protein synthesis, particularly viral messenger RNAs.  So yes, that's--and that interest though, ultimately led me to where I am, what I am studying now.  And through a process that I urge many students to follow these days, and that is follow the science.  Let the science direct you to where you should go.
Speaker 1: Okay rather than announcing I'm going to discover a cure for this or I'm going to discover this compound.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: That nobody's ever--
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: You know, is it hard, is it difficult to explain what you do to people as a general rule?  I mean, I mean not to--I mean the technical part aside, that fact that you are dealing with something that you can't deliver a dramatic explanation for--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: On the surface, does that--
Speaker 2: It, it may be now and I, I, I would have to ask the person who I'm speaking to, but I got a, a very important lesson when I was in graduate school once when I was--a friend of mine in graduate school, he was a post-doc in, in the department that I was a graduate student in and he invited his Ph.D. advisor--he had gone to graduate school at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] [Cambridge, Massachusetts], and his Ph.D. advisor was a famous bacteriophage biologist named John King.  He invited him to come and give a seminar there and then he had, he hosted an informal dinner for him at, at his house and I went.  And this friend of mine's wife who didn't know me well at the time, asked me well what, what do you do, what do you study?  And I started trying to explain it and John King stopped me and he said "No, no, no, William, look, look.  You tell her that you're trying to understand what makes your hair grow fast or grow slowly."  That's protein synthesis.  So you put it in simple terms that everyone, and they're not really simple terms, but it's in terms that everyone can understand what you're, what you're talking about and what the significance of what you do is to them.  So in a sense what I was studying at that time was what makes hair grow fast or slow, because I was studying what controls the rate of protein synthesis.
Speaker 1: Now, now thinking about the complexity of the world, it's often more difficult to tell the truth about something and to make somebody believe it, than to--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But that is a better, that's a better approach.
Speaker 2: It, it, it is because then once, once you say that, then you can, then you can venture into the less well known aspects of what you study and, and you don't--the person listening to you doesn't get overwhelmed by that which they don't know if they are putting it into the context of that which they do know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then they can ask questions about those elements that that they don't know about.  So you know if, if I'm telling you I'm trying to understand a principle that determines how fast your hair grows which is simply a protein synthesis question, you know how fast do you make the kerotin that, that's making up the, the hair?  And then I can now take that to what I directly study is how a cell regulates whether it's going to make this protein ferritin or not, which is a protein that stores iron.  And how fast it makes that protein or how slow it's going to make that protein is what I, you know--so you know about hair but you don't know about the molecule that stores iron.  If I start with the molecule that stores iron, I've got to explain that to you first.  So it, it's just sort of a way of getting us into the realm of the, of the actual story without having to set up all of the elements of the story first.
Story_ID: 20480
Speaker 1: Okay now what was the, what was the title of your dissertation and what did it mean?
Speaker 2: 'Messenger RNA Competition in vivo', And so what it meant was it really was how do different, how are different messenger RNAs [ribonucleic acids], which are the molecules within the cell that carry the information that the cell uses to turn the gene into a protein.  So we have 30,000 or so odd individual genes in our, in our cells.  Each one of them being expressed and the proteins from them being made at a particular rate, some not at all in certain cells and some only, and some in, in all cells, but different ways in which you control how much a particular protein is made.  At one level that happens as a result of whether you utilize or how efficiently you utilize that information, that messenger RNA, to turn it into a protein.  What I wanted to understand, or what were the elements that led to selection of one messenger RNA versus another, and I thought that one part of that was the two messenger RNAs competing for a limiting amount of some component of the protein synthesis machinery.  And that competition determined how fast one message was made versus the other, one message was translated versus the other.  So that's what it meant, that's what I was studying.  Now one could, could now turn that into the hair story and say well it's a question of whether the cell is going to make the protein to make a hair fol--strand or whether it's going to utilize the pro- the message that allows it to make, let's say fat.  I don't know, I mean it's something like that which makes a difference between what the character of the cell is.
Speaker 1: Okay so then we can understand then that scientists all over the world, or somebody is studying the protein seq- I mean the sequence that makes the protein that constructs part of your ear cartilage or something.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And somebody else is discussing something else.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Or will at some point.  And all of this information will be used to--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Make us healthier and like I said--
Speaker 2: Or to understand what kinds of things we can do to make us healthier, yes.  All of this information helps us understand the biology, to understand the cell, the organism, you know the, the person, and, and by understanding that, then we can come up with, with approaches that make us healthier.
Story_ID: 20481
Speaker 1: Okay now you, you mentioned letting the research lead you.
Speaker 2: (nods)
Speaker 1: How were you led into the, into the study of how iron is stored?
Speaker 2: So as, as I was interested in, in how messages compete for the translation--for the protein synthesis machinery in order to be turned into protein, one of the things that I noticed is that in the cell there are certain messenger RNAs [ribonucleic acids] who don't necessarily compete.  They're controlled by some other protein binding, a protein binding to them and preventing them from being turned into protein, being translated.  And so I became interested in that aspect of gene regulation, that concept.  And at the time that I became interested in that, there was an emerging understanding that the major iron storage protein in our cells, its synthesis was regulated by how much iron the cell was exposed to and that it had been hypothesized and the data on this looked pretty--that were supporting this hypothesis looked quite good.  And it had been hypothesized that that was due to a, another protein that would respond to iron, that would bind to the messenger RNA that was encoding this major iron storage protein ferritin and when it was bound, that it would prevent that message from being translated.  And so that became the model system that I was interested in studying.  And when I came to Chicago [Illinois], to UIC [University of Illinois at Chicago] to start my own lab, the project that I was decided that I was going to work on was actually identifying this protein that was binding to the messenger RNA.
Speaker 1: Okay now how did you choose the University of Illinois at Chicago?
Speaker 2: Well I had applied to--for jobs at a number of places and I had gotten a job offer from Meharry College, Medical College [Nashville, Tennessee], and then one from the University of Illinois at Chicago.  And I thought the one at University of Illinois at Chicago was a better opportunity for what I wanted to do.  So--
Speaker 1: Okay now the University of Illinois like I guess Washington [Washington University in St. Louis, Missouri] has a medical school.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Was that a major factor in the--I know Meharry is a medical school.
Speaker 2: Yeah Meharry is a medical school as well.  The job offer that I had at UIC was in the medical school.  It wasn't a major factor; I did not have to be at a medical school.  I, I think that I would have been comfortable at, at a university without a medical school, or in a liberal arts college within a, within a university as well as being in a medical school.  I have always, even though my, my research has been biomedically related since I started graduate school, I have always simply been interested in science and knowing the answer to, to intriguing questions for me.  Not necessarily needing to have those questions directly relate to human health.  My view is that our, our better understanding of biological systems leads to better human health no matter what that biological system is.  So that's, that's--so I'm comfortable in, in any of the realms but I--and part of that I guess is that much, much of my graduate work was done in a biology department outside of a medical school.  It wasn't within the medical school at Washington University, it was actually in the biology department because my Ph.D. advisor a year after I had joined the lab, took on the chairship of the biology department so we moved from biochemistry where he had been in the college of--in medi- in the School of Medicine at Washington University to the biology department, which was in the liberal arts school at Washington University.
Speaker 1: Okay so, so I take it you had teaching responsibilities as well as research--latitude to do research.
Speaker 2: Yeah I--there--the teaching responsibility in the graduate program at Washington University--are you saying as a graduate school or here?
Speaker 1: Well here.
Speaker 2: Here, yes I do have teaching responsibilities and I've, I've--one of the, the differences in being in a medical school versus being in a, a liberal arts school, that is a major difference for many faculty, is the level of teaching responsibility.  Medical schools tend to have a lower teaching responsibility than a liberal arts school would have.  Nonetheless, we do have teaching responsibilities and they're to the medical students and they're also to the graduate students that come through the program.  And I've done both since I've been at UIC.
Story_ID: 20482
Speaker 1: Okay what would your typical day be like?  I have to ask this question and I don't always remember to ask it, but what would your typical day be like as a research scientist?
Speaker 2: As a research faculty?
Speaker 1: Yeah, as a faculty member.
Speaker 2: Okay a typical day would be you know arrive in the laboratory at sometime in the morning, it depends on the--over the twenty-five years that I've been at UIC [University of Illinois at Chicago] [Chicago, Illinois], it would range anywhere from as late as nine o'clock to as early as six in the morning, depending on what mode I'm in at that particular time.  I would tend to come in--it depends on the phase of--early on I would come in and start doing experiments of course.  As I grew my lab, became less of an experimentalist in--as a, as a research scientist and more of a director of a team.  And then I would come in and I would either read or write or talk with my students about their experiments or look over data from experiments that they had done.  Sprinkled in there would be days where I would have to give a lecture, so I'd--leading up to those lectures, I would work on the lectures, but there were days where I would have to give a lecture anywhere from an hour long to a two hour long lecture to either graduate students or to medical students.  But typically these would be courses that were team taught where I would have responsibility for a very focused set of lectures that would be in an area that I had some expertise or some background in.  And I would then, try to give that to the students.  I have spent part of the time being director of a course, and in that capacity then I would also organize and coordinate the lectures of other faculty within that course and coordinate and gather the grading of the, the exams and so forth for the students, or their assignments.  And that would be sort of a typical day in the life and it would end anywhere from--or as early as five o'clock to as late as one could imagine, depending on what was necessary.
Speaker 1: Okay now in the course of your research, I mean and the kind of research that you do, is it typically--I mean are you monitoring some process that you have to come back and check on at regular intervals, you know that might bring you there in the middle of the night to check on it.
Speaker 2: At this stage I don't do that very much or haven't done it for a number of years now because the students will do that.  But when I first started in this position, I would come back to work almost every night.  I was trying to purify a protein so I was taking tissue from an animal and processing that to try and pull out of that the protein that had the activity that I was interested in.  And that is a, at various stages a continuous process that you cannot walk away from.  And so it would require either never leaving or coming back to the laboratory and finishing up some aspect of it later that night or working through the night.  Whatever was, whatever was called for would be what we would do.
Story_ID: 20483
Speaker 1: Okay now what do you envision or project about your research?  Where, were do you think it's going to go and how is going to be able to benefit the larger picture and the future?
Speaker 2: Okay so the, the protein I was interested in, in, in studying in the beginning as I set up my laboratory has turned out to be one of two proteins in the cell that regulate iron metabolism in the cell, the regulate the expression of most of the genes that are involved with iron uptake, its storage or its export from the cell.  And so these are what we call the master regulators of iron metabolism and cellular iron metabolism.  And so they contribute to the overall regulation of iron in the body and so they are of interest to people who study iron diseases of humans and, and how they may play a part in or be those molecules that one can look at for indicators of benefit or harm of any treatment that one looks at for iron metabolism disorders.  So that's one way in which the work that we've done contributes to, to the bigger picture.  We've also have been--the collaborative (unclear) and I were the first to understand the, and this is a little bit technical here, that the molecular structure of this protein bound to its target site on the RNA [ribonucleic acid] which was a very satisfying accomplishment, quite honestly.  Understanding that structure helps us to understand a lot of aspects of this that could lead to therapies and therapeutics for iron metabolism regulation or, or treatment of disorders at the cellular level and that sort of thing.  So I, I, I see the work and the accomplishments that we've, that we've had as contributing to a broader understanding of how the cell and therefore organisms control iron, control iron utilization, its uptake, its storage and so forth.
Story_ID: 20484
Speaker 1: Okay now you were the editor for a book, 'Metal Ions in Gene Regulation' in 1997.  Now this implies, also there, there are other metals that are being regulated.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: At the cellular level.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And, and also set you up as--I mean you seem to be the coordinator of, or you seem to be someone who understands maybe what the other research is and maybe can, I don't know, at least coordinate an anthology about them if nothing else, so--
Speaker 2: Right, right, yeah and, and I did this and then two years ago, yes two years ago now.  I also co-organized a meeting with--on metals and biomedicine or something, metals in medicine, which is, is looking at a variety of different metals and how they play an important role in human health.  Yes, there are a number of--most of the metals are trace elements that we call, mainly we'll call or refer to them are, are essential elements for, for our diet, for our health, but they also have to be controlled.  Those include copper, copper is a major one, zinc, I'm blanking on--cobalt as a potential one, nickel for particular, nickel not so much in us, but in organisms that are in our environment and so forth.  And these are, are the ones that might be needed from a nutritional standpoint.  And then there are all of those that are more toxic that we have to deal with as well in part because of the damage they can do with, to cell parts and organelles and so forth, but also as competitors for those good metals.  So things such as cadmium and lead, mercury that are, are really toxic metals that we also have to understand how they are controlled in the environment and how our body reacts to them if, if exposed.
Story_ID: 20485
Speaker 1: Now recently, in recent years, I'd say maybe the last five years to my recollection, there's been a health food fad around silver. Now what is, what do you make of that?
Speaker 2: I think that it is not a good fad because silver can be not such a nice metal.  It, it is utilized, it has been utilized as an anti-bacterial type of metal because some certain organisms will be, their growth will be inhibited by silver.  But it, it can be potentially toxic depending on, on how the organism interacts with it, how it is handled by the organism.  So I don't think it's a good idea for it to be considered as part of health food.
Speaker 1: I know there was a fellow on the media a couple of years ago who was on 'Today' Show and some of the other shows whose skin had turned blue.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Basically because of the ingestion of colonial silver.
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.  I've seen those pictures, yes.  And, and my colleague at UIC [University of Illinois at Chicago] [Chicago, Illinois], Simon Silver, has done some work on silver and looked at mechanisms within bacteria primarily that are involved with detoxifying silver and, and that sort of thing.  So that within the environment there are organisms that deal with silver better, they detoxify it and so forth.  But it's not a good thing for us to be ingesting.
Speaker 1: Okay. I thought I'd ask.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In my opinion, in my opinion.
Speaker 1: I thought I'd ask. It didn't, it didn't seem like it was to me either.
Story_ID: 20486
Speaker 1: Okay now, now you've worked with the National Institutes of Health for the metal biochem- metallobiochemistry, right?
Speaker 2: Right and they're a grant review panel.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you do much of that kind of work on a national level, or--
Speaker 2: Today?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes I'm, I'm currently a member of the molecular and cellular hematology study section at the the NIH [National Institutes of Health].  So I, I continue to, to contribute to the community in that way which is, is really evaluating the proposed projects of other scientists and giving them some type of rating of merit so that the, the NIH [National Institute of Health] can decide what they're going to fund and not fund.
Speaker 1: Okay now as, now you're continuing to publish, right?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Even now.
Speaker 2: Trying to, yes.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm, yes.
Speaker 1: I know you've taken on some administrative responsibility.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But when you're, when you're conducting research, you don't really--as you were saying it's leading you, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And not you it.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: So are you going to conduct research until you just retire or you think--
Speaker 2: Ideally that would be what, what I would do.  Someone that I hold up as, as, as a model is a scientist whose passed on now.  His name was Helmut Beinert and he was at the University of Wisconsin [Madison, Wisconsin].  And he was considered to be, you know sort of the pioneer in, in a area of research that I, I'm in right now.  But he could be found working in his lab and actually doing experiments well into his nineties, well just before he passed on.  And that's an attractive, an attractive life to me.
Story_ID: 20487
Speaker 1: The challenge today though, is that you know it's, it's, it's hard to maintain the funding for your research through that time period because you, you do have to be able to adapt and adjust to the changes that one sees happening within the National Institutes of Health, the National Science Foundation and many of the foundations, private foundations around the world that will fund research.  So yes stay in tune, you have to stay active in that regard.  And it's not the easiest thing to do, always be coming up with new ideas and new approaches to things, but it is one of the challenges that we're faced with and one of the things that the public expects from scientists if they're going to fund their research, is that they come up with things that are new and innovative and push society forward, both at the level of health and at the level of, of new products and new ways of doing things.  So you know my, my idea vision is yes to continue to do that.  The reality is I may not be able to, but that's my, my vision.
Speaker 2: Now do you--does your research attract commercial interest or outside money?
Speaker 1: I've never pushed it in that direction.  Probably a mistake, but I've never pushed it in that direction.  I've never pushed it in that direction to a large extent because of the constraints that that puts on you.  If I discover something new, if I discovered something new yesterday and I was coming in to talk with you, I--with the way my research is funded, I'd be--if I'm comfortable telling you about it, I can just tell you about it, I have no problem.  But if it's funded by a private, by a company, they want--they're doing that because they want to take advantage of any potential product that may come out of that, which means that you want to be able to patent that and your, you complicate it if you publicly talk about something before you've filed for a patent.  And I've always been uncomfortable about that from the standpoint of, of really doing science that is for the good of everyone and so I haven't pushed it in that direction.  Potentially yes it could, it could be, could have implications that are important for the private sector.  But I've just never thought that way.
Story_ID: 20488
Speaker 1: Okay so you started doing--I think some administrative work.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: In order to facilitate the development of minority Ph.D.s.
Speaker 2: Started there, yes and, and that has grown--well not necessarily that has grown, but I've taken on even a larger responsibility at the university to sort of lead, spearhead diversity initiative for the campus that I see as one of the most important transformative processes for the campus in a long time.  So that's one of the reasons that I took it on.  But it is very different than my faculty responsibility.
Speaker 1: I know often professors say that they don't really want to do administrative, they don't want administrative duties, they'd rather conduct research.  But so, so why do you do it?
Speaker 2: A real commitment to, and passion for seeing diversity correctly positioned within the university, within the academy.  I, I have always felt from the day I went into Washington University [St. Louis, Missouri], that we have approached and thought about diversity and what universities that are, are majority universities, what, what, they way they approach diversity mainly from a, a numerical standpoint.  How many of each group is, is present at the university, without going beyond that.  And so what it has led to at universities around the country is a sense of allowing people to come into the university without their actually being a part of the university or without their, their being there actually influencing how the university operates, what it does, what research it does, what, what is the content of its curriculum and what are its activities towards its communities that it services and so forth.  And that--these are the places where diversity can actually add a great deal of benefit to universities and a great deal of strength if thoughtfully approached.  And, and looked at in a broader sense other than simply who's here.  But it begins to ask the questions about what is the value that each individual brings here and how do we take that value, how do we take that, that skill, that experience, that history that can be influential and educational to us, how can we make that a reality?  How do we actually do something with that?  How do we make that become a better service that we provide to the populations that we provide service to?  So it's really envisioning a new university, to be quite honest.  And I wanted to be a part of this kind of university transformation, and that's why I was willing to take it on.  And, and I've always felt that--and this is, this is actually from childhood that you know I came up in a neighborhood where not many people went on from that neighborhood to college.  And worse than that, many, many of who I thought were the most talented individuals in the community, got into legal trouble, went to jail, you know what have you.  And I've always felt that because we have not been intentional about valuing the talents and skills of everyone and recognizing that we come with different histories and experiences, but that we all bring value, that we've missed the opportunity to take full advantage of the talent that is our society.  That we've, we've, we've shorted ourselves.  I've always felt that and, and unfortunately, the history of the country has been that that's been divided along racial and ethnic lines.  And so I have a commitment and, and really a burning passion to see much of that changed.  And I think, and I believe that it will be better for universities in the long run.
Story_ID: 20489
Speaker 1: Okay is, is the reason why you stay at UIC [University of Illinois at Chicago] [Chicago, Illinois] because of public education mission of the school?  I know that UIC is one of the larger urban campuses in the country and that has a stated mission of educating, you know lower income people in an urban environment.
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.  I think, I would say that that's part of it.  It's not all of it; the mission of UIC and the experience that, that I have as a faculty member is an important one, and important for keeping me at UIC.  UIC has also been a place where I can do the work that I'm interested in doing and I've been reasonably successful at, at, at achieving some of the goals I've had for, for my science, my research.  But I think that I could be comfortable at other places as well.  But I've not found any place that is, is as attractive when you take everything into account.  And one of those things that is really an important aspect of it is the city of Chicago [Illinois].  I've come to love the city of Chicago.
Speaker 1: What, what is it about Chicago that, that you love?
Speaker 2: It's a dynamic city.  It offers a range of different opportunities for you know really engaging in an urban environment.  I like restaurants, so that's, that's one thing and you can find almost anything that you want here.  I, I don't-- my wife and I don't take as, as much of an advantage of this as we probably could, but the arts that are in Chicago are just really outstanding and as good as almost any place in the country.  I mean you could say New York [New York], but New York is a difficult city to live in.  And Chicago is an easy city to live in.  For a big city it's really quite, quite nice and easy to live in, so for all of those reasons, I, I, I've come to love Chicago.  There are a lot of things that I could say that I, that are not quite as fond of, you know the traffic and that sort of thing, but overall, it's, it's a really wonderful city.
Story_ID: 20490
Speaker 1: Okay now what are some of your responsibilities right, right now as an assistant to the provost?
Speaker 2: The main responsibility is to develop a diversity strategic plan for the campus.  And that's almost complete at this point.  But that has been the main responsibility, that's the main task.  It's been a long process because I've decided to take the approach that the plan itself is irrelevant.  It's really changing the culture of the campus, and that's through communication, through conversation, through dialogue that one begins to change the mindset of the campus about diversity.  And that's taken some time but I'm, I think that we're seeing that take hold now.  The other part of the responsibility though is to, is to really bring diversity into as many of the activities that come through the provost office as possible.  So to bring diversity to the table when we're talking about curriculum, when we're talking about certainly student demographics and recruitment and retention, to bring a perspective that may be a little bit different to efforts to change the outcomes for students, to improve outcomes for students, to think about how to improve faculty diversity and success of faculty, the environment and climate that faculty experience at the university.  And then the most difficult one is to, to really start to address issues around the staff that are at the university.  I mean the university is, is a jobs place, but how do people feel about working at the university, and how do the talents and skills and, and benefits that each individual bring to the university get realized in their activities, in the way that the university interacts with them.  So those are things that, that fall into the realm of my responsibility for, with the provost.
Speaker 1: Okay now do you have any responsibility in advising the various student associations?  I don't know if there's an association of African American scientists or Hispanics or you know.
Speaker 2: There, there are offices and activities that might deal with African American students, Hispanic students, Native American students and so forth, and I do engage in, in conversations with them about how to do certain, different things and so forth, and, and provide any leadership or guidance that I might there, or listen to what their concerns are and then bring those concerns to the provost so that the actions can be taken and that sort of thing.  But these are still more at the level of, of more of an official administrative structure within the university.  I don't interact so much with the student organizations that are centered within the student body itself.  I really leave that up to the other bodies that I might interact with to do that.  But it is something that--from a university perspective and as we think about this position evolving into the future, where its best positioned in that regard is, is something that we ought to consider.  I don't think it would be at the level of the student or the--if we truly want to make--I mean one of the goals of this initiative is to truly drive diversity to the core of the university as much as research and teaching and learning are at the core of what a university is about, so diversity should be sitting there along side.  That means that everybody has to be engaged in bringing diversity into the activities of the university.  If you place too much on one office in terms of being responsible for that, we don't move it into the core.  We really simply have it as a surface layer for the university that can be stripped away as the individual goes away.
Story_ID: 20491
Speaker 1: Okay now who, who would you say is the leader in the field of iron metabolism at the cellular level?  I guess who would be the leader in that, that--
Speaker 2: There are many.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There are many coming from different perspectives and around the world.  And so I it would be hard for me to say who is the leader.  There are some who have contributed over a number of years and need to be acknowledged for that.  One of my very good friends, in some ways a mentor, is one of those, Elizabeth Theil who is at the Children's Hospital Oakland Research Institute, CHORI.  She started her faculty career at North Carolina State University [Raleigh, North Carolina], did some of the early work to understand how the iron storage protein ferritin was regulated by iron itself.  Has contributed greatly to our understanding of how that protein ferritin works in terms of iron storage and so forth.  So she's been certainly one of the leaders in the field, one of the important contributors to, to our understanding in the field and a good friend and mentor.  But there are other people that have contributed in other ways, in other dimensions on this and it would be hard to say that any one of them working now is the leader.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There are some that, yeah-
Story_ID: 20492
Speaker 1: All right now this is a question that we always ask.  Sir what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today, from your vantage point?
Speaker 2: Okay the biggest concern that I have for the African American community right now is, is what seems to be a lack of emphasis on education.  In my role as--in the provost's office I get to go over, review outcomes data for our students and, and a big concern is how our African American students are performing.  A big issue in the community I live in is the gap between the performance of the African American students and, and other students.  My wife has been doing a lot of work in the community on that and has been looking at a lot of the data.  And it's just really troubling, the trends that we're seeing with the focus on an ability to, of the African American students to really compete outright in, in the realm of education and recognizing that the future success of individuals in this society is really going to depend on education to a large extent.  And so that's a, that's my biggest concern for the African American community.  I think a lot of the other issues that are within the community would be addr- better addressable if we could deal with the issue of focus on education and introduce within the community a sense of, of pride in being the best within the classroom, being the best on the, on the exams, being, you know being the best coming out of, graduating from the high school or college.  That, that's an important thing to try and re-instill into the community because in fact it was there at one time.
Story_ID: 20493
Speaker 1: Okay when you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there anything major that you would do differently if you could?
Speaker 2: Well in retrospect I, I think I would take a, a very, very different approach probably almost at every stage.  Certainly in terms of my approach to applying to colleges, I would take a different approach.  Not so much that I would make a different decision in the end, but I, I believe that having and realizing what your options are is really important in, in mapping out the best, best path for, for you, for yourself.  So that would be, you know I'd probably do that differently.  I would approach, I really liked and enjoyed graduate school, which put me there a little longer than I probably should have been and I would approach that differently.  I'd approach my post-graduate education differently.  I would, would have tried to actually go someplace other than--I stayed at my graduate institution and my graduate lab to do my post-doc even though I changed that, the focus of the project a lot.  So those are things that I would do differently.  I'm not dissatisfied with where I am, but I would probably do them differently in retrospect now.
Speaker 1: Okay likewise when you look back at your career, what today would you can see, what today would you see as your legacy?
Speaker 2: Persistence.  Each of the major accomplishments that I've had in my science career have been because of persistence; really sticking to a line of work when others may have felt that it wasn't going to net positive results, so persistence and recognizing when persistence is important to, to have, yes.
Story_ID: 20494
Speaker 1: Okay now we haven't asked you much about your family, but when did you meet your wife?
Speaker 2: I actually--my wife and I actually went to the same high school and we knew each other in high school, but actually only met her formally right after she had graduated from high school.  And we were introduced as two people that were interested in playing tennis, and so we started playing tennis together.  And did that for, all the way through our undergraduate years, just playing tennis in the summers 'cause she went to the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland] and so I didn't see much of her during the, during the academic part of the year.  And we weren't going out or dating or anything at that time either.  We would just get together and play tennis in the summer.  And then she was a year ahead of me so when I was getting ready to graduate, it was sort of a discovery that the person did something other than tennis, who was interesting for reasons other than tennis.  And so we started going out with each other at that point and eventually got married.
Speaker 1: Okay all right, so do you think it was a benefit to be married while you were going through your graduate studies and--
Speaker 2: It, it presents you with different challenges.  That she was doing graduate work for the two of those years meant that we were, we were on the--we understood each other's situations and the fact that you know, you'd have to be in the library for a long time or be in the laboratory for a long time.  Once she started to work, there was certainly benefit 'cause she's in an MBA program and she got--hers was a two year program and so she came and finished before I did.  So her having an income actually made graduate life not so spartan.  But on the other hand, then I had other responsibilities outside of the lab, that other of my colleagues did not have.  So--
Speaker 1: Okay and what does she do for a living now?
Speaker 2: She works at a bank, in the, on the operations side of the bank.  She's a project manager.
Speaker 1: Okay now do you have children?
Speaker 2: Yes, I have two, two boys, William Ashawn (ph.) and Michael Desmond.  And William Ashawn is, was born in 1983, he's now in his second semester of his third year of law school.  So he'll be finishing in the, in May.  And Michael was born in '86 [1986] and he's in Los Angeles sort of deciding what he's going to do with the rest of his life.  He won't like me putting it that way though.
Speaker 1: Okay so he hasn't narrowed down any--
Speaker 2: He hasn't narrowed down yet.
Speaker 1: Okay
Speaker 2: But he's, he's consistent with his generation.  It takes--they're taking more time to narrow it down.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I, I'm--that may not be such a bad thing.
Story_ID: 20495
Speaker 1: All right are you, you still a member of the Scientific Review Committee for the National Institute of Health?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Molecular Cellular Hematology Review Committee.
Speaker 1: Does that take on--you know how much time does that take up?
Speaker 2: It takes quite a bit of time.  The committee meets three times a year and you get grant proposals that you have to thoroughly review and make a judgment on the merit of it.  So that's I would say at least talking about a month and a half of attention.  It's not direct attention, the only attention, but a month and a half of attention three times a year.  So--
Speaker 1: Okay and is there a, an association of, of other biologists who are working on similar--
Speaker 2: Well the, the committee itself is, I don't know, somewhere between fifteen, twenty members.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Maybe, maybe--I mean I could be saying too, too large.  But it's in that range.  And that group will be you know many of those members will serve the same period of time and others overlap for some of them.  They come from the general scientific community, they're invited to serve on--based on what they've, their contributions to the science, scientific communities from their actual research that shows that they have expertise in, in the areas that are covered within that review panel's realm
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The set of grants that come in, grant proposals that come in to that particular review panel.  Sort of defined by the, the description of the, the actual panel itself and the--and what the, what's called a study section's goals are for contributing to the science.
Story_ID: 20496
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now we want to go back to your father's [George Walden] birth date.  And you think--we, we've, I think we've resolved it now, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, it's, its, its early 1920s, probably 1921 or so.  Which would put my mother's [Emma Powell] birth date at somewhere around 1911 or so; somewhere around that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was about ten years older than he.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now how did they feel about your career?  Did they have anything--have they expressed their--
Speaker 2: Well they're both, they're both, they're both passed, but prior to that, they were--they supported it, they were generally positive about the career.  Neither of them fully understood what was going on.  They would have better understood had I gone into medical school and become a doctor.  But understanding what you do as a scientist, as a, a faculty member at a university, was not something that was readily accessible to them, so they didn't really understand all of the aspects of what I did.  I mean if I told them that I taught students, they would understand that, but they wouldn't understand the research side of it, or any of the other responsibilities of a faculty member because they just weren't exposed to it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now your brothers and sisters for the most part went to college as well.
Speaker 2: They all went to some level of college, yes.  My older brother [George] and older sister [Letha] (sp.) both have bachelor's degrees.  My oldest sister is a registered nurse and nurse practitioner degrees.  And some graduate study in nursing as well.  My older brother has a B.S. [Bachelor of Science] in biology and my younger sister has a bachelor's degree.  My younger brother has an associate's degree in electronics.
Speaker 1: Now did you when you were raising your own two boys, ever play "What Is This?"
Speaker 2: I have to embarrassingly say no.  We, I don't think we did play exactly that game.  We talked about it but we didn't play exactly that game.  And so neither of them are, are scientists.
Speaker 1: The result.
Speaker 2: Yeah (laugh), maybe, I don't know.
Story_ID: 20497
Speaker 1: Well is there anything now that I have not asked you about that you think you--we need to touch on before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: What did I think you were going ask that I didn't, that you didn't ask?  That's sort of the question.
Speaker 1: What big aspect of life that I missed.
Speaker 2: One thing that I--you know it's-- we often times talk about mentors and, and the life of, of individuals.  And I thought you were going to ask me more mentor questions.  A really important mentor of mine was, was actually my brother-in-law now.  And when I went to Washington University [St. Louis, Missouri] I joined a class of--in the biology, biomedical sciences, of forty-five incoming students and I was the only minority in that class of forty-five.  And there actually were no other minorities within the division at that time except for one and he was about to finish his degree.  And that turns out to be now my brother-in-law, who is, has been one of my really strong guiders, guiding lights.  He teaches at Central State [University] in [Wilberforce] Ohio right now in the chemistry department there.  But this is a person that just loves to learn.  And is really enthralled with and fascinated by numbers and mathematics and reads on number theory and that sort of thing all of the time.  But he's taught me how to really embrace that which you love and to really go at it with, with everything and in every way that you possibly can.  And he was someone who showed me that you could succeed as a Ph.D. student in that environment, and I thought it was very important.  It's not always the faculty member, what have you that is a guiding light.  It many times is the other student, and especially a senior student.  And so that's something that we try to encourage, I try to encourage with students that I encounter, you know, to encourage those who come behind you.  I think it's a very important aspect, particular in the, in the black community that we, we encourage those that are coming behind us to do well, to excel, to exceed the, the expectations of everyone around them.
Speaker 1: Okay now what is his, his name?
Speaker 2: Joe Ross.
Speaker 1: Joe Ross, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right I'm just twenty miles away from him, I'm (unclear).
Speaker 2: Oh, really?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 20498
Speaker 1: So the last question then is--unless there's something else.  Is there anything else?
Speaker 2: I, I can't think of it right now.
Speaker 1: Are you still playing tennis, still running?
Speaker 2: My knees don't let me play tennis as much as, as I used to and, and the other thing is that I've gotten so enthralled with golf that it does--I don't have a lot of time.  I really love golf.  It's one of those things that because it's such a technical sport, that it's a challenge to figure it out.  And that's what, you know I've done.  My, my older brother [George] introduced me to this game and I curse him often times, especially when I'm not playing well.  But it has been one of those, you know in a relaxed way, wish you were relaxed all the time, but a challenge to actually figure something that's difficult to do, figure it out on your own.  So I've never taken a lesson.  I'm teaching, teaching myself how to play and almost there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well the last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different.  Sir how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As someone who was, who had vision, imagination, creativity and at least in his own realm, but most importantly someone who would listen and, and give measure and value to everyone who he came in contact with.
