Story_ID: 661141
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers; our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My full name is Henry Ronald White, H-E-N-R-Y, Ronald, R-O-N-A-L-D, White, W-H-I-T-E [HistoryMaker H. Ron White].
Speaker 1: All right, and sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My date of birth is 2/10/41 [February 10, 1941], my place of birth is Richmond, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay, and sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a lawyer.
Speaker 1: And you, you have a law firm of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yes.
Speaker 1: --called--
Speaker 2: I'm current--currently manager of a law firm known as White and Wiggins, LLC [sic. White and Wiggins, LLP, Dallas, Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today, today is March 14th, 2017.
Speaker 1: Right, and where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're currently at my office located at 1700 Pacific [Avenue], Dallas [Texas], 3742 is the suite number.
Story_ID: 661142
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we ask as kind of a warm up and they only require a short answer.  The first one is: do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: I have several favorites but I'd say on the meat side, I enjoy certainly steak, hamburger and liver.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: That's more than one--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) foods.
Speaker 1: Well, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue is favorite color, color.
Speaker 1: Okay, favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I would say spring is always generally inspiring.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Springtime, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Vacation destination I'd have to say has generally been the islands, Bahamas.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Saint Martin, you know, some of those islands (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Okay, and the last question is: do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Oh, I saw that question.  No, no, I don't have a favorite one, it simply comes up at the time and how I feel; so, the answer would be no.
Story_ID: 661143
Speaker 1: Now I'm going to ask about your family history, your mother's side of the family and your father's [Ernest White, Sr.] side but we'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Mattie Ellen White, M-A-T-T-I-E, Ellen, E-L-L-E-N, White, W-H-I-T-E [Mattie Starke White].
Speaker 1: And what is her maiden name, please?
Speaker 2: Her maiden name is Mattie Starke.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: S-T-A-R-K-E.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Oh, her date of birth would be (pause) May 9th, 1921 and place of birth would be in Henrico, Virginia [Henrico County, Virginia].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now what can you tell us about her side of the family?  I mean, how far back can you trace 'em and what are the stories from that side about what they were doing?
Speaker 2: In terms of my mother's family, I'd have to say that my mother was one of ten children.  She was the oldest girl out of that.  There were five boys and five girls and she was pretty much the leader of the family.  She's one of the first that got a chance to, or took advantage of going to high school and graduating from high school [Virginia Randolph High School; The Academy at Virginia Randolph, Glen Allen, Virginia].  She was primarily responsible for the remainder of the family in terms of their care and their maintenance (clears throat) and so she was always active, always learning and always leading.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what--what did her parents do for a living?
Speaker 2: They were, well, my grandfather [George Starke] was, I'd have to say there was a, a distinguished young, young man but distinguished elderly man who I recall being a major leader within, not only within the community and the family but in the community.  He worked several jobs but his primary job ultimately was with Trailway bus company [Trailways National Bus System; Trailways Transportation System, Inc.] and so he was one of the monitors and persons that were responsible for the buses that would come into the Richmond [Virginia] terminal and make sure that it was--they were always maintained and that the people that were on there that they enjoyed.  He was like the hospitality guy, was part of how I saw him but at the same time he had a responsibility for that schedule, make sure that people got on and got out of there on those Trailway buses for a number of years.  He actually performed several jobs as most of them did during that period of time.  He was also one of the caretakers for one of the churches out in the community not far from where they lived.  There was an Anglo church but it had, you know, a sizeable church and it had cemeteries and so forth which he was responsible for, making sure that that was maintained.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Good.
Speaker 1: All right, and your grandmother [Hattie Starke], did she (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And my grandmother, my grandmother was the, she took care of the home.  She was the one that was primarily responsible for those ten, ten children and making sure that they were all fed, in school and minding, she would say, minding their business (laughter) at that time--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but that was her, her principal function to be sure that one, everyone went to school, that they got out, graduated, and that they went to church, consistently, regularly and were involved in the, whatever activities took place within the community.
Speaker 1: Now was your mother the, the eldest?
Speaker 2: She was the oldest girl.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: She had brothers, a couple of brothers that were older than she was.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I thought that she's probably the oldest girl, at least with all the responsibilities (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, she was.
Speaker 1: --you said that she had.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she was the oldest girl.  I thought I said that, I'm sorry.  She was the oldest girl.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and now, did she have a chance to go to college?
Speaker 2: No, no--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but she did, took the ingenuity and, to go to nursing school.  So after she graduated from high school, she was determined to, you know, do more than she had, had done already, so she went to nursing school and got her, her nursing certificate and that's the way she spent the remainder of her life providing nursing care both for some of the hospital institutions and later, and for private patients.
Speaker 1: So she would have been like a LPN [licensed practical nurse]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --or something, or--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --yeah, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Exactly.
Speaker 1: And do you know where, where she went to school?
Speaker 2: Saint Philip's [Saint Philip School of Nursing] in Richmond [Virginia].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was, it was Richmond Medical Center [Hunter Holmes McGuire VA Medical Center, Richmond, Virginia] at that time, but Saint Philip's is the, is the hospital facility that she practiced in.
Story_ID: 661144
Speaker 1: Now did she grow up in the City of Richmond [Virginia]?
Speaker 2: No, she grew up, initially, in the, I'd say the rural area of, of Richmond, which was in Henrico County [Virginia], that's where she and her family, brothers and sisters all grew up out there in Richmond and that was, what I call it--Tuckahoe area [Virginia] and that's where she, she grew up at that time, she and the, the remainder of the family.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now did she have any stories about growing up--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --that she shared?
Speaker 2: --the stories primarily that she related to us and that, of course, we saw was how disciplined our grandmother's--in this case, the grandmother was, or her mother was, and her father, grandfather, that's Hattie, Hattie Starke and George Starke.  Hattie Starke was primarily the, the wife of George and the caretaker of the home and was the one that ensured that, you know, everyone was fed and that they attended school and that they attended church, you know, and that they performed their household chores, everybody had a household chore at that time.  A lot of this was happening before they had electricity within that area, you know, and, of course, that came on a little bit later but that was her primary charge for my mother [Mattie Starke White]--my grandmother and my grandfather; and as I mentioned earlier, my grandfather worked several jobs to be sure that the family was cared for.
Story_ID: 661145
Speaker 1: Now let, let me go to your father's side.  Can, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my father's name was Ernest Henderson White, E-R-N-E-S-T, and middle name was Henderson, H-E-N-D-E-R-S-O-N, White [Ernest White, Sr.], and my father's father was Carter White and his mother, my dad's mother, my dad's mother was Eva White, was her name (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, your dad, your dad was born in 1918, right--
Speaker 2: I believe that's correct.
Speaker 1: --yeah, and was he born in Richmond [Virginia] or out in the county, too?
Speaker 2: As I understood it, it was born in the Richmond area.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So once again (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When I say, Richmond area, that was before that part of Richmond was annexed, it was a section called Westwood, that's where they ultimately moved to and where he bought property and where the family grew up.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So Westwood I've seen outlined, it comes up again and there's a Westwood country club [Westwood Club, Richmond, Virginia] out there and some other things, right?
Speaker 2: Right, that was, it was Westhampton [Richmond, Virginia], Westwood and there was a section within that area there, was a section that had been apparently carved out for African Americans to live.  There was a small development there of about no more than fifteen to twenty families that, that lived in that area and was surrounded by the white communities and, of course, most of the residents of that area either worked for some of the white residents in that area and or other small establishments in that area.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they, they did domestic work for--
Speaker 2: That's right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) chauffeurs, butlers--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right.
Speaker 1: --maids and--
Speaker 2: That's right--
Speaker 1: --all that, yeah.
Speaker 2: --that's a part of what the charge was for, well, opportunity was and the employment was for that community for, for a long time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Of course, people began to move and families began to grow and multiply and, of course, that no longer became, you know, as desegregation took place--the--no longer became the sole source for maintenance and upkeep and work and employment.
Story_ID: 661146
Speaker 1: Now did your d- dad [Ernest White, Sr.] get a chance to go to high school or college?
Speaker 2: Yes, my, my dad, you know, he was, he was extremely active.  He went to, to Virginia Randolph High School [The Academy at Virginia Randolph, Glen Allen, Virginia] that was located in Richmond [sic.] but, yes, he, he was one of the few that graduated from high school also.  He didn't go to college but--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --he did graduate.  That time that they graduated from high school that was an accomplishment.  So he was one of a few that graduated from high school at that time.
Speaker 1: Yes, so Virginia Randolph, it was, was it Randolph High School or--
Speaker 2: It was Virginia Randolph High School.
Speaker 1: Virginia Randolph, okay, this named for one of the Randolphs that owned slaves way back when that, 'cause I know, I think a John Randolph, he freed his whole--
Speaker 2: That's right, that's what I under- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) planta--
Speaker 2: --understand that name came from--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and he was supportive of that school that was established out there and it became one of the first or only schools that would, would, that African Americans could go to, to get a high school diploma.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I believe, yeah I believe in the first part of the 19th century, John Randolph, who was one of the richest men of Virginia freed his slaves, it was in his will--
Speaker 2: That's right, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and I know a bunch of 'em went on a wagon train to Ohio, where I'm from, and settled near Pickaway [Pickaway County, Ohio] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's amazing.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  The land that they were supposed to settle on--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --they were met by muskets and told they better keep moving.
Speaker 2: Oh my god.
Speaker 1: So they end up settling in Greene County, Ohio.  So, yeah, there are a lot of Randolphs still around.  I knew some Randolphs in the area--
Speaker 2: Is that right.
Speaker 1: --related to the Randolphs that came from that plantation.
Speaker 2: I see, I see.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so interesting, you know, yeah, to hear that name, Randolph (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well that's--this is, you know, what I'm giving you is a part of what I, I recall from the descriptions and conversations with my parents--
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: --in terms of how all that was formed but that became, that was, that was the go to school for African Americans that were in that county [Henrico County, Virginia], that part of the county and it was Virginia Randolph where they had an opportunity to go to school and graduate and both my mother [Mattie Starke White] and my dad attended that high school and graduated.
Speaker 1: And that it was, that was a big deal then--
Speaker 2: Oh, it was a huge deal--
Speaker 1: --if you come out of high school--
Speaker 2: --oh it was a huge deal, it was a huge deal because it was--they were telling me about others that, excuse me, didn't, their peer group in many cases were not able to either go or finish--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --okay, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, many didn't get out of grade school in those days.
Speaker 2: That's right, so, you know, they, they were extremely proud of the fact that, one, they, they fought and, and completed, enough to get that diploma, which I think was a part of, of--motivation for them to, to pursue other kinds of goals beyond high school.
Story_ID: 661147
Speaker 1: Now, what was your father [Ernest White, Sr.] focused on, his aspiration when he finished high school?  What--what did he end up doing?
Speaker 2: Well, my father was extremely active, somewhat of a leader, I guess, within that community and he was known for his athletic ability in terms of sports.  He was, at the high school there, he played two sports and lettered in both of them, at that time was baseball and golf, he was involved with, but that wasn't a part of the curriculum but he was, later was heavily involved with golf but those, those were some of the sports that he, he was involved in at that time.  My, my mother [Mattie Starke White], of course, she was on the academic side.  She was the one that constantly studied, got good grades and ultimately graduated from Virginia Randolph [Virginia Randolph High School; The Academy at Virginia Randolph, Glen Allen, Virginia] about the same time.
Story_ID: 661148
Speaker 1: So, I mean, I suppose they met in, in high school [Virginia Randolph High School; The Academy at Virginia Randolph, Glen Allen, Virginia] or maybe before, but is there a story about how they fell in love and got together?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) (Pause) I can't say that, the story that, the only story that I got was that, of course, they, the distance he had to walk in order to come see her, occasionally, which was from that Westwood sect- section [Richmond, Virginia] to, to the Broad Street road, I call it Broad Street road section [Richmond, Virginia] which is where my [maternal] grandmother [Hattie Starke] and [maternal] grandfather [George Starke] lived and I can recall even during that time that the parents were pretty disciplined and, and ensured that, that the time, there were time limits on the, the dating, any dating that took place during that era.  So, these are some of the stories that, that I recall having been shared with me that when he visited, it was generally for a short time but he had had to walk quite a distance because they didn't all have cars and transportation at that time in order to, to visit and often that was in, under some supervision of the, of the parents who were very, generally very nearby.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And a good part of that often took place, I understand, at church, you know, as probably a test to determine the, really the character of the person that, that they were, they were pursuing at that point.  So, that's, that's a little bit of what I, I recall.  I don't know if I addressed your question exactly but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, you addressed it, and, let me, let me ask this.  Is there, does the name of the church survive?  Do you remember the name of the church at that time?
Speaker 2: Pilgrim Rest [sic. Pilgrim Journey Baptist Church, Richmond, Virginia] was the church that they, that my mother and them attended.
Speaker 1: Children's Rest?
Speaker 2: Pilgrim, Pilgrim Rest, which was right off of Broad Street road, it's still up there now in that area (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was this a Baptist church?
Speaker 2: Baptist, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was a Baptist, yeah.
Story_ID: 661149
Speaker 1: Now when you think about your parents' personalities, the way they look, the way they walked, their talents, their energy level, their views on things, mannerisms, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: A combination, I think a combination of both because, see, in my family, the siblings were five years apart, I was the oldest, my, my brother [Ernest White, Jr.] was next, five years younger, and my sister [Roxanne White Brinson] was ten years younger, so, whatever discipline they had they, they spaced it out so that each of us were five years apart.  In terms of who I take after, I think it's a combination of probably both.  I certainly admired my, my mom [Mattie Starke White] and my dad [Ernest White, Sr.] for their tenacity and the discipline that they demonstrated during the tough time in terms of one graduating, being the only in their families on both sides to graduate from high school [Virginia Randolph High School; The Academy at Virginia Randolph, Glen Allen, Virginia] and then once having graduated, pursuing whatever interest they each had to try to make a life for the family.  It was a bit, a little bit at the time, at that time, was spent trying to find a way to obtain employment in order to be able to maintain and take care of your, your family.  My dad was, as soon as he got out of, of high school, shortly thereafter, he, of course, was recruited, well, got married, was, went into the service and then was, into the [U.S.] Navy and so I think that was another major step for our family, and certainly for my mother and him.  His first assignment, after he had finished his basics was, was in California.  And so he was connected with food service in the Navy and that's where he spent his entire time, I think as a chief petty officer was the position that he acquired.
Story_ID: 661150
Speaker 1: So he [White's father, Ernest White, Sr.] rose pretty high for an enlisted man, chief petty officer--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --he's like the mess sergeant--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --and so he, this is World War II [WWII] and from a lot of people we've interviewed from that period of time, they say that the [U.S.] Navy put all black sailors in food service, pretty much--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that's where they would (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's what I understood.
Speaker 1: --send you to the kitchen, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Dorie Miller [Doris Miller], the great hero, was, worked in the kitchen--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --when the Japanese attacked at Pearl Harbor [Naval Station Pearl Harbor, Hawaii]--
Speaker 2: I see.
Speaker 1: --you know, so, that's typical and the Navy was the hardest, that's what people say, was the hardest for an enlisted man of all the services.
Speaker 2: Oh I see, we each have our bias because I went in the [U.S.] Army so I always thought that that was the toughest, you know what I mean (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, look, the Navy guys--
Speaker 2: Some other would say that the Marines [U.S. Marine Corps] and others were a lot, a lot worse but no that--
Speaker 1: Well, that there were some black Marines, there weren't many--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --but in general--
Speaker 2: They didn't let them in earlier.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the Navy was like really hard on black enlisted men, you know.
Speaker 2: Right, but he, he survived that and--
Speaker 1: And, of course, this is a segregated--
Speaker 2: That's right--
Speaker 1: --Navy, too?
Speaker 2: --um-hm, um-hm, yeah, he survived that.  He, that was, his tour there, was how my family, meaning my mother [Mattie Starke White] and I, were transferred over, transferred to California because within a year and a half after he had gotten there, he had, he was assigned to a naval base [March Air Reserve Base] in Riverside, California and he arranged for us to catch the train from Virginia to come out there.  I think my mother insisted that well, you know, he's out there, we, we got to go, so that was my first train ride out of Richmond [Virginia].  I think I was probably about two, three years old at that time.
Speaker 1: Now do you remember it?
Speaker 2: I remember a little bit about it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, just a very little bit about being at one, train ride and ultimately what I remember most is where we stayed, which was kind of a, I saw more diversity than I'd ever seen, when we hit California because I would see different kinds of people within that community which, and the communities that I originated from there was only blacks, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I would see a few Hispanics and Asians at that time but that's, that's where we, I got my kindergarten start, about three years old, I think three or four years old, in California.
Story_ID: 661151
Speaker 1: Can you name your brothers and sisters for us and, in order; and just tell us a little bit about each one, you know?
Speaker 2: Yeah (clears throat), no, I will (clears throat), sorry.  Now I got, I got just a fantastic family.  My brother, he is, his name is Ernest [Ernest White, Jr.] and, of course, he's married to Margaret [Margaret White] and he has two fine sons [Ernest White III and Shamont White].  Ernest is, currently he's, has his doctorate degree in ministry and he also has a degree in psychology, which he's a practicing psychologist.  He is, has been continually active on, been on the school board in Spartanburg for probably about twenty-five years now.
Speaker 1: Spartanburg, South Carolina (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) South Carolina, yeah, that's where he lives, Cheraw [South Carolina], is the area but actually Spartanburg, I said Spartanburg, Cheraw is where he's, he's lived most of his, I guess, adult life now since he moved from Virginia, some time ago.  My sister, who's Roxanne [Roxanne White Brinson], she has two children also, two fine young ladies, one of them, of course, works for the bank.  I'm trying to remember the name of the bank, but it'll come to me.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and, and she, the other daughter is, we're excited about is, just finished law school about three years ago, she's up in New York, her name--there is Marvise [Marvise Brinson] and Onya, Onya Brinson is the niece we have who is now a lawyer, which will be the next lawyer in the family.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so that's it.  It's like the three of you?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Three children, three siblings of Ernest White, Ernest and Mattie White [Mattie Starke White]; and each of us, except for myself, have two children.
Story_ID: 661152
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) My sister [Roxanne White Brinson] has two and my brother [Ernest White, Jr.] has two, two boys [Ernest White III and Shamont White], sister has two girls [Marvise Brinson and Onya Brinson] and I have one son, whose--my son is Eric [Eric White], outstanding young brother who's just turned fifty but I'm--we're proud of him because of all of his accomplishments during the years.  Eric, of course, grew up primarily in Dallas [Texas] and finished the Arts Magnet [Booker T. Washington High School for the Performing and Visual Arts, Dallas, Texas] which was a new innovative educational institution here in the City of Dallas and he got a scholarship from the Arts Magnet to Berklee conservatory of music [Berklee College of Music, Boston, Massachusetts] upon graduation and he managed to win, while there, a couple of DownBeat awards [DownBeat Student Music Award] and he finished Berklee and when he completed his, his academic training there, he moved to California and he's been out in California ever since and has done, I think, extremely well (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So is he a composer, arranger or--
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He, he primarily is an audio engineer.  He was in the performance side.  In fact he, he traveled early on after he got out of school with Jay-Z and Trey Songz, some of those guys and so, I think, five or seven, five or seven years I guess, learned the business, learned a lot, did a lot of writing himself and decided that he ultimately wanted to come off the road and get into a more stable part of the business.  And so he's, he become the audio engineer for 'The Voice' for about the last five years, I guess.  His wife is one of the executive producers (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is the TV show, 'The Voice'--
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's one of the longest running talent shows that's been on.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, we're really excited about his success in that industry, both he and his--and our daughter-in-law.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: It was Anthea, Anthea Bhargava is her, Anthea Bhargave White is her full name (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, can, can you, can you spell that at all for us or is it, it's probably written on the--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I got it, I've got it.
Speaker 2: So, all right, it's okay then.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I got it.
Story_ID: 661153
Speaker 1: We always ask about growing up and we left you in California as a little fellow, right, with your parents [Mattie Starke White and Ernest White, Sr.] and how long did you stay in California?
Speaker 2: We were there until the end of his tour and we came back when I was, as I understood it, five.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause you started kindergarten there, you said, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And so this would have been, 1946?
Speaker 2: About that time.
Speaker 1: Yeah, by 1946, and so did the family move back to Richmond [Virginia]?
Speaker 2: We moved back to Richmond and we moved back to Richmond in the community called Westwood [Richmond, Virginia] and in that community, which I've described earlier was a community of probably anywhere from fifteen to twenty families max.  That's where I was introduced to the Westwood, Westwood elementary school [Westwood School, Richmond, Virginia].  Westwood Elementary School was a part of a complex consisting of both the elementary school on one side and the junior high on the other side of that one building, it's like a--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --large framed dwelling but that's where they built those schools at that time.  So, the challenge there, when they, when we went to get admitted, I guess this is the first time I, I really recall my mother being heavily involved in my academic development.  She, she was not satisfied with them placing, attempting to place me in, in the preschool, kindergarten, although kids started school at six at that time, I think it was five.  She said, "Well he's already," she went to school said, "He's already done all this, he's already studied this and he's advanced enough to be in that first grade, not in any preschool". And after some discussion and some negotiation, I think that's how I got to be placed one year ahead of my peer group.  So, I began, then began there in that small school until, and that was only, that only lasted for about a year and a half because at that time they desegregated, did I say desegregated, they were segregated at that time, they began busing for African Americans of blacks or Negroes at that time to other schools to avoid blacks going to school with white students.  I'm saying that because there was a white school about, less than a mile from our home, in that community, that settlement, that was known as Westhampton [Richmond, Virginia] and within that area, less than a mile, there was a large brick elementary school and a large junior high school that could have, we felt could have accommodated us but we were not allowed to go there at that time.
Speaker 1: So this is, this situation is the reason for, and the basis for Brown versus the Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954].
Speaker 2: That's right.
Story_ID: 661154
Speaker 1: This is 1946 still, yeah--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --forty-six [1946], '47 [1947] we're talking about, now this is when the State of Virginia has entered into a big crisis.  It's being sued by NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], the, oh, the pastor that preceded John, Vernon Johns' niece [Barbara Johns], I think, sued the state [Davis v. County School Board of Prince Edward County, 1954] and there's, anybody watching this can look all this up, I can't remember the exact date, but she sued and other black people sued in the State of Virginia.  It was a class action suit--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --in which resulted, basically, in the [U.S.] Supreme Court decision of '54 [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] to desegregate public schools--
Speaker 2: Public schools.
Speaker 1: --but you couldn't have, you know, the school, if they're going to be separate they had to be equal and they couldn't figure out how to do it.  They couldn't do that.
Speaker 2: They had to make that, no, they didn't make that investment.
Speaker 1: No, they didn't--they couldn't make that investment.  So--
Speaker 2: You're talking about economics then when you're talking about that--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and that's, that's, that's in part is why, what drove the, the reconciliation in some of the agreements that were achieved later.
Story_ID: 661155
Speaker 1: Just for the sake of example, now y- the Westwood School [Richmond, Virginia] that you were in, how many black students were in, in Westwood?
Speaker 2: Oh, god.  My, my guess, my guess would be, I'm trying to remember back at that time, probably twenty, twenty, twenty-five, it had to be at least that number because they all came from that, those settlement I call it, settlement community that we lived in [Westwood, Richmond, Virginia].  So it was all the kids that had been born there or grew up there or that moved to that settlement so that's, that's at the elementary school level.  The junior high level, they had a few more, they were the older kids and so I, my guess there was probably about fifteen, maybe twenty that were housed on, housed in that, that side, but they were operating, two operations, one is elementary which would have been first grade up to six and then on the, and the next, next little building, it would be the junior high school students attending that, the next room, not next building, next room.
Speaker 1: So how many rooms are in the school?
Speaker 2: Two.
Speaker 1: Two, okay, that's what I was--
Speaker 2: Two big rooms, yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right, so there's no, no gymnasium there?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no, no.  It was a playground.  In fact it was, that had been built on the space, in the space that ultimately became the playground for that community.  When they tore it all down, it became as a playground for that community (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So--
Speaker 2: --and that school was located, we called it the passage.  We'd walk through the woods that was probably about, about 100--well it was 100 yards, probably about 100 yards from where our home was on the backside of that, that area.
Speaker 1: Were they, was there indoor plumbing there or--
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, no, no, no, no, not in that, those, no, not at that time.
Speaker 1: So there's no gymnasium, no auditorium, no lavatories (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: --no--
Speaker 2: No.  Everything's outside.
Speaker 1: --cafeteria or--
Speaker 2: That's right, oh no, no.
Speaker 1: Any of those, okay.  Those sort of--
Speaker 2: I'm sorry I didn't give you all those descriptions but I think, to some extent, maybe I blocked it out, yeah, but--
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, well a lot of people, you know, when we talk about, a lot of people don't give the details where they went to school as, and I have to dig it out sometimes but, but this is part of the problem here--
Speaker 2: Oh, no.
Speaker 1: --that we have, I mean, did you have chalkboards in there?
Speaker 2: Well they had chalkboards, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm not in denial, because I didn't, I didn't stay very long.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In fact, within that year, after the law changed, we were then, as I mentioned, bused down to, to Carver [George Washington Carver Elementary School, Richmond, Virginia].
Speaker 1: This is a larger black school?
Speaker 2: Which is a larger one, yeah.  It was near downtown.  It was actually near downtown.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that was the larger black school that had been established.
Speaker 1: So it was a place that they could fake like it was more equal than, than the one that you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, but, but it was, yeah, but at the same time, yeah, they had better accommodations, okay, public restrooms, cafeteria, books, you know, 'cause the books we were seeing at that time, as I recall, they were secondhand books at the other school, okay.  They were being passed down by the school up the street 'cause I'd see the label on those books that we got.  See, you caused me to reflect back now on what, what really I saw and what took place and--anyway, as I guess, you know, you develop a mental block when you're trying to get through some of this stuff but--
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, now--
Speaker 2: That's what existed.
Story_ID: 661156
Speaker 1: Now what is, we always ask this question like thi- can you describe the, now did you grow up in the same house or did you move, move a lot?
Speaker 2: No, no.  When I first moved, when we first moved down there, we moved into a place in, in the, in that community [Westwood, Richmond, Virginia] which had a, I want to say a pawn shop on the front side of it and they had three rooms on the backside of it and so my, my folk leased that space when we first moved back, okay, and then we later moved from that into the commun- further into the community and my mom [Mattie Starke White] and dad [Ernest White, Sr.] got a home there that provided for, at least, I think two and a half bedrooms and other accommodations that we did not previously have, okay--
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) when we moved there.
Story_ID: 661157
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?  Was it like, what did it look like, was there any particular smells or, or sounds associated with it?
Speaker 2: I don't recall the, any unusual sounds.
Speaker 1: Well, it doesn't have to be unusual just--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, well I mean, when you, when you're talking about that, that community [Westwood, Richmond, Virginia], that's a community, like I said, it was about fifteen families at best that were surrounded by the white community.
Speaker 1: Now was the white community basically a well off community or was it just--
Speaker 2: A good, good middle--it was a middle class white community, you know, I'd say, you know they had, it wasn't mansions in there, they were a conservative white community of two, three bedroom places.  I've got pictures of them some place but I don't, I'll show you that--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --that were in that area at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay, so was it like, you heard of the Main Line in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] where all the mansions are that, that black folks lived in, Ardmore [Pennsylvania] and some of these other communities out there outside of Philadelphia but they're there to serve those big estates--
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, well.
Speaker 1: --that basically says, it's not like that.
Speaker 2: No, not necessarily but, but, but that community served as a source for labor, obviously for the surrounding community 'cause it wa- it wasn't as if many folk had jobs in positions, you know, at that time.
Story_ID: 661158
Speaker 1: Was there a maj- a major business district in the black community [in Westwood, Richmond, Virginia]?  I mean it's a small (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I know it's a small, but was there one block or something that had maybe the--
Speaker 2: There, there was, there was a black family that opened a convenience store at, on a part of, as a part of their dwelling.  So they apparently extended the dwelling so that they would be able to have a convenience store there which serviced that community other than, that's, that's, that's the only one that was African American owned and was a small convenience store that had, you know, candies and cookies and some basics (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was it near the school [Westwood School, Richmond, Virginia], basically?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was, it was across from the school, that's where it was located, you got that right.  I guess the services, serviced the kids and everybody else that came out of there.
Speaker 1: I mean, I can picture that sound like so many people, places (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right, but the other, the other places, of course, you know, you're talking about at best, a two mile deal.  The other stores were outside the perimeters of the residential area that we lived in and, of course, in that community you could go a block and there would be, what we call the ice cream parlors and other little concessions that were up there that you go in and buy but, maybe a small restaurant but you didn't go in and eat, okay, and that, that, that strip there, it served the rest of the community and just like any other community during that time, as I recall, that's kind of how it was set up.  You may have had the convenience store that was operated within the community by one of the local families which was cookies, candy and stuff like that but the main enterprise was, surrounded the, that living development.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So--
Speaker 2: Or you have, you have insurance agents and real estate agents that they have their places a couple of blocks away but on a commercial strip and in those days you weren't invited in or encouraged to participate--to go into those establishments.  You go in and you get, you get your ice cream or you get your soda and you take it out, okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what would happen if you stayed in too long?
Speaker 2: Well, they'd, they'd usher you out, you know, usher you out.  No, I'm, now as I reflect on it, we had what was known as a High's Ice Cream stores [High's of Baltimore, LLC] like, it's like the Barnes Ice Cream parlor [Barnes Ice Cream Manufacturing] and so, you know, we, the outing for us in that community was to go up to the ice cream store to get ice cream on Sunday after, after church [Westwood Baptist Church, Richmond, Virginia] and, but that was probably one of the few, aside from the, the larger drugstore that was up there which you go in and you buy whatever medicines you needed and, and you'd leave, you take it out and leave, consume it at home but that's, that's how it was set up.  That's how it was set up.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I've got pictures of some of that stuff but, you know, you said no pictures just yet but (laughter), 'cause I'd have to find 'em and show them to you but we have, as we talk about it, I'm able to reflect a bit more on some of the accommodations, or lack of accommodations that were there at that time, during that period.
Story_ID: 661159
Speaker 1: Now were there any black professionals in town, I mean, a lawyer, or a doctor, or a dentist or, or--besides, I, I know there were teachers I'm, I assume--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --at least a couple, you know, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, there were a couple and I'm, I'm speaking primarily from that small district and community that we grew up in, but surrounding and outside in downtown in Richmond [Virginia], yeah, there were other professionals, doctors--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and a few lawyers at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right.  So you're (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Doctors and dentists and a few lawyers, you know, that were in the City of Richmond, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so we're talking about general area around Richmond and in Richmond is the place that, you know, you grew up in, basically, I mean, the little community in Westwood [Richmond, Virginia], I mean, you interacted with the larger city of Richmond?
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, no, yeah, we did after they started busing us downtown to the school, that's when a lot of other things began to open up but it's still, it's still, it was, I call it, it was still segregated but, no, that, that busing took us out of that small ten family community into downtown Richmond which exposed us, at the school, Carver [George Washington Carver Elementary School, Richmond, Virginia] and Benjamin Graves [Benjamin A. Graves Junior High School; Benjamin A. Graves Middle School, Richmond, Virginia] which was a junior high school and ultimately Maggie Walker [Maggie L. Walker High School; Maggie L. Walker Governor's School for Government and International Studies, Richmond, Virginia] to a larger population of blacks and that's where you, you got to interact and develop relationships with friends and interact with, or at least meet some of the professionals that were servicing that market, still segregated, but servicing that market, okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, now did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Does that make, does that tie back to where you--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah it makes sense.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That makes sense.
Speaker 2: Trying to see where you, where you--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 661160
Speaker 1: Now did you have any favorite teachers or mentors when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, I can tell you one person that was very helpful when, when I started in that two room school [Westwood School, Richmond, Virginia], it was a Ms. Allen [ph.], I don't forget her 'cause she was the one that was there at the time that, that, I think, these, tutored me to ensure that, that, that I was, I would get her lesson.  So, I remember Ms. Allen.  She was, the school was divided in two, you know, you had elementary on one side and you had the junior high on the other side.  Ms. Allen was responsible for all the elementary students who taught, taught me, and Ms. Holmes [ph.] had the upper grade students in the next, adjacent room which is where the, she--they were taught.  My, my experience there was no more than a year before we were then bused down to Carver Elementary School [George Washington Carver Elementary School, Richmond, Virginia] which is where I completed my elementary training until we graduated from elementary school.  Mr. Morden [ph.] was the principal of that school.  That was a whole different organizational structure that we got used to and appreciated and respected because it seemed to be the caring nature of the teachers that were there and there was more than one, you know, you had options then as you, as you transfer from grade to grade.  Then, of course, once we finished Carver Junior High School [sic.], we graduated and went to Benjamin Graves Junior High [Benjamin A. Graves Junior High School; Benjamin A. Graves Middle School] which was a few blocks away but, in downtown Richmond [Virginia].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we completed the junior high there and then, of course, we had the option then of going to either Maggie Walker or Armstrong [Armstrong High School, Richmond, Virginia], wasn't really an option but my school that I was assigned to because of geographical location at home was Maggie Walker High School [Maggie L. Walker High School; Maggie L. Walker Governor's School for Government and International Studies, Richmond, Virginia].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was a great experience.
Story_ID: 661161
Speaker 1: When you were in school, did you have a favorite subject?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my favorite subject was science.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and of course the other one was music but--
Speaker 1: Did you play an instrument?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I played, I, in fact I was, I don't know if you know anything about Kennedy [Joe Kennedy, Jr.].  Kennedy was a top, one of the, probably one of the first well known violinists, jazz violinists.
Speaker 1: Was who?  What's his name?
Speaker 2: Kennedy, Kennedy.
Speaker 1: Kennedy, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: You'll, you'll see him around if you, if you're an advocate of jazz but anyway, so he was our band instructor for the time that I was there and he's the one that encouraged me to not only play my, well my instrument was saxophone, alto sax, but he encouraged me to get involved with the orchestra and to learn the bassoon.  So I was one of two that took on that instrument and played in the, in the orchestra for the time that I was there.
Speaker 1: Were you, the only member of your family who was a musician or were there others?
Speaker 2: No, my brother [Ernest White, Jr.] he played, he played an instrument too and my sister [Roxanne White Brinson] she, I think she took some piano lessons, she didn't take it very seriously but, but my brother he did.  Yeah, he played, he played a couple of brass instruments.  So, that was, that was, that was a welcome experience to get that training 'cause that kind of got us connected with, at least got me connected with the other part of the school and students and, and other activities that I think helped me to grow ultimately but that, those were my instruments, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, now did you, did you have a school band?  I mean--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was in school band.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, school band and orchestra.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 661162
Speaker 1: Now did you, were you like a leader in high school [Maggie L. Walker High School; Maggie L. Walker Governor's School for Government and International Studies, Richmond, Virginia]?  Did you--?
Speaker 2: Ah, there's some say I was innovative or mischievous in some extent 'cause I would take some risk, chances (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now were they, are there any stories about risk that you took in high school that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think I may have encouraged one student to, you know, at that time, they, they had other little pranks and so forth that, that I didn't share this but some kind of way I think I got my hand on some artificial defecation that was, that was taken to the cafeteria and I think I almost got suspended when it was put on somebody's tray.
Speaker 1: So it looked like it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it looked like--
Speaker 1: --made out of rubber or something or--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so, you know, we had, I guess we would find innovative ways to entertain ourselves but I was, I thought I felt that I was being unfairly blamed for, for, not so much for putting it there but for bringing it there and encouraging somebody to put it there.  So I think it wound up on, in some places that it probably should have--shouldn't have and I think they called my parents (laughter) and told them, told them that they're going to have to either come down and get me or they're going to have to try to see if we can modify his behavior because, anyway, so that's, for the levity, that was one of the incidents I recall.  Other than that, I think I was a good student because I focused heavily in the science area and by the time I got to the eleventh grade, I was trying to figure a way how to be able to go to college and was trying to concentrate on those subjects that I thought and projects that I thought would help me to get there.  So I did get selected for the science fair that was at the University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia] and I had two projects that I had developed in my last year, one was a hydroponic project and the other one was an insect collection.  I probably collected anywhere, I think, eight hundred some different insects and named them and on the, on the hydroponic project, which is the one that received favorable mention from the judges in the University of Virginia, which we were trying to compete to see if we could get some scholarships, that was a bean project that I, that my science teacher, chemistry teacher, assisted and aided me with that project to put that together.  So I think that in part was the one that afforded me the opportunity to get a scholarship that I used to get to Hampton.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it's Hampton, was it called (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it was Hampton Institute [Hampton, Virginia] at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay, right.  Now they call it--
Speaker 2: Hampton, Hampton University now.
Speaker 1: --Hampton University, right.  Hampton Institute was similar to Tuskegee Institute [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] in that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right.
Speaker 1: --there was a plan to develop practical skills and--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --that sort of thing, an industrial school--
Speaker 2: That's right, you read the history.
Speaker 1: --model, yeah.
Story_ID: 661163
Speaker 1: So was there, did you have a good counselor or teacher?  Was there a special teacher (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, oh yeah, no, I had--
Speaker 1: --that kind of guided you through?
Speaker 2: We had, yeah, we had some, we had some good, good folk, that's what was unique about the Maggie Walker [Maggie L. Walker High School; Maggie L. Walker Governor's School for Government and International Studies, Richmond, Virginia] experience.  The teachers took personal care, personal interest in trying to help students, at least expressed an interest in trying to get ahead.  And so, you know, I remember several of them but Ms. Ransom [ph.] was on the math side and she, she said, "Boy, don't you come in here without doing my lesson," you know, I mean, I'd be admonished from time to time which I appreciated.  There was a Mr. Petty [ph.] who, I was trying to learn everything I could who taught typing.  So I was one of the few brothers that learned to type while I was there which has helped me, you know, even now in terms of being able to work the keyboard.  So I was able to type my reports and my handwriting wasn't the best so typing was another real valued asset that I picked up in, in high school.  Then my science teacher, you know, he was, was quite, quite an aid, also Henderson [ph.] was his name, and he guided me and encouraged me to study certain subjects and to take on different projects all that would require extra time in order to be able to advance, to prepare myself for, hopefully a scholarship in going to college and that was the kind of nurturing you got when we were making those transitions at that time that I understand some students didn't always get even after, not necessarily in that school but in other institutions.
Story_ID: 661164
Speaker 1: Now did--did you even consider going to any other, to any other school?  I know, I know Virginia State [Virginia State College; Virginia State University] was close by, right, at Petersburg [Virginia] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, oh yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: But did you think, did you consider that?
Speaker 2: I considered those as, Virginia State or, or Virginia Union [Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia] as an option had I not gotten that scholarship but I was competing to get a scholarship so that I could go to some other schools and I was just excited when I got the opportunity to be admitted to Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia].  I think I may have applied to, to University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia] at that time but didn't get selected for that, that school, I thought maybe because they had evaluated my science project that, that might have afforded, I couldn't have gone without a scholarship, let me put it that way.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So the basis of my decision was based in part on having my mom [Mattie Starke White] and dad [Ernest White, Sr.] helping me to submit these applications to the various schools and ultimately being selected by Hampton to receiving a scholarship at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Now before we leave school--
Speaker 2: It wasn't a full scholarship.
Speaker 1: Okay, but it was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So my parents still had to--
Speaker 1: Now, now you were used--
Speaker 2: --had to pay some.
Speaker 1: --used to working from what I read, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, I sure did.
Speaker 1: You delivered papers, the African American--
Speaker 2: Well that's what I started early on when I was like twelve, thirteen, fourteen years old which was a valued experience because two things, one, it taught me how to count and two, taught me how to communicate with my community because that's where I had to service those families within the community.  So it wasn't a huge community.  We had maybe about twenty families but you had to deliver it, you know, and you had to speak to the neighbors, you had to collect your money and, you know, so it was, to me I had to learn some business skills (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) If I know anything about these communities, they'll straighten you out if you're wrong.
Speaker 2: Oh, you know--that's what I love about it.  I mean, those, that's what we've gotten away from in many cases for those who are fortunate enough to live within communities, that's, maintaining some connections some commun- and some communications so that you can benefit from what the elders have already learned and what they're really open about sharing if they thought that it would help you to make a better decision, you know.  So, that's, that's a part of what I, I got there.  You were asking me about high school and what assistance and what--
Story_ID: 661165
Speaker 1: I read that you also shined shoes at a spot, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, no, I did.  There was a, there was a, this was in junior high [Benjamin A. Graves Junior High School; Benjamin A. Graves Middle School, Richmond, Virginia].  There's a young man, I was trying to find a job in addition to cutting grass and I think, I think shared with my dad [Ernest White, Sr.], said, "Well there's a barbershop maybe I'll do up and see if I can get a, get a job."  He said, "Well, why don't you go do that."  So I went up there and visited with him, he was from Germany and he, (speaks German) "Sprechen ein--," whole lot of German, very little English, "Nein English," but he was kind enough to say, "Well, I'll tell you what.  I'll try you."  He said, "You come up here, you know, after school, maybe a couple of days a week and then maybe you can come all day on Saturday," and he said, "when you get out of school, just come on up and what I need you to do is, is sweep up around the chairs when, when needed but also would like for you to go and get the stand operating so you can be a shoeshine boy here at the, at the barbershop."  So that turned out to be a pretty good little business there that I kept at least a couple of years or so during junior high and high [Maggie L. Walker High School; Maggie L. Walker Governor's School for Government and International Studies, Richmond, Virginia].
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is a German barbershop so I guess the clientele--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --was white pretty much, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it was.  No, no, well you see 'cause that was outside that was then a mile and a half, two miles at best from where I lived.  You got this little development here that was African American, everything around it was Anglo, okay.  And so up, up the street in West- called the Westhampton area [Richmond, Virginia] where other commercial establishments and include the barbershop and, you know, the five and dime stores and stuff like that but he was the primary barber within that community and so, yes, and it was fairly, a very upscale community that was kind of adjacent to that area up there, the Westhampton area but that's where his clients would come from.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I think it was about a four seat barber, barber business at that time but I learned a great deal.  Yeah, I learned a great deal.  He, you know, shared things with me that helped me to understand how people were thinking, what they, what they were doing, what would work, what may not work, you know, so he was very supportive.
Speaker 1: First, is there a good story about what you learned?
Speaker 2: Is there a good story?
Speaker 1: Yeah, about what you learned, what you remember?
Speaker 2: From the--
Speaker 1: Something that he said or, or did?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, well I mean, the only thing I remember is that he just, he strongly, he had, he had one, one daughter who was in school, too.  He just encouraged me to be sure to continue to stay in school and be sure that you always acknowledge the customer, those that warrant acknowledgment.  He said, he didn't, he didn't force me, encourage me to service anybody that he felt it was going to be disrespectful.  So, you know, we felt pretty comfortable working with him and for him in that shop.  What I learned was all the conversations that took place.  That's an education you don't get, okay.  The, the, the value of serv- working in that barbershop was, was like a tutorial on white America and their thinking and their conversations, the nature of the conversations and the kind of issues that, that, became being discussed at that point.  As far as I was concerned, I was like a nonentity in some cases 'cause they, you know, they didn't acknowledge the fact, except thanking me for the service I did, I provided them but other than that, you know, it didn't inhibit their conversations.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, you learned a great deal if you listen.
Speaker 1: Did they talk about race relations?
Speaker 2: Not much.  I didn't hear a lot about that.  They, they would hear, they would say things occasionally about maybe some school related issue but they would, the major--I wouldn't say all of them, some were expressing interest in keeping things the way they were, it was, you know, not in favor of all this disruption that's taking place.
Speaker 1: Changes--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So, you know, I heard that.  The other, of course, part time job that I had was, which was extraordinary, educational vehicle was my dad got me involved with the Westwood country club [Westwood Club, Richmond, Virginia], supper club that was there; and that was during the high school--latter part of high school and during the times that I was off from college [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia].
Story_ID: 661166
Speaker 1: Now your father [Ernest White, Sr.] now, did he like, was he involved in golf over there or, or?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah well, you know, he played and he caddied.  Yeah, he did some caddying and there was a group of them within our community that turned out to be exceptional golfers but, 'cause our community [Westwood, Richmond, Virginia], because it was not far from the golf course [Westwood Club, Richmond, Virginia], you know, when you, when they strategically place these settlements, what comes out of those settlements are people that are, that pick up the skills and other things that you learn from the white counterparts that are in that area.  They don't know, I was being, being taught but there's a, there's a great deal of information that's being shared and learned.  And so, although they, they were admitted to the, to the club and the golf course on special days, so there's special days in which the caddies could go and have their day of golf.  So my dad would, would always with another group of guys from the community would go out and play golf, and perfected some pretty good scores.
Story_ID: 661167
Speaker 1: So we were just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know where that is.
Speaker 1: --speaking off, off camera about, you know, the need to have two jobs and the need to have a job with benefits if you're raising a family in those days--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and then the value of having some other skill.  You said your father [Ernest White, Sr.] was a tailor and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he wanted to use his job to be able to go back to get tailoring trained and he did a little of that.  He didn't do a lot of that commercially but, you know, he'd take care of stuff for the family, you know, that's, that didn't, I think he didn't, he didn't want to be confined to that small little space that--sewing, and so forth, so he didn't do a whole lot with that except for us in terms of taking care of pants and things like that, he didn't, he didn't do it much, but my father-in-law did who actually was, he turned it into a little enterprise so he made suits and things like that for the ministers and people in the community; and did fairly well as a, as a sideline.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 661168
Speaker 1: But to the country club, I guess we left off at the country club.  So, so your father [Ernest White, Sr.] got you involved at the, at Westwood country club [Westwood Club, Richmond, Virginia]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  In fact, you know, that, that's like a, what's that network too, because folk within the same industry know each other and they try to find ways, other ways at that time to try to support one another in terms of whatever they're trying to do.  So, you know, what you learn in, in, affiliated with some of these clubs, gives you a pretty good platform in terms of customers in business and things like that.  So what comes out of those or other parties that they have it's not just working at a club but it's all the many parties that the members have for, you know, for their, their clients and their customers and their families which becomes another source of revenue for the people that work at the club.
Speaker 1: Right, so, so did you like bus tab- tables in high school [Maggie L. Walker High School; Maggie L. Walker Governor's School for Government and International Studies, Richmond, Virginia]?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, that's, that's where I started.
Speaker 1: --for those, those event, yeah, those kind of events.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, no, that's where I started.  That's where they start you, you know.  They want you to get, they want you to figure out how to carry a tray and how to be sure that you know where the kitchen is and that you, you know, help clean the tables and that you're making room for the waiters who are the ones that are supposed to have the extra finesse to be able to service the patrons and the customers there to get the bigger tips.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: You see.
Speaker 1: And I suppose you got tips shining shoes, too, right in the barbershop (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, yeah, yeah.  No, I did, I did really well with that early on with that because I always had a pocketful of quarters, you know.  Quarters was significant at that time because four of those make a dollar, you know, so, so, no, that was--
Speaker 1: And a dollar went a long way.
Speaker 2: That--it sure did and that's why I always had money during that time when I was in, in junior high [Benjamin A. Graves Junior High School; Benjamin A. Graves Middle School, Richmond, Virginia] and, and high school from some of those jobs.
Speaker 1: Now did you encounter, I asked you before about black, the black middle class, I mean, lawyers and professionals and that, but you were encountering the white middle class in, in shining shoes and being a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, absolutely.
Speaker 1: --waiter, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, absolutely.  That's why I had, you know, wasn't apprehensive about that environment or those, those folk because I, you know, you have a pretty good sense of what their interest and what their needs are and, you know, you know who's an asshole and who's not, you know.  You know who's--you know who's--have money and who's faking it, you know, and who's paying their bills and who's not.  And so, you know, it, it was a good educational exposure and experience.
Story_ID: 661169
Speaker 1: Hampton, now we've got Hampton University [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], this is 1959, I guess?  Is it, see, did you start in '59 [1959] or--
Speaker 2: Well, Hampton would be '59 [1959], fifty--
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause you graduated from high school [Maggie L. Walker High School; Maggie L. Walker Governor's School for Government and International Studies, Richmond, Virginia] in '59 [1959], right, from--
Speaker 2: Yeah, '58 [1958].
Speaker 1: Fifty-eight [1958], okay.  So you would have started in the fall of '58 [1958]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, all right.  So 'cause you, that's right, because you were kept, you were skipped up a year.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so, I was a year ahead (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, so '58 [1958], all right.  So, 1958, this is a year, when, now this, is this the year or the year be- or is it the year before or two years before when the governor of the State of Virginia [J. Lindsay Almond] closed all the schools down to keep desegregation [sic.]?
Speaker 2: You would ask me that.  I, I--
Speaker 1: It's like one of those years.  I'm just saying it's one of those late '50s [1950s] years.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But did you all talk about it in those days?  Did you, were you well aware of it?
Speaker 2: Yeah to some extent because, I guess, when, you know, well Hampton was a whole new transition for me because it was the first time away from home and, the first time living in a dormitory with other men, students, so that was really a new experience trying to get acclimated to one being away from home, trying--being responsible for taking care of yourself.
Speaker 1: Yeah, were you excited about it or were you like kind of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I was excited, I was excited, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was excited about the, what it offered because it offered me an opportunity to hopefully grow and learn and develop other relationships, which I did, with, with students from other geographical locations 'cause I had never been in an environment where people were from, you know, all over the country, well most of them from the East Coast, and having a chance to meet them and compare notes in terms of what they went through in school and what their aspirations were and what family backgrounds were and what their, what they were attempting to accomplish by going to, to Hampton.  So that was new and different.
Speaker 1: Who was the president of Hampton when you started there?  Did you know or, or was he even black or, or was he a black president (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No but, no, no, no, he was, he was black, he was (unclear), yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right 'cause they had, they had just changed over in the '40s [1940s].  I know Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] got its first black president around 1940 and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know, you would ask, you would ask me that and I should know it off the top of my head.
Speaker 1: Well, I just, it doesn't--but what was Hampton like, that's more important?  What was it like?  Was it what you expected or was it really different from what you thought it was--would be?
Speaker 2: Well I didn't have a lot to compare it with except Virginia Union [Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia] because Virginia Union was right there at, in my city and the professionals that I, I knew of, got to know, were, for the most part, from Virginia Union and the ministers that were pastoring our churches, or our church, which was Westwood [Westwood Baptist Church, Richmond, Virginia], they were fairly, substantial ministers that were graduate, graduates of the seminary there.
Story_ID: 661170
Speaker 1: I mean, people that, like, I'm still remembering, E.D. McCreary [Edward D. McCreary, Jr.], who was a pastor of Westwood [Westwood Baptist Church, Richmond, Virginia].  Westwood had developed a fairly distinguished reputation for being a good solid church attracting good ministers.
Speaker 2: Now was, was it a Baptist church?
Speaker 1: Baptist church, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, I figured it was but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We didn't know about others at that time, you know.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Surely they existed but those that, those that existed that we were affiliated with were primarily Baptist.
Speaker 2: Okay, now I didn't ask you a lot about, you mentioned the fact that your grandparents made sure that everybody went to church, your maternal grandparents [Hattie Starke and George Starke], anyway, so--
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause we had ministers within the family.
Speaker 2: I imagine that you were, I didn't want to take this part for granted but I assumed that you had an active church life growing up and--
Speaker 1: Oh absolutely, absolutely.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: In fact, we got, my, one of my uncles, he passed, was the minister in the family and my grandfather and grandmother they were all deacons and deaconess and leaders within, within the churches.  So, yeah, that was, that was pretty much a given.  We may have, we may have one, one or two uncles or so forth that didn't go as often but for the most part anyone that was a part of that Starkes family, and all their white family, you were active in church.  The church in Westwood [Richmond, Virginia] where we lived, that's where I was mentioning Dr. McCreary and some of the others who were a part of the Virginia Union [Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia] vanguard, they, they were active leaders in every way in terms of being available and accessible and I think that's probably what helps the community to, consciously to, to be able to live with itself, you know, develop certain disciplines and to look for other leadership to help guide us through those, those rough times but that's, that's, that was a part of the church fabric.  Did you ask me another question or something (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, yeah, I was just asking you about church and I guess a follow up on that would just be that, before we go back to Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] was that, did, did you get opportunities in the church to express yourself as a youth and become, do, do leadership--
Speaker 1: Oh, absolutely.
Speaker 2: --type things?
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, BTU [Baptist Training Union] and I, you know, I played my, I won't say my first concert but first, any musical instruments, they provided you an opportunity and encouraged you to, to perform in church if you had a particular skill.  So, part of mine was obviously, you always got called upon to, to cite a poem or to read a Bible verse and perform if you have an instrument or participate with the choir; and I did all those things with, through the church.
Speaker 2: Okay, you'd play a solo on alto [alto saxophone]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 661171
Speaker 1: Now, you're playing alto [alto saxophone], did you, this is the beginnings of--well, bebop and stuff.  Were you, did you, you know, were you a Charlie Parker fan or, or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I have Charlie Parker's, all the albums.  Man, I've got stuff I can't use now, trying to figure out how to convert some of that stuff, you know.  (Unclear) I got several cases full of old albums with all the, all the favorite jazz artists and a lot of them are gone now but, yeah, I have, I have that collection and I participated.
Speaker 1: Did, did you have a favorite of the bebop era?
Speaker 2: Ah, Cannonball Adderley.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Does that pass the test (laughter) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah I think so.  Cannonball's all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was bad.
Speaker 1: That works.
Speaker 2: No, they, yeah he was, you know, 'cause he was, he was an alto.  In fact I was fortunate enough my, my aunt's husband who lives in, still lives in Rhode Island, her name is Alice Fisher, she married a big saxophone player who gave me my first instrument, a Chu Berry Fisher [sic. Chu Berry saxophone], and he played all around the country but primarily a jazz artist who lived in, who lives in Bo- she still lives there, she's eighty-eight now and she's the last surviving, the last surviving relative on my dad's [Ernest White, Sr.] side among the men and women that were born to Eva and, Eva [Eva White] and Carter.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Carter White.
Story_ID: 661172
Speaker 1: Now did you play in Hampton's band?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I played in Hampton's band [Hampton Institute Band], too.  I played in Hampton's orchestra [Hampton Institute Orchestra] too, sure did.
Speaker 1: Now did you have a group that played on the side anywhere?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we had another group that we used to play occasionally, jazz group, you know, and that's a part of what I guess I took to, in the [U.S.] military when I went in the military because I formed another group in the military that played for the troops occasionally.
Speaker 1: Okay, well don't get too far ahead now (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I know but you, when you ask these questions, I'm saying, oh lord--
Speaker 1: Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], yeah, right, right, it builds other stuff.
Speaker 2: --that's, that's other stuff that I didn't think about but--
Speaker 1: You have a musical career almost, you know, well, yeah, you have a, a whole music track here--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --where you're playing, playing serious music.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, well, but you couldn't make any money at that darn time, you see.  So that's why, you know, you had to choose other, another career path and try to keep that on as a, as an avocation, which you don't lose it, the taste for and, you know, some of the, yeah, I really should have stayed with it probably more and I could have done a lot more, other creative things with it but at that time they always, it was always, "Well you can't, you can't make any money playing, playing in bands and you can't make any money playing jazz," and so, you know, you always try to, and then you begin to look for other alternatives for a career path that you felt could pay you.  Everything was focused on what can you do.  "Do you want to be a doctor, you want to be a nurse, you want to be--," you know, whatever it may be, at least something that you, you can be fairly assured based upon historically what we've seen in our community could pay you, okay.  So, that's how some of the decisions were made.
Story_ID: 661173
Speaker 1: So what was your, your thinking when you entered Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] and, you know, about career?  What, what were you thinking you would, you would do?
Speaker 2: When I entered, when I entered (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I think you, didn't you major in chemistry or something?
Speaker 2: I did.  Yeah, yeah.  When I, when I entered Hampton, my interest was science because I got there primarily because of the, the science projects that I developed.  You know, I was trying to do something a little bit different and so I, you know, like I said, I started this collection that, at least got recognized when I went to the, the exhibits was, I guess I must have had anywhere from eight hundred, almost a thousand in different insects that we had classified.  I can't remember half of 'em now but that was the project (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And how did you have them?  Did you have them glued to something or pinned to?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, pins--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in boxes, yeah, in boxes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then the other project was--the hydroponic project was one that I started because I had gotten in the science class.  At Hampton they were teaching, probably one of the few schools, radiation and was teaching, Ms. Sanders [ph.] was the professor's name, was teaching us about radiation and how that, how it operated, how it worked and what influence it had on certain life forms.  And so, I had, I thought I had a strong interest and felt strongly enough about it, thought that it would probably provide some real opportunity after I graduated from Hampton with a bio- biology, chemistry minor which is my course, course line.
Speaker 1: Now, now this is the time, I mean, today in 2017, one of the most popular movies is 'Hidden Figures' (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Which is funny (laughter).
Speaker 1: --about a black woman who, who lives in Hampton--
Speaker 2: Do you know that her daughter was in class with me?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Katherine Johnson's daughter--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: --was in class with you?
Speaker 2: --in class with me, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, in fact, we still get emails occasionally from my class from a number of the classmates but, no, we've been obviously celebrating that.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Can you get that as a full statement where he says it?
Speaker 2: Oh sure, yeah, just, let's just--yeah.
Story_ID: 661174
Speaker 1: Well tell us about, just, just start that yourself so I'm not interrupting you (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, darn--his name.  God (unclear)--
Speaker 1: You don't have to think of her name, necessarily, but just, but just, just go on and just to tell us the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well anyway, they, the, I felt that we had an extremely bright class that I was a part of it at that time at Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] that finished in '62 [1962] and when I heard the news about the mother of one of my classmates who was over at Langley Air Force Base [Virginia] and had done all that extraordinary work, we knew that she worked somewhere over there but we didn't know exactly what she was doing at that time, was featured in a major film that was just recently released.  So, you know, it's after thirty, forty years, it's funny how the grapevine works.  The news traveled really quick among our class which a good number of us are still alive and still around and so we were all very excited to hear that news about how she's finally, finally got recognized in terms of the work that they were doing over at the Langley Air Force Base.  We knew how hard it was just to get through the, get on the base as much less being able to work on, on a major project like that during that, during that period of time.  So, I, we did see the movie and could certainly relate to, to having to use the outside bathrooms and everything else during that time, you know, being isolated in every other way except for the job and task that you're being assigned.  So, I just thought that was an extraordinary way of, of reflecting on history in a positive way that makes everybody, at least, in our community proud of contributions that were made that we didn't even know about, you know, the sacrifices that were made that we were not even aware of at that point, we just knew her mother had a job.  Didn't know what she was doing, didn't know the extent of it, you know, and didn't know how she had been singled out and recognized for the extraordinary skill that she had coming from that Hampton [Virginia] area, you know.  Just didn't, didn't even realize it so it's a, it's a historical, educational narrative that I think hopefully will long be remembered in, hopeful it will be reflected upon in other disciplines where we've been but have failed to be recognized in a proper way so they will educate the public.
Speaker 1: Katherine Johnson [HistoryMaker Katherine G. Johnson], who we're discussing, we interviewed her in Hampton about, I guess about seven years ago [sic. 2012] and--
Speaker 2: Is that right.
Speaker 1: --she still lives in the Hampton area and she--
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: --she said, now, unlike the movie ['Hidden Figures'] or what was in the movie, she told us that unlike her character in the movie, she could not, though the movie wasn't out then but she, but when I was watching the movie, I'm thinking, she said the toughest part of working over there was the fact she couldn't tell people what she was doing--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --'cause it was top secret.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, it was NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --so you couldn't, they could have Russian spies in the black community (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: --you know, they didn't know.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, they were working there but people in the community had no idea what, what she was doing--
Speaker 2: What, what she was doing.
Speaker 1: --there, right?
Speaker 2: No, they probably thought she was working in the cafeteria or something, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Kitchen help or whatever it may be, you know what I mean.  You would never assume that she had that kind of responsible job.  You know, you just wouldn't, that's, that was the consciousness at that time.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and the, the idea that she was doing mathematics to support NASA was not an affirmative action motivated job--
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: --it was a job moti- by--motivated by the fact that she could do, could do it (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right.  The skill level.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: That's amazing, isn't it?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's amazing, it's amazing, and (simultaneous)--
Story_ID: 661175
Speaker 1: Now was the, the Jefferson Accelerator [Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility, Newport News, Virginia] over there then?  I mean, it's, it's over there (unclear)--I mean the Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] professors we've interviewed talk about the Jefferson Accelerator being nearby and Hampton shares responsibility for it with the University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia] and some other institutions there, you know.
Speaker 2: Ah, no, now that's when I came later as far as I can recall.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So there was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I mean, these alliances came a little bit later.
Speaker 1: Okay.  When you mentioned a professor teaching radiation, I was thinking that perhaps he had something to do with the Jefferson Accelerator.
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, that was a young lady, oh, I'm embarrassed now because I can't remember all these names.  It was a chemistry--science teacher and, and I think, I think Hampton had gotten a fellowship of some sort to do some testing with radiation isotopes and that's how I think we got involved with that, with that class but that's all I recall of that, of that, of that project but what I was doing was, was primarily a chemical formula that we were using because hydroponics was not anything that anyone was talking about at that time.  They were talking about food scarcity, they were talking about alternative ways of growing food and how effective it could be doing it purely with chemicals and that that could be done.  So, I was trying to get on the front edge of something.  That was a project that I thought if it was done well and it actually proved to be successful that would get recognition so that hopefully I could get, considered for a scholarship.  That was a pragmatic thought of what I was doing at that point--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but still consistent with the field that I was in which was science, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, now how did, did, you graduated with a degree in chemistry, right?
Speaker 2: Degree, biology.
Speaker 1: Biology and--
Speaker 2: Chemistry minor.
Speaker 1: Chemistry minor.  Did you ever consider becoming a doctor?  Were you, was that at the back of your mind?
Speaker 2: I thought about it but no that wasn't, my interest was to be, to be able to use those skills in a laboratory to continue to develop other products and do research in that vein.  In fact, I still felt that was a possibility up through the time I got out of college and, of course, went into the [U.S.] military.
Story_ID: 661176
Speaker 1: So, you were in ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] at Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] I take it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was in ROTC.  I was in, you know, Pershing Rifle [National Society of Pershing Rifles].  I didn't miss a thing if I could, something that I thought would help me to improve and to get ahead, so--
Speaker 1: Now, now did you run for office, for class officer or anything like that in school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, one of the squad leaders for the, for the PR, for the Pershing Rifles.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What about frats [fraternities] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I was leading some other stuff.  Yeah, there was social frats at Hampton.  They had Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity], Kappa [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity], Ques [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity] and then they had social frats and the social frats you could get in in your second year and that's what I joined, it was called, Fidi Amici was the, was the acronym--
Speaker 1: What's the name?
Speaker 2: Fidi Amici, Fidi Amici fraternity.  It was a social frat, not, it was the same ritual for Alpha, Kappa, Ques but, but you could join it at that time your second year.  And so, I joined it at that time and also became a Pershing Rifle and I forget, two (unclear) weapons was enough rather than go through one more.  I had friends in both Kappa, Kappa, Alphas and Ques and I said, well, let me just rest with what I've got so far and if I join I'll join in the graduate chapter, graduate chapter later but my, my fraternal social environment at that point was with the, was heavily involved with the Pershing Rifle fraternity and the social frat that I joined.
Story_ID: 661177
Speaker 1: This is a time when, 19--the late '50s [1950s], early '60s [1960s] was a time when--
Speaker 2: Sixty [1960].
Speaker 1: --the U.S. is basically not in a war anywhere.  It seems hard to imagine that now as we sit here when the U.S. is still engaged in two wars, you know, as we, that's been going on over ten years but in those days there was no, there was, there was the occupation of German--West Germany.  They had troops in West Germany, in Japan and other places around the world but there wasn't a full scale war going on anywhere.  So, it seemed like a good time to be in the [U.S.] military from that standpoint (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, well the, the military experience was, I think enlightening and rewarding because I was fortunate enough to get in as a second lieutenant and the first assignment was in Germany and so I was assigned immediately upon graduation [from Hampton Institute; Hampton University Hampton, Virginia] after the basic training to, to Kaiserslautern [USAG Kaiserslautern Army Base, Kaiserslautern] in, in Germany and was assigned there by the, to the Quartermaster Corps [U.S. Army Quartermaster Corps], 56 Quartermaster Battalion I think is what that one was.  I can give you the names of the others but that's, that was, that was the first, first assignment and I stayed there for at least a couple of years before being transferred to Mannheim [USAG Mannheim, Mannheim, Germany].  The reason that worked so well was because I had just gotten married [to Rita White] which was, married before I left to go to Germany, right after my basic training I got married to just an outstanding young lady who I dated for a number of years.
Story_ID: 661178
Speaker 1: How did you meet your wife [Rita White]?
Speaker 2: Oh Jesus Christ.  I met my wife in high school.  We both went to Maggie Walker [Maggie L. Walker High School; Maggie L. Walker Governor's School for Government and International Studies, Richmond, Virginia] and I think we were in, nah, that's not exactly accurate.  I met her in junior high, that's when I first met her at Benjamin Graves [Benjamin A. Graves Junior High School; Benjamin A. Graves Middle School, Richmond, Virginia] and at that time we got, got a chance to talk a little bit, wasn't sure how far that would go but it continued to be a great relationship, got more serious as we went onto high school and so we dated throughout, throughout high school at Maggie Walker.  We were both in the science class at that time.  I think that's a part, had something to do with it too, we both were studying science at that time.  And so our whole cadre of friends were, other students that were in similar classes that allowed us to get together socially in addition to at school.  And so the relationship just grew so that by the time we got a chance to finish high school, that's when we, well the first time we separated, I got selected to go to Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] and she got selected to go to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and she, her background also, I think it was zoologist, zoology major, so that's, that was a part of the connection, both were in sciences.  I thought he was trying to signal you but anyway, so did I answer, answer your question, Larry [Larry Crowe], on that?
Speaker 1: Well, yes (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In part, yeah but see--
Speaker 1: Yeah, then finally you were, I mean so at some point, I mean, when you went to Howard law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.], did it have anything to do with the fact that she was, she was in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] or was she still there then or what?
Speaker 2: No, she, yeah when I, when I went to Hampton, she went to Howard, yeah.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: And, and we separated for a little bit there and then we got back together and--
Speaker 1: Just before you got, went into the [U.S.] military?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, no, we got, we had gotten back together.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I guess we never really totally separated, you know what I mean.  So it, we (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, it was probably tougher than it is now to stay in touch with someone because we had, we didn't have cell phones and computers--
Speaker 2: That's right, well.
Speaker 1: --and you had to call, long distance costs a special fee, right?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I'll see her, I'll see her when I came home for breaks, you know what I mean.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause it, I mean to call on the phone, that's a lot of money for a college student in those days.
Speaker 2: No, you're right, you're right, you're right.
Speaker 1: So you either write a letter or, you know.
Speaker 2: You're right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's a lot of letter writing.  I still got bags of letters that we wrote.
Speaker 1: So to really exercise some kind of fidelity or interest required a lot more willpower and work (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You had to work with it.  Yeah, you had to work with it, you had to work with it but, so we stayed, we stayed, we stayed together, continued to nurture the relationship throughout our college, although we were separate, we'd see each other each break that we have or had when we came home, you know, for the various holidays.  So that, that's, that, that has been an outstanding relationship.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, so you got married just before you entered the military, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 661179
Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-two [1962], you're commissioned as a second lieutenant in the U.S. Army after graduating from Hampton Institute [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia].  Now this, '62 [1962], this is the second year of the John F. Kennedy administration [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] and I was about twelve then but my recollection was that the country, at least black people were optimistic.  The Civil Rights Movement was going on and it seemed like we had this young president that seemed to be open minded, the space program was going on and people just, was it like that for you?
Speaker 2: I think at that point, yeah, we were encouraged, I mean, as much as you could be in terms of the election of John F. Kennedy, Kennedy at that time.  I think we generally felt that--optimistic that he was, could empathize at least with the situation it had been and according to certain news releases suggested that he probably would, would have been more approachable and more forthright and I think would address some of the civil rights issues that we had previously encountered in a positive way.  I think that was generally the attitude at that point.
Speaker 1: Now were, before you left Hampton, were students organizing in, to, I mean in demonstrations or sit-ins or anything like that, that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, because in fact I was involved with one down there at the local drugstore at Hampton the year before I left.  In fact, we had organized to the extent that we went down to the local drugstore at Hampton and sat in it down there as well as those of us who went home for the summer.  We demonstrated in Richmond [Virginia] too at the Woolworths [Woolworth; F.W. Woolworth Company] and the Thalhimers [Richmond, Virginia], Thalhimers because in the department stores, Thalhimers and Miller Rhoads [Miller and Rhoads, Richmond, Virginia] were the two major department stores in that area 'cause you couldn't go in and try on any clothes, okay, and then you couldn't go in there and sit down and eat, okay, at either of those department stores, although that's where most of the, just about everybody shopped at one time or another.  So, the activism that we developed at Hampton translated to an ongoing movement for those of us who lived in other places, for example, Richmond and other cities around the country, we took that with us and tried to be sure that we became active or connected with those, those, those various areas where we lived during those summer months.
Speaker 1: Now, now did you encounter Reverend Wyatt Tee Walker [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Wyatt Tee Walker] in those days?  I think he was operating out of Richmond area.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I knew of him but I didn't know him personally, yeah, Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the students, were they, were they organized in Southern Christian Leadership Conference [SCLC] or CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were very active.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were active at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay, I mean, one, more than another or, or--
Speaker 2: No, no, no, I wouldn't say, you know, it would make that distinction at that time.  We just knew that, you know, CORE and SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] and some of the others were, were active and we participated with--when we got back home with whoever was taking the leadership at that point.
Story_ID: 661180
Speaker 1: --The [U.S.] Army, you reported to Fort Lee [Virginia] first, right?
Speaker 2: I reported to Fort Lee first.
Speaker 1: And then you were assigned to Kaiserslautern--
Speaker 2: Kaiserslautern [USAG Kaiserslautern Army Base, Kaiserslautern, Germany].
Speaker 1: --slautern--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --okay, and the spelling is in this, I'm not going to stop to ask you to spell it but, but the spelling is in this outline and in other--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --forms of communications about this.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But you were at, in Germany from '62 [1962] to '64 [1964], two years?
Speaker 2: That's right.  Actually, actually I was in, in Germany for three and a half years, total, because I was in there for three years and then they, and we extended the tour, the tour, what do I think it's another year and a half or--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --total time in Germany was three and a half years.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause you went, you went to Mannheim [USAG Mannheim, Mannheim, Germany], too, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Mannheim, um-hm, for the last year and a half.
Speaker 1: Kaiserslautern to Mannheim--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and then, and what were your principal duties in, as a second lieutenant?
Speaker 2: Primary duties was, as a platoon leader for a maintenance battalion, so primarily ensuring that all the vehicles that we had were maintained in good shape and operational, that was part of the first assignment there.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now you were in Germany when President Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was assassinated, well, you were there when the Cuban Missile Crisis went down, too, right, before--
Speaker 2: I think it's about the same time, I'm trying to remember.  I know, I know that we were there when the president got hit at that time.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was '63 [1963], '62 [1962] was Cuban Missile Crisis--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And the, I mean, so a lot of people were afraid that the country's going to, I mean, the world's going to be destroyed by--
Speaker 2: Going to war, yeah.
Speaker 1: --nuclear war which is not a good feeling for anybody (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no.
Speaker 1: That's something that cut across all lines of race and everything, you know, class, you know.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So in, what was the feeling in the military when, when the missile crisis went down?
Speaker 2: Well that, the, the issues that I think received, most of the discussion at that time had to do with, when we were out of the country, had to do with the assassination of, of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.].
Speaker 1: No, that's '68 [1968].
Speaker 2: In '68 [1968].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's not until '68 [1968], yeah.
Speaker 2: And this was Kennedy?
Speaker 1: Yeah, '63 [1963] was Kennedy.
Speaker 2: In '63 [1963], okay, that's ri- okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Because I'm trying to, I'm trying to reflect back on exactly what had happened 'cause I know was a somber period and I think what we got was, you know, the news was spotty in Germany but we would get spotty reports on what had just happened and what was going on at that particular time, in fact, that it had occurred in Dallas [Texas], of course we hadn't been here at that point--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --but that was part of the news reports.  So it was a somber time.  I mean, for the military, you know, people were quiet and tried to attribute some of it to the civil rights issues and other related issues that it surfaced during that time, as I recall.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause his assassination came in, in November after there's a whole summer of demonstrations in Birmingham [Alabama].
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: There was the bombing of the church in Birmingham [16th Street Baptist Church, Birmingham, Alabama] that September--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and cities all over the United States, north and south had demonstrations for civil rights and there was a pending civil rights bill that people were expecting, you know, that hadn't been signed yet.  So, so all this is going on but you're saying in the service you got spotty kind of--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we didn't get, you know--I think it was--probably way it was managed.  We didn't get a consistent stream of, of information on that and I think I understand why, you know, 'cause we were working out with weapons and, and looking for trying, looking for any reason to try to be sure that we could hopefully maintain some degree of sanity during that period--that's what I, part of what I recall.
Story_ID: 661181
Speaker 1: Was there tension, I mean, the--the [U.S.] Army was integrated when you joined, but, but, it probably still mirrored some of the racial tensions in the country anyway (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no, no, yeah, it was, it was integrated but not, not completely in terms of attitudes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so any stories about the, any impressions of, of, 'cause I know you lived on the base but are there any impressions about the German people in those days?
Speaker 2: Any impressions (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, what were your impressions?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my impression, my impression was generally positive, generally positive, primarily because I took German in, in school and so I was able, you know, (speaks German) "Sprechen ein bisschen Deutsch," so that, that helped a bit in terms of at least opening the doors.  I, you know, you never feel that you're fully embraced but we had some good relationships with some folk there so it wasn't as bad certainly as it could have been and we did quite a bit of traveling.  I used to go down to, when I was in Mannheim [USAG Mannheim, Mannheim, Germany], when we moved to Mannheim, we'd go down to Heidelberg [Germany] on weekends to the jazz cellar there and so I got a chance to participate in some of those kinds of activities that humanized probably a number of, of the people and--
Speaker 1: So, so who performed in Heidelberg at the jazz cellar?
Speaker 2: Oh, Jesus Christ.  They have, they'd bring in, they'd bring in, sometime it was just jam sessions but they'd bring in different artists from time to time to perform, I can't--
Speaker 1: Some of the big, big names from the states?
Speaker 2: A few.  I was trying to remember some of 'em that were there but that was a local place where either that or artists would come up and perform and participate, especially on weekends.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you play (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You're testing, testing my memory.  I played one time down there with 'em, yeah, sat in, got a chance to sit in.  In fact we had, you asked me about this, we had, I put together a group that would play around, this is Vietnam, that was later, that was in Vietnam, that group that I put together was in Vietnam--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the, the German, Germany was primarily visiting the jazz cellars--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and, yeah.
Story_ID: 661182
Speaker 1: So you came back to the states in '65 [1965] to Fort Jackson, South Carolina, right?
Speaker 2: Fort Jackson.
Speaker 1: In C- Columbia (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Columbia--
Speaker 1: --right?
Speaker 2: --Columbia, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay, South Carolina, yeah.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And so you were there for two years, I guess?
Speaker 2: No, well I was only there for about a year before I got reassigned.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, about a year before I got reassigned to Vietnam.
Speaker 1: All right, so you're in Qui Nhon, Vietnam [Qui Nhon Airfield, Vietnam].
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Q-U-I-N--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --Y-A-N [sic.].
Speaker 2: That's, I call it mid-country because Saigon [Vietnam] is down here (gesture), Qui Nhon is mid-country, Pleiku [Vietnam] is up here (gesture) 'cause, geographically in terms of how I remembered it in terms of the assignment but the--
Speaker 1: So what was--
Speaker 2: The responsibility there was to, to handle the logistics of the petroleum that was coming in to be sure that the ships arrived, that they were offloaded properly and that the petroleum products were distributed upcountry to the troops.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, you'd be responsible for dispatching oil tankers and, I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right.
Speaker 1: --gasoline trucks--
Speaker 2: Trucks, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and that sort of thing?  Um-hm.
Story_ID: 661183
Speaker 1: And was, was Qui Nhon [Vietnam] a very hot place to be?
Speaker 2: We always had our weapons but it wasn't as bad as you might suspect, I mean, we, we weren't really lax because you couldn't tell, you don't know North Vietnamese from South Vietnamese.  You know, that was the, that was the challenge and the danger of being in an environment like that.  Occasionally there'd be somebody get--who got hit, some surprising because they said, well, there was a North Vietnamese that was in the, in the area, had infiltrated the area, but beyond that, you know, you're more concerned about your day to day life and you see evidence of some, some troops coming back, coming back either in the ambulance or, or in the infirmary that's, was very close to our facility.  So, you know, you'd see evidence of people being shipped back from up north back down to, to that area to be treated in order to be sent home.  So it's not, wasn't that, I wouldn't say, for a war zone it was about, probably as best as it could be in terms of safety only because, you know, you, people were always cautious because they could see evidence of what's happening north and near North--North Vietnam border with the troops being sent back, or brought back down to the Qui Nhon market [Qui Nhon Airfield, Vietnam] for the hospital.
Story_ID: 661184
Speaker 1: Now it was in Qui Nhon [Qui Nhon Airfield, Vietnam] that you, you started the band, right, the jazz band (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, Qui Nhon.  Qui Nhon we had, I had, one, two, three, four, four players, five players on average and we did play around for a couple of the troops in, in that area.  There was a couple other guys.  There was a drummer, guitar player, sax, piano and, so that was a diversion for me, so--
Speaker 1: No bass player?
Speaker 2: No, we didn't have a bass player.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A guitar player occasionally would switch but, no, it was primarily guitar, drums, keyboard and myself.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now do you remember the name of the band?
Speaker 2: God, I had it (pause)--
Speaker 1: Well, that's all right.  We'll just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I'm going to get, it should come to me because it was, it's like Raunch [ph.], no, god da- (taps finger) I'll, I'll, it'll come to me.
Story_ID: 661185
Speaker 1: Anything memorable happen in Qui Nhon [Vietnam] that, you know, affected your thinking for the rest of your, about the rest of your career and what you're going to do?
Speaker 2: At that time I was focusing primarily on what the options were.  I spent the extra time I had trying to find out what options I had when I got out.  And so my communications was not only with the family in terms of letting them know how, what was going on in a regular basis but I was communicating with some of the corporations to try to determine if there was some opportunities for a job so that I could transition, I would get employment.  When I communicated, I didn't get anything, well I got some expressions of interest but no serious expressions of pay, a pay grade that I thought would work.  On average for the kind of research work I was seeking, there was, the salary level for the major corporations at that time wouldn't--did not exceed ten thousand dollars and so, that was starting, for--
Speaker 1: Now to put, that wasn't too bad for those days.  Six thousand dollars was more than (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, ten, ten, ten, yeah, eight to ten, yeah.
Speaker 1: Ten, ten to ten thousand dollar is not that, it wasn't that bad.  I mean--
Speaker 2: Well I thought it was but, you know.
Speaker 1: Well, yeah, I mean, someone making a good middle class salary is making twenty, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I guess, you know, I mean, but that's, that's somebody's established in what they were doing in those days.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: I mean, salaries have changed so much since then but many people or professionals, accountants and such, were making like seven, eight in '67 [1967] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, you're probably right, but no I was, I was discouraged with that, that number and said well I need to find something else that I need, that I think I'd enjoy and do because I can't, apparently it'll take me some time to make any real income in this profession going that route and that's when I determined that I'd probably best try to go back to professional school and get a, get a professional degree and then see what I can do with that, which is when I decided to pursue law.
Story_ID: 661186
Speaker 1: How did you make the decision about law?  What, what prompted you?  What pushed you towards law (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, what, what prompted me was having observed some of the proceedings that had probably had taken place and what I thought was probably a better way to either administer the process so that the penalties would not be so disparate as it applies to some of the troops.  It appeared to me that sometimes the African American troops were getting more harsh penalties than some of the others and, or either weren't represented at all and when I got a chance to represent some of them on probably two occasions, we were successful in minimizing the penalties that that trooper received or, or protected his, his ability to remain in the military, you know, and not end his career, you know what I mean?  And, and it was just really a matter of having someone to, in that particular case to speak up for him and to do a little bit more research to be sure that the full, full scope of the facts were shared with the deciding officer.  So I said, "Well, you know, this is not bad, I feel pretty good about this," and I think I could enjoy working in this particular field so that's when I began to look, that, coupled with the low pay at that time, looking for some other profession that I could pursue that would have the ability to pay me more.
Story_ID: 661187
Speaker 1: (Background noise) And the [U.S.] military at that time could, was, you know, was, had promised to pay for your schooling, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --yeah--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --going forward.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So you, you knew you had, didn't have to worry about tuition.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Well, you still got to worry some 'cause you know your tuition is not covered fully by that, that stipend you get.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so you're in Qui Nhon [Vietnam] how long?
Speaker 2: For a year.
Speaker 1: A year, okay.  So you came back in '68 [1968]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, so you were in the states when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther, King, Jr.] was assassinated, I guess, in '68 [1968]?
Speaker 2: In '68 [1968]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, April '68 [1968], that's when Dr. King was killed.  Does that sound right?
Speaker 2: No, it, if I go back and look at my information, I got--killed, Dr. King was killed I thought when I was still in Vietnam because I remember that, that somber period.
Speaker 1: So maybe it was, but he was killed April 4th, 1968, that's for sure.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, so you were still in Vietnam then?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was still in Vietnam at that point.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: So, so did you come--
Speaker 2: --'cause that was a frightening, kind of a frightening period 'cause at least the news clips we were getting, you know, in terms of what had transpired and nothing was clear.
Speaker 1: And did you hear about the riots in--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --the major cities and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, sure did, sure did.  Yeah, nothing was clear at that time in terms of the news.  I think it was managed news more than anything else but, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you either came back later in '68 [1968] or early '69 [1969], I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it would have been, I have to look at my chronology again in terms of the time when I got back and what, because I worked for the summer, I need to double check that again.  I worked for the summer before going to law school [at Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] with the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] program for about a couple of months, two, three months.
Speaker 1: Now is this the, the position with the counseling for the Richmond chamber of commerce [Greater Richmond Chamber of Commerce], is that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and that was the Y--that was YMCA instead of the chamber of commerce, that was the YMCA--
Speaker 1: YMCA, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: (Pause) Okay, so--
Speaker 2: They had, they had a, they had a program for young men at that time and I, Doug Battle [ph.] was the director's name, that's who I worked for during that period in Richmond [Virginia] for that summer.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, that's some--before you started law school?
Speaker 2: That's right (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So--
Speaker 2: --'cause I was, was the start that, the end of that, that summer cycle for the next semester.
Story_ID: 661188
Speaker 1: Did you do anything in preparation for law school?  Did you consult with anybody or talk to any, any lawyers, or?
Speaker 2: The only, only thing I think I did at that point was to consult with a fellow by the name of Lambert [ph.] who was in our community.  He was a part of the Lambert family but he was the only lawyer that was there at that point.  We had a couple other lawyers that are fairly prominent that I, but I didn't get to them but Leonard was the, my go to person because he had graduated from Howard also and got some insight from him as, in terms of what, what to expect.
Speaker 1: Now, now did you know or did you know of anybody that knew Doug Wilder [HistoryMaker L. Douglas Wilder] then?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I didn't know Doug the way I got to, got to know him but I didn't know Doug at that time.  I knew of him but did not know him personally.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  So Howard University law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.], so, what were your first impressions of Howard?
Speaker 2: Well, first impressions was that, one, it was a, offered a professional school and a discipline that I had been admitted to and I thought it was a great opportunity.  I think what's, what, what influenced me most was the caliber of and stature of the, when I say my predecessors meaning those other lawyers who had gone to that school and who had made a mark within, within the country, you know, and certainly on the civil rights side but certainly in their respective communities.  So that's what was attractive about that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were aware of the legacy of Thurgood Marshall and--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And Charles Duncan [HistoryMaker Charles T. Duncan], Oliver Hill [HistoryMaker Oliver W. Hill], Spottswood Robinson [Spottswood William Robinson III]--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --and all those--
Speaker 2: Well see, all that centers around the Virginia area, Washington [D.C.], Virginia, so, the, Richmond [Virginia], especially the Richwood [West Virginia] history and the transmittent- transmission of that history primarily through his churches in his communities.  So, no, I, I, I knew of th- knew of those personalities.
Story_ID: 661189
Speaker 1: Were any of your instructors from that, you know, that, that civil rights period?
Speaker 2: Chisholm was, Dr. Chisholm [Elwood Chisholm].  I got several others.  Red Moss [ph.] was.  You know of him or heard of him if you haven't?  He's quite a giant and has been in the legal field but most of these guys are passed now.  So, the, I should have made my list of other, other names that I've got, all of whom I have known or have encountered at one time or another but that, it'd been such a legacy created by my predecessors so you know you, you just, that's, that's almost a natural transmission of intelligence when you make a decision where you're going to go to law school there and you begin, they begin to share the history and the investment that others have made already to forge that, forge that path.  And so, no, that's, that's, that's an important piece of the legacy of Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Okay, that's right and now the, the president of Howard then was James Nabrit [James M. Nabrit, Jr.], right?  Was that true?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he's one of the first ones, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and he was, he was a law school--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --grad too, I mean, a teacher, too.  He was the former dean of the law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: Did you have a, was there a particular portion, I mean, a part of law school that you were attracted to more than another?  Like contracts or torts or, I don't know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.  At, at, in terms, in terms of the practice areas, I was primarily trying to understand the business areas that were related to the practice.  We generally had to take most of those courses that you mentioned in terms of contracts, torts and property, that's all a part of the curriculum and then, of course, they let you choose electives as you go on for your next, next couple of years but, no, I had to, I had to take those basic courses and the, I wasn't, I wasn't, my, my interest was trying to focus more on the civil side of the docket rather than the criminal side and so a good bit of my time and the courses that I took dealt with personal injury, business, torts, contracts, it's a part of the general course.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what about the instructors.  Did you have a favorite instructor or one that you learned the most from, anything?
Speaker 2: Moss and Shulman [ph.], Chisholm was good; (pause) those, those are three that come to mind now.
Story_ID: 661190
Speaker 1: What was the toughest part of law school for you?
Speaker 2: Trying to be sure that you could get those cases briefed (laughter) and submitted on time, you know, as part of the assignments, having a family and trying to work part time too.  So this wasn't, you know, my, my investment wasn't one in which you just had free rein to go and enjoy that intellectual experience, I had a family that I had to provide for.  So that, that was the other part that took, took up some of the time.  So I, you know, I'd be working part time wherever I could down there at, at that time 'cause I, in terms of law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.], I had the family up here, I said up here, had the family in Washington [D.C.] with me and trying to manage that was a challenge.  [U.S.] Military stipend doesn't always hold, it's not always adequate, you know, so you look at other ways that you could hopefully manage and make some money during that interim to cover those bills and those obligations that you have.
Story_ID: 661191
Speaker 1: Did you clerk for anybody during this period of time?
Speaker 2: I clerked on the back, the last year.  In fact I was invited by the legal services, Washington, D.C. legal services office [Legal Aid Society of the District of Columbia] (clears throat), throat's killing me, legal services office, my early part of my third year and then I subsequently was hired by the Federal Power Commission to clerk for the remainder of that year and for part of the following year after I finished until I got an offer from Atlantic Richfield [Atlantic Richfield Company; ARCO] to, to go to Dallas [Texas], or to come to Dallas.
Speaker 1: How did that take place?  I mean, did you meet a representative of Atlantic Richfield in, in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] or did they, how did they find out about you?
Speaker 2: No, that's, that's, I'm trying to remember how that, that occurred.  I, I think, as I recall, I just applied and I was interviewed while I was still at school.  I think they had a representative from the company there and because I had done considerable work on the environmental side, and in terms of writing some articles related to the environmental side, I think that that provided the magnet, magnet that offered, well encouraged them to make me an offer.  I got some of that written out some place but that's what I recall.  The offer was made by Atlantic Richfield, they were interviewing at the various schools.  I had already had some experience in the, in writing the article, the Environmental Policy Act [National Environmental Policy Act of 1969] had just come out.  See, you're taxing my mind, but it'd just come out during that, that year.
Speaker 1: Oh, is this the synopsis of selected statutes and executive orders related to the Federal Power Act?
Speaker 2: That was, that was once I was hired by the Federal Power Commission, that was one of the jobs I did, clerking for them but I had written, I was on the, I was selected to be a part of the bar review [sic. law review] at Howard [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] and the article that I drafted that got their attention was the, was the review of the new Environmental Policy Act that had just been enacted (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, here's the title, 'A Panoramic View of the National Environmental Policy Act.'
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, so you have to help me put these pieces together 'cause this is, I'm always, I'm doing other stuff but that's where that would have fall- fallen into place.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that in part was, I think what attracted Atlantic Richfield to make me an offer 'cause they were catching all kind of hell with the new Environmental Policy Act coming out, they are challenged with between that and Environ--and, and exploration and production initiatives that they were investing in and that was going to put a hold on a lot of things until, you know, they were sure that they were in compliance with the new act that was being offered.  So I think that was part of the inducement to make me an offer.  They said, "Well, heck, he already knows about this, you know, probably helps cover our diversity quota, too, what are we trying to do," (laughter) but, but that's--
Speaker 1: Two in one.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, that's, there's always that, we don't get paid for it all the time but in this case it was worth the investment.
Story_ID: 661192
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You were just talking off camera about you being the oldest student and having--giving, giving you a little advantage on (unclear) in law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, 'cause I was, you know, I was at least five or six years older than the average student that would have been admitted at that time and then I had that real life experience being married [to Rita White] and having a child [Eric White] and having been in the [U.S.] military so you see things a little bit different than the student that's, who's just coming out of college who is going to law school with a few life experiences, okay.  So that enabled me to, I think, develop a relationship with some of the faculty to the extent that I was selected, I guess, that last year to be the student faculty representative for the, for the law school and that was a time when Pat [ph.] and some of the others, Harrison [ph.], and some of the others were there and they were having issues trying to, you know, students began to not only boycott but raise issues at the school.  Back during that time, they, they weren't that bashful about, about trying to improve the climate and ensure that we were getting the kind of resources that we felt we needed that we were investing in for our career.  So, I did get a chance to participate in that capacity on behalf of the student body, the law school student body, my last year.
Story_ID: 661193
Speaker 1: When we left off, you had received an offer from Atlantic Richfield oil company [Atlantic Richfield Company; ARCO] in Dallas [Texas] to participate as an environmental and labor attorney.  Now how did your wife [Rita White] feel about moving to Dallas?  Or did you know anybody in Dallas at all?
Speaker 2: No, absolutely, no I didn't know anyone in Dallas at that time.  We just knew that that was a southern city that was down there in Texas and we did learn, of course, fairly early on that that was where Atlantic Richfield and other oil companies were located and that if I was going to pursue any career path in, in the field, legal field, in that environmental area, that may not be a bad opportunity.  So, I asked, well they had offered to provide me and my, well first me first, a trip down here for the interview and, you know, I had no idea how the interview was going to go so I accepted the offer to go interview.  I was interviewing wherever I could get an offer at that time because I had a family.  And so, I came down and interviewed at that point.  It was one of those interviews that take place--that took place I think in most metropolitan areas with, with African Americans.  That race thing was still obviously a conspicuous issue that we always have to deal with, you know.  Well, where am I going, what's the climate there, what's the makeup of the, the staff and the leadership in that organization, how, will I be accepted, what is the nature of the community and the involvement of the African American community at that, at that point Negro community, and in terms of the business of this particular company and how might that be viewed.  And so, they sent me down for a weekend to take a tour.  Of course they were gracious as usually, they give--put you in a, in a Class A hotel and feed you and try to give you a tour but the tour that I got was, you always feel that it's structured in such a way so you see the very best of what the white community has to offer and didn't give me much of a glimpse although there were one or two other African Americans that were on board in the company at that point or what the real community was like.  So--
Speaker 1: So, were there other black lawyers employed by (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no, no, no other black lawyers there.  There was another black lawyer in California, I think, at that time, one or two in California.
Speaker 1: So what role did the other black people play here in Dallas?
Speaker 2: In Dallas, oh, the, I've got a, I've got something I'll show you, which shows you the profile of what that was at that point.  I was the first African American to be considered as a corporate lawyer in the city.  There were at the time--
Speaker 1: In the whole city?
Speaker 2: In the whole city, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They also, so I gave you books so you could see the numbers and things like that so you can have some comparison 'cause it's not so impactful unless you can see the number of, you know, eight hundred, nine hundred thousand people and you, you see the number of, the number of lawyers which at that time was about eight thousand Anglo lawyers that were in the city and you asked about the numbers of the African American lawyers that were here in the city and that, that number was, the real number was about eighteen maybe twenty, okay, and of course Hispanics weren't that prominent at that point 'cause they kind of converted a little bit later on and became, started being identified as Hispanic because there were certain advantages that were accorded them but before there was only two: whites and African Americans, in terms of distinction.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now that's, that's surprising (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Yeah, a little weird isn't it.
Speaker 1: I mean, considering the--
Speaker 2: I mean, now it's, it's, now you don't think of it because it automatically, the diverse classes that are within a metropolitan area now are clearly identified because that's how the country has moved, at least the United States has moved in certain markets, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It wasn't always that way.  You think back at that time and, you know, and the time that we were making these decisions and moving, there was only whites and blacks.  That was the distinction, those were the counts that were being maintained for the most part, okay.
Story_ID: 661194
Speaker 1: I came down, got a couple of people that were trying to be courteous and cordial and show me around a little bit.  I realized when I got back, I didn't have a lot of information that I could share with my wife [Rita White] and they wanted to know, they said, "Well we're really interested, we'd like to make you an offer," you know, and I said, "Well, I'm--I'd be happy to consider that offer but I'm not sure I'm able to make any decisions regarding that offer without first having my wife to come down and take a look and so we can better determine what the alternatives are for my family," okay, 'cause at that time I had a wife and a son [Eric White].  And so they said, "Oh yeah, we'd be, we'd be happy to do that."  So they, they did in fact arrange for me, I think a couple of weeks or so later.  They said, "You let me know what time you can come and arranged for me to come back down to spend another weekend and, and to look around, to try to make that decision."  We did, they got a slightly different crew.  I told them, I don't want them to take me just to the white areas, I need to see where the black communities are, I need to talk with someone else who'll give me a better perspective of what, what's here really for African Americans.  And so they arranged that also.  Was there something you need to get?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  I keep hearing something but it's all right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but anyways, so, so we did that and I, when I came down this time, I had to, I wanted to visit with the African American lawyers that were in town and I, my contact at that time was, was C.B. Bunkley [C.B. Bunkley, Jr.] who had been here for a while.  L.A. Bedford [Louis A. Bedford, Jr.] was another prominent lawyer who had been involved, who was here.  My classmate, Walter Irvin [ Walter L. Irvin] had been here a year before and Walter had graduated from Howard [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] also that year before and had been here and so those were the, the four, three or four persons that I spoke with on that second trip and I think but for the encouragement of, of C.B. Bunkley, whose son-in-law became the city attorney for Dallas [Texas] in subsequent years but he was well respected because he had been here practicing.  He had primarily a civil practice, sole, sole practitioner, just like everyone in the city, primarily the sole practitioners except for a couple of them that had partnered together or working together, not so much partnered but that was the, that was the legal climate at that point.  So, Bunkley said that, you know, he said, "Ron [HistoryMaker H. Ron White], I know you, you know, you'll be the first African American to be extended an offer or at least potentially accept an offer, we need you to accept this offer because that hopefully will begin to open some doors in terms of getting some more lawyers hired by some of these corporations and businesses and that, you know, that included the, the governmental entities too."  So I said, said, "Well, I had told them I had to get with my wife, I need to see, see the various areas that, where we could probably live and see what we could, we could arrange."  I said, "Well if I can't make it work, I'm going to get an agreement so they'll send me back to D.C. [Washington, D.C.] in two years."  So, I got that agreement in place as a part of the condition of accepting the offer.  There are several other things I think I discussed or was considered in making that decision.  So my wife and I said, well, we'll give it a shot and see what we can do.  So we established those conditions with the encouragement of the African American lawyers that were well respected at that time in the market, saying, "We'll help wherever we can, if you don't like it and you still want to practice, you've got an office here in my, in my building to work, to do some work," so that gave me another alternative that if it doesn't work I can still go out and practice with the, one or the other established lawyers and make a go of it.  That was in part the dynamics of what, what evolved in terms of my decision to come down and give it a shot.
Story_ID: 661195
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So this is 1971 and now, now there was a, there was an African American bar association, right, at this--a black bar association?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but that--that came just a wee bit--that, that was a, was a black association, that was J.L. Turner [J.L. Turner Legal Association, Dallas, Texas].  It wasn't named J.L. Turner in the beginning.  We subsequently changed the name to J.L. Turner because he [J.L. Turner, Sr.] was one of the more senior lawyers who had survived.  There's a whole write up that's been done about him just in recent years but he was an established lawyer, African American, he had a small shop.  He and his dad primarily practiced together, okay, and they did primarily probate work in the city at that time.  That was, that was, that was it but there were eighteen, twenty max, African American lawyers that were in the city [Dallas, Texas] at that point and most of the practice from the lawyers was on the criminal side of the docket.  I had focused, although I always, I got some of that experience in trying to determine what would happen, how do you handle a criminal case, how do you get people out of jail, you know, you wanted to be sure you knew some of that but my focus was, was not to do the traditional deal, you know.  Someone had to try to open the doors when I went out and practiced to, to practice either that business, that corporate law, those other areas that, that generated some substantial dollars the way we were not because you knew that people were seeking representation, but you didn't see any African American lawyers doing any of that kind of business.
Story_ID: 661196
Speaker 1: Now at, at Atlantic Richfield [Atlantic Richfield Company; ARCO], was there any particular white lawyer that, that helped shepherd you through (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely.  Jim Coffey [ph.] was one that was on the litigation side of the docket with Atlantic Richfield and Ken Dickerson [Kenneth Dickerson] was the, like the, like the regional general counsel who was very supportive.  You know, but for them, but for the who was head of the department here, it would have been pretty tough because they, he not only insured that I got the training and support but got the latitude to do some other things that I think actually catapulted me into leadership roles within the city and I think that's how it happened.  They were receptive enough, I think understood enough in terms of the challenges that Dallas [Texas] offered that they supported most of the endeavors that I attempted to participate in, some clearly race based because of the advocacy that was needed or the positions that had to be taken or the organizations that I could be a part of at that time that wasn't frowned upon in terms of support by Atlantic Richfield--
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) at least the local leadership and the legal department.
Story_ID: 661197
Speaker 1: Now were you the first black lawyer to be admitted to the Dallas Bar [Dallas Bar Association]?
Speaker 2: No, I was the third.
Speaker 1: Third, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  There was Finch, Fred Finch [Fred J. Finch, Jr.] was another lawyer who was killed here years, a few years back (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And that was what?
Speaker 2: Was he, he was killed, both he and his wife [Mildred Newton Finch].
Speaker 1: Were killed?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah.
Speaker 1: What happened?  There's a story there (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In fact, he, he operated a newspaper [Dallas Examiner] too.  I can't give you all the details of it but his wife--[HistoryMaker] Mollie Belt is, became the successor of that particular paper that's still published today.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But--
Speaker 1: Yeah, we interviewed Mollie Finch Belt, yeah.
Speaker 2: Is that right?
Speaker 1: Yes we did.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  Well that was her, her father, both the father and mother were killed, Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So how were they killed?  What happened?
Speaker 2: Well, somebody, some, never got, never (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I know we've got the story but it's been so long ago I couldn't remember.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but they, they never got the, the culprit, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, so--
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know that, you know during this time, being here you kind of, you've got all the information if you try to stay involved and you, you knew the personalities but, oh, he was, it was a sad, very sad because, you know, he kind of, he managed his business, he stayed to himself, he did some leadership, played some significant leadership roles in terms of fostering the papers and other things like that in the city but, no, he, anyway, so that was, so the two was Finch who would, who was a member of the Dallas bar and the other one was L.A. Bedford [Louis A. Bedford, Jr.] who joined.
Speaker 1: Bedford, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, L.A. Bedford.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: My ment- my mentor was, was C.B. Bunkley [C.B. Bunkley, Jr.], he, he didn't ever bother but, doing that but he didn't, he had a pretty, pretty good practice representing folk all over the community on the civil side.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, so that wasn't an issue.
Speaker 2: When you say that wasn't an issue, meaning?
Speaker 1: Well, what, you were the third so I mean, well, it wasn't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --but it wasn't--
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, yeah.
Speaker 1: --I mean, were you, were they welcoming in the Dallas bar?
Speaker 2: Well, I got, I got sponsored in by an Anglo lawyer who was an environmentalist here in the city and he, just so happened he saw me downtown, you know, everybody think, well, you know, this is the way people are.  If they don't see you down there, you got a coat and tie on and you seem to be, and you had the, and you're at the bar association, I think I was, he invited me to go to the bar association, that's what it was, after he found out that I was a lawyer.  And so, that's when the conversation began.  And so it, I didn't join immediately, you know, it took two, three months so, more than that before, he said, "Well, I want to, I want to be the one to sponsor you if you, if you want to join."  I said, "Well, I've got to be sure I passed the bar and get, get acclimated in terms of my job before I get distracted in terms of some other things," but that's, that's who--who sponsored me into the bar association at that time.
Story_ID: 661198
Speaker 1: Talk a little bit about the nature of your work at Atlantic Richfield [Atlantic Richfield Company; ARCO] when you started.  What, what did you do?
Speaker 2: Okay, the, the work that I did was primarily was on the environmental side offering opinions, either based upon that new Environmental Policy Act [National Environmental Policy Act of 1969] that had come out or working with one of the other lawyers on some of the litigation that the company had assigned to some of the outside counsel and most of that work was the, either research or the review of certain documents that had come in that had resulted from management having certain questions regarding the impact of the Environmental, the Environmental Policy Act or other related laws on their operation, that's primarily what the work was during that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We would get employment issues periodically and I worked with another, one of the senior lawyers on employment related issues that again had to do with review and research and opinions based upon certain personnel related issues that surfaced that had to be addressed, that was the first couple of years or so.  The environmental piece grew in terms of significance in terms of by virtue of the fact that I'd, I'd done some writing to be invited to the Canadian bar foundation [Canadian Bar Association], symposium that was in Calgary [Alberta, Canada] and was asked to be a panelist by one of our, our lawyers who was connected with Atlantic Richfield but who was office in, in Canada.  That was a pretty exciting little project.  So I got a chance to go up there for that, that particular project.  I took my wife [Rita White] up for that one too so she got a chance to see a little bit of Canada at that point.
Speaker 1: Now, now, that's in the Rockies [Rocky Mountains], right?  Calgary, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, yeah.  So, that was a bit, bit of information that, I guess, that I know the way I got support by the other lawyers that were a part of the Atlantic Richfield team that was important.  So I, it was comfortable.  What the, the, and of course I think, I have to commend them because when I received other offers that I felt necessary to accept, they were generally supportive.  It was like within the first couple of years, well actually, after about four years, was selected to become the president of the, president of the black cham- the Negro chamber at that time, Negro Chamber of Commerce [Dallas Negro Chamber of Commerce; Dallas Black Chamber of Commerce] which was a fairly distinguished crew but, but didn't have a lot of young, young, younger folk involved, lawyers so that became a mission that I guess I accepted and became the platform for a number of substantial changes that were made, that we made, meaning the chamber and its leadership made within the city.  Again, I was fortunate to have at least another couple of Atlantic Richfield persons who were also active with me on some of these projects.
Story_ID: 661199
Speaker 1: Now did the Negro Chamber of Commerce [Dallas Negro Chamber of Commerce] change their name eventually, to?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was one of the first initiatives that, and I brought you some materials so you could see, see that (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So they, did they become the Dallas Ft. Worth Minority Business Developing Council [Dallas Fort Worth Minority Supplier Development Council]?
Speaker 2: No, that's a different deal.
Speaker 1: That's a different thing?
Speaker 2: That's a different organization, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all together, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the Negro Chamber of Commerce became the Dallas Black Chamber of Commerce.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Dallas Black Chamber of Commerce.
Speaker 2: You know that, how we describe ourselves and all that is real important in terms of how we're received.
Speaker 1: Now, now the interesting thing here is that this is kind of late in the, in the, in terms of the rest of the country, Dallas [Texas] is lagging in this regard, you know, still being called a Negro or something at this stage (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, sure.
Speaker 1: --yeah, 'cause people started, I mean, the black power--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --yeah, discussions started '65 [1965]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and, you know, by 1969 or '70 [1970] at least (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --most people were talking about they're black--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --and James Brown's record, 'Black and I'm Proud' ['Say It Loud (I'm Black and I'm Proud)'] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'I'm Black and Proud,' yeah.
Speaker 1: --came out in '69 [1969]--
Speaker 2: Yeah, you understand what I'm saying.
Speaker 1: --summer of '69 [1969].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, so Dallas is '73 [1973], so Dallas is, decided to change and this is probably to be sure that more conservative leadership that they are the black businessmen and more concerned about, you know, not (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What it will do to their business.
Speaker 1: --yeah what's not going to rock the boat too much to make business.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well that was, that was, that was an attitude, you know, but you, I guess we, at that time, at my age, we were probably the youngest group that was coming in here but you were coming in and this case, at this time we were coming in with skills.  We were coming in with training--
Speaker 1: So, rather than just rhetoric, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh absolutely, yeah, because, at that time, I had the history so I could show you that, I was trying to pull some of that last night so you'd see that it was a timing in terms of whether black chamber was, or the Negro chamber was at that point.  At the time I was on there, we had formed another group called, the Committee of 100 [Dallas, Texas] and another group called the United for Action [Women of Dallas United for Action, Dallas, Texas].  That's, those were significant organizations because they consisted of the, the new, new citizens who had, younger citizens who had come to Dallas who had accepted corporate jobs.  The principal employer became, shortly after I got here, appeared to be IBM [International Business Machines Corporation] and Xerox [Xerox Corporation].  And so, that's when you began to see some young men in, in blue suits and white shirts and, you know, dressed up.  You didn't see that, that kind of profile unless people were going to church.  You didn't see that in the business community and you certainly didn't see it in downtown Dallas, okay.  So, out of that group of newcomers, and it wasn't just IBM and Xerox, a few other corporations came into the market at that point.  We were able to through their interest in trying to find some affiliation with some black organization, that they could connect with if it's no more than willing to get a haircut, a shop or to find what church to go to, you know, which is always what folk are looking for when they, when they begin to commute or they migrate to another city.  Out of that group you either developed what was known as the Committee of 100 and the United for Action.  The Committee of 100 was sponsored by the, by the Black Chamber at that time during the time I was there and that's, that's the organization that was creating forums to have discussions about our status, generally.
Story_ID: 661200
Speaker 1: This is a time when, I know Black Collegiate magazine [sic. Black Collegian], and other, Black Enterprise, were talking about the sunbelt and opportunities in the sunbelt, black folks from the northern cities after they got their degrees, were heading south to Dallas [Texas], Houston [Texas], Miami [Florida], Atlanta [Georgia], you know, a lot of that I know (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At that period?
Speaker 1: Yeah, oh yeah, early '70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: The people I knew that were coming out of college and I was a part of that, that group but I didn't go, go that way but so many people came to Houston, Dallas, Atlanta, Miami, New Orleans [Louisiana].
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, they were, they were coming in but, you know they in, in part, the business climate was encouraging that.  You see, nothing happens unless, and that's why I, I guess I, I stay so wedded and was so committed to the connection.  The things I've done has been because of the relationship that I try to forge or encourage the business community to take on as initiatives that would, would help us to begin to grow and thrive.  You know, we couldn't continue to, to operate in archaic ways that we had historically as a city and, and, and, and the message was to talk about business more than anything else, what does this do in terms of, of reforming the way Dallas is perceived and what does it do to attract other major business enterprises to relocate here and what do you have to offer to ensure that those who come who happen to be of a different ethnic persuasion are going to be comfortable and be able to be productive in the market, you know, that's, that's what gains attraction, I learned that early on.  And so when we talk about change, you know, it, they talk about it purely in black terms, doesn't get very far 'cause they, it's perceived to be just a selfish motive and nothing that's larger that's going, openly either help benefit the general public or enhance the economic status of that, that region.  So that's what we, the Committee of 100 [Dallas, Texas] was one that began to invite speakers in from out of, out of the city, those that were more vocal, those who had a message and those that could inspire people.  So that's what the Committee of 100 did.
Story_ID: 661201
Speaker 1: Who came to town to speak?  Who did you bring (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Ah, I see, you're going to ask me those questions.  I got that stuff but Lola Falana was one of 'em.  Any other, Andrew [ph.], I mean, any political leader that was vocal at that time became--
Speaker 1: So Jesse, Jesse [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] was big then--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --he was really big.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, Jesse was big then but Jesse was in and out of town periodically anyway.
Speaker 1: What about Earl Graves [HistoryMaker Earl G. Graves, Sr.]?  Did, did he come?
Speaker 2: I think Earl was one of our speakers too.  I have to check my list.  Here you've got to give me a chance to pull my list.  You've got me sitting in this chair and I've got a book that will show you exactly what, want to give you some good information.
Speaker 1: Okay, I just, just asking you off the top here (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) I know.
Speaker 1: I'm not trying to trap you.
Speaker 2: No, no I don't feel trapped, I don't feel trapped because I'm prepared to address it but I feel a lot more comfortable giving you something a little bit more substantive that will help you.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so was it, with Lola Falana coming in and--
Speaker 2: No, no I said Lola Falana.  Lola Falana was, frankly, Lola Falana was a sponsor for a company that my wife and I put together called, Amber Hues Cosmetiques [Amber Hues Cosmetiques, Inc.].
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: That's how she got here.  I don't know why I put her name in there.
Speaker 1: Okay, so around a business--
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: A business--
Speaker 2: Yeah, this was a business investment my wife and I made--
Speaker 1: --effort, okay, all right, yes.
Speaker 2: --to create an ethnic cosmetic line called Amber Hues Cosmetique and it stayed operational of about eight, nine, almost ten years.  We couldn't get the additional funding to continue to grow it so it was comparable to a Mary Kay [Mary Kay Inc.] but at a different level but we got to a number of markets early on that showed that there was a growing need and then, of course, Mary Kay began to develop their line.  Of course, they got, you know, when you drop 10million, $50 million into a market trying to make something happen, you can't, we can't com--we couldn't compete, okay, but that was, it was the same concept.  So they, anyway, that was a personal venture between Rita [Rita White] and I and we got some, some strong support early on from some of the locals in the community, Anglos in the community for that venture.  It wasn't enough but it, Larry [Larry Crowe], let me tell you, even one person as an advisor who helped a little bit was Maurice Stans.  You remember him?  He was secretary of commerce.
Speaker 1: Right, right, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He came, paid a visit, he was, he was encouraged to try to find a way to support it.  He rallied a few other folk to offer some support, it wasn't enough, you know.  If it was a million dollars that would have been great, probably would have got us over the next little level but it was helpful at the time 'cause we, we needed some seed money that we didn't have to get into the next six months to a year.  The point was, he expressed that interest and some of that was inspired by some of our local friends who happened to be Anglo here in the market who had taken a look and was trying to serve as advisors for that, that business.  There's a family by the name of Jack Lowe who you will find in some of my material was the, one of the persons that I worked with, with the Dallas Alliance, who was instrumental in forging an agreement among African Americans, Hispanics and blacks that we thought could help resolve the school desegregation issue, that's a little bit later on but that's where that relationship forged.  Jack Lowe, Sr. was one of the--had earned the respect of other Anglo business persons in the communities so he was put up for some of the hard tasks and that is trying to figure a way to communicate in some cases what the various constituencies that were in that black and Hispanic community.  Some trust was built after some testing of him in terms of some of these issues that we worked on but that was an organization that the judge at that time ordered us to collaborate to see if we could help look at the--this constituency and find if there's some common way to offer some changes within the educational system that would, that might bring up- bring upon, bring about a settlement of the case.
Story_ID: 661202
Speaker 1: I think off camera we were talking about how the Committee of, of 100--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --was composed of African Americans just coming to the city [Dallas, Texas] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Let's, let's talk, let's talk about that a moment because just, just to me, that's a significant cadre of intellect that emerged in the city about the same time that I arrived and shortly thereafter.  The city became more visible after I, after I got here in '71 [1971], '72 [1972] because I began to see young men downtown, occasionally, in blue suits, white shirts, I didn't see that before, okay, and although there was a corporate sector here, mostly in the banking industry, 'cause that's where, how the city was managed and became really the major banking sector of the southwest, I did see a lot of African Americans and probably if you go back and research to see well what was the employment pattern at that time, it will tell you something that will probably not likely contradict what I've shared, okay (laughter).  So, it seems to me that along, along the lines of, of research that at some time I'm sure it's already printed, we would want to know why did it take so long and what role did, was played and why, why, what were the goals to, to achieve some of the business goals that we had.  But anyway, the Committee of 100 [Dallas, Texas] consisted of those young men who had arrived in the city and that were connected with businesses and corporations at the point, at that point, and out of frustration, of course, we, we would meet at local bar or restaurant, happened to be African American at that time so that we could at least get together and socialize and find out really what do we need to do to survive and thrive.
Speaker 1: Now, now this is, it struck me, you said is a committee of young men, no, the women weren't involved at this point with this--
Speaker 2: No, we've--two organizations were formed and that's, that's an appropriate question because you know if young men got together and women were not a part of that, even at that point, someone would raise the issue, why are we not invited in because we were a part of the, of the Black Chamber [Dallas Black Chamber of Commerce] or the Negro Chamber [Dallas Negro Chamber of Commerce], some of them were at that time, why don't we form a committee that would accommodate our interest and our needs which we think are similar.  And so the United, group called the United for Action [Women of Dallas United for Action, Dallas, Texas] was formed to accommodate the female side of business.
Speaker 1: Okay, so United for Action--
Speaker 2: United for Action is the name of the organization.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right.
Speaker 2: See my, my, my--
Speaker 1: And did both work, groups work together?
Speaker 2: On some things.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but, but for the most part, we, you know, we, we worked separately.  We, we cosponsored certain events that took place and that brought some great input from, from a much needed segment when you begin to have activities and you bring in personalities that you want to be supported, okay, and these were the kind of activities that were sponsored were those activities that were educational that could, could enhance our knowledge of what's going on in the rest of the country or what's going on politically or what's going on in terms of school desegregation or what other practice should we be adopting so that we can make more progress in the areas that we said we have an interest.
Story_ID: 661203
Speaker 1: Was Dallas [Texas] a part of the--the black community in Dallas a part of the National Black Political Assembly that, that started in '72 [1972] in Gary [Indiana], I mean, were they, were they a part of that national movement?
Speaker 2: Well, you see, you have to give me a specific name.  I can tell you that, you know, some of our ministers had been, have been keeping up with certain activities that had been taken place over the years and that connection often is through the denominations.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And Dr. Haynes [HistoryMaker Reverend Frederick Douglass Haynes, III] probably could give you some of that information because he's researched a lot of that--
Speaker 1: I know we mentioned it yesterday.  I can't remember a lot about the specifics but he was aware of it and he was, he was very young at the time.
Speaker 2: Yeah I know, that's right but, you know, the only, what we would hear about would be through the, the conventions that the churches often happen which provided another vehicle to have a good exchange of information and the reason I was familiar with it was because Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] was, was a base for convening the Baptist conventions on campus and that's when we got somewhat of a more realistic view of what our spiritual leaders thought about and what their commitments were to certain ideologies and initiatives that were being sponsored.
Speaker 1: Okay now you didn't, you didn't think I meant the National Baptist Convention [National Baptist Convention, UCA, Inc.]?  I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I knew--
Speaker 1: --I was talking about the national black political convention in Gary.
Speaker 2: I know you didn't but, but I was merely raising that--
Speaker 1: Okay, in Gary, yeah, all right, okay.
Speaker 2: --in terms of bringing back the connection between Hampton and what it often did and what we sometimes had access to in terms of information, in fact that it hosted the, sometime the religious conferences in Hampton or on campus occasionally which gave us an education that we normally would not get.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Be that--have you need read it but it's, it was important.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right, okay.  So, so--
Speaker 2: Let me get, sorry I took you off track on--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Go ahead.  You were, you were going to--you were following a particular line (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I was just asking a question, I may have taken you off track, I hope I didn't, but--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 661204
Speaker 1: You were telling us about the Committee of 100 [Dallas, Texas]--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and I asked you about the women's participation and we, and we mentioned United for Action [Women of Dallas United for Action, Dallas, Texas] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Ye- United for Action, right.
Speaker 1: --as a counterpart--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you know but with a separate, but both are relation are separate, they're really not working, I guess they're, they worked together on some things but not--
Speaker 2: No, I would have to say that, yes, collective--collectively on some issues but it just served as a forum for both a male organization and a female organization, to, to, to kind of make it to meet and to make, try to assess the issues in terms of where they stand versus where we stand in terms of some of the, not only political but economic issues that we wanted to discuss and or pursue.
Speaker 1: And to say to be fair today, as we sit here in 2017--it probably--these organizations would not exist separately like this, I mean, not today, not 2017--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --but in those days--
Speaker 2: No, no, no, I would, I wouldn't say they would not exist--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --because they in fact do exist.  You still got the sororities and fraternities--
Speaker 1: Well that's true.
Speaker 2: --okay.
Speaker 1: That's true.
Speaker 2: Same, same, same deal.  I mean maybe a different focus but it is a different focus in many cases but, but yeah, they do exist and, you know, they continue to grow with agendas that, what, support the females and fraternities with agendas that support male and male activities, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I, you know, you're making me think about this now in a different way.  I, you know, I know that fraternities and sororities have a social agenda and they have a service agenda and we've always speculated that the social was higher than the service but some say the service is higher than--the fraternities will tell you and sororities will say the service is higher than the social (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, absolutely.
Speaker 1: But I don't, you know, the reason for the, the separation, though, seems to be more social than service, you know, but--
Speaker 2: Well, what they, ask yourself why.  I mean, why was that?  I mean, I think everything evolves the way it does because of, there may not be any other vehicle to ensure the coming together and relating to your peer group in ways that you, you've often feel comfortable and as a means of, I guess, developing some self worth and, and finding other ways of leveraging constituency bases to do other projects within your respective communities but, no, we, that still exists and they're becoming bigger and stronger, you know what I mean.  They, you haven't heard anything about a merger between fraternities and sororities in--
Speaker 1: No, right.
Speaker 2: No, no, you're not going to see that, you know, 'cause it has probably other, other purposes that, special purposes that services that respected constituency group.  I think all the fraternities I'm, you know, I'm a part of the Boule [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity], been part of that for, since 1976, and always had some concerns about how we, how we have either grown or not grown but we've grown substantially now in the last twenty years.  I like to think I've been a part of that, that, that growth and the initiatives that have been taken to hopefully be sure that we create priorities that are in the best interest of quote, our community, I mean that ethnic community which has always generally been on the low end--receiving end of, of much of what we pursue, right?
Story_ID: 661205
Speaker 1: I can say this now.  I'm, I'm thinking about what you, you asked just now and I'm thinking just right, right, thinking as a person that studies history or hears a lot of history, that I don't think, I mean we have these gender specific organizations now but they're rooted in the past.  They're rooted in a, they developed in the past.
Speaker 2: Oh, they sure did (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) There are very few, and even though they may be thriving now, there are very few that are starting, that they're being started today.  I mean if you were to start a, an economic organization, a Committee of 100 today in Dallas [Texas] from scratch, I doubt if they would be all men or all women or, you know.  I think it would be like probably a combination today.
Speaker 2: I think, I think, I think you're probably right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But because these sororities or fraternities are rooted in--
Speaker 2: In the past?
Speaker 1: --in the, yeah, way back in the past (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The way they originators.
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Speaker 2: The founding are the originators.
Speaker 1: --where people quite naturally thought of organizations as being like gender specific, you know, though there were organizations that were mixed but they, even when, within the church, you have like a steward board, a stewardess, you know everything is like cut, you know, and women didn't get in the pulpit and, you know, that's for the preacher, the man is, you know, it's, it's, you know, women would say that's sexism, you know, historic sexism but it's, you know, it, that's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Clearly you haven't, you have to spread gingerly, you know.  You're kind of tipping around.  I want you to just, we'll just talk, we need to just talk about these things, it's going to be recorded.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right.
Speaker 2: But, but no, you're right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, all right.
Speaker 2: You're right.  I guess, it depends upon how you define the timing and how you define one institution, they're all institutions as a resource and we don't always create a resource to achieve all goals, you know, and so in our mind we have to begin to define where, not only our alliances are but which one of them provide us the most value in terms of our individual pursuits, you know.  So, that, that's what I, I think, we found at the time in this market, according to the demographics, that a Committee of 100 was needed.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 661206
Speaker 1: It was obviously needed because we had a black, a Negro chamber [Dallas Negro Chamber of Commerce; Dallas Black Chamber of Commerce] at that time that had been started by some very substantial African American leadership and had existed for a number of years up to that period of time which, the time that we came in, the executive director was going to, will resign and the finances were at a very low end and they weren't even sure that they could pay the next staff person to stay on board, that's where that was (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now this, yeah, now this is, let me just interject here, that this was a time in the early '70s [1970s] where we really starting to see the effects of integration on black business.  A lot of black businesses that existed on the street level in black communities were closing down 'cause people were going elsewhere with their money because they were allowed to, you know, were allowed to do more than we were allowed to do in the '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s].  And so with the struggles in the '60s [1960s], by the '70s [1970s], people are, are taking their money to the mall and not going on Fifth Street [Fifth Street Historic District, Lynchburg, Virginia] or, or, you know, the, the commercial strips in the black community anymore.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so you--
Speaker 2: It's (unclear).
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: I think that's what, you know, they're marching now so those chambers of commerces are, are imploding because they can't, they don't have anybody, they don't have any business anymore.  You don't, you don't have the same level of--
Speaker 1: You say they're imploding?
Speaker 2: Well they don't have the same commitment from the black community--
Speaker 1: No, no.
Speaker 2: --that they used to have.
Speaker 1: No, no, you're right, you're right and I think that varies in each commercial metropolitan area depending on where you go.  I think at different times, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah, the times are maybe different but the same thing is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, they are.  I think, you see, you see, Texas is what two years behind, wasn't it?
Speaker 2: Well, I forget.
Speaker 1: You understand, so what I'm telling you, everybody else has already surpassed us in terms of consciousness, in terms of the implementation of law.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and what you're saying, the new successful black business person in Dallas [Texas] then is coming and working for IBM [International Business Machines Corporation], they're working for Xerox [Xerox Corporation], they're working for, I mean, in your case with, with ARCO [Atlantic Richfield Company]--
Speaker 1: ARCO, um-hm.
Speaker 2: --you know, and they're not, you know, they're not entrepreneurs starting their own--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: --you know.
Speaker 1: No, no that's right.  They're, they're coming in, there's a corporate, a new corporate sector--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --a new corporate breed that understands, and business principles and look at every, every transaction or every organized entity in that light, you know.  What's the goals, you know, what's the process, what's the end objective to be achieved, you know.  What's the staffing required?  Was the funding required?  What's the budget?  You know, that's a different, slightly different thinking that, I think, was verbalized.  So when you begin to look at where we are, we say, well comparatively, at least at that time, what our stores, will the stores that we had were stores that we're catering to, to our population, but you know, you always had beauty salons, you know, in every market and so I guess systemic enterprise that you're going to always find at different degrees.
Speaker 2: Or that funeral homes and beauty salons then (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You're going to have funeral homes, yeah.
Speaker 2: --and the barbershops--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --those weren't encroached upon then but--
Speaker 1: No, but they're--
Speaker 2: --they're starting to be now.
Speaker 1: --but they're being encroached upon, you got it.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: You're absolutely right and if you look around the country now you'll see that there's some other, there's a lot of crossover and you say, "Why in the hell, why they going to bother, bother with that business," you know but, you know, if you're a business person I guess you look at where, either the low hanging food is, where you think you can bring an impact on the market and that's what's beginning to happen.  Now, so, you know, you could, you could crossover and use that same analogy even in my profession which, you know, we're challenged.  You say, "Why in the hell are they challenged, they've got a used market out here?"  Well that's, that's true but it's been encroached upon like every other market, you know.  If it's a matter of pricing, folk will price it down, folk will go and, because of ethnicity, to where they think the, the delivery of goods may be better, right.  And so, you know, you may or you may not get it if you're looking at, looking for the business along ethnic lines so you can't, you can no longer, you cannot, no longer treat an enterprise even if it's African American owned or managed or whatever the case may be or Hispanic.  You have to look at how you can be competitive with the next guy that's out there even for your market, so it's tough.
Story_ID: 661207
Speaker 1: At any rate (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) discussion point (laughter).
Speaker 1: --but the Committee of, of 100 is, you know, so the Committee of 100 [Dallas, Texas] is, is doing--
Speaker 2: Let me, let me get back to that 'cause you--
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah.
Speaker 2: --I'm glad you're fixed on that because that is, had been a forum for a number of years that effectively had begun, begun to educate the African American market in terms of its status as compared to other metropolitan areas and that although Dallas [Texas], I know Texas got the, the freedom call in March two years late, that meant we had a lot of catching up to do in terms of educating our people, in terms of rights and privileges that you should be insisting upon which also applied to the school desegregation issue that had begun to surface and was in the forefront of everything during that time that began in the late '60s [1960s], okay.  So there was a need for these new business type that were in the city to help the community, generally, to make more prudent decisions in terms of options that were being offered that may not truly offer value even in education.  I don't know if that makes any sense.
Story_ID: 661208
Speaker 1: What was going on in terms of school desegregation in Dallas [Texas] then; were they, had they started busing in '73 [1973] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, they're trying to decide how they, how to bus at that point.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay.
Speaker 2: No.  You know busing had been floated around but everything was obviously against any kind of busing at that point 'cause they had, had no real plan, okay.  So that's why it was a thirty year struggle to try to get, get the leadership in the city to recognize that there was no other option 'cause you had federal mandate that this is what had to happen.  And so that went up and down the, the legal trail for years, all the way to the [U.S.] Supreme Court, okay, before the leadership recognized well after being told, well, there's no other option, you, you've got to do something that's going to comport with the law and then of course, you know, concessions were made but, in some cases, you know, careers had been built in that twenty-five, thirty year period, fighting it or ignoring it, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well meanwhile in Boston [Massachusetts] they're turning over buses and fighting and everybody's--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: It's in full swing, you know, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah but I think ultimately what happened is that the reputation of the city was marred by that attitude to the extent that major corporations could no longer attract talent into the market and it became more costly trying to persuade folk that, you know, Dallas is a fair and open minded city and that it's going to give you a good shot and you got every opportunity to, to progress here, if you come here with, and get involved, you know that didn't always prove true.
Story_ID: 661209
Speaker 1: Well, continue on with the Committee of 100 [Dallas, Texas] and, and the other, you know, organizational attempts by the black community here to pull themselves together which it sounds, it really sounds exciting.  I didn't really know this discussion we get into that like that but this is really something that's interesting because it, it proves that, I mean it paints a picture of people coming to Dallas [Texas] with more on their mind than just, you know, the job that they have, you know, and how to climb in that little job, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah well, yeah.  I think, I think you're right because I think that the folk--we generally will recognize the disparity and how that disparity impacts your family at every level, okay, and then these people that are coming in are not childless so they don't remain childless very long and so therefore automatically they become concerned with what's the status of the educational system and the reports were constantly showing that there was great disparity within the educational system, great disparity geographically in terms of where you live and the amenities that were available to you.  That discussion is still going on today, okay, and the solutions are being offered in different ways but, you know, unless it has some stroke behind it and the leadership, and we understand the leadership base that helps to move a city or town or whatever it may be, it becomes, you don't see much evidence of change, you know.  So, you know, during the years, we, had a sheet I want to show you that some of the leadership that we've had here in the city that has been instrumental in, instrumental in making that change.  This will show you some information here of the history of Dallas, facts in elected office from '65 [1965] to '85 [1985] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, hold it up just for a second just to, so people can see what we're referring to but this is, yeah.  So this is from the, what paper is this?
Speaker 2: This would be the Dallas Morning News.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right.
Speaker 2: See right here, Dallas Morning News--
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah.
Speaker 2: --is when that was published.
Speaker 1: All right.  When was it?
Speaker 2: Can you see?  Blacks found, found rum in the political arena and it was, it was giving you the period between 1965 and 1985.  That's when, this does--not including every political office, but this is some of the major political officers that had been elected to office during that period.
Story_ID: 661210
Speaker 1: Where were politics when you arrived?  I mean, did we, how many elected officials were, were here in the city [Dallas, Texas]?
Speaker 2: Oh Jesus, I can't give you the count off the top of my head (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or, or was it, or were there, I assume it's grown since then or whether, there weren't many?
Speaker 2: No, it has, no but he--
Speaker 1: Were there any, you know?
Speaker 2: Yeah, here let me, that's a good question.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I can, I can't, can't, I can tell you that the ones that were in office appointed at certain periods early on.  For example, it started with Dallas City Council, C.A. Galloway was appointed February '67 [1967].  A lot of them were appointed in order to try to offset that, that, that opposition that was constantly being raised in respect to the leadership in the city.  So they began to appoint someone, so C.A. Galloway was appointed in 1967 and he served, you know, for a short period.  You had George Allen [George L. Allen] was elected to the city council and they've got buildings named after George Allen now, this was in 1968 and he served until 1975.  You've got Lucy Patterson who was in the '70s [1970s], that's '73 [1973].  She was, served on the city council at that time.  Juanita Craft who, each of these were advocates in some way who got the attention of the leadership and the support by the black community were appointed or elected to positions at that time, this is in the '70s [1970s].  We had Fred Blair [Fred L. Blair] who was elected in 1980 and you had Elsie Faye Heggins elected in 1980--correction, yeah, 1980 also.  Al Lipscomb, who's one of the, been one of the most vocal males that served, he was later elected in 1994 although he was a perennial advocate, he was always at the city council meetings regardless of who was in office.  He was the one that was always raising the issues regarding, well, what's happening to the money, why's there not a fair allocation, why we're not being appointed to boards and commissions, that was Al Lipscomb, okay, and he just passed not so long ago.  Diane Ragsdale, she's still, still around.  She was elected in 1984, now this is later on but I gave you some that were elected in early 1970s, that was the basic leadership on the Dallas City Council at that time.  I'll give you, we've got a congressperson, still have a congressperson, congressman [HistoryMaker] Eddie Bernice Johnson, who's still in office.  She, of course, came on as the representative for District 33 [Texas House District 33].  She was elected in 1972, okay.  Now she's, she's still in office.  We have others who are state legislative representatives.  First African American male that won a seat down there was Joseph Lockridge [Joseph E. Lockridge], he's a lawyer and Joseph died in 1968, shortly after he got in, got in position in 1966 but he was one of the first African Americans to serve in the state legislative- lature [Texas Legislature] and, of course, Zan Holmes [Zan Wesley Holmes, Jr.], you'll, anybody you talk to around here can tell you about Zan.  Zan is still extremely active but he is kind of the godfather in terms of elected officers because of the time that he served which he was elected first in 1968 and served until 1972 but he's still very prominent in the Methodist denomination and has one of the more prominent churches in the city.  The others that are noted here, I guess compared to other cities it may seem like a small group but would be Sam Hudson [Samuel Hudson III] who was first elected in 1972 and you had Clay Smothers who was elected in 1976, served till 1980.  Lanell Cofer who served from '78 [1978] to '82 [1982].  Jesse Oliver who's still around.  He was elected in 1982 but currently he's working for the transportation authority which is DART [Dallas Area Rapid Transit], so he's no longer doing that.  He's, he's a former lawyer, served on the bench for a short period of time.  That's the, that's the state legislature.  My, my, this is the group here with judges.  We had Larry Baraka [Larry W. Baraka] who was also a state criminal district judge elected in 1984.  I was appointed in 1983 and served for two years.  We had Berlaind Brashear who was also appointed in 1977 and he served 19--well, I said, I shouldn't say appointed, and elected in 1978.  He's no longer in, in position.  Joan Winn [Joan Tarpley Winn], who's a young lady who served early on in 1978, she was appointed to the, to the bench and she's no longer serving on the bench at this point.  We've had some outstanding school board [Dallas Independent School District] members, Emmett Conrad [Emmett J. Conrad], Joe Kirby [ph.], Kathlyn Gilliam, Robert Price [Robert E. Price], Robert Hester [Robert H. Hester] and the State Board of Education, we had Emmett Conrad, who was appointed.  Now that just, I wanted to go through that 'cause I hate to mention just a couple and somebody will say well, God, he didn't mention so and so and so but that was from the publication, was the source, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 661211
Speaker 1: Did the Committee of 100 [Dallas, Texas] and the United for Action [Women of Dallas United for Action, Dallas, Texas] group really facilitate these, you know, some of these campaigns and these appointments?
Speaker 2: I can, I can say, they were actively participating.  I wouldn't say that they were taking the sole leadership on those, okay, because there were other political organizations that had been formed that often took the leadership on some of these organizations.  They would contribute money, they would support 'em in other kinds of ways--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but there was, we had political organizations, Progressive Voters League [Democratic Progressive Voters League], for example, that often took the front leadership on getting some of these candidates in office and trying to help with the funding, okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, was there an overarching meeting of the interested groups to, you know, push, you know, a black political agenda in Dallas [Texas]?
Speaker 2: Was there an overarching meeting--
Speaker 1: Yeah, like where everybody get together under one banner to do something or at least one meeting to, to figure out who's going to do what to get--
Speaker 2: Yeah, there were, there were meetings that were conducted but a lot of the meetings that took on some traction were by the religious organizations, at least.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's the ministerial alliances that we have in the city, okay.  I represented the, the ministerial alliance [Interdenominational Ministers' Alliance of Greater Dallas] here, probably about ten years I sat under Zan's [Zan Wesley Holmes, Jr.] leadership and I always felt that the ministerial alliances had tremendous influence and stroke because they communicated with the congregations on, on a regular basis and they had a substantial constituency that pretty much remained in place and they became a source for insuring that new information that needs to be shared was shared hopefully throughout their respective congregations.  So the ministerial alliances have, I think, still are fairly important in influential organizations within the City of Dallas.  There are, you know, democratic associations and other political associations that have formed but they don't always have the same kind of constituency that the ministerial alliance had, have within the black community.
