Story_ID: 659157
Speaker 1: Do you call yourself Carrie or Carrie Mae?
Speaker 2: Carrie is fine.
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay.
Speaker 2: Or Ms. Weems (laughter).
Speaker 1: Ms. Weems, yes. So I'd like to begin by slating today, I am your interviewer [HistoryMaker] Harriette Cole. Isaac Feldman's the videographer, Matthew Hickey is observing.  I'd love for you to say and spell your name, and tell us today's date and where we are.
Speaker 2: My name is Carrie, [HistoryMaker] Carrie Mae Weems. That's spelled C-A-R-R-I-E, M-A-E, W-E-E-M-S.  We are in, at 4 Time Square [sic. 4 Times Square] a beautiful day in Manhattan [New York, New York].  I think its September 9th, September 9th, 2000 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tenth.
Speaker 2: September 10th, 2014. Wednesday.
Speaker 1: Wonderful.
Speaker 2: Three fifteen [3:15].
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Four, twenty, fifty-three [April 20, 1953], Portland, Oregon.
Story_ID: 659158
Speaker 1: So I'd love to start with some People magazine type questions.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Would you tell me what your favorite food is?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) My favorite--popcorn. I'm a big popcorn fan.
Speaker 1: Wonderful, and your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: I love them all.  I love the seasons.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color.
Speaker 2: I'm not sure, but I do love chartreuse and yellows and burnt co- burnt orange and those sort, those sort of tones. Deep red.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I don't have one; I've been many places.  I'm open to the world, so I like many places, and I go to many places.
Speaker 1: Your favorite phrase or saying.
Speaker 2: I'm not sure if I have one.  I'm not sure if I have a favorite phrase or a favorite saying.
Story_ID: 659159
Speaker 1: I'd like to just start with your family, would you please tell me your mother's name and date of--date and place of birth? And tell me about her.
Speaker 2: Well my mother, her name's Carrie [Carrie Polk Weems], so I'm named after my mom, and she was born in Clarksdale, Mississippi. In maybe 1935, she's seventy-nine years old now, so I think it's 1935, 1936 something like that.  I was actually just talking about her, about this with her on Sunday.  Very powerful woman and very kind, very sweet and also very tough; but is this sort of extraordinary woman.  Like many of the women in her family who are clearly there, ready and always for their children.  I could do no wrong in my mother's eye that would allow her to turn her back on me for a moment.  And that I find extraordinary.  So she's such--she's a really interesting person.  My father [Myrlie Weems] for a long time was, loomed so large, was so bright, that for a long time I really didn't see my mother because she was very quiet in a way in the background.  But once she emerged, and I really saw the depth of who she was, I was pretty--pretty blown away.  And, and now my mother is--though she's not the oldest woman in her family she's, she is the matriarch of her family.  She is, she is her mother's mother, you know.  And so she's a very interesting person with very deep passion very deep conviction, very spiritual, very focused and I learn a great deal from her as a woman.  I'm very proud to call her my mother.
Speaker 1: And she grew up in Clarksdale, you said?
Speaker 2: They grew up in Clarksdale, Mississippi, yes.
Speaker 1: Do--can you tell me about her growing up years?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother comes from, from a huge family.  The Mullen and Polk family, which is my, my sort of maternal family, they all lived in Mississippi.  They were all sharecroppers in Mississippi.  Her mother Ozzie [Ozzie Mullen Polk], was a--an extraordinary woman and of course I knew my grandmother very, very well, Ozzie.  And her mother Bessie [Bessie Mullen], I knew very well, my great-grandmother who I also love and adored.  They were really a very tight knit family.  At a certain point my grandfather [Elbert Polk], who was both black and Jewish, who passed physically for white; decided that it was really time to move the family out of Mississippi and to another place. And they found Oregon and eventually the entire family, the entire extended family along with my father's family, the Weems fam- family made their way to Portland, Oregon.  But they were very, very tightly connected.  My mother has ten brothers and sisters.  My great-grandmother had fourteen children, and, and, they coalesced into a very, very tight clan.  And they have moved together, and they all live together, they all live in the same neighborhoods, they all live in the same community, and they see one another constantly.  So, so growing up I rarely had lots of other friends because I have all of my, my cousins, my nieces, my nephews.  I had this huge family that was deeply connected that was always together.  And they still live their lives very much that way.  So that was her background, coming from a very tight knit family, wonderful mother and father working together.
Story_ID: 659160
Speaker 1: My father [Myrlie Weems] and his seven brothers lived across the street from my mother [Carrie Polk Weems] and her six sisters.  And so the Weems boys were all determined that they were going to get one of those pretty Polk girls.  And so several of my father's, my father and his brothers married my mother and her sisters.  And then my grandfather said, "Enough."
Speaker 2: Well, you said that that your parents worked together.  Were they both sharecroppers?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And so can you describe that work, how they talked about their work?
Speaker 1: Well there's, there's you know, I have, I've of course talked about this in many places.  And have done many interviews around it and I've also written about it I think as well, but they were, they were deep sharecroppers and my father talks, talks most about it.  My father was the storyteller in the family.  So my father talked more about what that experience was like and there's a really great--I have some great interviews with my father talking about this part of his life as a sharecropper in the South and what it was like, and I used a portion of it in this fabulous film ['Lincoln, Lonnie, and Me,' Carrie Mae Weems] that I made actually.  And my father and using his voice as the, the sort of over narrative to the Civil War.   I'd been filming Civil War reenactments for a while, and my father talks about the sort of--the way in which when they were coming up that they would play with all the young kids.  The young white kids that were there because they were they're--they're the, the children of the, of the owner of the plantation.  And then the certain point when they got to be about nine or ten years old they had to start calling them (laughter) Ms. Pauline [ph.].  It was like, you know, it was just eight, eight year old kids, you have to call Ms. Pauline 'cause she's white and you're black, you know.  And my father and I really sort of laugh about, about sort of the ridiculousness of, of the circumstance the situation.  But I must tell you that one of the great stories and if I, if I cry a little bit you have to forgive me.  One of the great stories my cousin told me about my father was that--she said, "Carrie Mae [HistoryMaker Carrie Mae Weems], so we were stuck on this plantation.  We were stuck on this plantation we couldn't get out.  So I was staying with Grandmamma Weems [ph.] and, and so when we were there, and it was in the winter and it was just cold, horrible.  And girl one night your daddy he stole back onto the plantation in the middle of the night, and he got us up, he got us out of there, Carrie Mae.  We got up honey, and we ran, we ran all the way through those fields and over through those hills.  We didn't have time to get dressed, we didn't have time to put our shoes on, and that's what you daddy did for me.  He got me off that plantation."  I mean right, so you know it's like, wow. That's like just a couple years ago (laughter).  So it's like this sort of full and rich and very dynamic history.  I think, you know you asked me earlier like what is the one thing that--what's the one saying that you think about what's your favorite saying?  And I think the thing, the thing that's comes to me (crying) that's come to me, is my father says to me.  "Every day you get up, and you put on your pants and you wash yourself and you dress yourself and you prepare for the day.  You prepare to live, every day."  And so on my deepest days when I have a problem (crying) it's the thing that I hold onto, the thing that propels me forward.  And I must say it's, it's what all of my work is.  It's all about that, just being propelled forward and finding a way and preparing yourself for making a way when there appears to be no way, you know.  Affining that lining, affining that space that allows you to move and to be prepared for it every day.  So yeah.
Story_ID: 659161
Speaker 1: Tell me your father's name.
Speaker 2: My father, my father's name is, is Myrlie, M-Y-R-L-I-E.  Myrlie Weems.  Myrlie Weems, he died maybe, my father died twelve years ago, twelve years ago.  I don't remember the exact date of his death or the day of his death.  I think I was too distraught.  I was too distraught to revisit it, I just know that this light in my life was gone one day.  And, and that is was sort of amazing.  And that--you know it was, it was all right because you know, there was so much a part of him that was really in me.  That I can so feel, you know, I can feel, I can feel my father's blood in me, and it helps me a lot.
Story_ID: 659162
Speaker 1: When you look back at your parents, and your, your family history, how far back can you trace your mother's family or your father's? Can, can you go back to slavery?
Speaker 2: Well you know, essentially, essentially you know, they were just you know, just a half step removed really.  So, my father [Myrlie Weems], of course, would not call himself a slave, nor my mother [Carrie Polk Weems].  But they understood what they were in for sure, and they understood the meaning of that.  So I can go back to my great, my great-great-grandparents.  On my mother's side and my father's side but that's about as far as we can go, as far as I can go.
Speaker 1: And were--through each generation were they all sharecroppers?
Speaker 2: Well, sharecropping really became sort of what it was in the '30s [1930s] and so, so that's when they came along, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  You, you described the, both families leaving Mississippi to go to Oregon, do you know how they learned of Oregon?
Speaker 2: Yes, through my aunt.  My aunt [Weems' maternal great aunt] Avie, Avie Mullen Smith.  The last of the Mullen clan who, who passed away several years ago actually again on my mother's side.  Avie decided that she was gonna--they were on a, they were on a trip and for some reason she and her best friend went to Portland, Oregon.  And they love it, she got there and she love it and she called from, from Portland, too, too--back to Mississippi.  And she said, "I think I've found the place for our family.  It's beautiful, and I think we need to come and check it out."  And so a couple of my uncles along with my [maternal] grandfather [Elbert Polk] they drove out to Portland, they had a look around.  They looked at property; they said, "Hey, okay we'll do it."  And little by little the entire family over the course of about six years the entire family, about two hundred people or so moved to Portland, Oregon.  They moved as a group, so twenty would come, and they'd send money and the next group would come.  And my mother, my mother, and her sister who were married to my father and his brother were the last to actually come, they were the last to come (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Why is that?
Speaker 2: There's a small group that stayed in, in Mississippi.  But, but the vast majority of, of the family moved.
Speaker 1: Do you know why your mother and her sister were the last?
Speaker 2: Oh, well they, they married.  They married; they were married.  They were young women, they married and my mother said, "But there goes my, there goes my family," (laughter) right?  And so they decided that they would follow as well, that they weren't going to stay behind.
Speaker 1: And did the Weems family apart from the husbands follow?
Speaker 2: Not completely no, no, no.  Primarily my father and four of his brothers, four of his brother who were very--deeply connected to the Polk family moved along with the Polks and the Mullens.  But the rest of the Weems stayed in the South and in, they stayed in Clarksdale [Mississippi] and then in, in Memphis; Memphis, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: So they moved to Portland, what opportunities were there for them in Portland?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm not really sure.  I think that you know, that land was cheap, it was away from the South, it was beautiful.  And my grandfather, because of my grandfather's ability to float he's was like, you know he could like float, he could free float.  So basically my entire family worked for my grandfather.  My grandfather started a janitorial business, and we all worked for my grandfather for many, many years.   They owned restaurants, and we all worked in the restaurants also that my grandfather owned along with my, my aunts, so it was a family, it was a family affair.  I don't really know any other reason, other, other than that for them making that decision to come to Portland.  Other than it was beautiful, they could, that they did, and that they, and that they thrived there.
Speaker 1: And when did this move happen over what years (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It started in the '50s [1950s],
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Nineteen--I think probably the, probably the first few moved out maybe in '49 [1949].
Story_ID: 659163
Speaker 1: Your parents [Carrie Polk Weems and Myrlie Weems] moved as a married couple?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But you were born in Portland [Oregon]?
Speaker 2: I was born in Portland, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, can--do--what is your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: I was just writing about this the other day.  I have two deep memories that are, that are inextricably connected.  And one is, I'm--I was probably three, three or four, three or four years old.  And I'm walking down a flight of stairs, and there's this really beautiful stream of light that's passing through our window, through the windows.  So that you could see, you could see the dust in the air, right, you know you could just sort of see this movement in the air.  And I remember, I remember like reaching up and trying to eat it, all right.  Trying to sort of consume this beauty that I saw floating in the air and then continuing on down, continuing on down the stairs.  Continuing on down the stairs and then walking around the, going down the corridor down the hallway, making a right hand turn walking toward the living room.  But I think this is now, now a few years have gone by, right.  So that was my first memory of descending the stairs, of walking into our living room and sitting in the living room was an Abe Lincoln [President Abraham Lincoln] impersonator sitting in our living room.  And I, I seem to recall that there was some sort of centennial that was happening.  A centennial was taking place and my aunts and my [maternal] grandmother [Ozzie Mullen Polk] they were all dressed up in these sort of long dresses and billowing blouses.  And somehow I think that this Lincoln impersonator must have been somehow associated with that.  But I just remember standing at the door and just, just gazing upon this, this tall man sitting at our house with the with the stove, the stove what is, stovepipe hat.  Sitting in the living room, looking just like an Abe, Abe Lincoln in a big chair, really crazy.  Those were my two first serious and deep memories.
Story_ID: 659164
Speaker 1: I want you to think back on the home where you grew up, the neighborhood.  Can you tell me what sights, sounds and smells you remember?
Speaker 2: Oh well I lived across the street from, I lived on Flint [Avenue] and Page [Street].  I lived across the street from my, my grammar school, my grade school where I went to kindergarten.  And my--I lived in a big beautiful house that was on the corner surrounded by fruit trees; pears, apples and plums, and we had chickens in our yard.  My mother [Carrie Polk Weems] was always out feeding chickens; we had a chicken coop in our yard.  And my [maternal] grandparents lived across the street, and their home lived another, you know, another generation right, so we were all together.  And then next to, to door to my grandmother [Ozzie Mullen Polk] lived the Stoudemire [ph.] family.  One of the Stoudemire's actually went on to become like a famous baseball or basketball player; I'm not really sure but you know, they were wonderful.  And then the Buchanans [ph.] who lived down the street were black and Native American.  And they were very pronounced in their sort eth- that eth- that sort of ethnicity, that sort of beautiful Indianess was so gorgeous.  And they had this sort of beautiful black long wavy hair.  And all of us wanted one of those Buchanan boys.  I mean it was like, "Will you just look at me, just look at me, just ride me on your bicycle," you know what I mean?  "Ride me on the handlebars, please."  And it was alive and fun, and we had a great time because I was in the house with you know, my mother and my father [Myrlie Weems] and my sisters.  And surrounded by a tight, tight, tight community of people who went to church together, who had celebration together, who cooked together who feasted together, who played together.  It's a very tight, tight, tight, community.  I knew everybody in my neighborhood; I knew everybody in my neighborhood.  And a, and a few years ago, maybe about five years ago I went home, and I went to my neighborhood.  And the Stoudemire family still lives in their house.  And my [maternal] grandfather [Elbert Polk], now passed on to somebody else in my family, still owns his house, right.  We've been gone from the neighborhood for years; I've been away for forty years, and I go by to make a photograph of the house.  Take a picture of my grandfather's house, and Mrs. Stoudemire came to the door, she opened her screen door, she looked out.  She said, "Carrie Mae [HistoryMaker Carrie Mae Weems] is that you?"  Fifteen, fifteen years later she takes one look out the door--I left when I was five years old, seven or something and she knew me right away.  It was just amazing; it was really amazing.  Very warm and touching, so and so there is still, there is still people in that neighborhood who I, I grew up with who never left.  Never left the street who still live right there, so it was a really wonderful visit.  I think, I think in some ways it's sort of the most, the most cherished memories I have about my, my childhood, you know.  It was really very lovely.  My, my parents, my father, my father, his brother's they were involved in their unions.  And you know so when May Day would come around the men would go to their unions for demonstrations and marches and protest.  And, and--but all the kids who go across to the park [Lillis Albina City Park] at Eliot [Eliot Elementary School; Harriet Tubman Leadership Academy for Young Women, Portland, Oregon] where we would have May Day celebration and dances and races and dancing around maypoles and singing May Day songs.  You know; this sort of beautiful rite of spring.  Both tied again as both sort of a political holiday and the celebration of spring.  And those memories too are very etched in my, in my head and I think that they also have played a role in the work that I'm kind of I'm into to, to making in my later life.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) you mean in your later life?
Speaker 2: Well, for instance, May Days, I have a film called May Days ['May Days Long Forgotten,' Carrie Mae Weems].  The stuff that I've done around Tatlin's monument and Third International [Tatlin's Tower, Monument to the Third International] and these sorts of very specific kinds of political, the political work that I've made.  It's very much rooted in, in these earlier sort of political notions about protest and celebration.  Bringing those two things together, linking them together.
Story_ID: 659165
Speaker 1: Portland [Oregon] at the time that you were growing up--
Speaker 2: (Clears throat) (Cough) Excuse me.
Speaker 1: It, it's far west.  What, what were the politics like during the time when you were growing up in, in Portland?
Speaker 2: Well, it was a very quiet place when I grew up.  I mean, you know it's so far out there.  I mean really; you know, I mean, you know I mean, you know there're, you know there're great adventures and stories about the Oregon Trail right I mean you know.  Making it there on the Oregon Trail and making it to that place is really--you know what I mean.  There are great, great sort of stories about it, great adventure around it, but it was really--it was really the far west.  And so it was--I mean of course for there, there were laws in Portland probably, probably like you know, like the turn of century.  Like you know 1900 where, where blacks were actually forbidden to settle in Oregon, and so they did not, they settled in Seattle [Washington] for instance.  So there's some interesting politics like, like that.   But, but actually growing up there it was a--was really a great place to, to grow up.  I didn't feel a lot of tension, didn't feel a lot of, of sort of you know, racism.  Didn't feel like it was, you know, like, you know, very conservative place at all, it was its own kind of weird oasis in a way, you know.  Sort of far remove--far enough removed from a lot of stuff that, that, that people actually kind of got along.  And so it was sort of interesting growing up in that kind of environment where you didn't really feel that you were being brought up in a place where even though you knew racism existed.  Where it was really a question for you wasn't really a problem.  And that same kind of way that one would have experienced it in, in you know southern cities or much larger cities where there was great, great tension.  You know as a result of, of, of the migration that happened out of the South and into much of the, the Midwest and then of course into, into the East.  So relatively speaking very few black people really settled in that area.  You know, Portland is only really on the map the last twenty years, so it's a--it was a unique, unique place to grow up for sure.
Speaker 1: And your neighborhood was--what was the racial composition?
Speaker 2: It was--when I was, when I was five, six it was primarily, primarily black.  There were white people that lived in my neighborhood, but it was primarily black.  When I was probably in the third grade, we moved to another neighborhood.  It was a predominately white neighborhood though there were black families in the neighborhood, but it was predominately white.  Again, I didn't feel any particular strangeness or any particular tensions at all really around it (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And what years are we talking about?
Speaker 2: Well, we'd be talking about '60 [1960], or '59 [1959], '60 [1960], '61 [1961], '62 [1962].
Story_ID: 659166
Speaker 1: As a young girl during this time, were you aware of what was happening in the East and in the South in terms of race relations?
Speaker 2: Well, I was certainly becoming aware.  I was becoming aware through my, my parents.  Of course when John Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] died that was a huge, a huge moment in, in our lives.  I remember my mother [Carrie Polk Weems] gathering us from school and, and bringing us home you know.  Or rather not allowing us to go back to school when we came home for, for lunch break because we came home from lunch break.  And then of course when, when King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] died it was, it was enormous.  My father [Myrlie Weems], my father--I remember driving around with my father all day we were--my father took us to the country a lot, we were always out on drives together.  With my reciting the 'I Have a Dream' speech over and over and over for my father because he wanted to hear it again and again, and again, and again and again (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And how old are--were you at this time?
Speaker 2: I was about eight, nine, eight, nine, eight, nine.  Ten (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So this was around when King died that he was having you recite it?
Speaker 2: No, this must have been the, the March on Washington, it must have been the March on Washington, you know because I was reading that speech over and over again.  Because King died in '68 [1968], '65 [1965] or '68 [1968]?
Speaker 1: Sixty-eight [1968], he died in '68 [1968] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sixty-eight [1968], yeah.  So yeah, yeah he had, he hadn't died yet, hadn't been assassinated yet.
Story_ID: 659167
Speaker 1: Now you described your father [Myrlie Weems] telling you about being a sharecropper.
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: At what age were you when he was telling you his stories, a little girl?
Speaker 2: I think, well he probably started talking about it (pause)--well, I mean you know I worked in the fields too right? Right, I mean my entire family in Oregon worked in the fields as well, I mean that's what we did.  We were sort of you know itinerant farmers in Portland [Oregon] during the summers, and everybody in my neighborhood worked in the fields in the summer.  And, and then when we worked for my [maternal] grandfather [Elbert Polk] during, during the, the winter, during the school year.
Speaker 1: In his?
Speaker 2: In his--either in the restaurant or in the factories to be cleaned or the restaurants that he cleaned.  You know, each family we, you know, each family had their, their chores, they had they had their, their duties.  So you know we, you know we had like Del Monte Foods [Del Monte Foods, Inc.], can foods was one of the clients, my grandfather's clients, so we like cleaned that place.  And Fa Busa chinese restaurant [ph.] (unclear) you know we had to clean that place you know, so my grandfather was a very, very hooked on--very industrious man.  So you know, so, I'm sure that you know at some point at some point probably.  When I was you know, seven or eight or so my father started telling me these stories about being a sharecropper.  You know we're working in the fields because, because that's what we all did.
Speaker 1: When you were working the fields in Oregon whose farms were these?
Speaker 2: They were--it was a very prominent family in Oregon, I think that their names; the family name was Adler [ph.] and the Adler farms.  And the Adlers had farms all over Portland.  They owned like you know huge, huge swathes of land.  And we worked for them a lot, a lot you know.  They had strawberry fields, and bean fields, and corn fields, and potatoes fields you know.  And they were you know and then of course Oregon and Washington are known for apples and for cherries.  But apple season comes in, in September, so by that time we would be in school.  The kids would go back to school and my mother [Carrie Polk Weems] and father, occasionally would go then to the Hood River Valley [Oregon].  And they would pick apples on, on farms for a month or a few weeks to a month before, before we would all sort of settle down for the, for the school year and for the winter.
Speaker 1: So, at what age are you working the fields?
Speaker 2: From the time I was about five until I was fourteen, fifteen.  I think maybe about fifteen, you know and, and finally, finally (laughter) one of my, one of my teachers, I can't remember his name anymore.  I should--you now I just don't recall at the moment.  But he thought that I should be in, in theater you know.  And so he came, he came to our house one summer day after we've come home from the fields.  And he asks my mother if, if I could be relieved from you know, summer duties.  So I could actually go to a private school [Catlin Gabel School, Portland, Oregon] and study theater (laughter).  And that was actually the, you knows was like the, you know my mother said, "Well sure, that'd be lovely," and so, and that's what happened.  So I, I sort of got a break and, and after that I didn't do much work in the, in the fields any more.
Story_ID: 659168
Speaker 1: Was it ever a thought before then that you didn't want to do it or just that (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was, it was a thought every day (laughter) that you didn't want to do it, I mean, it's nothing glamorous about it by any means.  But it's been some serious hard work, right.  You know because you had to be up by four o'clock (laughter) right.  The bus left at four o'clock because you had to be in the fields by like you know, 5:30.  And then you know, you know you'd finish up by three o'clock or four o'clock in the afternoon.  It was like some seriously grueling work.  And, and there was one woman in my neighborhood Ms., Ms. Elvina [ph.], Ms. Vina who was just this gorgeous woman.  Who, (laughter) who every morning got up and put on like a full face of makeup.  And sort of wrapped her hair, and sort of tied up her like work shirt around her waist (gesture).  You know her shit was like, just like sinuous, right.  And she'd like hit the fields like that way (laughter) every morning.  It was like, this chick was like, I am not letting this shit hold me back, ok.  I'm gonna be fine, (laughter) it was fabulous she was amazing, you know.  And you know and because you know I think you know everybody in my, in my neighborhood [in Portland, Oregon], did exactly the same thing.  You'd, you'd--it was just normal, it was just the way life was and that you worked hard.  And, and you knew your neighbors, and you know that was your, your job.  And then you know, you played all evening you know, (laughter) you played, you played at night, and you know you had a great time with your friends.
Speaker 1: And so you were working?
Speaker 2: I've worked all my life.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: I've worked all my life.
Speaker 1: Who got paid, when you were a little girl?
Speaker 2: Well we all got paid, and at the end of the day we all gave our money to our mother [Carrie Polk Weems].  And then she then she doled out she--you know your allowance for the week.  But it was all us a serious contribution to the household.  You know, or to your school clothes or to something that you needed.
Speaker 1: So that work ethic from, from five.
Speaker 2: Yeah, has very much informed (laughter) the who and what of my ass (laughter).  So it's like, so I still get up at five o'clock in the morning as, does my brothers and sisters.  And so you know that's when everybody in my family is on the phone, and chatting with one another because that's what--when they (laughter) get up.  So I mean I sort of like that.  I mean by the time, by you know, by the time eight o'clock or nine o'clock or ten has rolled around I've usually like put in, like a day's work.  And, and now I can like do other things you know because I've been working all morning.  Or certainly I've had like a lot of quiet time to myself to think and write and do what I'm doing alone.  But yeah it, it certainly has some informed a lot of, a lot of who I am and sort of my work ethic.  Also what I, what I think about, and how I think about the world, and what I think about work, and what I think about hard work.  And what I think about kids, and you know what I think you deserve (laughter).  And you know, you know It's, it's you know It sort of fashions a moral code and a code of ethics that, that I live by.
Speaker 1: Did you ever resent having to do all that work?
Speaker 2: Of course, I'm sure I did, I'm sure I did like any child would.  You know, like any adult would and its hard work.  You know and it's, its summer heat (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, it's like you know, but I think you know, just, I think, I think that when you're, when you're surrounded by people that this is the way everybody made their living then it's different.  The level of resentment is not quite the same.  You know, it's not like everybody else on the block is sort of kicking it during the summer.  Everybody is working during the summer and so, and so it's tempered by that, by that reality
Speaker 1: It is everybody mixed race or is this primarily black people?
Speaker 2: There were lots of white people in the fields not, not just, not just black.  There were lot of, lot of white people in the fields as well, yeah.
Story_ID: 659169
Speaker 1: Where did you go to school as a child?
Speaker 2: I went to Eliot [Eliot Elementary School; Harriet Tubman Leadership Academy for Young Women, Portland, Oregon], for, for, for kindergarten and second grade.
Speaker 1: That was across the street?
Speaker 2: That was across the street, Ms. Russell [ph.] was my first grade teacher, and I loved her and I know she loved me.  Isn't it amazing that you can remember stuff like that?  I don't remember my third grade teacher and my fourth grade teacher you know what I mean, but I remember Ms. Russell.  And she was, she was black, she was also black and really pretty.  I just thought she was so beautiful, and so beautiful hair.  And you know, and every time I looked, and she looked at me I just thought she was smiling when she looked at me.  You know, and I don't know if any of the other kids felt that way, but I certainly felt this incredible love always coming from her towards me.  And then I went to Sabin, Sabin School [Sabin Elementary School; Sabin K-8 School, Portland, Oregon], and which was a very mixed school.  Primarily white but there were certainly black kids there as well.  And then finally to Boise [Boise Elementary School; Boise-Eliot/Humboldt PK-8 School, Portland, Oregon], so these were my elementary school, school years.  And high school I went to Jackson [Andrew Jackson High School, Portland, Oregon], which was also predominantly white school with a few black students mixed in.
Speaker 1: Were these public schools?
Speaker 2: They were all public schools, yeah.
Story_ID: 659170
Speaker 1: How would you describe young Carrie Mae [HistoryMaker Carrie Mae Weems], what was your personality as a young girl?
Speaker 2: Not sure, I know I was very curious, I was very curious.  And I think sort of fun loving, of course, loved to have fun.  But, but I can remember being a very serious person, I was very serious, serious person.  And you know, I remember being about nine, eight or nine sitting, sitting on the stairs that lead into my basement.  It was a summer afternoon and I was sitting there coming to grips with the fact that I was really an individual.  That I was really an individual and, and there was something you know and that I could feel the limits of myself that I could feel the limits of my life.  You know in a way, and I didn't think that, that I knew that one day I would die.  You know, that there's this sort of this weird melancholy.  You know, it's just a very strange melancholy.  I just could not--it was something that I saw about something that was happening in life.  Again, I think coming to that since that I was truly an individual.  That I wasn't just a part of a group, but that I was me, and that this complexion was interesting, kind of deep.  And having these very complex feelings that I still have.  And that I, I you know that they were you know like I felt like I've always been like the same person.  Except that now I'm able to articulate a little bit more what it is that I'm thinking, and feeling, and going through.  I couldn't express it then, but this sort of constant (gesture) energy state.  There's always the same you asking very similar kinds of questions.  They are, they are questions about life, questions about responsibility, questions about actions and deeds, being very aware of them at a very young age.  And, and those are sort of very strong memories for me yet and still.
Speaker 1: Do you know what precipitated that moment?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.
Speaker 1: In that--from that moment of awareness, did, did you, did you feel a shift that kind of lasted, did something change for you?
Speaker 2: Yes a certain kind of consciousness changed.  In other words that (gesture), that suddenly I was truly aware of myself as an individual (gesture) who had individual choice.  Right that you're not just, you're just here on the planet, you're here on the planet for a very particular reasons.  And that you have choice, and what are your choices going to be.  Right, and that's a sort of--it's, it's a very interesting thing.  I don't know you know, what--how you sort of came to this sort of realization.  But so, I was a very intense kind of person, and I asked very, very direct questions very early on of everybody.  My mother [Carrie Polk Weems] used to say, "You are really too much. You just don't ask people those kinds of questions Carrie, really" (laughter).
Speaker 1: How did people react to you when you asked a direct question?
Speaker 2: My mother you know, you know it depends, depends on who you're asking, my mother would just sort of look at me and shake her head, like, my god.  She I, I think she'd be sort of embarrassed.  So, so I was probably very direct and, and I guess, again I can't even not--it's probably not much different than I am now, you know.  And again that sort of feeling that you are who you are throughout the course of your life.  The only difference is that you're able to express it.
Story_ID: 659171
Speaker 1: How many siblings do you have?
Speaker 2: I have six brothers and sisters, three brothers, and three sisters.
Speaker 1: And where are you in the birth order?
Speaker 2: I'm the second to the oldest.  I have an older sister Alice [Alice Weems (ph.)] a brother who's a year younger.  And another brother John [John Weems (ph.)], who died, he's the only brother who--sibling who died which is really unfortunate and then the rest.
Speaker 1: So as one of six children finding the individual Carrie Mae [HistoryMaker Carrie Mae Weems] could have been a challenge when there're a lot of people in the house?
Speaker 2: I think somehow we were probably raised to very independent.  And my father [Myrlie Weems] certainly, my father you know, one of his, his great gifts was to treat us all with the profound respect.  And with great love and each of us in turn thought that we were the favorite, right.  Right, I just knew I was my father's favorite right, my sister, "No, no, it's me."  So he had that sort of you know incredible generosity of spirit.  And then of course you know my sister left home early.  I moved out early you know, so they, they allowed us lots of space to be, you know, to be who we were, and who we were so, yeah.  You know and then of course you know my sister took the brunt of a lot of stuff too right, because I wasn't the oldest, she was.  She was the one who was expected to look after the family you know when my mother [Carrie Polk Weems] was at work, you know was at work.  She was the one you know that was expected to get us up and to school.  She was the one expected to like get breakfast for us if my mother was gone, right.  You know, even though she's only a year older than I.  So, in fact, my sister actually has much more resentment than I.  You know, because I didn't have to do anything (laughter).  I just didn't have to do anything in that way.  So I could skate you know, I could skate under the radar a little bit more than my, than my sister or my brother who's a year younger. Because my brother was my brother right, the eldest son, so that carries a certain kind of weight.  I was sort of you know liberated from that zone, and I think that I really took advantage of it, you know. (Laughter) In all kinds of ways both good and bad probably from their perspective.
Story_ID: 659172
Speaker 1: As a child, what did you envision you would do with your life when you grew up?
Speaker 2: Oh that I'd be an artist.
Speaker 1: Always?
Speaker 2: Pretty much, pretty much (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When did that, when did you decide that?
Speaker 2: Early, very, very early maybe when I was you know eleven or so maybe a little earlier you know.  So you know I would--you know we lived in this, we lived at one point after my mother [Carrie Polk Weems] and father [Myrlie Weems] divorced, we lived in this wonderful house that my [maternal] grandfather [Elbert Polk] owned.  And there was a beautiful attic with these wonderful windows that overlooked, that overlooked my neighborhood [in Portland, Oregon].  And I would go up there, and I would pretend as though I was an artist living in Paris [France], (laughter) right.  You know, I'd go to the eighty-eight cent store, and I'd get like easels, and paint.  You know I'd be standing up there like painting.  And my mother--you know I'd put on my mother's like domestic spock- smock you know they were blue.  You know, and I'd go up you know, and would paint.  You know overlook the city you know, I'd invite friends over for seances (laughter), bringing back Johnny Tucker's [ph.] grandmother's spirit you know.  So he could like talk to her you know I mean, I was insane.  So you know, so I had these ideas about you know, the arts, and being involved in the arts very, very early.  And I didn't know what I was going to do.  You know, I was interested in dance, and I was interested theater, and interested in the visual arts, painting, ceramics, and those sorts of things.  But I had a very deep, deep sort of sense of that's what I was going to do with my life.
Speaker 1: And did you parents encourage your artistic side?
Speaker 2: Not necessarily, they didn't really hold it back either, but it wasn't like I was taking classes you know.  I didn't start taking classes--I mean you now, of course, I took drawing and painting in school.  But I didn't take like dance classes, and ballet classes, or piano classes or anything like that.  My family really couldn't afford you know that kind of thing.  But I was a good, I was a good you know--I really had a great sense of body as a young person like a really wonderful sense of body.  And so, people would see me and invite me to take their dance, their dance classes, they would offer dance classes to me.  So, so people saw me, I think very early on, people around me saw me as a little talent.  A little budding talent that needed to be nurtured so, so somebody introduces me to theater, somebody introduces me to dance and that sort of thing so, I was very fortunate in that way.
Story_ID: 659173
Speaker 1: And you obviously are a tall woman, as a child were you tall?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was tall and thin.
Speaker 1: So, in your social circles what was your presence, in your social circles?  As a tall, lean person, were you, were you among the tallest?  Was that something you were even aware of?
Speaker 2: Probably, probably yeah.  I was tall and thin, and I know that people talked about my being tall and thin.
Speaker 1: And you said that your teacher came to your mom [Carrie Polk Weems] to ask if you could take theater class?  Was that your introduction, your formal introduction to theater?
Speaker 2: Yes it was, yeah.  And it was Shakespearean [William Shakespeare] theater, so it was even more, more shocking.  The language and --you know it was conducted at a private school [Catlin Gabel School, Portland, Oregon] the only private school in town.  And it introduced me to a whole other world of possibility and, and people and thinking, ideas.
Speaker 1: What (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know what one could do and be, must have been fourteen or fifteen, I must've been--fourteen, probably.
Story_ID: 659174
Speaker 1: When you were age twelve, I was reading you--is when you met Tom Vitners is that correct?
Speaker 2: Tom Vinters.
Speaker 1: Vinters, yes.  Sorry.
Speaker 2: No, I think it was a little older.  I think I didn't meet Tom until I was maybe sixteen or so.
Speaker 1: Okay, so we're not at sixteen yet, let's go back to fourteen.  So you're introduced to theater (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Theater.
Speaker 1: And what happened after that?
Speaker 2: What do you mean?
Speaker 1: Well, in your creative pursuits because this was a door opener for you.  The introduction to Shakespeare [William Shakespeare] and the former side of the arts.
Speaker 2: Right yeah, well you know, Catlin Gabel [Catlin Gabel School, Portland, Oregon] was, was, a wonderful place to, to be.  I did summer theater with them for two, for two summers.  The first summer that I was there I met this beautiful, beautiful woman.  Her name was Catherine Jelski and she--I remember her standing off to the side just sort of like looking at me.  And I thought, who is that beautiful girl?  And we became just fast, fast friends and she's still my best friend 'til this very, very day.  And her father was sending her off to Germany, he was sending her back to Germany because she had fallen in love with a black boy.  And who, who was actually a very good friend of mine.  Not a good friend of mine, but I knew him from school.  I knew him well; we had grown up together.  Donald Washington [ph.], a great, great, great dancer, beautiful man.  And her father just wasn't having it and so he sent her off to, was sending her off to Germany.  And before he sent her off, we became friends and really got a chance to know one another and then continued our relationship.  But not only is Katie important because of that, because of our first meeting, but she also introduced me to Tom Vinters.  In 19--when I turned sixteen after she came back from Berlin [Germany].  We attended school together, high school [Andrew Jackson High School, Portland, Oregon] together as well.  So listen, she was a very interesting and very important person for me because Katie--and I was also writing about this as well.  I've been working on this narrative called 'Swinging into 60.'  And it's about women who are turning sixty or who have turned sixty.  Moving into their sixties who also came of age, became of age in the '60s [1960s], or came of age in the '60s [1960s].  So it's a lovely sort of way of framing our life in this sort of way.  So I've been thinking about her a great deal in, in this way, and it occurred to me just recently that Katie introduced me to a lot of things that really changed my life.  And she came from a very wealthy Jewish family, and I'd came from a fairly you know, poor black family, working class family for sure.  And so Katie had incredible resources.  She knew a lot of things, and she knew a lot of people and by hanging out with Katie, by being with Katie you know, she sort of introduced me into her world.  And what the shape of that world was like and I introduced her to mine.  And, and that was our sort of life together and has been our life together for the last fifty years or the last forty-five years.  It's been working in that way; it's been very, very interesting.  So, she introduced me to Tom Vinters; she decided to go to CalArts [California Institute of the Arts, Valencia, California].  Which I did not know about, I did not know about CalArts, but Katie introduced me to CalArts because she decided to go.  I was going with my best friend, so I went to CalArts.  So she's been very important to me in terms of the sort of trajectory of my life in some very important ways.  So I wasn't always so completely aware of you know.  When you're just buddies and your friends you're just hanging out.  You know but when you sort take a big step back, and you say, "Oh, what did that friendship really mean?  What has this friendship really been about, you know?  How has this friendship really impacted, influenced you?"  Well, some of the things really sort of became apparent to me.  That ah, Katie introduced me to those people; she introduced me to that set, she introduced me to that set, and to that set, and to that set.  And for those things I'm very, very grateful.  My first trip to Europe you know was a result of my friendship with Katie, or I should say the depth of my experiences in Europe.  She had been living in Berlin; she was now back in Berlin living in East Berlin [Germany].  So you know, I--you know walked into East Berlin and learned a whole other kind of thing.  That I would not have come to know with--you know but for her and through her.
Speaker 1: And how did you meet her?
Speaker 2: At Catlin Gabel, during the summer theater.  She was there that day--for a few days before she was being shipped off to Germany.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: And, and we met, and we decided that we would stay in touch with one another.
Story_ID: 659175
Speaker 1: Now, you mention going to CalArts [California Institute of the Arts, Valencia, California], were, were you the first in your, in your immediate family to go to college?
Speaker 2: I think so, yeah.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Was it--was college something that you discussed as a child?  Did you assume you would be going?
Speaker 2: No, but I also didn't assume that I wouldn't be going either.  You know, I mean it--you know, my mother [Carrie Polk Weems] helped me with my studies and I was very interested in school.  I was very interested in what I was doing, but we really didn't talk about sort of college.  It's like you know that I can remember in any sort of sustained or serious way.  And of course by the time, I you know, I left home when I was sixteen.  I left home when I was sixteen so by the time I actually was going to college I was really going to college on my own I was really already taking care of myself.  So it was a, it was another kind of conversation, another kind of reality.
Story_ID: 659176
Speaker 1: So you had your daughter when you were sixteen (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I had my daughter when I was sixteen, so I guess I left home when I was seventeen.
Speaker 1: So, having a child at such a young age, what, what was that experience like for you?
Speaker 2: It wasn't good, I didn't like it, I really didn't want children, really.  And I'm very happy that I have my daughter she's a great, great woman.  Beautiful, beautiful spirit but, but no I, you know, I hadn't planned on having kids.  And, of course, I don't think most sixteen year olds do, it was an accident.  And--but I, but I was fortunate and that my aunt, my aunt Nelly [Nel Polk] and her husband raised my daughter for me.  So that she was close to me, she was in the family.  She was always around me, I could see her whenever I wanted, she could come over whenever she wanted et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.  And it was, so it was a really--it turned out to be the best of the best of both worlds.  It hasn't always been easy, won't lie about that, it hasn't always been easy, but, but I'm so happy that my daughter is in my life.
Speaker 1: Your aunt and uncle raised her?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Did she know that she was yours?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: Sometimes families (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes, oh yes, no, no, she's always known she was mine.  And, and she lived with me for a while, you know, which she came with me to New York [New York], when I first moved to New York.  And it just wasn't, it just wasn't really the right place to be.  I mean you know like I was like living with like transvestites in Harlem [New York, New York] (laughter).  You know I was just, you know, not that there's anything wrong with transvestites, but transvestites in Harlem is another thing (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And she was little?
Speaker 2: You know.  And they, you know, and they were terrific because you know, actually one was a transsexual, and one of the first transsexuals in this country, who went on to work for Bella Abzug.  Who you know these were like incredible people we were living very, very close to Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York] she--.  So, so her name was Dee [ph.] and Dee was married to this guy, this polish guy, so Dee was black.  She was married to this polish guy who was very, very, you know, like very, very masculine, who was a construction worker.  And it, it turns out that, you know, there were all of these sort of black drag queens.  Or you know, you know transvestites who were dating all of these like professors at, at Columbia (laughter).  It was just like a wild, scene, but the lovely thing about it for me was that they treated me like I was their daughter.  They just sort of took me in and they loved having Faith [Faith Weems Jackson] there because there was a baby in the house.  You know, so it was really kind of lovely they were very, very kind, they were very kind.
Speaker 1: What--where are you, what time period was you?
Speaker 2: So this is like you know in 1970.
Speaker 1: And you would come to New York from where?
Speaker 2: From California so, I you know yes, so I left Portland [Oregon], and I moved to San Francisco [California].  And, and Katie [Catherine Jelski] and I lived in San Francisco together and then Katie, and I came to New York together and we brought my daughter with us.
Story_ID: 659177
Speaker 1: So when you were in San Francisco [California], you were in school is that correct?
Speaker 2: No, I went back to school later.
Speaker 1: Okay (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know I finished school [Andrew Jackson High School, Portland, Oregon] you know when I was sixteen--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --finished school.  Lived a life, did all kinds of things and then went back to San Francisco at a certain point and went back to school [California Institute of the Arts, Valencia, California] when I was about eighteen or nineteen something like that.
Speaker 1: So when were you in the Anna Halprin dance workshop [San Francisco Dancers' Workshop], was that, that's in San Francisco.  Was that why you went to San Francisco?
Speaker 2: No, but again Katie [Catherine Jelski] was taking classes with Anna Halprin because Katie really wanted to be a dancer.  I didn't really want to be a dancer.  I was just a natural dancer, do know what I mean?  I could just do it.  And so, and so I went to visit Katie--I actually thought I was only coming to visit Katie in San Francisco, and then I would move to Montreal [Canada], this was my dream.  I would be in a French speaking country but be close to home right.  So I could have the best of both worlds.  And I got to San Francisco, of course, fell in love with San Francisco.  And, Anna Halprin saw me, and she said, "Oh would you like to be in a dance company?"  Right.  So, before I knew it, I was, you know, in Anna Halprin's dance company, which did not sit well with Katie since Katie was really the one that was really serious about dancing.  And I just sort of waltzed in and you know do a couple of pirouettes and I, you know, landed in the company fairly, fairly quickly.  So Katie and I had our, our moments around, around these kinds of things.  So, yeah that was before I moved to--I moved to New York [New York].
Speaker 1: And so, you and Katie decided to come to New York together?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What was your motivation for coming to New York?
Speaker 2: I was well--of course, New York was New York.  New York was New York, she was gonna be a dancer, I was gonna be a model and then do something, something, you know, something--do you know some sort of interesting life.  You know of course art, art was always in the background.  But at that moment I wasn't sure what kind of artist I was going be.  But I thought you know, I could probably get by on my looks for a bit you know.  I mean you know, we've been like you know, go go dancers in San Francisco, you know.  So you know, we were like you know, sort of you know--by this time you know, we're sort of you know, young but kind of worldly.  But not, you know not, not, not completely reckless, even though I had a child.  I had loads of common sense you know, I knew that I didn't want to be involved in drugs.  I knew that I didn't want to be involved in prostitution.  And, and you know like the, like you know there's sort of like, I'm not sure exactly what I'm, I'm going to do, but I know what I am not going to do.
Story_ID: 659178
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And you left home [Portland, Oregon] at a very young age, so--
Speaker 2: And I left home young, yeah.
Speaker 1: How did you earn a living during that time?
Speaker 2: Do you know, I was a waitress, a dancer, you know a Kelly Girl [Kelly Services, Inc.].
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I was a Kelly Girl--you know, I was--I wrote about this the other day too because a whole group of us, you know.  A whole group of us lived bicoastally for years.  We like moved between San Francisco [California], and New York [New York], (laughter) and we were Kelly Girls in both places (laughter).  So we'd get to the city, we'd get to New York, right.  Throw on our light little business attire, dash over to Kelly's, you know, take that like typing exams, and (makes sound) (gesture) right.  You know, and the next day we would have a job somewhere.  I'd have a job on Madison [Madison Avenue], on 5th Avenue--we'd do all these like crazy jobs.  And I lived that way for a long time.  I lived that way for a long time and, and being a Kelly Girl afforded me really the opportunity of sort of swing back and forth between these coasts.  So I had a fabulous apartment on 84th Street that I had for years, that I subleased while I went back to California I mean.
Speaker 1: 84th and what?
Speaker 2: 84th and Central Park West (laughter).  Right, I was like twenty, I got like an apartment in New York right, that ain't bad.  I mean it was like very, very interesting time.  We were really smart; we were really, really smart.  And so I came here once with you know with Katie [Catherine Jelski], with Paula [ph.] you know, a whole group of us.  There were five of us we were very, very, very tight.  And these were my--and they're still my closest girlfriends.  Paula and Katie are still my closest girlfriends.  And that was the work that we did for a long time.  So we had a great time you know, trying to figure it out.  Trying to figure out who were we gonna be as women and as artists and practitioners in the world.  But also this is how we're gonna make a living too.  Right, you can always type if you can type and you can say hello in a nice way you could always work.
Speaker 1: That's true.  Now this is--are we in the early '70s [1970s] now?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 659179
Speaker 1: So politically, there's a shift when the '70s [1970] come?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And for you as a young woman in New York [New York]--interestingly you're doing a very traditional job at Kelly Girls [Kelly Services, Inc.].  You know, you could type in a politically changing environment, how was the shift of political consciousness, how did that affect you in your life?
Speaker 2: Well you know, I think for a long time there was a certain kind of--again, I think that you know, it's kind of difficult being black in America.  Not be--and to come along during that time.  And not be politically aware, socially aware, I'll use that, socially aware you know.  That--you know a part of your condition is being black in America is be socially aware.  You're always aware of the circumstance in relationship to the politic of this--you know and the representation of this body.  You know what it triggers all around you what it triggers you know, and the force whether it's in this room or any place else right.  I mean it's always, I think always present, always there.  So there--so, that awareness was there and then a certain point I was, I was you know, eighteen or nineteen I'd been living in New York, I turned eighteen here.  And then went back to San Francisco [California], when I went back to San Francisco, I met this really sort of amazing man his name was Raymond Marshall.  He'd come from New York, he'd been brought up in Harlem [New York, New York], very, very smart, very savvy man and he introduced me to politics in a serious way.  He was a Marxist, and he introduced me to Marxism and we were together for a really long time.  We had a long and difficult relationship, but he really introduced me to the--to real sort of political formations ideological formations; they were very important to me.  And even though he was a jerk in a lot of ways he really introduced me to some of the important concepts to go on to really form the real political base of my life.  And for which I will forever be indebted to him for that.
Speaker 1: How would you describe that base?  What is your--?
Speaker 2: We were socialists, we were Marxists, we were communists.  So that's in some way fashion or form or another I am still that.  You know, I'm deeply interested in the social, I'm deeply interested in pushing for deeper investigations and of, of democracy and that always takes me to that something that is more socialist in structure.  Even when we look at the way in which Russia and China had sort of collapsed on itself.  These sort of ideas about democracy a fuller democracy I think was surreal and palpable and necessary.  So they are important ideas to me, and they do play a lot in the in the work that I make, you know.  Whether it's through looking, looking at the social family structures or, or other larger structures.  I'm always looking at structures of power and how we look at them how we negotiate them and how we attempt to--to challenge them.  And what basis can we challenge them and critique them. Pose another set of questions around their viability.  In face of the, in face of your own power in relationship to them.
Story_ID: 659180
Speaker 1: Was it Raymond Marshall who introduced you to photography?
Speaker 2: Yes, he gave me my first camera.
Speaker 1: And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He gave me my first camera, a Nikomat; I still have it.
Speaker 1: So this was a eye opener so to speak?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Oh no, he's fabulous, great man, he was just an asshole.
Speaker 1: The, the camera, tell me about your introduction to photography.
Speaker 2: Oh well you know (pause), Ray, Ray always had like the best equipment.  You know he's like one of those kinds of guys like, you know, when you did something you like always got the best, the best that you could buy.  And so he had beautiful lens, beautiful cameras.  And I think for--it must have been like maybe my twentieth birthday or my twenty-first birthday. You know I'm like, I'm like, like the worst person to talk to about time.  You know like, like, you know, a lot of things swirl around me you know like sometimes I can't tell like was that a dream or did that actually happen?  You know like, you know like my realities are sort of changing in interesting ways.  So, I'm not really the best person to talk to about chronological events.  I get them a little mixed up, but he gave me a camera for my birthday, it was right around my twentieth birthday, could been my twenty-first birthday.  But I--he gave it to me I just loved it I mean I immediately took to it, so I'd already studied dance and theater.  And you know I wasn't really interested in being an actress.  I wasn't really interested in being a dancer if--probably if I had known more about choreography the art of choreography I could have possibly could have been a dancer or a choreographer.  But I didn't know anything about choreography I didn't have a mentor to teach me about choreography really and that it was even a field that one could investigate.  But Ray really showed me that photography was something that one could do.  And that you could process your film in your own kitchen.  And you could hang it up to dry in your own bathroom, and you could print it in your own, on your own back porch you know.  And, and he had these ideas too about photography that you know, that he was going to, you know, you know photograph in Cuba, and he was gonna photograph in Russia.  And he was gonna, you know, go to like, you know, to great socialist countries.  And you make, you know, important you know photographs and, and it was sort of contagious you know.  And so he gave me the camera, and I fell in love with it and I sort of did all those things he never did, but I did all those things.  And so again another thing for which I'm very, very grateful to him for he was a really great mentor in a lot of ways.  I love photography, and I immediately, I knew, had a sense of what I could do with it, a sense of what it could be.  Of how you could really craft and create something.  And the first thing that I wanted to do is to make important pictures of black people.  Because the photographs that I had seen of black people had been so awful and so stereotypic, and so derogatory for the most part.  That I thought that was the first thing I needed to deal with let me deal with the way in which black people are represented.  Let me try to give something that's not quite--not, not positive but true and dynamic.  You know, that really talked about the shape of the life of a culture of people you know that had to do with them.  You know, being knocked out on the elevator (laughter) you know right.  With a man standing over you with your head--I mean just this sort of ridiculous kinds of representations.  I just didn't--I just needed to confront that immediately it was not what I knew.
Speaker 1: So the first images that came when started taking where what?
Speaker 2: The first image, the first image that I made, of course, I made you know some photographs of political demonstrations that I was a part of, those kinds of pictures.  I still have a few of them, none of them were really great because I was still learning.  But I made really beautiful portraits of women, of my friends, people that I knew, lovely portraits of them.  Some that I still have you know, that I printed.  You know, like when I got my first camera, I still have them I still have the slides, I still have negatives I kept them close by me.  So yeah, but it was, it was very clear that I was interested in that.
Story_ID: 659181
Speaker 1: When did you know that photography would be at least a medium for you, for your art?
Speaker 2: Oh then.
Speaker 1: Then?
Speaker 2: Right away, right away, and then I enrolled in classes right away, at City College in San Francisco [City College of San Francisco, San Francisco, California], great, great place to study photography.  Still have my notes from my classes, still use some of my notes for processing, because they were so fabulous.  They were so great you know, I mean, you know, the craft is a craft, just a craft, right.  So they were talking about the craft these great teachers you know, and so I still use some of that material when I need it, I still li--it's a blue notebook.  A blue notebook with my notes from like forty years ago or whatever it was.  So yeah, it was pretty cool and, and then, and then I--at some point around all of this Ray [Raymond Marshall] came home again.  One morning--one afternoon and he rushed into the apartment, and he woke me up.  And he, he said, "You have to see this, wake up." And I got up, and sat in bed.  And he put this book in my hand, and it was a copy of 'The Black Photographers Annual' by Joe Crawford great guy who died a few years ago maybe ten years ago now.  Who had did this incredible, he had did all this wonderful work with black photographers.  In New York [New York] primarily, Beauford Smith, Roy DeCarava, Anthony Barboza, [HistoryMaker] Dawoud Bey even, Ming Smith being one of the only women.  John Pinderhughes, Adger Cowans [Adger W. Cowans] these sort of amazing, wonderful, wonderful men.  All of whom your--Shawn Walker all of whom I came to know.  But I looked at what they were doing, and I said, oh there it is, that's what I'm gonna do, that's what I'm gonna do.  And so I then started my preparations thinking about school learning some more.  And then coming to New York, so that I could study with them and get to know them and, and eventually I did.
Speaker 1: So, you're, you're--you came to New York at what point were--after this you have this experience this was in San Francisco [California] right?
Speaker 2: In San Francisco, so I'm in San Francisco I'm hanging out with Ray, I'm doing my political stuff.  I'm taking classes and then at a certain point--so maybe around the time I'm twenty-four or so I start coming back to New York.
Story_ID: 659182
Speaker 1: Before that, didn't you go to Europe?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes I'd gone to Europe but you know for, you know, for a short period of time.  It wasn't like six months or anything it was like you know a few weeks during the summer.
Speaker 1: Going to traveling out of the country being the girl who was working the fields [in Portland, Oregon], what was that experience like for you when you first went overseas?
Speaker 2: You know I've always been like the fairly well sorted kind of girl.  You know as, you know as all my other brothers and sisters and my mother [Carrie Polk Weems] and my father [Myrlie Weems].  My father--my mother was always a homebody but my fat- you know like were like--you know like I'm very comfortable in the world.
Speaker 1: And you knew that?
Speaker 2: I'm just really comfortable in the world; I'm very comfortable in the world, I'm very comfortable.  I think you know again, I keep going back to my father because he really taught me so much.  You know my--some of my earliest memories of my father is having my father pick me up and put me on his knee.  And look at me and he says, "Never forget that you're the equal to any other man or woman.  Black, white, brown, yellow it does not matter, you are their equal, and you have a right."  I mean from that high (gesture), that was the teaching, and it was right and it mattered.  There was no one greater than I, and you are greater than no one; you are the equal; you are human; nothing is greater than you except god, if that's your spiritual belief.  So on that human plane this is an even playing field; there, money doesn't matter, right. Every man has to get up and put on his pants one leg at a time.  I mean just that sort of little fundamental ethics you know that guided, that guide me in my life.  So going to Europe, I felt comfortable.  I was ready to explore, I was ready to look, I was ready to learn, I ready to try a new languages. I was ready to sleep with the French boys, the German boys, the Italian boys, Portuguese.  I mean you know, I mean you know let's, let's do it, (laughter) let's have fun.  So you know I've never been though you know party girl actually.  No matter what, I've never been a party girl.  I'm, all--I'm, I'm really vir- very straight, very square.  I'm very square, but I love looking you know.  I love looking; I'm a photographer, I love looking, I love looking at how things shape out.  You know what's happening over there and, and, you know and have al--and I've always felt safe enough to enter into territory and know that I would be alright.  You know, that you know that you know I'm not stupid.  So I know when it's dangerous, I know how to back up.  You know but, but the world, for the most part, isn't dangerous.  The world, for the most part, is a fairly normal place, right you know.  So you go, you, you experience, you look, you, you--you explore.  And, and I've had like a great time doing that.
Story_ID: 659183
Speaker 1: You came to New York [New York], and I believe you early on took a class at the Studio Museum in Harlem [New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: I did, I did.
Speaker 1: How did you, what, what was the Studio Museum in Harlem to an artist at that point?  This is in the '70s [1970s], right?
Speaker 2: Yes, in the '70s [1970s].  Well, it was probably the only black museum in the country, and it was started by Ed--Ed Hamilton [sic.].  What's, what's his name?  Ed, Ed, I can't remember Ed's name.  But a really great guy and you know who, who was one of the fou- one of the founding, one of the founding members.  The Studio Museum was the kind of place where--I mean it was so hip that there'd be something going on at the Studio Museum in Harlem.  And I'd fly from San Francisco [California] like on Thursday so I could be there on Friday, Saturday and Sunday, right.  You go if Michele Wallace is you know, 'Black Macho Myth of the Superwoman' [sic. 'Black Macho and the Myth of the Superwoman'] was going--.  There was going to be a reading then you were at the Studio Museum of Harlem so you could check it out, right.  I mean you know, because everybody in the community would be--I mean everybody that was anybody in the community was going to be there.  You know, and so it was just a phenomenal place to be. It started over on 5th Avenue upstairs.  And it was my first encounter with the work, work of Roy DeCarava.  Of course, I would go on to work for Roy DeCarava years later.  But, my first encounter with Roy, and [HistoryMaker] Dawoud Bey was teaching there and Frank Stewart was teaching there.  And I started taking classes with, with Dawoud.  I started classes with Frank Stewart and then Dawoud took over for Frank Stewart, and this is actually sort of important in terms of like history was a sort of a very important, sort of moment.  Coreen Simpson was also taking classes at that time along with me and we were always the only students who were hanging out like constantly trying to learn this craft.  Coreen Simpson was doing it because she was at that time a journalist and she was writing stories and she needed somebody to come with her to take photographs.  She could never find anybody to come with her to make photographs.  And so she decided that she was going to learn to make photographs so that she could actually photograph the subjects of her interviews. That's how she actually came to photography, and Coreen and I became very good friends and we're still friends to, to this day.  She's a great woman very, very interesting.  So I took my first classes in New York [New York] at the Studio Museum.
Story_ID: 659184
Speaker 1: Now when you mention Frank Stewart, let's just put him in context.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Can you, can you describe Frank Stewart at that time?
Speaker 2: Well, you know at that time Frank, Frank Stewart--Frank was one of the youngest members of the Kamoinge Workshop, had been very, very close to DeCarava [Roy DeCarava].  Jules Allen [Jules T. Allen] had also come here from California.  I knew Jules in California, they were very serious photographers and still are.  Frank had a very unique position because he had been here for a really long time, he floated between New Orleans [Louisiana] and New York [New York] and a few other places.  I'm not really sure, but, but you know, very esteemed photographer who, of course, is still working, is still working now.  So to have Frank as a teacher was, you know was sort of an amazing thing.  I'd seen many of his photographs in the--in publication in 'Black Photographers Annual' ['The Black Photographers Annual'].  Some of them still haunt me, there so beautifully made I wonder how he did them.  So it was great to have him as, as a teacher and then later Dawoud [HistoryMaker Dawoud Bey] came on (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And you mentioned the Kamoingee.
Speaker 2: Kamoinge.
Speaker 1: Could you share what that is?
Speaker 2: The Kamoinge was a phenomenal organization that had been started by Roy DeCarava and Lou Draper [Louis Draper].  Lou Draper and DeCarava are now both, both dead, and I studied with Lou as well worked with Lou along with Anthony Barboza actually at a certain point.  But the Kamoinge was a very important organization for black photographers in New York City.  And it was head--led, led, by DeCarava who was really sort of the spiritual founder of the group and also sort of the--he was the high artist in the group.  And really set the tone for the group and they were visited by many people.  You know when the French photographers would come to New York, you know, from Cartier-Bresson [Henri Cartier-Bresson], they would go--would come to see DeCarava.  Robert Frank came to see Roy DeCarava. They wanted to know what these artists were up to, so they were very, very important.  They played a large role in my life, and the first grant that I actually got as a photographer was to do a film on the Kamoinge Workshop and Roy DeCarava.  And sort of charting the history of American black photography or at least blacks involved in American photography.
Story_ID: 659185
Speaker 1: You're studying under great photographers [at the Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York], great black photographers, how--how did that inform the artist who you were becoming?
Speaker 2: Well, DeCarava [Roy DeCarava] was probably the most important.  I thought that it was Anthony Barboza, because DeCarava, DeCarava's style is very, very subtle.  And he's a, you know, he just a master, a master printer, and I was a little intimidated by him also.  I was afraid of him, and but one night, not one night--you know, again I was a fairly intense person.  I was taking classes I was trying to make some decisions about how I was going to move forward.  And I decided that there were several photographers in New York [New York] that I was really interested in working with. One was the Japanese photographer Hiro [Yasuhiro Wakabayashi].  The other one was Lou Draper [Louis Draper], and the third was Anthony Barboza.  So I stayed up, I had their prints on my wall in my ap- my, my 84th Street (speaks French) appartement.  I had their prints on my wall you know clippings from magazines and publications.  And I stayed up for like forty-eight hours like looking and writing and thinking 'cause that's what happens when you're hungry, you know.  You can, you know, you can live on adrenaline for a while and I decided that I was going to work with one of these men.  And that I was going to start calling on Monday morning at eight o'clock.  So I'd stayed up, I'd made this decision I had their names written down, I had their telephone numbers written down, I had their addresses written down.  Monday morning comes along I pick up the phone, and I start calling these numbers, one after the other, one after the other, all morning until somebody picked up the phone. So finally somebody picks up, it's his studio, and I said, "Hello is Lou Draper there?"  "No, Lou's out in the, in the, in the dark room." "Okay, can you ask him, when, when can--," "Well, you can call back in five minutes?"  Call the other number (makes sound), "Is Anthony Barboza there?"  "Anthony's out in the studio right now, but you know, you can call back in ten minutes."  "Oh, okay."  Picked up the phone (makes sound), "Mr. Hiro is not here right now, you must call back next week." (Laughter) This, I mean just this sort of crazy thing. And finally I realize that two of the numbers were virtually the same except for one digit.  And that Anthony Barboza and Lou Draper were actually working together.  And that, when I was calling, one would be in the studio and the other would be in the dark room.  Or one would be in the--right the--the, you know.  They were sort of doing this thing and finally Anthony got on the phone.  Tony Barboza got on the phone, and I said, "Hello, this is [HistoryMaker] Carrie Mae Weems calling.  You have absolutely no idea who I am, but I know who you are and I've decided that I'm coming to work for you."  And he said, "Who is this?  Shirley? Is this Shirley?"  And I said, "No, this is Carrie Mae Weems, and I have been up for a long time, and I've been looking at your photographs for a long time.  And I just can't think of a better person to work with, so I'd like to come by and talk with you to find out when I could start."  And he said, "Well can you come by on Wednesday?"  And that's how I started working with Anthony Barboza.  And then I worked with him for a long time and Lou was there, so I was suddenly working with two of my favorite photographers in one fell swoop.  And it was really, really wonderful and then you know, that he didn't hang up on me was like a miracle.  But I was so impassioned that I was just--it's like I have to do this.  You know, and you know, like there's no other way of doing it, than other--you know than, than being direct.  I've gotta do this, and I gotta work with you, I'm looking at these photograph's that you can teach me what I need to know.  And so, I work with him, and I would then work with him on special projects because then I'm flipping back and forth.  I know California, I know New York, I know how to drive, I--you know, I'm like you know.  So you know, so he--if he needed to go to San Francisco [California] he would call me up, and I would pick him up and I would take care of everything.  If he needed to go to L.A. [Los Angeles, California], I would pick him up I would drive I would take care of everything.  So I was really a good little assistant you know, and I'd stay out of your way.  So it was pretty, pretty wonderful and they were great teachers, they were great friends they were, you know, very kind to me they were very kind to me.  And I learned a great deal from them.
Story_ID: 659186
Speaker 1: What did you learn from them?
Speaker 2: You know, they were, they were hard working people, but you know, the thing that I learned most was the great camaraderie that existed between them [Anthony Barboza and Louis Draper].  The great camaraderie that exists between artists.  And if you wanna get something done you have to have wonderful camaraderie with your friends and you bring your friends with you.  You don't leave them behind, you bring them with you if you can, you know.  And so all day long the studio--besides learning how to point a camera at something or process a roll of film, it's--it's the atmosphere that you're creating that you're working in, right.  It becomes like a place where you know all the artists are dropping in and meeting everybody, because everybody is there because there's a community that really thrives on one another and not only are they working professionally together; they're working as artists together.  Their exhibiting together, and their partying together.  Their doing--their living together and that was a great lesson that was a great lesson that you bring your friends with you and they are still in the Kamoinge Workshop.  And they still meet as the Kamoinge Workshop.
Story_ID: 659187
Speaker 1: So you describe this community, who, who made up this community?  Who were the artists and photographers and friends who were coming through?
Speaker 2: All those, all those, all those guys.  All those guys, all the same photographers you know.  And you, and you shared information you traded information.  You don't hoard information, you didn't keep it all to yourself.  He said, "Man, I've got this job going on, you do this one, you do this one, let's try, try--," you--you know.  Sort of wonderful, there's a generosity of spirit that I really admired very much with those guys.  Any you know on the other hand, you know, they--Barboza [Anthony Barboza] has always been very generous, DeCarava was very, very generous with me.  Some of the other boys, because they were boys were not so comfortable with me, and they were not so comfortable with my sort of rising quote success as they, as they saw it.  And, and were not very kind, I mean there was not much they could do about it, right because it's not like they're in any positions of power.  But there's a certain kind of generosity that didn't, that didn't come, didn't come back my way that didn't flow my way that I, that found a little disappointing.
Speaker 1: They were indifferent?
Speaker 2: Perhaps, perhaps.  DeCarava called me one day, he was--had been teaching at Hunter [Hunter College, New York, New York] for many, many years.  And he called me up, and he said, "Carrie, listen I need you to come, I need you to come down to Hunter.  I need you to teach for me this semester." And he said, "I, I, you know, I want you to replace me, you know while I go out and do some stuff I got to do."  And I said, I said, "Roy, this is, this is [HistoryMaker] Carrie Mae Weems (laughter), this is Carrie Mae Weems." He said, "That's who I'm calling."  I said, "You want me to replace you?" This is like, this is like a huge honor.  I mean this is one of the great photographers of our, of our time truly.  Misunderstood, but one the great artist of our time really, really phenomenal artist.  And wow could he, could he do it you know he could do it to have him call me and to ask me to come and teach to sit in for him was really a great honor.  I thought that he would call Jules [Jules T. Allen] or Frank Stewart or any of the other guys.  Yeah, he chooses me, and our relationship just deepened over, over time.  I've given him several scholarships in the last few years to students in various colleges under, under the name of Roy DeCarava in order to keep his name alive.
Story_ID: 659188
Speaker 1: Now you described these men, I mean, apart from Ming Smith they were primarily black men who were well, Kamoinge [Kamoinge Workshop].  And then at a certain point you decide to organize an exhibition on women's photography ['Women in Photography']?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Can you describe that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know actually I started that work when I was a student, I started that work when I was a student.  When I was a student really at CalArts [California Institute of the Arts, Valencia, California], at CalArts there were--I didn't--there were no books basically on black photographers.  With the exception of 'The Black Photographers Annual,' there were no books regarding the history of people of color, involved in the history of art generally, and certainly not in photography, so not unusual.  And of course, you know, there, there was very little about, about women as well.  So, so I just decided that I needed to find out who was doing what since there was no books at that--well let me start doing some initial research.  And so I would gather my coins and buy a bunch of stamps, make out my little, you know, leaflets, and flyers.  Actually a friend of mine in the printing department at CalArts make these beautiful flyers for me.  One about woman and photography, and one about blacks and photography.  And, and I would just send out all of these notices.  And then people started sending me slides and resumes, and documents from all of--you know like--So I would say, "If you know anybody will you send, send me their information."  And people would send me more information I would send out more fl-.  So it was this, this sort of thing just sort of kept growing and growing and growing right.  You know finally I had like this unbelievable like (gesture) stack of you know of, of files, and slides from people from all over the country.  Women artists and, and people of color, primarily black.  It was really fascinating and so, so it was based on that, then I decided to do this first show on 'Women in Photography' for Brockman Gallery [sic. Cityscape Photo Gallery, Pasadena, California], one of the important African American galleries, not museums, but galleries on, on the West Coast in, in Los Angeles [California], where I'd gotten a job.  You know, the Saars were there, Lezley Saar was there.  Kerry Marshall [HistoryMaker Kerry James Marshall], I don't know if you know Kerry, David Hammons was hanging around you know John, John Outterbridge, was hanging around, Alonzo Davis.  I mean it was like amazing you know the whole West Coast contingent of artist that I was hanging with.
Speaker 1: And it this, this is early in their career?
Speaker 2: This is early in their careers.  We were all young.
Speaker 1: And Lezley Saar, I know Betye [HistoryMaker Betye Saar], who's Lezley?
Speaker 2: Well Lezley--Betye's daughter.
Speaker 1: Alison [Alison Saar]?
Speaker 2: She has two daughters.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In fact, maybe she has three.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes Lezley is also an artist as well; Ulysses Jenkins, so we were all working at Brockman Gallery.  It's you know, it's very hip, thriving.  It was sort of like the counterpoint to the Studio Museum [Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York] on the West Coast, very interesting, very interesting.  So I was working there, and they allowed me to do my first exhibition there which is where I met [HistoryMaker] Deborah Willis.  Who became--has become my lifelong friend, um-hm. So yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, you--
Speaker 2: --a little bit of a life, huh?
Speaker 1: I'll say.
Speaker 2: Sort of, kind of.
Story_ID: 659189
Speaker 1: This is your first show [sic.] you are still in your twenties at this point?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And how was that show ['Women in Photography'] received?
Speaker 2: Well people were very excited about it, first of all, the artists were thrilled.  I was also in an organization I think by this time of Women in Photography in LA, a Los Angeles [California] group.  So I'm--was working with them as well, and there may have been a few small articles about it I don't think it was like enormously publicized. You know the L.A. Times [The Los Angeles Times] didn't come out to write about it or anything like that, but it was but it was certainly seminal for me and for the artists.  You know the thinking that went on behind it.  And people from the community came to see it but it wasn't--wasn't, didn't, it didn't you know the lightning didn't come down, the curtains didn't part.  But something happened it set us all I think on a very interesting course.  That first of all that the work needed to be done that needed to be done.  And that there were certain kinds of people that could do it, you know.  It takes a certain it takes a person, a certain personality to do this kind of work.  And, and since I am so--very invested to what happens to other artists.  I'm sort of like a very good person to be in that position.  Deb Willis [HistoryMaker Deborah Willis] is very much the same which is why we get along so incredibly well.  Our first impulse is to bring the group together to assess what is happening, to assess what's needed.  And then to figure out who's there to fill the void.  You know it's a dynamic way of working.  So you know I'm running around I'm really, really young.  But I'm calling museums and saying you know, "Shawn Walker is going to be on the West Coast this--in the next month.  I think it would be really wonderful if we actually did you know, like a lecture there at the museum focused on his work.  I think that you know, the museum certainly need that kind of thing, because that's not what you normally do.  And he's a great friend of mine, I'll be happy to help you put it together." It's like, "Who is this, you can't be serious, who the fuck do you think you are?"  (Laughter) But I was right, and it was the moment, it was the moment, because museums hadn't been at all inclusive.  And they hadn't--not only had they not shown any people of color you know, there were no lectures either. So it was like, wait a minute, here is this woman coming in sort of delivering us this sort of gift and all we have to do is take it, take it.
Speaker 1: Now this is interesting because you, you know at this point that you are an artist.  That you are a photographer and what you are doing curating and producing for other artists (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, you know you what I may tell you something, and this is probably one of the things that I've learned.  Or rather I should say that I'm very proud of--I never, when I contacted museums or galleries, talked about my work.  And it was only after with Shawn Walker, and a few other people coming to the West Coast when this curator said, "You're a photographer right?"  And I said, "Yes I am." And he said, "Why don't show some of your work?"  And I thought, "Well that's pretty (audio disturbance) presumptuous, how could I possibly like, curate myself?"  That's not done; other people curate you, you don't curate you (laughter), right.  You know, so I wouldn't feel comfortable in that position.  And so you know, so like weeks go by, and he keep saying, "I would really love it if you would just show a couple of pieces of your, of your work."  But it's really through his sort of insistence ultimately that--his insistence, that I actually wound up showing just a couple of slides in the very end of a talk that, that Shawn Walker was doing--that I was doing, actually, on Shawn's work.  And then I started doing all these talks about other artists.  I was writing about other artists and it was really through writing about other artists, and talking about other artist, so insistently people started asking me about, "Well what is it that you do?"  And it's like, well that, that's not important actually right now.  I'm interested in what they do.  And but sooner or later people convinced me to show something or to do something and suddenly, suddenly this career is sort of happening.  Not that I was really planning for it, I really sort of thinking about organizing more than I was thinking about exhibiting.
Story_ID: 659190
Speaker 1: Did that come from the political organizing that you had done with Ray [Raymond Marshall]?  Like, this organization of other artists' work where, where, where do you think that was born, from where?
Speaker 2: I'm not--I don't really know, I mean I just know that it's something that I'm very interested in doing and I remain--you know, you know I did this exhibition at, at the Guggenheim [Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, New York, New York].  And I thought well that's great, but I wanna have like conversations with other artists.  So I thought--I organized, a three day symposium that brought together over sixty artists to talk about work.  There were choreographers, and dancers, and musicians, and visual artist and it was extraordinary it was an extraordinary event.  But for me it was the highlight, it was the high light of, of the work.  So being there was wonderful, but being able to enlarge that platform to include multiplicity of voices was so much more interesting and exciting, rewarding.
Story_ID: 659191
Speaker 1: Now back in your twenties, as you're organizing this great presentation of female artists ['Women in Photography'] and then being invited to show a little bit of your work.  What work--what is the work that you were creating, your own work during this same period?
Speaker 2: I had started making--I had started making actually, sort of interesting group of photographs on farmers.  There were a group of black farmers who lived in Central California, very close to CalArts [California Institute of the Arts, Valencia, California] over the ridge and into the valley.  And a little town called Val Verde [California], and I got a job there in the local community center.  And worked there for a while and I went there virtually every week.  A couple times a week to photograph this very interesting black community that was out in the middle of no place.  Cowboys and farmers, and also there were, there were other--other Mexican farmers were there Filipino farmers as well.  So I was photographing farmers a bit I was sort of starting to show that work.  I'd been photographing in New York [New York] as well had made some very interesting photographs around the City of New York.  So I was doing a documentary work, a kind of reportage, conventional kind of, kind of work at that, at that point.
Speaker 1: And how were you earning a living during this time?
Speaker 2: Well I know that occasionally I was a Kelly Girl [Kelly Girl Service, Inc.]--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --and then of course you know, there were periods of time I was in school, so I was getting you know, grants.  But yeah, it was between that you know between being in school between being a Kelly Girl and a waitress or, you know.  Primarily as a--as a Kelly Girl I think that think that's primarily how I made my, my living.
Story_ID: 659192
Speaker 1: I want you to tell me about Prentice Polk?
Speaker 2: Who?
Speaker 1: Prentice Polk, you, you--I, I'm reading that you bought photographs from P.H. Polk?
Speaker 2: Oh (laughter), Polk, oh he was so lovely you know, it really is true I suppose, you know, I started by saying earlier that I really was a curious girl.  And, and I remain, I remain so (laughter) and I had to--written a grant I was, I was a student.  I was a student--I was a student maybe, somewhere.  I think that I was a student somewhere I don't remember exactly where I was (audio disturbance).  I'm sorry about the mic [microphone].  I was a student some place I don't remember anyway but, but it's, but it's some time I was still in my twenties, and I came to New York [New York].  I'd gotten a grant somehow that I've written to visit a lot of photographers, a number of photographers and P.H. Polk was one of them.  I went to see the man [Reginald McGhee] who discovered Van Der Zee [James Van Der Zee], who was living in Atlanta [Georgia].  I went to visit Ed Sherman [Edward Sherman], and I went to visit P.H. Polk all of them on the same trip to do these oral histories with them.  And Polk was in Alabama, he'd worked in Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] he had been the photograph for Tuskegee for a number of years.  And had known George Washington Carver, and had made all of the important photographs of Carver.  Carver's home, of his studio, the portraits of him, there were just really incredible.  So I get to Polk's house, and we are--you know, we just fall in love with each other immediately.  And I stay there for I don't know three or four days.  And we go fishing together in the mornings, and we come back, and we, we'd fry the fish.  And we have ice cream for supper, and then we have these long wonderful talks.  And his studio was upstairs on the top floor of his house.  It was like, it was like two hundred degrees up there and it was just--I could not believe this man worked in these conditions.  Negatives were everywhere, negatives were everywhere, prints were everywhere I mean just stacks and stacks and stacks and stacks and stacks. And of course everybody by this time understood the value of who he was as a man.
Story_ID: 659193
Speaker 1: And there were some activity going on around him, and somebody trying to organize something to help him archive this work.  You know, but it never really happens. You know, nobody ever really came forward to really archive of work of this great photographer (laughter).  So I'm talking to him, and I said, "Mr. Polk I'd like to buy several of your photographs," and he said, "Well, okay."  And I said, I said, "I don't have a lot of money but how much are they?" (Laughter) So he said, "Well you can get one for thirteen dollars, two for twenty-five" (laughter).  I said, "What?"  "You can get one for thirteen dollars," (laughter) "and two for twenty-five."  I said, "Are you out of your mind?"  It was unbelievable.  That's how much he was selling his prints for, that's how much he was selling them for; that's how much he was selling them for.  And so I had this whole conversation about this idea.  And what he was selling his work for and, and then suddenly all these people were coming down to Alabama.  And to his home and he raised his prices a bit.  You know, maybe they were you know two for forty-five dollars now were something absolutely crazy.  But you know but he made a living, he made a living, he raised his girls himself, he raised his daughters himself.  His wife [Margaret Thompson Polk] left him, she just walked off and left one day, and he never saw her again.  And he was just sort of wonderful and, and very generous.  And he decided that he--you know his important work was called 'The Vanishing Negro.'  But I don't know if you ever saw the book, but it's a really beautiful, beautiful book the portraits are just gorgeous.  And he decided that he was going to do this series of portraits based on this idea that the world was changing.  That, that look of black people you know that those old, that old style was fading there was a new generation that was, that was coming.  You know, that was dressed differently that presented themselves differently.  And you know, his first photograph he said I saw this beautiful black woman walking down the street, and she had on this big apron and a bandana and an old raggedy sweater you know.  And he said, "I ran after her and asked her if I could photograph her."  And you know first she didn't want to come but I convinced her to come into the studio.  It's this beautiful photograph of this beautiful woman with her hands on her hips and he, he said, "I called her the boss."  Really great picture, really, really wonderful you should look them up.
Speaker 2: I will.
Speaker 1: So this is, that's P.H. Polk.
Story_ID: 659194
Speaker 1: In the vein of documenting others, you--I believe your first major video work was, you were still in you twenties in '82 [1982], your documentary on black photographers?
Speaker 2: I was a busy girl, damn, damn (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Can you describe that project?
Speaker 2: Yep, I had gotten another grant (laughter) I was at UCSD [University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California], by that time.  I was at UCSD for sure at that time and by then I mean you know I sort of knew all the guys.  And I was in my late twenties, I must have been in my late twenties.  And I understood them a bit more, understood myself a bit more.  And I knew that history was really important, being able to document it, to describe it and to really enlarge the dialogue on what was the American photography.  What was the shape of American photography?  What were the complexities on American photography that, that needed to happen?  And then at that moment when I, when I looked out on the landscape I couldn't see anybody doing that work.  And so I thought that I should do something, try to do something about that.  And so I, I got a small grant it wasn't huge maybe it was maybe two thousand, twenty-five hundred dollars, something like that but enough for me at that time.  I, I came, I stayed with Shawn Walker; I was dating Shawn Walker actually at the time.  And I organized basically three or four tiers of, of artists, then we shot them over the course of three days.  And, in fact, last night the cinematographer came to my, came to my lecture at, at BAM [Brooklyn Academy of Music, Brooklyn, New York], Al Santana [Alfred J. Santana] was the cinematographer.  Wonderful, wonderful artist and his wife Marilyn Nance one of the artists that I was going to be interviewing.  So I wanted to look at Roy DeCarava specifically as a--an important seminal figure in the, within the movement and then the Kamoinge Workshop as a larger group.  And then a group of them that were related to the Kamoinge people like Jules Allen [Jules T. Allen] and Frank Stewart. And then the younger group of photographers that was sort of coming behind them.  And that group included people like [HistoryMaker] Lorna Simpson, Lorna Simpson, and Marilyn Nance, [HistoryMaker] Dawoud Bey maybe there were only a few other people involved.  So it was sort of a really wonderful kind of stretching out over the course of several days.  Really looking at these artists with the--who they were what their work was really about and the thing that's sort of lovely about that is that I did some initial editing of the work.  But MoMA [Museum of Modern Art, New York, New York], decided to do its exhibition on Roy DeCarava ['Roy DeCarava: A Retrospective'].  The first sort of major exhibition of Roy as it happened in, in New York [New York].  They used much of that footage in order to do their research.  So the work had started to sort of circulate in that kind of way.  That researchers now are coming to me for those files because they need that history because nobody really wrote it down, right.  There's 'Black Photographers Annual' ['The Black Photographers Annual], and it does what it does and then Joe Crawford died.  There's [HistoryMaker] Deborah Willis, who, of course, continues to do really very, very important work; there's nobody else like her on the planet.  There's nobody else like her on the planet, she is the woman that is doing this work, there's nobody else.  People talk about it, but she's the one who's doing it; she's a fierce sister.  I hope she's a part of this series [The HistoryMakers]; she's bad.
Speaker 1: She is.
Story_ID: 659195
Speaker 1: So your first collection of photographs, photographs, text and spoken word.  Your 'Family Pictures and Stories' ['Family Pictures and Stories, 1981-1982,' Carrie Mae Weems], that you created I guess was it the following year, 1983?
Speaker 2: Well I started the photographs earlier, I started making photographs of my family earlier.  And, it was really through my encounter with Zora Neale Hurston that I really began to understand the power of the personal narrative.  You know the--even though my father [Myrlie Weems] had been a storyteller I didn't really think of him as a storyteller, he just told good stories, right.  I began to understand that he was really a storyteller that he was really the bearer of narrative.  Not all of us are that; not all of us are that, right.  And so Zora sort of introduced me to a way of thinking about possibilities of the ways of which I could work with photography.  And use photography and language, and narrative together even though she wasn't using photographs.  It was still kind of what she represented that sort of fostered a whole new set of ideas.  I am so grateful, I'm so grateful that she, she lived.  I'm so grateful that she did what she did, that she el- she freed me.  She freed me; she gave me the right and the, and the authority to do the work that I actually went on to do with 'Family Pictures and Stories.'  It was a very important work for me.
Speaker 1: So when you say that Zora freed you, how, how did this occur, what, what happen?
Speaker 2: By, by example.  You know that there was--she charted the path.  So she'd allowed--she gave me space.  You know, I mean that's the thing I think is so wonderful about what people do.  Really when you are the--what, what you being the trailblazer means that you have really opened the path for others to follow.  So she, she was that, she was that for me and for a whole hoard of people that came along with me.  That suddenly there was an articulated voice positioned in a certain kind of cadence that described a certain kind of life that was not urban.  That was not urban right that was very important right.  I supposed that in some ways Hughes, Langston Hughes is the same way right, this way of describing that was not urban. You know, that was, was always sort of like you know, like waltzing with the blues, so to speak, right.  And I think that there's something really valuable, it was certainly valuable for me and--
Speaker 1: So, so at--where were you, were you in school [at the University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California] when you learned about Zora Neale Hurston (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah in school, I was in school.  I was in, you know, I was in that place where I didn't know what my voice was.  You know, that I was--I knew lots of people, I looked at lots of things.  I was making photographs, and I'm actually a very good--can be, sometimes a good photographer.  So you know, so I was doing what I do but I was still not--I hadn't yet found my own articulation it just was not, it was not clear what that was.  What my direction needed to be how it needed to be.  And so I went to San Francisco [California] to visit a friend for the weekend because I was so despondent, I was so depressed.  I was struggling, that sort of struggle to find my way through.  And on the way out the door that Monday morning, I looked down, and there was this, this book 'Their Eyes Are Watching God' [sic. 'Their Eyes Were Watching God,' Zora Neale Hurston]. And I remember somebody told me that I reminded them of Zora Neale Hurston, but I didn't know who Zora Neale Hurston was.  So it was like, oh that's that woman somebody said that I reminded them of, and so I asked my friend if I could take the book.  Her son had just finished reading it for class.  I got on the bus, I decide I was going to take the long way back to San Diego [California] because I didn't wanna get there too fast.  And I read 'Their Eyes Are Watching God' all the way from San Francisco to San Diego.  And I got off the bus reading the book, pulling my suitcase behind me.  And I got into a taxi reading the book.  And then I got to my apartment, and I was reading the book and I unlock my door and I was reading the book.  And I walk into my bedroom, and I was reading the book and I sat in my bed and I finished it.  I said, "Oh, oh, okay, okay I got it, I got it, thank you."  It was just such a powerful example; I was so grateful.  Got up the next day went to the library, checked out everything they had on Zora Neale Hurston, ordered everything else they didn't have.  Bought everything else that I possibly could and finished up my degree and then decided I was going to be a folklorist.  And went off to UC Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] to study, to study there, you know, it was like you know the, the lights, the lights were just sort of turned on bright.  How amazing is that, you know you just never know who you're going to touch by doing what you do.  Phenomenal.
Story_ID: 659196
Speaker 1: People have likened your work to Zora Neale Hurston in the sense of the visual anthropologist (laughter).
Speaker 2: Oh really.
Speaker 1: When you describe, when you describe that experience as you have been describing the work that you're making it makes perfect sense.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So from going to school [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] to be a folklorist, did you even know that that was a thing to be before that?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure, but it became very clear (laughter) that it was a possibility.  Well, of course, I'd been very interested in anthropology and ethnography but I don't know if I knew about folklore as a category of study.
Speaker 1: And so, after this eye opening experience of Zora Neale Hurston, then going to study how to be a folklorist what was the next project that you created?
Speaker 2: So I did 'Family Pictures and Stories' ['Family Pictures and Stories, 1981-1982,' Carrie Mae Weems].
Speaker 1: Which is--yeah can you describe that?
Speaker 2: Well, it's you know that, it's a series of photographs of family members with lots of text and narrative.  And many, many photographs, you know I've always worked with large groups of pictures that, that are composited in some sort of way, not as collage.  But rather sort of groups of, of, images that are relational, are relational and I enjoy that working in that, in that way.  After I finished 'Family Pictures and Stories,' I moved back to northern California.  I moved to Oakland [California], and I enrolled in Berkley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California], Alan Dundes, the great Alan Dundes was my teacher, who was truly amazing.  Again a great, great, great teacher along with Barbara Christian, who was teaching in the English department, the African American studies department.  Another great professor and they taught me what being a great teacher is, I mean they were really wonderful.  And so I studied with Dundes, and I studied with, with Barbara and I was very connected to both of them.  They were really quite wonderful and during that time they didn't know that I was a photographer, they didn't know that I was you know curating.  They didn't know anything about my life in that way.  They just knew me as one of their, one of their students.  It was much later they realized what I was sort of up to.  But during that time I did 'Ain't Jokin'' ['Ain't Jokin', 1987-1988,' Carrie Mae Weems] a series of photographs about--that uses text and humor.  Humorous text as, as the, the sort of troupe through which one views and understands and negotiates the work.  So that was like a very important piece to do.  And then from 'Ain't' to 'Ain't Jokin'' I did 'American Icons' ['American Icons, 1988-1989,' Carrie Mae Weems] and from 'American Icons' I did 'The Kitchen Table Series' ['The Kitchen Table Series, 1990,' Carrie Mae Weems].  So they were all sort of just sort of like these sort of things that were just sort of coming very quickly.
Story_ID: 659197
Speaker 1: And so, in, in terms of your artistic process, you--can, can you describe it.  Because you're at one point, you're taking pictures but then, there's poetry, there's humor, there's a lot of prose, how are you developing your style?
Speaker 2: Well I'm not really sure but I, but I was for a long time very interested in things that were very direct and immediate.  There, there's not like a lot of mediation between what is seen and how it's made.  You know like you know, somewhere in this environment and it's a constructed set right.  The lights are sort of set up a certain way, and you make sure there is balance and there is highlight.  And there is all the stuff that sort of going long the picture frame that it's being constructed in order to have this sort of particular image of Carrie [HistoryMaker Carrie Mae Weems].  So trying to set up you know like a very direct relationship with the subject and with the viewer.  With the subject and with the viewer, with the audience--always been something that I was really interested in and trying to get rid of as much artifice as possible.  As much sort of nonsense on the surface as possible, so we can just look very clearly at the subject and having the subject always look back, right.  You know, that I'm engaging you right that I am not like an object simply of your gaze.  I'm really engaging you in some sort of a conversation with me.  Trying to construct images in that way has been a very, very important way of, of working.  The text you know happens in, in a variety of different ways for and 'Ain't Jokin'' ['Ain't Jokin', 1987-1988,' Carrie Mae Weems] because I was really at that moment in the folklore program [at the University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California].  And really thinking about the devastating effects and uses of humor became really important for me to use humor that was a preexisting humor.  That, that there was a real history to right, so this idea for instance you know, "What are the three things you can't give a black person?" "A black eye, a fat lip or a job," right. The way which you know, humor is used to really social control the other becomes really important.  "Mirror, mirror on the wall who the fairest of them all?"  "Snow White, you black bitch, and don't you forget it," right.  You know, perfect, right?  Coming out of Anglo American humor about blacks.  And so there were these dynamic things around humor that, that I was starting to learn.  I'd always really disliked jokes when I was growing up.  I did not like putting other people down through humor and somebody would be the scapegoat to my, my humor.  I thought just really a vile and offensive thing to do so really trying to understand how it functioned was very important to me.  And how audiences used it you know related to it or not was also very important to me.  And the thing, an interesting things have happened around it, joking.  You know people--a lot of, a lot of institutions have used that work they wanted to show the work, display the work.  You know, and I said, okay, okay all right okay, all right, you know (laughter).  But you know, students have like taken over the administration (laughter) people walked off their jobs (laughter).  You know that kind of stuff has happened as a result of these photographs, right, you know.  Customs [U.S. Customs and Border Protection] refused to ship them to England at one point for and exhibition, right.  A group of workers who were working on my text panel refused to print them, right.  I mean you know, until they found out that I was actually black.  Now all of that's really, really interesting.  The group of students in some place up north, you know, persisted in taking over like, you know, the president's office (laughter).  The president calls, "Do you think you can come here to this university to explain exactly," (laughter) "what you--." "I told you that there might be consequences" (laughter).  "You'll have to deal with that one, I'm sorry," (laughter) "I really can't, I really can't fly there to like you know to like mitigate the situation.  You've got to deal with that," right.  So interesting things have happened around these, these kinds of projects.
Story_ID: 659198
Speaker 1: And then the 'Kitchen Table' ['The Kitchen Table Series, 1990,' Carrie Mae Weems], I think probably 'Kitchen Table' was really sort of the, the breakthrough project for me because it brought so many things together.  So much thinking together and it is really, I think that kind of moment where I finally sort of really discovered the sort of deeper essence of myself.  And the nature of my own voice and what it meant to be a women, and it meant to be a black woman.  And what it meant to be in love and out of love what it meant to question monogamy and did I really want to be in a monogamist relationship or was I really about something else.  You know I mean just really kind of digging (gesture) and a very rich way into the soil of what was possible.  And, and I think that probably one of the reasons that it remains incredibly, you know, such a--an important work for thousands of people around the world.  Men and women come to me to talk to me about that work in ways that I can't even begin to describe to you.  I mean even last night was just, was just phenomenal the comments that these men and women made about that work is just really powerful.  It really moves people in very, very deep ways.  And so, I really moved to make it, and it was at really great moment and a very tumultuous moment in my life.  I was very, very you know was at a deep rupture, you know, I was at a deep, deep place.  You know of really battling, I was battling for my soul.  I was battling to figure out what I was going to really be as an artist.  And how I was going to be that, as an artist. And that you know like really trying to deal with it, to deal with it and yeah, it was a, it was a tough struggle.
Story_ID: 659199
Speaker 1: Can you describe--first of all, 'Kitchen Table' ['The Kitchen Table Series, 1990,' Carrie Mae Weems] naming it, in that way, the construct of 'Kitchen Table' can you talk about that, some more?
Speaker 2: You mean how it's made actually (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. And why you gave it that name, what that means?
Speaker 2: Well, well you know, eve- even as a writer I'm sure that you know that like one paragraph leads to the next.  You know, where the first book leads to the second book, the third book there's something very important about your own archive, and your own making.  And so, I'd made these, I'd made these photographs--I was living in a small town in New England, in Northampton, Northampton, Massachusetts.  I'd just moved there to teach.  I'd just left Berkley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California], it's my first serious teaching job [at Hampshire College, Amherst, Massachusetts].  And I had this set up, this very beautiful kitchen, very simple, very simple kitchen was really beautiful simple overhanging light, a Swedish light, they were very popular at the time.  And I thought you know like I would pass it every morning and every evening I thought, what a beautiful space.  The light that came into the room was lovely, beautiful space to make images.  And so, I invited this man over, and I started photographing him at my table.  And that led to starting to photograph myself at the same table.  And then inviting other people to join me at that table it was very, very simple.  I probably worked on it for about six or seven months and then probably towards the end like, you know, like every single day, two and three times a day working at that table.  And photographing at the table and really trying to you know, processing immediately.  And making sure the negative was perfect and not going back and photographing it again.  You know just really, really in this zone of, of working and it just was, it was just coming together.  You know the prints were gorgeous, I loved printing out on my own--I was taking my time to, to make them.  And, and then the text, the text works in a very interesting way the text really rides alongside.  I see the text as being parallel like it is, its own narrative own thing it can be read completely on its own.  As the photographs can be completely read on their own.  When you bring them together, there's a third thing that happens, and I'm very interested in that third thing that happens right.  And sort of all of those kinds of experiences.  And so, so I'm always sort of thinking about, how do I lead myself and my viewer into a space of habitation to be with me for like the next hour, you know.  You know, it longs it take to really walk through this image or to read through that narrative.  And now to go back and sort of look at those two things in relationship to one another developing a real pacing.  And so, it's really quite wonderful, it's a wonderful for me to work and to figure out how to solve the problem of, of sight and sound simultaneously.  And trying to get to that I think you sort of also lead me back to film eventually.  Because, because it was another way to sort of bring again those, those--that third thing into the mix. That there's image, that there's sound, that there's music, that there's cadence, that there's movement that's actually happening simultaneously.  That, that you can't quite accomplish with the still photograph.
Story_ID: 659200
Speaker 1: You know the notion of 'Kitchen Table' ['The Kitchen Table Series, 1990,' Carrie Mae Weems], for, just as a concept is something that we often think everything gets discussed--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --at the kitchen table.
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: And as you say, so many people have been affected by the work.  As you were creating this work over the months that you made it, what was your intention behind the creation of this work?
Speaker 2: Oh, that's a great question.  Well, as I said I started making these photographs of this man and the image might be in the book.  Beautiful brother who lived in my neighborhood [Northampton, Massachusetts].  And so I started looking at the relationship of, of men, how men work.  So I thought-- so I did this piece that's called 'Jim the mission, if you choose to accept, is to land on your own two feet' [sic. 'Jim, if you choose to accept, the mission is to land on your own two feet,' Carrie Mae Weems].  And, and that same man then, same subject I used over and over actually throughout 'The Kitchen Table Series.'  I think I was really interested in a couple things truthfully.  One, there were actually many things that were going on.  The first, the first important thing was really coming to a sense of my--the, the quality and the character of my own artistic voice.  And really discovering a place and a way of making that was very particular.  There're very few photographs that look like 'The Kitchen Table Series' I mean it's very singular in a way.  You know, like being very clear about how it was constructed, and how it was made, very simple and very direct.  But also with beautiful action and activity around it so, my own aesthetic voice was very important.  My own personal voice as an artist was, was key.  But I was also up against the deeper pressure of trying to understand something about the nature of representation.  And how to represent women, and how to repre- how to represent women in general and how represent black women in particular.  There was just really nothing there.  There was a lot of theoretical texts that was circulating at that time.  Very important essays were being written, were being delivered and discussed constantly.  More movies are--essays on women was a key I'm teaching at that same time [at Hampshire College, Amherst, Massachusetts].  I'm looking at the way in which women are representing themselves, or not being able to represent themselves in any sort of clear and normal way.  So it was sort of you know in sort like in a very deep social context of, of trying to figure out making that 'kitchen table really emerged.  And so there were a number of different factors that were really playing in at that moment.  Being very clear on, on the critical discussion. The critical, the critical discourse going on around women and representation was absolutely key to its making which is one of the reasons that the woman is absolutely central. And is always looking back is always aware of the gaze and who might be looking, that she is finally a subject that is in control, in control of her own making. That was very key to me.
Story_ID: 659201
Speaker 1: Many of my students at that point [at Hampshire College, Amherst, Massachusetts]--many of my female students--well, what I noticed was many of my young male students when I ask them to make a self portrait of them, which is always their first, their first assignment in my class.  Make a portrait of yourself and of something that you really care about and love.  Right, so that I could see two things simultaneously.  All the boys would photographed themselves in a very frontal almost confrontational way in relationship to the camera.  More often than not women will always turn at a profile to the camera.  And their face is always somehow obscured by something, their own hand, their own youth, their own pose, their own--right.  This sort of way of never quite being able to confront the camera.  It's, it's a training, it's a way in which women been trained to respond to elements of representation.  The instruments of representation, right.   So you're always hidden in some way but you're never quite revealed as subject.  And in control of your own making subject even when you're making.  So that was very interesting to me, so I'm thinking a lot about all of those ideas.  About these seminal essays that did not include, that did not look at woman of color at all, right.  I had conversations with Laura Mulvey, about where, where were women of color who had a very different kind of experience.  In her seminal essay ['Visual Pleasure and Narrative Cinema'] that was read by hundreds of thousands of people around, around the world.  And it was really important so, so it was really you know like in that, that context.  And so I was thinking about a lot of that in the making but I was also just thinking about the need to really make really beautiful images that I could claim as my own.  That came out of my own deep psychic understanding of what a picture needed to look like that represented the (makes noise) (gesture) us and the best of all possible ways in our complexity.  It was a great challenge it was really fun, but getting to that point was treacherous, and long, and hard, and difficult, and I cried a lot getting to that space.
Story_ID: 659202
Speaker 1: Struggled a lot (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Treacherous, why?
Speaker 1: Finding yourself is, is not easy and all that noise and all this noise and that, that's the standard over there.  The standard is over there the standard hangs at that museum over there, and none of that looks like you, none of that represents you.  Right, the closest that you get to any of that is standing as guard in relationship to that.  To security, securing, securing it for somebody but never really any other, any other way.  So you know and so since I knew all of those people, I'd photograph for those people, rather I printed for some of those people.  From Garry Winogrand to Todd Papageorge, I mean you know two, you know, the men that were really important to like American photography.  You know I printed for them I'm an excellent printer, right.  But so, that I'm thinking about, I'm thinking about that, and so those become, those become important, important and seminal, seminal memories, (singing) if I could say it that way.
Speaker 2: That's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And useful, and useful, you know we were, we were challenging a tradition.  Right.  Ultimately, ultimately you know I mean like this project this narrative project [The HistoryMakers], of African American history makers is really a corrective to a very long tradition of you know systematic exclusion.  So it's happened in every facet of the country and every facet of culture.  Right, and so we're now trying to play catch up, we're playing catch up in very interesting way.  And museums are attempting to catch up, artist are attempting to catch up, writers are attempting to catch, historians are attempting to catch up.  Right, whole new departments are being developed in an attempt to catch up.  You know, and of course you know and then of course you have to deal with you know the, you know the changing same as Amiri Baraka would say.  Where MoMA [Museum of Modern Art, New York, New York] hires curator for its first time, it hires a you know, a curator to take care of those people, right, those people--very interesting.  You know, Okwui Enwezor just did like you know an incredible critique of MoMA's hiring.  Not a curator, but a consultant, the only African American in the fucking building to deal with that art, it was phenomenal.  It was phenomenal I mean you know this like one of most important museums in the world.  And, and I know many of the trustees and these are wonderful people you know accept that there, there is an exclusion.  And a part of exclusion happens because, because you just don't know them.  Just 'cause you're not at the dinner table, you know.  'Cause you, you know 'cause, 'cause, "Well I don't know them," you know.  "I'm inviting my friends over, but I don't know them," and so exclusion happens for a variety of reason's it's not just racist.  It's--some of it is just we just don't even mix.  In New York City [New York, New York], New York City is a great place for you know, not mixing.  It's a very segregated city in a lot of wits, the very provincial place it just looks cosmopolitan 'cause everybody is here.  But you know, you could be, you know the only black person like in the center of the city at a major event where there are a thousand people and it often happens in my experience, shocking.  And this is 2014.  So yeah, so the work has all to do with all of that.  It's a part of all of that it's not separate from all of that and my life, and my work there is no separation really between these two things.  It is, it's all one thing, you know.  I don't like, you know live for life or live for art I just live.  You know, and the art is a part of, a part of how I live.
Story_ID: 659203
Speaker 1: And what I'm thinking about, and so you asked me this question about how I came to use myself in the work.  In part, in part you know for a long time I thought that I had--was only using myself because, because I willing to push myself in ways that I can't push other people.  That I would be embarrassed to push anybody else, because I exploit myself in all kinds of ways, right.  That I'm, so I'm willing--I don't have to ask myself permission I grant myself permission to act out, to act out.  So I thought that, you know, really that it was really sort of much more connected to that.  But in the, at the end of the day really, the work really finally told me that I was really involved in the act of performance that I'm involved in an ongoing way.  In relationship to my notions about the body.  The politics of the body, the culture of the body, the odor of the body, the sensations of it.  It's sexuality, its sensuality; I'm really interested in all of that.  And a part--and I began to realize after a long period of time it took me years to realize.  That yes, it may have started as a--because I was the most convenient subject in the room, but it really had something to do with my deep need to act out.  And to perform and to use my own body as a site of, of confrontation.  To use it as its own subject that is contr- in control of its own making, of its own doing, that I own this.  That nobody else owns this and with this skin, I can do what I choose.  And that you know in the most general way and, and I choose to lay myself bare before you so that we could have a deeper experience about what this body means and what this body ultimately represents.  What is the nature of the black female body, how has it historically been recognized and how do we negotiate it's new, new terms for its presentation that's what I'm interested in.  And that's why I think I use myself so consistently in the work, and I have a good frame, I have good body, and I know how to use it.  You know, I'm a good director of myself in that, in that way and I don't mind being ashamed of myself.
Speaker 2: It's very self conscious of you to, to put yourself on the other side of the camera.  Often photographers are looking at everything else as opposed to turning the lens on themselves.
Speaker 1: Yes, yes I don't like to do that very much which is why I don't really photograph other people so much.  I really don't like people photographing me very much because I know what photographs do, and usually people don't make very good photographs (laughter) I mean right.  So I'm really clear about what photographs can do and since I am reluctant to allow people to photograph me.  I am also reluctant to photograph others unless they are absolutely and totally willing to participate with me, and they have a sense of what I'm doing with my camera.  Otherwise, I would rather use my own self, I would rather--because I don't wanna deal with what does it mean to represent somebody else.  And to do that in a way that might be a misrepresentation, right.  The history of photography has been a history of misrepresentation, so that's one thing that I'm really not interested in negotiating.  You know I don't need to, there are enough people that are out there doing that kind of work.  Let me figure out how to make a true image, with a true subject that is a willing participant so that whatever happens I am always in control of the construction of that image.
Story_ID: 659204
Speaker 1: When you speak about photography and the misrepresentation that often exists, I'm curious as when you--this is back to intention.  When you are photographing a subject, what is your intention, what is, what is, what is it you're searching for when you're making those photographs?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't photograph other people.
Speaker 1: Not at all? Well--
Speaker 2: For the most part, No (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Not anymore.
Speaker 2: For the most part, no.
Speaker 1: Right
Speaker 2: Really, for the most part, No.  I mean the--you know, like I, I don't make documentary photographs.  I don't, I don't make them.  If I'm in Cuba, if I'm in Cuba--if I'm going to, if I wanna photograph in cane fields then I put on clothes.  And I go learn how to chop sugarcane (laughter).  And then I might ask some people who are standing by if they wanna be in a photograph with me.  So, so it's so really that's--I mean, so it's really this very, very deliberate way of working.  So, yes of course if I'm in social situations and at parties and my friends are around I make those kinds of photographs.  But my serious work is the work that I, that I, my work it's, it's usually not involving very many other people.  Unless we are really agreed that something is gonna happen, that's gonna happen a certain kind of way.  And so it's constructed; it's not documentary, it's not reportage.  I'm not shooting willy nilly on the streets of New York [New York], going out and stealing somebodies image and then bringing it back home saying that I caught it.  You know, that's the way that many, many people work.  Some of that is important, some of that is I think that there are aspect of, of, of documentary that are absolutely key.  And I've seen beautiful, beautiful images made in the world but it's not the way that I want to work for the most part.  So, yeah.
Story_ID: 659205
Speaker 1: As you describe yourself as being involved in the art of the performance, you take on different personas or so it seems.  Is that--as you are creating your work and being, like you said if you, you wanna chop sugarcane, you're gonna learn.  If you're going to the cane fields, you're gonna learn how to chop sugarcanes.  How do you, how do you conceive of these photographic experiences that you're putting yourself into?
Speaker 2: Well certain things come to me in dreams and early morning, early morning process.  You know there's certain things.  That I'm just, that I'm very interested in, there's certain things in the world that I'm interested in and inserting myself in and you know I'm, I'm always you know interested in, in inserting myself in his- into history.  And into confronting aspects of history so, so in, in, in that way, you know like I'm never like I'm rarely in need of a subject.  You know there are many things that I, that I'm interested in and locations that I'm interested in, whether it's you know in sort of looking at architecture.  You know or looking at like you know like countries or looking at countries and architecture simultaneously.  What, whatever it happens to be, but there are these sort of lovely sort of spaces, you know, for--of, of habitation.  And, and I think about them I study things long and, and hard, and I do a lot of writing.  And a lot of researching and then I make a decision about where I'm gonna go and what I'm going to do.  And how I'd like to play, play it out.  You know, and sometimes I think about photographing other people using other people, but you know I'm trying to do a new project for MoMA [Museum of Modern Art, New York, New York] on its garden [Abby Aldrich Rockefeller Sculpture Garden].  And I just really would prefer to use another person to stand in as me, but I, but I don't feel like having to talk to anybody about it.  So I thought oh okay, just you know, just do it, don't you know just pack up your stuff.  Pack up your gear go do it and you know you'll be, you'll be fine.  You know it you know it just sort of easier.  I don't wanna tell anyone where to stand or how to stand or ask 'em if they're tired or if they want some water or if they need a break (laughter).  I don't wanna, I don't want talk to them at all, I just want, wanna make the work.  And, and so in a way that's why I sort of you know, sort of coming back to the work again and again and again because I don't wanna have to discuss it very much.  You know, I mean there's a part of you know, you know of, of, of having other people around that can be, that can be, be, be absolutely lovely and wonderful.  And then there's a part of work where as you know as a writer where solitude is just key.  And that, and that, that's the part of it that you love, it that it is your quiet time to make.  And you don't have to, you don't have to talk to anybody about the way in which you wanna ask that question and construct that language, make that sentence.  That paragraph it's just yours, it's just you and that thing.  And the same thing happens when I'm out photographing.  I don't, you know, like I can just, I can just, you know I you know, I only bring a few props.  You know, I can just do it the way I want to do without having to explain it to anybody because a part of what happens, of course, is completely spontaneous, right.  Sometimes the best thing that you do happens not because you were planning it but because you weren't planning it.  But because you weren't planning it, you were open to the experience you're just right there just at the right time.  The light is just right, and you're there and that music is playing in your head or on your radio and it is just flowing, and you just wanna ride that wave until it stops.  And you know and you enter this zone, you enter this really powerful zone of creative intention.  And, and you are--it's like being one with the world.  And it only happens occasionally so you really wanna be able to dance with it when it comes, I think.
Story_ID: 659206
Speaker 1: That's interesting you, when, when you were talking about why you wanted to become a photographer from your early years you described wanting to photograph black people and the black experience in a way that it was not being documented.  And now, that illustration is really coming through you, can you talk about that a little bit?
Speaker 2: (Nods head) I think I am the black experience.  I think that that's what I'm saying when I say that there is no separation between my life and my work.  There--it's all, it all the same thing.  And I use myself to stand in for far more than just me.  I'm not really interested in Carrie [HistoryMaker Carrie Mae Weems] in that way.  I'm interested in what she can represent for herself.  Through herself by using this body as a vehicle to have a much larger discussion.  About the possibility of this that, of, of what that looks like.  And how that is constructed, and how that posed, and how it's positioned and next to what, you know.  And how it's all made, I mean I--it's yeah, yeah, yeah, and it's, it's it is in that way sort of full circle.
Speaker 1: Well and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And another way of participating with the self.
Speaker 1: And then sometimes the images are not of--not, not a person at all, like with 'Colored People' ['Untitled (Colored People Grid)' Carrie Mae Weems], isn't that the--what the (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Squares?
Speaker 1: The shakers, the salt and pepper shakers?
Speaker 2: Oh, oh that's from 'American Icons' ['American Icons, 1988-1989,' Carrie Mae Weems].
Speaker 1: Sorry, I said the wrong name.
Speaker 2: Right, 'American Icons,' yeah I did that very, a long time ago also.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Maybe around 1990 [sic.] just, just, just as I was finishing or starting, just before I started 'Kitchen Table' ['The Kitchen Table Series, 1990,' Carrie Mae Weems].
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Or maybe they were happening sort of simultaneously.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, um-hm.
Story_ID: 659207
Speaker 1: So the use of, of--
Speaker 2: Artifacts.
Speaker 1: Artifacts, how, how do you use those in telling stories?
Speaker 2: Well, you know there, they, you know.  They, they just are what they are.  I mean, I mean you know coming out of that sort of background.  Looking at your folklore and looking at you know, black memorabilia that kind of work, trying to understand how again that that might have been used or how, how they were used repositioning them.  Rethinking about them was, was sort of, it was, it was something that I needed to do.  Something that I needed to do, I'd been buying that work and collected those, those objects trying to understand them and trying to figure out ways of disrupting their purpose.  Disrupting their purpose, and so using them in photographs then became important.  Chrome importers to salt and pepper shakers, and door stops, and clothes pin hangers.  And you know, the image of the black as a subservient to you, as a subservient in culture, in American culture was just so widespread.  And the thing that so sort of fascinating that the same things that sort of really kept them rooted to work in the eighteenth and nineteenth century were the same things, the same reasons. That you know, that kept them out of work (laughter) in the 20th century.  Do you know what I mean?  It's the same stereotype you know, right you know.  This idea that you, you are labor, you know either forced labor.  Right, which is what those, the, those, those images represent, that the Negro in some form or fashion is always at your service.  Always at, you're ready to work for you, and the reason that they are at your service.  To work for you is because this is what they look like, and anything that looks like this must work for you right, you know that you must have power over that thing.  So from dish washing detergent, floor soaps to notepad, to you name it you know.  A door stops and you know, window openers, just this way in which you were always reminded of this sort of subservient position of a whole group of people in relationship to the, the white self.  I think, you know, these people were sort of extraordinary, black folks were on to something they really were you know they were not playing.  And so, and so these idea's then that you know that they're lazy and that they're ignorant and therefore you must force them to work, you know.  Is that they're lazy, and they're ignorant, and therefore you can't hire them, you know.  Or they're hair looks like this, and so you can't have somebody sitting at your front desk greeting your clients with hair that looks like this.  You fucking imagine being fired because of your hair style, 2014 this is going on.  Black women are not allowed to wear braids because it's offensive to white people.  It's pretty extraordinary, it's pretty extraordinary, so that this sense that you are denied, that your essence is denied.  I think it's a pretty extraordinary narrative to negotiate on a daily basis, and that is what women are asked to do, that black women are asked to do.  Pretty remarkable, it's pretty remarkable you know, and that most of these women are asked to endure it alone.  So I, so I was reading this story about this young, young black girl maybe six, seven years old, goes to school pretty little braids and all her stuff and the teacher sent her home.  The teacher sent her home, reprimanded her for the braids in her hair, her hairstyle and sent her home.  And so it's just sort of amazing.  So I, I think that you know really again really again trying to understand how, how to penetrate these, these stereotypes, break them down.  Reposition them and really sort of turn the tide I think is really sort of crucial for our, for our own sort of personal survival, our own mental health.  It is one of the greatest challenges that we endure on a daily basis.  Negotiating this breach of our humanness, and a breach of our rights to be who we are.  To be distinctive in our own right, so that's what the images often tend to, to be about and then the sort of later work sort of then starts to really focus, refocus architecture.
Speaker 1: We have to--
Speaker 2: So this is a great place to stop (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So it's perfect.
