Story_ID: 331394
Speaker 1: This HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers] interview is being conducted with Mr. Robert Winfrey [HistoryMaker Robert Winfrey] at the Mattapan Baptist Church at Blue Hills Parkway and Eliot Street in Milton, Massachusetts.  The date is December 7, 2005.  The interviewer is [HistoryMaker] Robert C. Hayden and the videographer is Neculai Burghelea.
Story_ID: 331395
Speaker 1: Give me your full name and would you spell your name for me?
Speaker 2: Full name [HistoryMaker] Robert Winfrey.  That's R-O-B-E-R-T, W-I-N-F-R-E-Y.
Speaker 1: And Mr. Winfrey, what is your date of birth and where were you born?
Speaker 2: My date of birth is June 14, 1933.  I was born in the City of Atlanta, Georgia, Fulton County.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  You are retired but still practicing your profession.  How would you describe yourself as a professional, your occupation?  What have you been over the years?
Speaker 2: Well, I haven't really retired.  I sort of shifted gears or so.  I'm doing something now that I've given thought to just before I retired.  I, I asked myself the question what is it that you have not done that you would like to do and one of those things was I wanted to teach and work with senior citizens, those who are retired themselves or those in the twilight years of their lives.  I wanted to teach them music, to play a musical instrument.  And this is what I'm doing now.  I'm teaching senior citizens, some as in the age of some I think the oldest I have is about eighty-six or so.  Many are retired professionals and, and, and, and from all genres as such and this is a joy because I'm, I'm working with that age group that I never worked with before except in church choirs, preparing them but now they come to me.  I see them on average of once or twice a week and this is bringing some great joy to their lives and they find something useful, something to do and something to use their minds with learning to express themselves on musical instruments.
Speaker 1: We're gonna back and look at that in a great deal more depth later on--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --in our review of your life and your work.  But during your professional career what were you?  How would you describe your occupation?  What were you trained to do and what did you do?
Speaker 2: Well I started out with the, the desire to be a, a composer.  I was a music composition major at Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia] and it was my experience in the [U.S.] military, the [U.S.] Army, where I would work with the chaplains and preparing what we call character guidance lectures and we would go to different outfits even prison stockades and I was so fascinated with the teaching and how human beings would respond to creative teaching that I sort of shifted gears when I went to graduate school [Columbia University, New York, New York], I pursued music composition but then I started thinking seriously about the teaching component of, of what I want in music and this is what guided me into the teaching and administration of music.  So I guess a music educator--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --is an apt description.
Speaker 1: All right and musical arts director as well?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay and a choral director?
Speaker 2: Choral director, organist--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --instrumentalist.
Story_ID: 331396
Speaker 1: Before we go on and look at your early years and the things that influenced you, we have four or five People magazine type questions kind of personal interest questions--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --to give the viewers of your interview another slant on your, on your personality.  Could I ask you, Bob [HistoryMaker Robert Winfrey], what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Let's see, there's something I suppose I'm not a vegetarian but I, I was weaned on vegetables.  My parents [Ethel Clark Winfrey and Pete Winfrey] always thought that that was--vegetables, vegetables were a part of your, your growing up and your development and so, so fish and vegetables are my favorite foods.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  You have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?  A place you like to escape to?
Speaker 2: Well I like to return to Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And lastly do you have a favorite phrase or saying, kind of a philosophical thought that you use from time to time with friends and acquaintances?
Speaker 2: Yeah I have several so I like to quote my mentor Benjamin Mays says which is Emerson [Ralph Waldo Emerson], he said, "See how the masses of men worry themselves into nameless graves while here a faithful servant loses himself into immortality."  And there was another one that I liked to say, I'm familiar with that I use quite a bit.  I meditate on and that is, when my work is done and I face my maker, I would hope that I would not have a single bit of talent left and I could say dear Lord, I used everything you gave me.
Speaker 1: Beautiful, beautiful.
Story_ID: 331397
Speaker 1: We like to begin now talking about your family, your family history so that we have a background and a context of which to look at your growing up years and moving into your adult life and your education and I wanna ask you about your parents, about your parents.  Would you tell me your mother's name?
Speaker 2: Ethel Clark Winfrey is my mother.
Speaker 1: Where was she born?
Speaker 2: In Hawkinsville, Georgia.
Speaker 1: And what year?
Speaker 2: Nineteen twelve [1912], I believe.
Speaker 1: And where did you grow up?
Speaker 2: My mother?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: She grew up in Atlanta [Georgia].  She left Hawkinsville at the age of eleven and she came to Atlanta with her relatives and she mainly grew up in Atlanta.
Speaker 1: What do you know about her growing up years in Hawkinsville before she went to Atlanta?  Did she talk to you about those early years, do you have any?
Speaker 2: Very little.  Or so it was she may have remained in Hawkinsville a little bit longer but my mother's mother passed away at childbirth and so that left my mother sort of on her own with, with neighbors and friends of the family.  And so this is how she left at the early age to go to Atlanta to be with some other relatives.  And that's where she grew up.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What do you know about her growing up years in Atlanta from age eleven on?  Did she talk to you much about school and about the neighborhood in Atlanta?
Speaker 2: Very little.  She, she had to--by not having a great deal of education so I recall very well when I was a student in junior high school [David T. Howard Junior High School; David T. Howard High School, Atlanta, Georgia].  My mother went back to school to complete her high school.  Went to night school to complete her high school education as such but she, she, she didn't talk very much about except the few relatives that she left in Hawkinsville.  I have an aunt and she would bring her to Atlanta during--at least once a year to be with us as such but that was about the only close relative that she had in, in Hawkinsville.  So her years in Atlanta or so sort of centered around mainly her three children, my two sisters [Frances Winfrey Batten and Betty Winfrey Adger] and me and that was it.
Speaker 1: And who raised her in Atlanta?
Speaker 2: She was raised by an aunt, a distant relative or so, an aunt and she lived with her as such until she married at an early age or so but that was her raising in Atlanta.
Speaker 1: How would you describe your mother?  How do you remember her?  What was she like as a person?
Speaker 2: Sweet, kind and gentle and very, very disciplined.  And I mean by that and she instilled that in us.  Discipline in a sense that whatever you set out to do, do it well.  As, as well as you possibly can.  And she would not accept failure.  And so I think failure with my mother was virtually impossible.  That if something didn't work out there was another way to enable you to realize success so she was a disciplinarian but also a very, very kind person.  Our youth childhood or so, we had friends in the community or so.  They were always welcome.  There was always another plate to be set for them so she was that kind of a welcoming spirit of all the way from, from childhood to youth to maturity.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 331398
Speaker 1: What neighborhood did she [Winfrey's mother, Ethel Clark Winfrey] live and grow up in, in Atlanta [Georgia] when she was a teenager?  What part of the city was she in?
Speaker 2: The southeastern side of Atlanta.  So it's not far--not a great--not a long ways from a very popular city [sic. street] in Atlanta called Auburn Avenue so she, she was raised up, I lived around McGruder Street which is the southeast section of Atlanta.
Speaker 1: Can you spell McGruder for us?
Speaker 2: Yes.  M-C-G-R-U-D-E-R, Mcgruder.
Speaker 1: Did she ever share any stories with you about her growing up years on Mcgruder?
Speaker 2: Very little as such; she was a member of a Baptist church on--the fact the name of the church was Mcgruder Baptist Church [sic. Mt. Pleasant Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia] and she was--we would attend that service frequently even though we, we lived a distant part when we were growing up as children we lived quite a distance from that, maybe about three or four miles but I remember very fondly of walking those three or four miles every Sunday or so evening to attend those afternoon services.  They had services during the afternoon at that time.  That was, she was very much church centered as such and then as of course when my sisters [Frances Winfrey Batten and Betty Winfrey Adger] and I in school so she became school centered as well.  So those elements and of church home school and church were very, very prevalent in, in our growing up and my mother emphasized that very well.
Speaker 1: What do you know about her father, your paternal grandfather, what was his name?
Speaker 2: His name was Robert Clark.  So he had very little influence in my mother's life.  In fact he left Hawkinsville [Georgia] when my mother was a child and she never saw him again until later maybe in the, in the '40s [1940s] or so.  I remember very well when he came to our home and she was so surprised just to see him. I had never seen him before and heard very little.  She didn't talk about him very much.  But strange thing about is that during his senior years or so, she took him in.  He resided with her until he passed away.  His name was Robert; I'm named after him, Robert Clark as such but very little.  I got to know him a little bit but not really much (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you were how old when you met him?
Speaker 2: I was about ten, ten years old when I first saw him yes.
Story_ID: 331399
Speaker 1: Tell me about your father.  What was his name?
Speaker 2: My father's name was Pete Winfrey as such.  He was the provider in terms of, of, of the means of survival in our home.  My mother [Ethel Clark Winfrey] did very little work except when she had to as such but my father was--he left school after he finished, he was finished with the tenth grade, he decided to take a vocation so he attended the Atlanta Vocational School [ph.] and this is where he was graduated.  He took up cooking and throughout his life or so that was his--that was his skill.  He was a chef cook.
Speaker 1: You said your mother was born in 1912.  What year was your father born?
Speaker 2: Nineteen eleven [1911].
Speaker 1: And where was he born?
Speaker 2: In Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And he grew up in what neighborhood?  Do you know where he grew up?
Speaker 2: He grew up in the part of the, on the other side, southwest part of Atlanta and that was at that time was sort of the, the rural area of Atlanta or so that he and his six brothers and that part of Atlanta was not developed.  It's, it's, it's a masterpiece now but at that time or so it was undeveloped.
Speaker 1: What is there now?
Speaker 2: They--that street Martin Luther King Boulevard [Martin Luther King Jr. Drive] that extends through, that was called its Washington Park [Atlanta, Georgia] area and you--it was such a distance that when you at that time we were for transportation in the City of Atlanta, you rode what they called street cars.  Well your street car would come to the end of the line then you would have to get off and walk the rest of the distance and this is where my father grew up that distance from the end of the, the trolley car line.
Speaker 1: What stories did he share with you if any about his growing up years? Any things that stand out in your mind, things that he told you about his early childhood and youth?
Speaker 2: Well he was typical.  He was--sports was a part of his life but he would always tell us that he was not that good at it.  He was interested in it and wanted to but he was not as good as his brothers.  Well he was the youngest of the six brothers so naturally they, they doted on him because he was considered the baby, the baby brother as such but they were in terms of athletic skills or so they had superior skills even though he, he wanted to play.  I used to watch him play baseball and things like that or softball as such.  Those kinds of things that he would share with how he would dread losing but his brothers would always be the victorious as such because of their athletic skills or so.  And he, my father, was also a member of the Mt. Pleasant Church [Mt. Pleasant Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia] on McGruder Street, is what I was trying to think of.  He was also, he also grew up in that church.
Story_ID: 331400
Speaker 1: What do you know about your father's [Pete Winfrey] parents, your paternal grandmother?  Did you know her?
Speaker 2: Yes I knew her very well.
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: Her name was Dicey, D-I-C-E-Y, Olive [Dicey Olive] of course and we would--I would spend a lot of time with her beside her so I used to--her flesh I used to love to rub, I recall rubbing my arms, I used to love.  Every time I would see her I would sit beside her and just rub her arm so she was a delightful human being as such and she would come visit us quite often, stay with us and then she would go to visit with her other sons.  She had one daughter.  My father had one--she still--and she would, she lived with her most of her adult years with her daughter.
Speaker 1: Where were her roots?  Where was she from?  Do you know where she was born?
Speaker 2: I think she was born a place called, it's an extension of Atlanta [Georgia] so I think at that time it was called--I remember looking at her birth certificate, Coco Cola, Georgia [ph.].
Speaker 1: Coco Cola?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I remember seeing that.  Its Atlanta now, but there was that distant part of Atlanta where my father grew up or so I remember seeing with Coco Cola.
Speaker 1: Did she ever share with you stories when you sat with her, did she share stories about her growing up years at all?
Speaker 2: Very little, very little.  We would talk about certain things that existed at that time but very little historical references were made.
Speaker 1: Do you remember what year she was born?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.
Speaker 1: Don't remember okay.  What about your father's father?
Speaker 2: I never knew him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Never and very little was ever said about my father's father.  I--he, he, he, he didn't share that phase of his parentage with us.
Speaker 1: Looking back at your grandparents and your mother [Ethel Clark Winfrey] and father, what are some of the ways in which they influenced you as you were growing up in your early years, what do you remember?  You talked about the discipline of your mother.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What did your father give you?  What was he like?
Speaker 2: My father was large extent of the provider so you must understand I was born during the Depression [Great Depression].  That's a very difficult times so my father worked to maintain his family to survive.  We were of very meager means as such, very great in terms of love and comfort and family and faith in terms of certain creature comforts or so.  We had, we had limitations and, and my father mainly was the, was the source that would bring the--provide for the food and the rent (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) His occupation during the Depression at the time that you were born 1933, what was his occupation at that point in time?
Speaker 2: I believe he was--some aspect of cooking so either in much of or all way until actually I was, I was out of college [Atlanta Vocational School (ph.), Atlanta, Georgia], he was, he was a cook in a hospital.  He worked a great deal in, in the hospital in Atlanta--two hospitals in Atlanta.  The major part of his work was done at those two hospitals all the way from my early elementary schooling all the way through my graduate school my father worked as a chef cook in hospitals, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You mentioned he had how many brothers?
Speaker 2: Six.
Speaker 1: Six.  So you had six uncles?
Speaker 2: Six uncles, yes.
Speaker 1: What do you remember about them as a group or individually or in your life?
Speaker 2: I was very--we all were very close to our uncles as such.  There were times when and also to his sister my Aunt Clara [ph.] so I remember that they would come by the house and even though they had children of their own so they would come by and I would sometimes go with my uncle to ballgames.  Sometimes if I had to get some material for school or so and my father or mother [Ethel Clark Winfrey] were unable to do it, my Aunt Clara would take us to town and do some shopping and that bit.  So we're very close.  I was very close to all of my uncles and such, reunions, sitting around, listening to them talk and laugh and I was very laughter--much laughter but much happiness and as I say even though they were of that same status and so very little in terms of, of monetary assets.
Story_ID: 331401
Speaker 1: But (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Your mother [Ethel Clark Winfrey] didn't work?
Speaker 1: My mother would only work when there was a great need for something and I mean by that I recall that when I first started piano, I did not have a piano to practice on and I used to go to a church to, to practice my piano lessons as such.  And my mother decided that she would go find work and at that time she would do what we call day work as such.  And that is she would go into homes and do the ironing and that bit to get sufficient funds to purchase a piano and once that piano was purchased or so then she would discontinue.  She would be in the home with us.  So it was not a consistent workload that my mother carried.  Only when there was a great need such as providing something that my father [Pete Winfrey]--
Speaker 2: Looking back at your parents, your uncles, and the relatives in Atlanta [Georgia] as you were a youngster, were any of them into music?  Were any of them musical?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Not a one?
Speaker 1: Not, no, no.  Even my cousin they were athletes.  They were, they were very much into sports and that bit.  Although my--two of my uncles or so were cooks also.  That seemed to, to run among the brothers.  That was a common occupation then.
Speaker 2: Getting back to your father, the chef, the cook, did he do a lot of cooking for the family?  Or did your mother do it?
Speaker 1: My mother.
Speaker 2: Did he ever cook for the family?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes he--
Speaker 2: What was his favorite dish?  Did he fix anything that you particular remember that you liked?  My mother--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --my grandmother used to make chicken salad, and I know that was--anything he made?
Speaker 1: My father was a meat specialist so whether it was chicken or beef or pork or so he had a way of it was, it was--I like to call him a master craftsman at cooking different assortment of meats as such and we enjoyed that.  But for the most part when we had dinner or so, except occasionally, I saw my father would prepare dinner, but most part my mother was the cook of the house.
Story_ID: 331402
Speaker 1: Robert [HistoryMaker Robert Winfrey], how old were you when you first started taking piano lessons or being interested in music?  What were the roots of your musical inclinations?  When did they start?
Speaker 2: I used to listen to the radio or so and whenever I would hear music especially a piano or so, I would sit on the steps or at a dresser or at a table and imitate what I was hearing and the sound would be in my mind but there was no actual instrument that transmitted the sound so.  And I remember a neighbor or so would see my mother [Ethel Clark Winfrey], she would see my mother and she would say my mother, he's musical.
Speaker 1: So you were tapping them with your fingers?
Speaker 2: That's right with my fingers.  It would be on a table or it would be I would sit on the steps or stairs and I would do this.
Speaker 1: How old were you when you started doing this?
Speaker 2: I must have been five, six, seven.  I started studying about eight between eight and nine.  I started my formalized studies or so and this came about when my mother when my mother went back to school such and she met one of the educational programs she was in so that they as they didn't require, it was an elective, she was into music, and she was in a vocal music class, and she met the professor of that class, and she told him that she had a son who seemed to be interested in music and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She went back to school, what was this a public school or?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was a night school.
Speaker 1: Oh night school.
Speaker 2: Night school, evening school (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How old was she then?
Speaker 2: Let's see I was about, I had just about gotten through elementary school [Yonge Street School, Atlanta, Georgia] because I was skipped a grade.  I finished elementary school earlier so I was skipped from the fourth grade to the sixth.  So I was maybe entering what they call junior high school [at David T. Howard Junior High School; David T. Howard High School, Atlanta, Georgia] and there's that time that she went to night school to study and so my mother let's see my mother, my mother married at the age of seventeen.  She was in her thirties, yeah.
Speaker 1: So she decided to provide music lessons or your father [Pete Winfrey]?  What?
Speaker 2: My--she found this professor of the class that she was--at one of the classes she was in to in night school, she, she had the opportunity to talk with him after class and she told him about her son interested in music and he said, "Well, I can recommend you a good piano teacher," and he did and my mother met the piano teacher.  Her name was Mrs. Mary Barber, B-A-R-B-E-R, and that was my first piano teacher.  And she lived across town.  I lived in, in the southeast part of Atlanta [Georgia].  She lived in the southwest part of Atlanta and as soon as I learned how to get from east to west, I would--my sister [Betty Winfrey Adger] and I, we both took piano lessons together.  We would go after school twice a week for our lessons or so.  So this is how I came about my mother having met a professor at the high school.  We used to call him at that time if, if that person was in music call them the professor.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So how did you get to Ms. Barber's?  Her home, did she have a home?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I would go, I would catch--
Speaker 1: How'd you get there, did you walk?
Speaker 2: No that was such a distance as--I remember later on I used to ride my bike, but for the most part we had to have to ride what we call two trolley cars.  I would get from, from our place of abode to the town area.  I ride into town and then I would get another trolley car to go to the west side of the city.
Speaker 1: How did she teach you, how do you remember those early lessons?  What kind of teacher was she?
Speaker 2: Very, very good.  I think was a very good teacher, very patient or so I was a bit rambunctious in the sense that I wanted to learn rapidly and I wanted to do things.  I had a pretty good ear so I wanted to but she would discipline me to the fact that I must learn what we call music fundamentals, the literacy.  Learn how to read music, learn how to interpret musical notation and music symbols or so.  All of the other attributes or so of playing by ear and so would not be in any way denigrated but she wanted to give me the skills for this.
Story_ID: 360175
Speaker 1: You said that one of your sisters also started piano lessons with you?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now which sister?
Speaker 2: My youngest sister, Betty [Betty Winfrey Adger].
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: When was she born?
Speaker 2: Betty was born in 1934.
Speaker 1: Okay so she was a year older.
Speaker 2: She's a year younger.  I was born in '33 [1933].
Speaker 1: I'm sorry younger.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you had a second sister?
Speaker 2: An older sister, yes.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Frances [Frances Winfrey Batten], yes.
Speaker 1: Okay and did she play piano too or?
Speaker 2: She studied piano later or so around high school she started studying piano.  She took an interest in piano but not to the extent of Betty and me.
Story_ID: 360176
Speaker 1: I want to go back to your musical training as a young person in a few minutes.  But let me ask you a little bit about what is your earliest memory or memories of growing up in Atlanta [Georgia]?  How far back can you remember?
Speaker 2: Oh I can remember all the way back to my first school experience.  It's at Yonge Street Elementary School [Yonge Street School] in Atlanta all through the grades from grade one my first teacher was named Mrs. Rebecca Dickerson.  My first grade teacher I remember that first grade experience very well.  So and then--
Speaker 1: Anything particular happen that year that you still remember?
Speaker 2: Well I--actually I remember sitting at the desk and I remember when we first started writing she would take my hand or so and guide me, guide my fingers, my hand in making the different curves or curvatures or shapes of alphabets and and writing.  I remember that very well as such.  And the little plays that we would have within the classroom as such.  Yeah, I have a very vivid memory of my elementary grades.
Speaker 1: It was the Yonge Elementary School?
Speaker 2: Yonge, Y-O-U-N-G [sic.], Street.  It was the--the school was on Yonge Street [Williams Holmes Borders Senior Drive], so it was named the Yonge Street Elementary School.
Speaker 1: And can I assume that the school was in the immediate neighborhood of your home?
Speaker 2: It was.
Speaker 1: It was?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 360177
Speaker 1: What street did you grow up on and where did you grow--what was your neighborhood like where you grew up (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I mainly grew up in the Grady Homes housing projects in Atlanta [Georgia] as such and it was within walking distance of the elementary school [Yonge Street School, Atlanta, Georgia] so but that, those were my formative years that I through el-.  In fact we lived in the housing projects all the way really through high school [David T. Howard High School, Atlanta, Georgia] and through college [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] so it was only after I was finished I was graduated from college that my parents [Ethel Clark Winfrey and Pete Winfrey] had educated the three of us and they wanted to have a place of their own and this is when they, they moved from the housing project.  We were all (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How do you remember growing up there?  What was that neighborhood like, the Grady Homes area?
Speaker 2: Very people--church oriented practically.  Those who were not going to churches on the Sunday mornings or so had the radios on and, and we could hear them as we would walk through the community to get to our, our Sunday school [at Liberty Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia].  That was the first religious experience we would have Sunday mornings would be the Sundays--they call them at that time Sunday school as such and those who were not preparing to go to the worship service or so would have their radios on and I recall very well a famous group that was the whole community if you would leave one area to the next one you would hear a choir singing spirituals.  It was called the Wings Over Jordan Choir.  That was the choral group that populated the African American spiritualists.  I grew up listening to spirituals by this choir and this was a must, this was just a happening in in the black community.  So you would hear that every Sunday morning.
Speaker 1: This is a local group then?
Speaker 2: No, no, no this was a group that it was a national group but they would broadcast.  I think it came from California, it may have come from Cleveland [Ohio], I'm not sure, but they had a narrator or so who would give some background information about the spirituals and then they would introduce that with a hum or so and to this day I remember that hum.  In fact I rearranged it for the Harvard choir [Kuumba Singers of Harvard College].
Story_ID: 360178
Speaker 1: You're taking piano lessons and then you have this experience--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Can I assume then that this also may have influenced your interest in music and singing?
Speaker 2: Greatly.  It did greatly.
Speaker 1: It did?
Speaker 2: As such and it also influenced my playing as I developed the skills in the church [Liberty Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia] or so because as I learned to play and read music then I would play for the Sunday school as such and then later for the children's choir.  So this was--
Speaker 1: How old were you when you first started playing for the Sunday school?
Speaker 2: Sunday school, let's see I started piano about I think eight or nine.  Probably about three years later I was--I could read music--
Speaker 1: So you weren't even a teenager and you were just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, oh yeah before I was a teenager, yes.
Speaker 1: You were playing for the Sunday school?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, yes.
Speaker 1: And then from the Sunday school you played for?
Speaker 2: Sunday school then I, I played for the--what they call a junior choir.  That was youngsters of my age group or so.
Speaker 1: Did you sing with them also?  Or did you just provide (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I didn't do much my sister Betty [Betty Winfrey Adger] was, was a fantastic soloist.  She would sing while I would do the playing the accompanying of the, of the songs that we would do and they were religious songs and we would do them for the church worship and also for various functions within the church setting.  And from there I started studying the organ.
Speaker 1: How long did you take piano lessons with Ms. Barber [Mary Barber]?
Speaker 2: I took piano lessons with Ms. Barber, let's see all the way through junior high school [David T. Howard Junior High School; David T. Howard High School, Atlanta, Georgia]  to probably about seven or eight years and then I started studying organ in downtown Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 1: How did that happened that you moved to the organ, what was?
Speaker 2: Well I became fascinated by the organ as a result of hearing the musicians play in my church or so and that was a keyboard instrument but much more involved then or so and the melodic tones, variation of tones, a tone quality of sounds.  It really, it really condensed orchestra, symphony orchestra or so so I was very much fascinated by the, by the sound of the--that glorious sound of the--came from the organ that you could--one could get and and by the church I grew up in a church that had an organ. And I so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Backing up just a bit when did you first have a piano at home?  Did you have it when you started taking lessons?
Speaker 2: No, we, we couldn't afford it.  I used to practice at the church.
Speaker 1: Oh you practiced--oh okay.
Speaker 2: And then my mother [Ethel Clark Winfrey] took a job to save money to purchase a piano and this was--
Speaker 1: How many years later was that do you think after you started taking--
Speaker 2: After I started taking about two years.
Speaker 1: Before you had a piano before?
Speaker 2: Before I had a piano, yes.
Speaker 1: What was that piano like?  How do you remember it?
Speaker 2: I remember it very well.  It was a big, at times a gigantic instrument or so I thought but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And it fit into the--
Speaker 2: --that was--you, you would force it into you know whatever I mean they had a difficult time moving it into the front room which was the living room of the housing project complex [Grady Homes, Atlanta, Georgia] where we, we lived or so but I remember it very well.
Speaker 1: Did you practice every day, you play every day?
Speaker 2: I practiced frequently.  Every day or so until I started taking in other interests or so I mean.
Story_ID: 360179
Speaker 1: I didn't live where we were or so it was just a short distance to what we used to refer to as the playground where you could play basketball.  They had several basketball courts, a football field, a softball field, and this is where I used to watch Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] play, I was a kid.
Speaker 2: You watched Martin Luther King play?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I watched Martin Luther King play football on that same field so that was the centerpiece for the youngsters that lived on the southeast side of Atlanta [Georgia] which was where Martin Luther King (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well how close was his home to yours?
Speaker 1: His home was closer to my church.  Well my, my home [in Grady Homes, Atlanta, Georgia], we would leave my home where I resided to the church and Dr. King's church was a block from my--Ebenezer [Ebenezer Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia] a block from the church from where I grew up and from that park he lived closer to Auburn Avenue, which is not--it was walking distance, I put it that way or so not a great, not a long ways.
Speaker 2: In terms of age, were you about the same age as Martin or?
Speaker 1: No, Martin was six or seven years older then, yeah.
Speaker 2: So didn't, did you play with him at all then or you just saw him (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh I used to play on programs with him or so I--he was, Dr. King was always and at that time we always called him ML or Mike that was everybody called him that was always a fantastic speaker, orator, even as a youngster or so growing up.  So he would give speeches or so around churches in Atlanta so of course he would come to my church which is Liberty Baptist Church [Atlanta, Georgia] as I said it was just a block away from Ebenezer Baptist Church and he would be the speaker of the program and sometimes I would be the organist on some of those programs.
Speaker 2: So this is when he was what a teenager or in college?
Speaker 1: No, this is when he--during his--he entered Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] at a very early age--
Speaker 2: He did yeah.
Speaker 1: --so yes and he was probably in his teens and also when he went to Crozer [Crozer Theological Seminary, Upland, Pennsylvania], a theological seminary, or so I got to know him real well then because we both had matured to the point that we could sort of talk and converse and that bit yeah.
Speaker 2: What other recollections do you have of the neighborhood, the park, the neighbors?  Were there any people in the neighborhood that influenced you in any way?  You had your music teacher [Mary Barber]; you had your parents [Ethel Clark Winfrey and Pete Winfrey] or anybody else that stands out in your memory as influence to you?
Speaker 1: Well all of the neighbors or so.  It was sort of like a village and so if my mother were not present or so then my friend's mother was present or so if their mother was working or so then my mother.  So that kind of a nurturing community that I grew up in.
Story_ID: 360180
Speaker 1: Tell me what sights, sounds and smells remind you of growing up in Atlanta [Georgia]?  These years that we're talking about.  What sights, sounds and smells remind you of your growing up?
Speaker 2: Sights in addition to the, the local sights are the playground and the school so two areas I was fascinated with.  Auburn Avenue, which was a centerpiece of business of African Americans or so, many of the local businesses.  You see I grew up in that area because we had a newspaper, a daily newspaper.  We had a bank and I mean they were black operated, black owned bank or so we had savings and loan and we had all kinds of insurance-- the Atlanta Life [Atlanta Life Insurance Company; Atlanta Life Financial Group, Atlanta, Georgia].  I grew up in that environment and in that area.  So by throwing papers was a part of my occupation growing up or so and working on a laundry truck where we would deliver linen, aprons and towels to all of the businesses practically on Auburn Avenue and such.  That was fascinating itself because I got to not only to meet, to see the presidents of the banks and savings and loans, I got to see the leading ministers and those proprietors of the, of the businesses, I got to know them as such because I would go in there and do the linen count.  So take in fresh linens, towels and that bit, fascinating as such.  And that was really my world for a long time or so the Auburn Avenue community of businesses and schools also.  And I mean by that small schools at the time they call them beauty culture schools.  I used to take linen to those schools as such.  There was a business school, the Jesse B. Blayton business school [Blayton School of Accounting; Blayton Business College, Atlanta, Georgia] right on Auburn Avenue.  Those were the sights and of course the churches and also the clubs.  We used to have a place--a club called the Top Hat Club [Atlanta, Georgia].  They would be--there would be an attraction of entertainment.  I was not allowed to go in.  I was not of age but I would sneak around them anyway such curious and such bringing that the bands and all.  I remember growing up so even my preteens used to have a--the great entertainers used to come to Atlanta.
Speaker 1: Such as?
Speaker 2: Louis Jordan was a, was a great attraction in Atlanta.  But then I remember the Jazz at the Philharmonic I used to go see frequently.  Duke Ellington as such would include Atlanta, Lena Horne.  So I had that culture so fascinating, but that was a part of my culture so I had to have that identity and then I could also relate to having met professors and presidents of the, of the colleges in Atlanta.  And even though those colleges were on the west side of Atlanta, these presidents and all would come to Auburn Avenue because that's where the bank which was a centerpiece of the, of the black community or so this where their bank was located so they would do their banking, I would get to see them also.  So I had that kind of I could identify very well with the culture and the education of Atlanta.
Speaker 1: You talked about the sounds on the radio--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Wings Over Jordan [Wings Over Jordan Choir] as sounds.  What about smells?  Any aromas that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.  Being a southern city or so you're gonna have the barbecue, ribs.  That was very, very common.  Fish very, very common.  And to most of the time the fish was fried or so very seldom would I, did I experience people eating or seeing people preparing baked fish or so. There was right, and you would get those smells and they, and so, they are southern dishes or so of collard greens, turnip greens, cabbage, tomatoes, pickles, peppers all an assortment of meat.  So in fact I recall very well that sometimes you would have on a corner or so you may have a stand or so where you could purchase a rib sandwich or fish sandwich from those stands and on various corners of the avenue of Auburn Avenue and so delicatessens and all and, and the fascinating part many of these were black operated and black owned so the entrepreneurship or so I grew up in that small but something that I, I treasured, because I would see my people who or so who could earn a living in that kind of a business.
Story_ID: 360181
Speaker 1: Now you grew up of course in segregation?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Before we get to schools, just tell me what was segregation like for you as a youngster and early teenager?  How do you remember segregation in Atlanta [Georgia] in the '30s [1930s] and early '40s [1940s]?
Speaker 2: Oh well I detested and I could, I could see it.  Even though we, and I mean my group, my peers and all, we had outstanding teachers in the schools, caring teachers who went beyond the books in, in the subject areas or so caring teachers would come to your home, would come to so we could--we would move away from the segregat- as much as we could avoid because we had our own culture in in the schools and in the churches and in the culture institutions in Atlanta.  It was when we came from our community like to go to the town and in Atlanta that's where you would experience the rigid segregation.  A lot of the places or so that were white owned in the, in the broader community as such I recall very well that the fountains were segregated, white only I remember seeing that very well, for colored see.  When I would go to take my piano lessons or so even 'til the time I was going to Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia] as such the trolley cars and the buses or so for colored to the rear or so and if you were sitting anywhere midway and a white person got on that trolley car bus, if you didn't move you would be asked to move back there.  I detested that kind of living.
Speaker 1: Did that happen to you?
Speaker 2: Yes it happened to me as a young boy.  I remember once that when I got on the trolley or so there were few people on the trolley, very few people, it was almost empty.  But as the trolley would make its stops and begin to fill up and then I remember a man said to me, "Boy move back there."  I--that brought about an anger that I had to learn to to control, but I detested it.  As matter of fact, that part of Atlanta or so, I, I, I didn't like and I longed for the day that I didn't--I would leave Atlanta because that part was such a drag so that I, I grew up with such a profound dislike and dissatisfaction because of the, the separation or so.  I was able to overcome that so because I was able to--it was instilled in me you know you are a human being, you have the dignity, rise above it.  You're not a creature of your environment, you can rise above it.  And that's where I come to discipline from home, my parents [Ethel Clark Winfrey and Pete Winfrey] and my teachers and all that came into, into fulfillment and this was something that enabled me to get beyond this segregated life in a, in a southern city.
Story_ID: 360182
Speaker 1: Yonge Street Elementary [Yonge Street School, Atlanta, Georgia], how many years were you there?
Speaker 2: I was at--it went to the sixth grade.  I was there for four years--five years.  I was--I went from the first to the second, to the third and to the fourth.  When I was in the fourth grade, I was skipped.  I was pretty sharp academically or so, so my fourth grade teacher Sadie Oliver [ph.] or so, skipped me and five others, put us in the sixth grade.  I never had a fifth grade so. Very, very pleasant memories of Yonge Street plays, programs, concerts in addition to the spelling tests and the oratorical we were--all of this was a part of our grand scheme of education or so.
Speaker 1: Was music educational?
Speaker 2: Music was very much a part of if, very much a part of it.  We would have the, not only the school concerts or so, sometimes we would have concerts with other elementary schools across the city as such.  So it was a very--culturally it was exciting, fulfilling cultural experience.  And this is how you can shut out the segregated component because you would have your own culture and your own way of, of enjoying living and contributing and sharing as such.  It was that when you are pulled out of that environment to have to go from your environment to another environment sometimes that was pretty hostile.
Speaker 1: When you finished your studies at Yonge Street, what was the next school you attended in Atlanta [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: David T. Howard [David T. Howard Junior High School; David T. Howard High School, Atlanta, Georgia].  It was the time a junior high school and then later before I was graduated from the junior high school, it became a high school so it had two high schools for blacks in Atlanta; one on the east side where I lived and one on the west side which was the Booker T. Washington High School [Atlanta, Georgia].  Two rival high schools and I mean intense rival.
Speaker 1: Who is David Howard, do you know?
Speaker 2: David T.--he was a civic leader in Atlanta.  He was also a funeral director but he was mainly known for contributing to organizations that would uplift African Americans of the black community.  He was very much known for that so contributing money or so and supporting black causes in Atlanta and they named the high school in his honor.
Speaker 1: What are your most vivid memories of being at D.T. Howard High School?  What do you remember about those years?
Speaker 2: Great years as such.  I was a little bit--most of the students in my class were a couple years beyond me because of I was having skipped a grade so I didn't have the maturity physically.  I didn't have the maturity, I could not play the skills that they could on the, on the diamond as such.  They were force appear.  Later on I got to that level but they were developed physically a couple of--two or three years ahead of me or so.  But I--school was just fascinating as such; the culture, the music, the art, the poetry, the academics or so.  I was an honor roll student.  I was an honor student in, in high school--
Story_ID: 360183
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tell me about your music and your music experience at the high school [David T. Howard High School, Atlanta, Georgia].  Did you play, did you sing, what were your--?
Speaker 2: Yes, I well at that time in high school I was--I had pretty much developed pretty good skill-piano, keyboard skills, so like in high school I was playing the organ by that time or as such so I would yes, I would do some playing at the school but we had a fantastic choir director or so who was he was a Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] graduate but he was a fantastic, very well known, had the orchestra also had the chorus.  I didn't do--after my maybe my second year or so, I didn't sing in a glee club.  We had, we had a boys glee club we called it at that time which was quite good.  I, I enjoyed that but then I took on other interests.  I did not abandon my music studies but in terms of the singing ensemble or so I sort of curtailed that before I was out of high school.
Speaker 1: What other interest did you have besides music and at that time, did you other school activities, in school activities?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, yes.  We have productions, different kinds of productions, plays and that bit and we would have a different oratorical, they call them at that time, oratorical contests as such where one would have an assigned topic as such and you would compete in terms of preparation in terms of the coherence, in terms of the unity, in terms of your thought process all of that.  That was a part of the--that was part of our education growing up.  So that was very much a part of the high school, secondary school experience, all of these factored into the picture, yes.
Story_ID: 360184
Speaker 1: Are there any teachers that--or a teacher that was particularly influential during your high school years that you remember?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Who was that?
Speaker 2: W.J. Rowe was my first teacher at Howard High School [David T. Howard High School, Atlanta, Georgia].  I had several teachers because at the time we were taking different subjects and you took those subjects from the specialist teachers but he was, he was the guiding influence in my, in my, throughout my high school experience.
Speaker 1: How do you spell his last name?
Speaker 2: R-O-W-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Rowe.
Speaker 1: And why was he such a guiding influence.  What was he about and how did he interact with you?
Speaker 2: Well one thing he is an excellent teacher in terms of, of not only his mannerism, his techniques of, of imparting the material, subject material so he made history (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Which was? He was a--history--
Speaker 2: He's a history teacher. He made it come alive.  So but then he would also have such things as poetic experiences he would bring to us and I used to do certain poems and he used to pull me out of class sometimes to go over to another part of the close facility to to do a poem or so that I had learned, well actually I had learned back in elementary school at Yonge Street School [Atlanta, Georgia] but he was so fascinated by that.  Everything I did practically I say including play the piano or in oratorical contest and, and public speaking programs, he was, he was the major influence.  He would provide that kind of experience for me.  So I sort of gravitated toward him.  So he was as I say he was a guiding influence throughout my--the major portion of my secondary experience.
Story_ID: 360185
Speaker 1: Did you have any after school jobs that you worked during high school [David T. Howard High School, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Yes, I used to throw papers.
Speaker 1: Throw papers?
Speaker 2: I used to throw the--we called them--I was at that time we called them paper, paper boys in the community.  You would have a paper route or so and I, I would have my own route or so and I would throw papers in the afternoon paper or so it's called the Atlanta Journal [Atlanta Journal-Constitution] as such and I used to throw papers with Martin Luther King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] brother, A.D. King [Alfred Daniel Williams King] and I had similar paper routes or so very close.  So I was at that time I was closer to A.D. King because we used, we used to wrestle and carry on quite a bit.  Martin was a little bit beyond that.  I stuck with A.D. because I would see him every day as such but we all had paper, paper routes and on early Sunday mornings I had to get up at four o'clock to get the morning papers to the different homes.  So yes I had an after school work and that work ethic I think came from my mother [Ethel Clark Winfrey] or so that whatever your needs or so or find a way to honorable way to providing.  I recall that my, my, my buddies growing up so one Christmas they got, all of them, they got brand new bikes and I couldn't--my parents couldn't afford to get me a bike.  So what happened was that I had a little after school job throwing papers and so I would save that money and then I used to cut the neighbor's grass also.  I would save that money and six months later in June or so from December June or so I had enough to get a brand new bike.  So yeah so you had that kind of development.
Story_ID: 331059
Speaker 1: You mentioned that Mr. Rowe [W.J. Rowe] involved you in poetic recitation, stage productions and he was an excellent teacher brought history alive.  I was reading some of your memoirs, and I understand you played the role of Benjamin Banneker, in one of the performances at the school [David T. Howard High School, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was--when we studied Negro history some reason that in his class or so he said that I was assigned to Benjamin Banneker, made the first American clock and other kinds of developments in Washington [D.C.], designing architects and bit so that was not something that I researched.  And so that was--he was assigned--that was the, the figure that was assigned to me in, in, in celebration of at that time we called them--we called it Negro history as such.  There was a very exciting too, because that definitely say history come alive to see the contributions or so that African Americans made worldwide, not just this country but worldwide and that was a part of our--to me it was almost it is now and it's almost unimaginable that you did not have access, programs, knowledge, education about the contributions of African Americans to America and to world culture.
Story_ID: 331060
Speaker 1: Who were some of the African American people in music that you learned about in high school [David T. Howard High School, Atlanta, Georgia]?  Did you--were there men and women that you learned about that were in the field with you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes, oh yes.  Roland Hayes was at the top of the list.  Roland Hayes would come to Atlanta [Georgia] and rather than go to the Civic Auditorium [sic. Municipal Auditorium] in Atlanta, because the Civic Auditorium in Atlanta was segregated, and you would have to sit in the top balcony.  There were a few occasions where I did go, because other than that I could not have heard a symphony orchestra.  So there was no place to bring a symphony orchestra except to but that was the rare occasion.  Other than that, my parents [Ethel Clark Winfrey and Pete Winfrey] would forbid us to go to an, an event that was segregated unless it was unavoidable you had to go.  But Roland Hayes would come to Wheat Street Baptist Church [Atlanta, Georgia], the largest Baptist church at that time in Atlanta.  I would hear Roland Hayes; I would hear Marian Anderson.  I would hear Dorothy Maynor.  I would hear great speakers, Mary McLeod Bethune, [HistoryMaker] Dorothy Height.  I would hear those, all of these great minds or such.  That was a part of my upbringing--
Speaker 1: How old were you when you heard Roland Hayes at Wheat Street Baptist?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: Yes I was in junior high school [David T. Howard Junior High School; David T. Howard High School, Atlanta, Georgia] so I must have been about preteens and, and maybe about thirteen so I had already heard him as such and--
Speaker 1: Did you have any special feelings about him at that point, listening to him?
Speaker 2: Yes, stage presence, stage comportment.  Not--this is over and beyond the gifted voice that he had.  He could--whatever he sang, you would--it would be picturesque.  His expression was so great and marvelous so that if he sang a German lied or so or if he sang a classical piece, a piece from the romantic period, didn't make any difference.  He could--he had a way, his expressions, his mannerisms, his musicianship, his carriage, his stage presence, comportment all of that factored into his great personality and I grew up idolizing him.
Story_ID: 331061
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) For those people who do not know who Roland Hayes was, would you tell me briefly who was Roland Hayes at that time?  What was he?
Speaker 2: Well I--Roland Hayes was an artist, an educator, a scholar.  It's hard to to confine him.  Musicianship yes, superb musicianship, but more than that Roland Hayes, Roland Hayes must have spoken about five or six languages as such, and I think I was in the fourth grade when his name first came from my fourth grade teacher, Ms. Sadie Oliver [ph.] and that name stuck with me later on.  He would come to, to Atlanta [Georgia] or so and the word would be out, Roland Hayes is gonna give a concert at Wheat Street Church [Wheat Street Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia].  Now later on at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] I used to see him at Sisters Chapel [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] or so he had done his latter years but still concertizing, but I used to see him on the campus at Sisters Chapel which was the largest place on the west side of the--in the university setting was nice.
Speaker 1: Where was Hayes from?  Where was he from?
Speaker 2: Originally, he's from Georgia and a part of Chattanooga, Tennessee.  Those were two southern areas of of Roland Hayes lived in the, in the South.  Of course, he went on to a short time to Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] or so but mainly he was, he was in Georgia and, and in Tennessee, both his, his upbringing as such.  But always have to this day been fascinated and love, moved by this great artist or so may have been, and I used to hear my professors at, at Morehouse music say he may have been the world's greatest.  That's a lot.  But Roland Hayes was of that distinction as such and to come from such humble beginnings as such and to rise or so family poor.  You know all this but he came, he became a giant.
Speaker 1: He was a tenor?
Speaker 2: He was a, he was a concert tenor yes or so.
Speaker 1: And he was out there before Marian Anderson?
Speaker 2: Yes he was.
Speaker 1: And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She gives him credit.
Speaker 1: And Paul Robeson?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.  Marian Anderson gives him credit for some of the successes that she was realized.  So that Roland--you know because of what Roland Hayes the doors that he opened he was a trailblazer in terms and the strength not a great in terms of the physicality but the strength of and the mind and, and artistry of, of Roland Hayes or so just is of such immense power.
Speaker 1: Well we are going to come back later in our talk since you, one of your major achievements in your musical career as the director of the Roland Hayes Division of Music [Roland Hayes Division of Music at Madison Park High School; Roland Hayes School of Music, Boston, Massachusetts] in the Boston Public Schools.  So let's come back to Roland Hayes--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --when we get you to Boston [Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: Okay. Sure.
Speaker 1: And your work here and in the city.
Story_ID: 331062
Speaker 1: You graduated from--oh let me ask one thing, were you still taking music lessons as you went through the high school years, were you still taking lessons?
Speaker 2: Yes, I started for a while I discontinued piano, and I began to concentrate on organ, and I would spend in my senior year at David T. Howard High School [Atlanta, Georgia] I was studying organ privately in downtown Atlanta [Georgia] or so.
Speaker 1: Where?
Speaker 2: A place called Cable Piano Company [Atlanta, Georgia] that had an outstanding, well there was a business but they had a music school where you would--one would learn to play.  They have the organs yes.
Speaker 1: Was this a black or white organization?
Speaker 2: No, it was, it was a white business.  It was a big business in Atlanta right on Peachtree Street in Atlanta, Cable Piano Company, one of the famous music dealers in Atlanta or so, and they have a--they had a fascinating organ department and somewhere my mother [Ethel Clark Winfrey] went in the store and she asked about the organ department and they got it up to a level in the store and she told the people that she--her son, she wanted to get her son some organ instruction and they directed her to a person who's in charge of that by the name of Virginia Minor or so and she was the person who to demonstrate the organs and fascinating teacher.  I studied (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How did you feel when your mother took you there?
Speaker 2: A little bit--this was a little bit awkward because I had not that sees a first white teacher I, I had up until that time I had all black teachers so she's the first white teacher--
Speaker 1: And her name was?
Speaker 2: Virginia Minor, M-I-N-O-R, Minor--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --so she's my first organ teacher.  In fact I studied with her until my sophomore year in Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] and then I started studying out at, at you know at the college as such.  Even though I was taking music classes pursuing my major I stayed with her for studying organ up until my sophomore year.
Story_ID: 331063
Speaker 1: So you graduated from Howard High School [David T. Howard High School, Atlanta, Georgia] in what year?
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty [1950].
Speaker 1: And how is it you went on to Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia]?  You were right there at home but why Morehouse?  How did that happen?
Speaker 2: I was--during my senior year at at Howard High School I was sort of looking toward Fisk, going to Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee] and I was talking with my parents [Ethel Clark Winfrey and Pete Winfrey] or so and of course they were concerned we can't afford it unless you've got a scholarship or something, we, we, we're unable to afford to send you to Fisk so my church pastor, minister or so, talked with my mother and he said that, "Robert [HistoryMaker Robert Winfrey] could not find a better education institution than Morehouse College, and it's right here at home."  So my mother talked with me about it and knowing that I was not going unless I received an all expense scholarship, and she even questioned that, because they'll be other expenses that we'll need to come up with.  I had a sister [Frances Winfrey Batten] with whom I was graduated with and also I had a younger sister [Betty Winfrey Adger] who was coming the following year, so to educate three of us or so they just did not have the means to do that.  So I went to Morehouse, and I never regretted a moment of having chosen Morehouse.  In fact I didn't know it at the time, but when I was at the high school at the graduation I received two scholarships to Morehouse.  So that, there was no other way I could go to any other school.
Speaker 1: What did you study at Morehouse, what was your major?
Speaker 2: Music.
Speaker 1: Music.
Speaker 2: Music composition.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Tell me about those years?  What stands out in your mind about those years you of course indicated they were great years but anything special here to you?
Speaker 2: Well I--of all the professors I had at, at Morehouse, the one that and he didn't teach me, I just would hear him in chapel services and when I was in school, chapel was, was required.  You couldn't miss chapel or so.  If you missed it or so, you were penalized so I was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Still the same today I guess.
Speaker 2: --so but there was certain days I would miss it anyway but I did miss some mornings because of the difficulty in coming from the east side to the west side or so quite a long ways as such.  Sometimes I would get just about on the campus and the doors would close well you're penalized if you're marked against it because your seat was checked every, every morning.  But that person that stood out more than any of the professors including my music teachers whom I found quite fascinating was Benjamin E. Mays [Benjamin Mays].  The most dynamic personality that I had encountered during my developing years or so I just took a, I took a likeness to him.  I, I gravitated toward him.
Speaker 1: What was his position there during your four years at Morehouse?
Speaker 2: President.
Speaker 1: Oh, he was the president (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was the president.
Speaker 1: --at that time?  All right.  Okay.  And so you got to know him fairly well.
Speaker 2: Got to know him yeah pretty well as such.  Being at Morehouse you would get to know Dr. Mays because he was--you would be--I remember sometimes I be sitting in my English class and he would walk right in and sit right beside you, you know and and take part in whatever the English topic that you, you were discussing as such.  He was that kind of personality as such.  I used to admire the way, I would, I would be on one side of the campus and I would see him leaving the administration building and he had a home on the campus and the way he walked and the way he carried himself or so the dignity, the decorum or so it was just great you know of, of this, this great mind as such so he was my mentor or so he never taught me a subject area or so.  So he was the person I admired most from Morehouse College.
Speaker 1: Now you lived at home while you attended Morehouse or did you live on campus?
Speaker 2: I lived at home, and that was a very difficult part of my Morehouse experience.  I didn't get to know a lot of the students the way one would by being a resident of the campus, living in the dormitories and being a part of that, that campus life as such.  I would take my classes during the day and I'd have to get the transportation back to my home [in Grady Homes, Atlanta, Georgia] unless I had to do some work in the library or so but I was still, sometimes I'd go home and come back.  But I, I was--I didn't have that type of experience of the campus experience that the other students had and I think I missed, I missed something of not being able to so other than the classroom and after class we would get together and for certain events, sporting events, the games and all I would get to interact with them but in terms of the closeness I, I didn't have that kind of experience that one would have when you have a dormitory mate or school mate who lives across, across the campus.
Story_ID: 331064
Speaker 1: At Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] what were some of the early pieces that you composed?  What do you remember as some of your early compositions?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I don't know if I remember the titles or not.  I would write down the tunes as such and I would give them certain name, whatever name appeared--was appealing to me you know.  Sometimes--I remember I did something like 'Golden October' [ph.] or something like that.  I was always fascinated in Atlanta [Georgia] during the month of October because the leaves are gold on the campus and all so I wrote a little piece called the 'Golden October.'  I don't know where it is now I doubt if I even remember it but that kind of, that kind of inspiration would come from that collegiate setting and then the campus setting was just gorgeous, small but, but beautiful and I would get inspired by the natural wonders.
Speaker 1: Did you take courses any other place while you were at Morehouse?
Speaker 2: Yes, I took all the music that I studied at Morehouse was taken at Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: At Spelman?
Speaker 2: At Spelman College which was right across the, right across the street so and that's what you called the university setting, the Atlanta university setting.  All the music that I--classroom music, composition, piano, clarinet, I studied at Spelman College as such.  Now the, the, the students at Spelman College those who were into taking pre-med take the biology chemistry, Morehouse has constructed quite a elaborate chemistry building.  Some of them would come to the Morehouse campus to take their science courses.  So that kind of--
Speaker 1: Were there many of men like yourself who went to Spelman for studies?
Speaker 2: There were some other students.  There not a great deal during my years at Morehouse or so there were not that many music students at Morehouse as such.  But one who's outstanding or so was two years ahead of me and that was Wendell Whalum.  Wendell Whalum was a junior when I entered Morehouse as a freshman.  Wendell Whalum went on to after the famous piece, then he came back to chair the music program at, at Morehouse.
Speaker 1: How do you spell his name?
Speaker 2: W-H-A-L-U-M, Whalum.  Wendell, W-E-N-D-E-L-L, so he was--grew to be of national recognition or so musically, but he was a music major when I was there as such, and there were others who came through Morehouse who were quite influential in music.  Robert Williams or so graduated before I arrived on the campus, but he was in a class with Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.].  In fact he wrote, he went on to become the music director at Grambling [Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana] school in, in Louisiana and he wrote a fascinating spiritual jubilee which he dedicated to Martin Luther King it's entitled 'Lord, I Can't Turn Back' and Robert Williams whose a--he would come to Morehouse and give concerts, he was an outstanding vocalist tenor something like on the order of Roland Hayes.  He was one of, of the great minds--musical minds of--that developed at Morehouse College.
Story_ID: 331065
Speaker 1: You were playing, you were studying music composition, but did you play piano and organ at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --for any particular groups?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was sort of like the assistant chapel organist or so that when--I didn't sing in a glee club, Morehouse Glee Club [Morehouse College Glee Club], and major reason why is because the glee club would rehearse at night, and I would be on the other side of town at home at, at night so I, I didn't have that opportunity to be in it but when the glee club would tour the country, different churches and institutions would sponsor them when they went on their concert tour, I would, I would do the music for the chapel, I would play the organ or so while they were on tour.  And so I was sort of assistant chapel organist.  I did play in a band there also, and I was a student band director as such my last year at Morehouse, yeah.
Speaker 1: Where did you travel to when you traveled to when you travel with the music, you said you had occasion to travel away from Morehouse, where did you--what cities did you go to do you remember?
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't travel with the glee club.
Speaker 1: Oh you didn't?
Speaker 2: No, no that's why I had to stay back.  Somebody has to--they would either have to get another music teacher from Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] or a student at Morehouse to play for the service, the chapel services every morning and that was my role that when the glee club was away, because the regular organist like Wendell Whalum was the chapel organist, but he would be with the glee club then I would, I would substitute.  I would do the services, I would do the music and sometimes that would call I remember two mornings straight Dr. Mays [Benjamin Mays] was in charge of doing the chapel services.  He came over and said, "I want you to lead the student body in singing in the Morehouse hymn ['Dear Old Morehouse']," so first time I ever done that to conduct student body.  Then the next day he said, "You did a fine job singing the Morehouse, conductor, lead us in singing the Morehouse school song."  So that kind of rapport we--I developed with him.
Speaker 1: During your last two years roughly at Morehouse, Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was here in Boston [Boston, Massachusetts] at the BU School of Theology [Boston University School of Theology] right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you have any contact with him?  Know about what he was into at that point?
Speaker 2: Somewhat when he would come to Atlanta [Georgia] you know come home or so I would see him and, and also when the word would get around that he would be preaching or he would be speaking at mainly at Ebenezer Baptist Church [Atlanta, Georgia] and as I indicated earlier so our church [Liberty Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia] was just about a block apart or so so I would go down and hear him preach as such, but other than that he didn't--I don't recall him ever coming to Morehouse when I was a student, when I was a student there.
Story_ID: 331066
Speaker 1: You graduated from Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] in 1955?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And that was June, was it a June graduation I guess?
Speaker 2: No I graduated--I tell--I was graduating, actually I graduated, I completed requirements in 1954 but I was minor so I think it was six hours and over half of them over four years was because I missed the chapel, it was marked against and the dean said, "You got to make these hours up," you know so I went to summer school and I, and I, and I made those hours up plus I was a French minor and then my French instructor or so said, "You don't need, you have taken all the French you need."  There was a conversation with the dean.  The dean said, "No, he needs another course."  So there was some division between him; anyway long story short, I took that course.  So I was--I completed requirements instead of June, I completed requirements August of such and shortly after then I went in the service.
Speaker 1: So from Morehouse you went?
Speaker 2: Into the service.
Speaker 1: Into the [U.S.] military, the U.S. Military?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I was during that time most of my classmates were already in the service or still in college.  They were a couple of years ahead of me you know chronologically 'cause most of them were in the service or about to complete.  We had to have two years so I had to, I had to go service I had no choice.
Speaker 1: You had to go, you didn't volunteer?  You had to go?
Speaker 2: I had to go.  Yeah or so I would--I could, I could--what happened was when I was deferred and I went down to the registration and I pleaded with them, "Let me finish my college program," and I said, "Then I will volunteer to go in."  So they did that.  They said let me finish but they were gonna send for me anyway so I just went ahead and said, "Look you enabled me to finish my college work, now I'll, I'll do my two years."  And so I went in.
Story_ID: 331067
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tell me about those two years?  Where were you stationed?  And what was your work in the [U.S.] military?
Speaker 2: After I--
Speaker 1: What division were you at the military?
Speaker 2: --I was in the U.S. Army.
Speaker 1: In the Army?
Speaker 2: Yes or so.  After I completed basic training which was required of everybody complete the basic training, they sent me to a guided missile school in Fort Bliss, Texas.  That was the missile center of the, of the entire nation or so and they were developing missiles on all as a comeback weapon as such.  So I was sent to Fort Bliss, Texas as a, to attend the guided missiles school to become a missile specialist as such.  While there in school, I was interested in the chapel services.  I always would go to chapel as such on Sunday, that was my upbringing so that whatever you did Sunday morning belonged to a service that you so I got to meet one of the chaplains there and even though I was in second part of training, I asked him I said, "Do you ever have a need for someone to play the organ," or so I say, "I'm available.  I play the organ."  So he wrote that down and he said, "I'm glad you shared that with me."  Well, just before I completed that part of my second phase of my basic training or so I got a call to chaplain so I went to the chaplain the brigade, the missile brigade chaplain office and chaplain's office and he said, "Well, I understand you have musical background?  We would--would you consider becoming one of the organists on the post?"  I said, "Yes, I would like that very much so."  So I became one of the organists in the missile brigade in Fort Bliss, Texas.  Well that, that was my military occupational program so throughout specialty throughout my career.  I did not go through the, through the other phases of military exercises.  I was an organist for the brigade until I was separated 'til my tour two years was up.
Speaker 1: Were you at Fort Bliss the whole time?
Speaker 2: Other than my first basic training experience was in South Carolina, Fort Jackson, South Carolina [Fort Jackson, Columbia, South Carolina] and then I played some organ there because some kind of way the chaplain found out that I could play the organ and I did some organ playing there but not very much, because I was in basic training and I--they didn't allow you that much time to do much of anything except to rest up from the rigorous training regimen that you were undergoing but then when I got to Texas and finished that phase of my military training.  Then I went into what you call a chaplain's assistant and this is when I would not only play the organ for chapel services morning and evening but I'd go into chaplain and care to guide us lectures and this is what fascinated me about teaching as such, this is how I entered teaching by watching them and being a part of the the character guidance lectures.
Speaker 1: So this was a turning point in your life?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was.  And not only that in Fort Bliss or so some kind of way the commanding general or so would have a function or so and I don't know how word got around that there's a, there's a, a soldier that plays, plays the organ.  So he called, his, his, his colonel called me you know and he told me about the different function that the commanding general would have and they would want me to play.  So I became the post commander's entertainer you know when he would have the dignitaries of certain dinners and banquets or so, I would play the piano and organ at that--at those functions.  So I was a chaplain's assistant at More- at Fort Bliss, Texas, then I was a commanding general's entertainer.
Story_ID: 331068
Speaker 1: And it was at this point that you decided you wanted to be a teacher?
Speaker 2: I decided that I was looking seriously about entering the teaching profession.
Speaker 1: Of music teaching?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, um-hm so I didn't abandon the, the thoughts of composition of composer and so I did a lot of that footwork when I was in New York City [New York, New York] because I went on and I taught a while in Georgia then I went to Columbia University [New York, New York] and I had a suitcase full of compositions that I and I used to walk up and down Broadway the (unclear) where these music--
Speaker 1: This was when now?  You're out of the [U.S. military] service?
Speaker 2: Out of the service.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And this is when I was going into Columbia University--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --or so and this when I take my compositions to various publishers.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 331069
Speaker 1: So where you ended up your musical career in the [U.S.] military, you worked with chaplains of different faiths?
Speaker 2: Yes--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --yes, Protestants, Catholic and Jewish.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Later on we're going to take a look at your work in Boston [Massachusetts] and again we're going to see multicultural diversity coming into the groups that you put together and directed, choral groups and so on so we'll come back to that notion later on.  Once you were discharged from the U.S. Army, you completed your obligation military, what came next?  You, I think, were telling me earlier that you wanted to continue your studies in music composition and what did you have in mind?
Speaker 2: I did.  Well I wanted to continue.  I wanted to go to graduate school, and I wanted to continue to pursue studies in composition, and also since I was seriously considering education particularly, the teaching component, I wanted to get prepared for that because during my undergraduate years [at Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] or so as I said I was a composition--those were my concentrations or so, so I didn't do any, prepare for any teaching experiences public school or at the collegiate level and I wanted to get prepared for the techniques, the methodology, education of philosophers, foundation courses and that bit.  So that's when I, I was really seriously considering teaching at that time and I wanted to seek better preparation.
Story_ID: 331070
Speaker 1: So deciding that you wanted to be a teacher, what were the next steps, what happened next?
Speaker 2: Preparation as such.  But since I came out of the [U.S. military] service, I was discharged in January in mid, mid part of the school year.  I was too late for me to pursue second semester graduate studies so I wanted--I didn't wanna wait until summer to go to grad school so I just, I took a job at a place called Forsyth, Georgia, Monroe County of Georgia and I took a job there.  I accepted a position as a band director in, in that small town as such and I actually I ended up I was going back there during the following summer after January that summer, I went to Columbia--into Columbia University [New York, New York] for the summer.  I returned to this job for two (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) At Forsyth?
Speaker 2: Yes in Forsyth, yes to develop that program and at the end of my second year [at Hubbard Elementary and High School, Forsyth, Georgia], I went to Columbia full time so I resigned.
Speaker 1: So you were full time band director?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: This was a high school?
Speaker 2: High school yes but I had--it was the school setting was from elementary through high school so I had the total music program, choral music, instrumental music, general music classes.  I had the whole program yeah.
Speaker 1: How do you spell Forsyth?
Speaker 2: F-O-R-S-Y-T-H, Forsyth, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Was that near Atlanta [Georgia] or was it?
Speaker 2: It was about yeah, it was about maybe fifty miles from Atlanta.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were there a year or two years you said?
Speaker 2: Two years yes.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 331071
Speaker 1: And then what happened?
Speaker 2: I entered Columbia University [New York, New York] full time.  I resigned that position and I wanted to have a full time experience at Columbia so I pursued the master's [degree] which I received at the end of the first semester and then I proceeded to do post-graduate at Columbia.
Speaker 1: So your master's degree was in what?
Speaker 2: Music education.
Speaker 1: Okay, not composition, do you do composition?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, composition was a major part of my, my graduate studies.  So in order to qualify for the master's degree I had to have it is required that I take music composition yeah.  That was a requirement.
Speaker 1: Did you have to do what they used to called practice or student teaching in New York [New York]?
Speaker 2: That's what I didn't do as, as an undergraduate or so I had no classroom other than the, the [U.S.] military or so but this is what helped me was when I accepted a position at Forsyth, Georgia as a teacher.  I was given credit for having classroom experience.  So I didn't have a, you know, a practical--that was my actual classroom experience.
Speaker 1: You mean the Hubbard Elementary [and] High School [Forsyth, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Yes, right.
Speaker 1: Was before you even went to Columbia College (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.
Story_ID: 331072
Speaker 1: You were saying earlier where we picked up on it you also had generated a large collection of compositions that you wanted to--somebody to take an interest.  Tell me about that experience.
Speaker 2: Well that's my first summer in New York [New York] at Columbia [Columbia University] so I had a full package of them.  So I would after class I would go downtown New York and I knew the area because it had been pointed out to me.  This was a publishing capital so I would go in the various companies, floors and all and I would talk with the receptionist.  I told her who I was ,and she can very much tell that I was, I was southern.  Most of them could.  And they were very sympathetic and they said, "Well leave us--."  So I had a package of them, said, "Well leave us two or three," and I would go then I go to the next floor and I'll go to another building wherever I could find a publishing company, I would do that and they all would say, "We'll get back it was something that we're interested in we'll get back to you."  So that never happened.  Well, a few I did meet; he must have been a musician, because he saw me leaving one of the publishing company offices, and he said, "I like, I like one of the compositions," he mentioned.  He sort of did the tune.  He said, "I like that very much."  So I felt good.  I said well maybe that's one they gonna publish you know.  That didn't happen.  So I, so I was on the beat quite a bit and I, I didn't give up.  I kept pursuing it and then I didn't get published at that time.
Speaker 1: Just jumping ahead, when was your first composition published?  I know we're jumping ahead but since we're on the subject?
Speaker 2: My first composition was published here in Boston [Massachusetts].  It was, I mean I was on staff here, working here, it was actually published in New York by one of the leading publishing companies in the world as such so that was the first opening that I had to have my composition published?
Speaker 1: What was the title of that piece?
Speaker 2: 'Let's Build A City.'
Speaker 1: Okay, we're gonna come back talk a lot more about that one--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --because that became a national--international piece so we'll come back to that.
Story_ID: 331073
Speaker 1: You went back to Hubbard Elementary and High School [Forsyth, Georgia] after you finished your master's degree or not?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't go back after.  While I was--
Speaker 1: Now wait a minute before we leave Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York] I wanted to ask you, being in New York City [New York, New York] where'd you live?
Speaker 2: On the campus.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: John Jay Hall on the Columbia University campus, yes.
Speaker 1: Did you spend time in Harlem [New York, New York] while you were there?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes quite a bit.
Speaker 1: Tell me about your Harlem life, was it musical, was it entertainment, was it just hanging out?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was, it was all of that, all of the above.  And so I--Columbia University borders Harlem so it is within walking distance and that would be my--a major part of my culture and entertainment life or as such.  Just walking the streets and observing or looking and the different places or so up and down 125th down in Harlem so going over to Abyssinian Baptist Church [New York, New York], I, I--that was just such a vast culture experience.  My church experience would be to go to Riverside Church [New York, New York] because I was fascinated by that great organ at Riverside Church which was in walking distance from Columbia.  I would attend that morning service and then after that I would go down into Harlem to attend a worship service and frequently I would go to new church called New Canaan Baptist Church [New York, New York] and I looked in the pulpit and I say you know I know him.  It was Wyatt Tee Walker [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Wyatt Tee Walker]--
Story_ID: 331074
Speaker 1: It was at New Canaan [New Canaan Baptist Church, New York, New York] and you looked up in the pulpit and (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) New Canaan, looked--and I recognized the face profile.  Then I looked at the church bulletin and there was Reverend Wyatt Tee Walker [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Wyatt Tee Walker].  I had met him in Virginia.  That's when I was teaching music there.  So I that's his service, I became a regular worshiper at the New Canaan Church.  So Harlem [New York, New York] also brought the experience to me because even though during my studies at Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York], I would go around maybe about three evenings a week that was an absolute outstandingly gifted composer by the name of Hall Johnson.  Wrote a lot of music but mainly wrote Negro spirituals and some of the finest including, including Roland Hayes, Marian Anderson sang his spirituals his arrangements and a classmate of mine told me about it said, "Why don't you come down and be with us at the Hall Johnson Choir?"  I said, "That's good."  So anyway I went and I walked in and he introduced himself I introduced myself and three nights a week and then I think it was in the Salvation Army building in Harlem.  I learned the art of conducting an interpretative African American spiritual from the master.  That was a part of my education while even at Columbia and New York [New York], yes.
Speaker 1: That's a great story.
Speaker 2: Right.  So all the--
Speaker 1: Did you do any playing in Harlem yourself at any clubs or churches?
Speaker 2: No, a few churches I would, I remember meeting a minister of music at one of the churches and he asked me to play which I did but that was the extent of it.  It was not a continuing program involvement so I just did the one or two experiences as such, but I was mainly a consumer to listen and to learn and to just be fascinated by the, the, the culture of Harlem.
Story_ID: 331075
Speaker 1: With your master's [degree] now from Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York], what was your next step, where did you go next?
Speaker 2: I had anticipated going back to Atlanta [Georgia].  I looked--I had been approached by job offers there and I met a, a, a young woman who was pursuing her master's.  We were all around the dormitory dinner table and so she came up, a friend of mine met her previously, and she had said she said my--her husband was on the school board is one of the few southern cities where African Americans on the school board so he was on the school board there in a place called Lynchburg, Virginia.  So he called his wife says look around there we need a music teacher here at the high school.  So she mentioned that to him and we gathered so that got to me I met with him around the dinner table and I met with her and she must have called her husband and said, "I met a young man I like very much.  But I think he's going back to Atlanta.  He's finishing up, he's finished his master's already and in a few weeks he's going back to Atlanta."  So some kind of way he, he tracked me down.  He got my home phone number and he called me in Atlanta and we struck up a conversation and he knew some of the people in Atlanta and I said I told him I said, "It's likely that I will stay in Atlanta but I will certainly consider you know the, the offer."  I think maybe that same evening or so the superintendent of school called me, superintendent of Lynchburg public schools called me by the name of Paul Munro and he--it was a fascinating proposal he gave and to be director of the high school choral music program as such and I thought about that and then I went back to Forsyth [Georgia] to see some people and one of the education supervisors there said she had gotten a call from Lynchburg.  She said. "Mr. Winfrey [HistoryMaker Robert Winfrey], take that job.  You're not, it's not something that you're, you're gonna be in forever," but I--.  "Leave Atlanta, take the job.  You can come back home or so."  So I considered that and I accepted that position on the basis that I would be there for a year at the most two years because I wanted to go back to Columbia and pursue doctoral studies you see and I, I didn't have much experience when I was at Columbia so my advisor said, "Robert go get some experience or so.  You, you've been a professional student now and then come back and pursue doctoral.  I'm not gonna approve your program.  Come back and, and pursue your doctoral studies after you've had more classroom experience."  The little experience I had in Forsyth [at Hubbard Elementary and High School] was not that much so I took his advice and that's how I ended up in Lynchburg, Virginia.
Speaker 1: So what school did you go to?
Speaker 2: Dunbar High School [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Middle School for Innovation, Lynchburg, Virginia].
Speaker 1: Dunbar High School?
Speaker 2: In Lynchburg, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Named after the poet?
Speaker 2: Named after the poet.
Speaker 1: Paul Laurence Dunbar.
Speaker 2: Paul Laurence Dunbar.  Yes.
Speaker 1: And what year did you go there?
Speaker 2: I went there in I think it was 1960 yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell me about being at Dunbar High School, was it eleven years you were there?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I was at Dunbar ten years.
Speaker 1: Ten years?
Speaker 2: Ten years.  I was in Lynchburg eleven years yes.
Story_ID: 331076
Speaker 1: Well, tell me about Dunbar High School [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Middle School for Innovation, Lynchburg, Virginia]?
Speaker 2: Dunbar High School was located in Lynchburg, Virginia which is a, a very conservative community as such but a wealthy community in terms of resources.  Segregated Dunbar was an all-black school and across town was an all-white school, E.C. Glass [E.C. Glass High School, Lynchburg, Virginia].  Two schools serving the greater community, one serving the black community and one serving the white community as such.  I decided that after my--the first year was, was, was, was great. That's when I met my friend Dr. Wood, Virgil Wood [Virgil A. Wood] who was a pastor of a church, he came by the house where I was residing and introduced himself and a member of his church also came by.  They were looking for an organist as such.  Then I began to develop community participation there being involved in the church work, the school work and other community.
Speaker 1: And the minister his name again?
Speaker 2: The minister of the church was Dr. Virgil Wood.  He was the pastor of a church called, a very fine church, Diamond, D-I-A-M-O-N-D, Diamond Hill Baptist Church [Lynchburg, Virginia].
Speaker 1: In Lynchburg?
Speaker 2: In Lynchburg, Virginia.  He had been there maybe two or three years and he approached me about becoming his, his music, minister of music at his church.  So I, I stayed there.  I went--I used to play at some of the other churches in the city but that was my main mission just to serve the Diamond Hill church family.
Speaker 1: In addition to meeting the Reverend Virgil Wood who played an important part in your career development--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --was there anybody else special that you met in Lynchburg?
Speaker 2: Several, several.  I was--the principal at the school, C.W. Seay [Clarence W. Seay] who was a graduate of Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee], so we got to know each other pretty well, Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], Fisk as such.  Quite talented educator known nationally so in fact one span of time he was president of the southern educational council or something like that.  And so it consisted of educators from the black colleges and secondary schools.  He was the president of that organization for a year or so. C.W. Seay, I got to know him pretty well or so and he pretty much gave me the run of the school.  I could do pretty much what I thought would be in the best interest of the students at that school.
Story_ID: 331077
Speaker 1: Tell me about your work over the ten years. What did you develop and what was that experience like?  You stayed there a decade so must have been working (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I this is why I enjoyed it so much.  I had, you know, I had only planned to be there a year or two and go back but I--
Speaker 1: So what kept you there?  I guess that's what I--
Speaker 2: Well after my first year--I got married at my first teaching experience [at Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Middle School for Innovation] in Lynchburg [Virginia].  I married, brought my wife there or so and then I became even more involved in, in the community of cultural, of social institutions in addition to the church and and to the school.  That was my whole life yeah.
Speaker 1: How far was Lynchburg from Atlanta [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Lynchburg from Atlanta it was about maybe about four hundred maybe three or four hundred miles.
Speaker 1: It was south.  Lynchburg was very southern Georgia [sic. Virginia] right?
Speaker 2: Yeah oh yeah definitely.
Speaker 1: You said you got married after your first year roughly in Lynchburg who did you marry and?
Speaker 2: I married Johnie Evans [Johnie Evans Winfrey].  So when I was in graduate school [Columbia University, New York, New York] I would come back to Atlanta and I had met her in Forsyth [Georgia] or so that's where I got to know her and when I was in graduate school, she went to Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] and we sort of we were right but we didn't see each other and then when she came home and I came home I would then I would get to see her and after visiting and courting her or so I ask her I said, "Well I'm gonna take this job in Lynchburg or so."  So the agreement was you go and see how you like that and you work or so and I'll continue what I'm doing and we'll see how this works out.  So we were right and during the breaks I would come home to Atlanta and then I would see her and we got married in August of 1961, yeah.
Speaker 1: And what was her career path at that point?
Speaker 2: Her career path, she had discontinued, she was attending Tuskegee Institute but she dropped out I think because of--really finances or so.  And she's one of those families where the mother had, her mother had seven or eight children and Johnie was at the mid she was, there were two younger than she so, so it was probably the finances she could not afford so she discontinued, and she began to work in a nursery in, in, in her hometown, Forsyth, Georgia.  So that's how we got to know each other and that's when I--when we were married or so I brought her to--we went to Virginia we set up household there.
Story_ID: 331078
Speaker 1: While you were at Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Middle School for Innovation, Lynchburg, Virginia], did you have a chance to get back to Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York] for any special opportunities?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was reading the--an educational magazine so Virginia I believe was--I don't recall the title of it, the magazine, but it was published and by the Virginia some education organization in Virginia and I happen to see the word Tang, I think it's T-A-N-G-L-E-Y, O-A-K-S, Tangley Oaks [Tangley Oaks Graduate Fellowship] and they were providing fellowships for certain areas and certain skills if you will meet the criteria, you will be considered.  I talked to my principal [Clarence W. Seay] about it I said I called his attention to it and I had not applied for that kind of a fellowship, any kind of fellowship before I was getting scholarship now any way.  He said, "Try it."  Then I begin to ask him questions.  He said about the criteria and writing this he said, "Oh Robert [HistoryMaker Robert Winfrey] you can eat that up."  I remember those words very well.  "Oh Robert you can eat that up."  Well any way I wrote it and I'm a poor typist, very poor typist.  So I decided not to type it.  I said this is gonna be unprofessional but I'm gonna write it.  And I wrote it out long hand so rather than get somebody else to type it.  So I sent it in.  I took a chance.  I got a call from the director and he said, "We received the information--your application, we were very pleased with your work there in Lynchburg [Virginia]," and this what I built around bringing music and, and, and artistic growth to inner-city youth deprived to a large extent youth and I built it around that and they gave me the fellowship to Columbia University, to any place I want to go to.  Well I want to go back to Columbia.  So I used the fellowship at Columbia and this was an outgrowth of my experience in teaching in Lynchburg.
Speaker 1: So what did you do with this fellowship, you were in there for a year or?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes I pursued courses like when you're in a degree program, you have to take those courses that are required.  I no longer have to do that now.  I could take whatever I want.  I would get academic credit for it and this was part of the courses I took applied to my doctoral program but I wanted to go in other parts of the university and take some things and I want to study also but being a composer so I want to study some other instruments like I studied the bassoon.  I studied the flute, the clarinet, the trumpet, the trombone, the tuba.  Those instruments which I had not previously other than clarinet, I had very little exposure to.  I could do that now as such.  And this is what I did when I went back to to Columbia.
Speaker 1: To Columbia?
Speaker 2: And then I returned to Lynchburg on a basis they would let me go that superintendent, we made an agreement, he say, "You're not gonna leave us and not return?"  So he said, "I will pay your salary while you are at Columbia on the basis that you will return to Lynchburg and teach at least a year."  So that was an agreement that I found acceptable and that's what I did.
Speaker 1: Didn't you develop an arts program too during this year or no was that after you got back to Lynchburg?
Speaker 2: At Lynchburg, yes I developed an arts program there, the--mainly for the community and beyond the school.  The school was sort of a centerpiece of culture in in Lynchburg.  That was it so there were other programs there but mainly the attraction was the high school and I developed a culture of arts institution at the encouragement of at that time the president of General Electric.  He was interested in in arts programs or so and there was not one in the Lynchburg community, especially not in, in the black schools so, so I developed that program during the summer.
Story_ID: 331079
Speaker 1: So I had other staff members with me as such and it grew to the point that before I left there in fact it was part of keeping me there.  They were discussing having a public school arts program in a public school, in the public schools and I would be the director of the arts program.  Well, it's a little late then because after three overtures from Dr. Wood [Virgil A. Wood] and from the music director here at that time, the late Peter Siragusa [Peter C. Siragusa] who were writing me, he and Dr. Wood would get together to bring me to Boston [Massachusetts].  The third time I accepted.  The first two times I--
Speaker 2: Where was Dr. Wood at this point?
Speaker 1: Dr. Wood had relocated to Boston.
Speaker 2: Oh Dr. Reverend Virgil would come to Boson?
Speaker 1: Yes he had--he was from the general area anyway when he went to Lynchburg [Virginia] as a pastor but then he relocated.  He was offered a position here so he relocated to the Boston community and since I was his music director at his church [Diamond Hill Baptist Church] in Lynchburg, he want to bring me back here to work with him in his program so he got with the music director here and said, "I have a young man-.-"
Speaker 2: Music director where?
Speaker 1: In Boston, of the music director of the city schools, Peter Siragusa, Peter Siragusa who was the music director for the Boston Public Schools (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I remember him.
Speaker 1: So the two of them got together and offered me a package.  I was working Dr. Wood's program and then I would teach in the Boston Public Schools.  They put that package together and I didn't wanna leave the South.  I figured if I was anywhere near leaving Lynchburg, I was going back to Atlanta [Georgia].  So I told him that I expressed appreciation for that I'd consider it, then the next time he wrote me or so it's different school in the South start in, in August.  So he wrote me another proposal and I said that you know I'm already teaching, I can't leave here, I'm under contract.  So the schools in this areas or so begins after Labor Day.  Not so down there, you begin around mid-August or anyway that's what happened.  The third time he got, they got to me early in the spring of the year.
Speaker 2: A year later, still after you?
Speaker 1: Still a year later and they brought me to Boston or so to look it over to see what this city and the school system was all about so I stayed maybe about three or four days.
Speaker 2: Had you ever been here before to Boston?
Speaker 1: Had been in and out but not, not that for any appreciative length of time or so.  I ended up going back home and talking with my wife [Johnie Evans Winfrey] and she said, "Well take it."  You know so I accepted the position as music director at the Jeremiah E. Burke High School [Dorchester, Massachusetts].  That was an all-girls (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What was the thing that--?
Story_ID: 331080
Speaker 1: Was an all-girl school (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What was the thing that really got you to leave Atlanta [Georgia]?  I mean you loved Atlanta; you still do.  What was it that got you to make such a big move?
Speaker 1: You know I--even when I was at Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York], I had one thing in the back of my mind that I had not seen enough, I had my experience was too narrow, and I was getting a broad experience being away from Atlanta, in Virginia and New York [New York] and I, and I felt that if I went back to Atlanta because I had some of my, some of classmates or so went off to graduate school, some of them were physicians and all and they came back to Atlanta and that was it for them.  They had the families, they had their profession.  That was it for them.  They couldn't leave I guess in a sense they could but that was, they were pretty much fixed.  I didn't wanna, I felt I might get to a point that I would not see, have the experience of working away from Atlanta in other areas and I figured that like the Lynchburg [Virginia] experience that if I went any place I would go back to Atlanta because I had worked in Lynchburg, I had studied in New York and have been back to New York, I had that vast experience that I don't think I would have had if after I was graduated from New York and returned to Atlanta, so I had a broad experience and that was what I desired to do.  So that was what, what then an experience to come to Boston [Massachusetts] or so that even enlarged my, my experience beyond Atlanta.
Story_ID: 331081
Speaker 1: Your wife Johnie [Johnie Evans Winfrey] was in favor of you taking--
Speaker 2: Making a move, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) To Boston [Massachusetts]?  You also were saying that you decided you really need to take an opportunity to broaden your experiences and people in the world (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --and Boston thought would be quite different.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But also who was Virgil Wood [Virgil A. Wood] and what was he doing here in the city because he was the magnet.  I mean he was the one who kept pestering you about coming here.  Tell me a little bit about Reverend Wood, who was he?  What was he doing here at that time?
Speaker 2: Well, prior to that time he was pastoring in Lynchburg [Virginia] and he had--he was such a dynamic leader there [Diamond Hill Baptist Church].  I mean we wept when he left as such and during that experience he was closely connected with the, the Southern Christian Leadership Conference [SCLC], which is a Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] organization which Dr. King headed.  He brought Dr. King to Lynchburg or so that's where Dr. King and I sort of renewed, he remembered me when I was a kid in Atlanta [Georgia] and he--when I--he was at Dr. Wood's, at the parsonage--church parsonage and I was--I got the call at my school so I, I sort of slipped out of the school, it's in walking distance, and when I was  coming up the street, Dr. King was getting in the car with Dr. Wood and Dr. Wood pointed said, "Dr. King do you know that Atlantan," and he looked at me you know and he couldn't believe it because I had matured or so okay taken on a lot of weight as such and we sort of renewed acquaintance there.  He was speaking there at the auditorium and I played for that service and so got a chance to talk with him following the services.  He said, "Look I been hearing about the great work you're doing in this town, keep it up."  He used to call me Robert [HistoryMaker Robert Winfrey] as such.  So I--we had a chance to fellowship a little bit during his during the Lynchburg stay, but Dr. Wood brought him to Lynchburg so when Dr. Wood relocated to Boston or so he carried on the same kinds of programs, programs designed to--community programs--to uplift to bring about greater opportunities for African Americans in particular as such.  He was very outspoken on certain issues and so Lynchburg would not back down no matter what.  The newspapers and all may have would, would, would castigate him and didn't make him any difference if he felt he was right and this was good, this was the right thing to do it didn't matter.  So I think he was doing some of the basic same, some of the basic things he done in Lynchburg here (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What were some of the things that Reverend Wood was tackling here in Boston when you came?  You were close to him and so what was he facing day to day?
Speaker 2: Among the things he was facing was they're certain school issues.  He was facing--he was confronting certain school issues.  There are certain social issues that he was, he was dealing with in terms of human dignity and growth.  I believe I'm pretty sure it was because I have a picture upstairs of him that he, he brought Dr. King to, to speak at a gigantic rally here in, in Boston when during the hay day of the Civil Rights Movement and so he was an activist or so involved in community when I when I--he wanted me to be a part of the cultural component involving young people and young minds doing things that enhanced their opportunities through--
Speaker 1: So he had a role--
Speaker 2: --through music.
Speaker 1: He already had a role for you to play--
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: --in his new city.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Because he had brought King here as you know in '64 [1964] and '65 [1965] and we had a big march in Boston (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I remember--
Speaker 1: --in April of '65 [1965].
Speaker 2: --reading about that yes.
Speaker 1: You weren't here yet--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --but Virgil Wood, Reverend Wood was leading all of that.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And he had his first church was what they call the Blue Hill Christian Center [Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: Right.  And he wanted me to come and be a part of that center too yes.
Story_ID: 331082
Speaker 1: So you got here, what did you think of the city and what position did you take?  You decided to come, you came and you came in 1971.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What position did you have (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In the summer of 1971.  I had a--
Speaker 1: By the way excuse me did you have a family at that point did you?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.  I had two sons.  One was four, one was two.
Speaker 1: When you came to Boston [Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: When I came to Boston.  Yes.
Speaker 1: What's the name of the oldest?
Speaker 2: Robert, we call him Scott, Robert Scott Winfrey [Robert Winfrey].  Yes and then the youngest is Peter Winfrey.
Speaker 1: How old is Robert today?
Speaker 2: Robert is thirty-eight I believe yeah.
Speaker 1: And what's he doing?
Speaker 2: He's, he's, he worked with youth and who have certain handicaps.  He was mainly is a social worker and so he worked with youth who have sudden shortcomings and so mental handicaps.
Speaker 1: And Peter? How old is Peter (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Peter, Peter is thirty-five I believe.  Peter is doing construction, works for a construction company.  He, both of them attended Boston College [Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts] or so Peter wanted to do more of that kind of work and so whereas Scott went in a different direction so.
Speaker 1: All right, so you came with the family, two children, two sons?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 331083
Speaker 1: So what's your first position in the Boston [Massachusetts] public schools?
Speaker 2: As a teacher in high school, Jeremiah E. Burke High School [Dorchester, Massachusetts].  I sort of had a, had a choice.  I remember my first, the first person I met other than Dr. Wood [Virgil A. Wood] was a gentlemen by the name of Rollins Griffith whom we took to each other.  I, I got to know Rollins or so but he was the first person I met in addition to Dr. Wood and he sort of took me under his wings.  At that time he was moving from principalship to some kind of administrative role but at that time he was I believe he was principal at Martin Luther King School [Martin Luther King Jr. Middle School, Roxbury, Massachusetts] as such so he took, he gave me a tour took me around.  Sort of gave me background, an update on Boston public school--
Speaker 1: He was black?
Speaker 2: Yes, he was black, and he went on to Rollins Griffith went on to become a very successful educator in the, in the Boston school system [Boston Public Schools].
Speaker 1: How do you spell his full name?
Speaker 2: R-O-L-L-I-N-S, Rollins.  I think it's G-R-I-F-F-I-T-H, Rollins Griffith or so he became I believe he became the first associate or assistant superintendent of his, of his race in the Boston school system so I had immense respect and admiration.  He's a musician too.  A very fine musician also so we had that commonality or so being in education also being in the musical arts.
Speaker 1: So that helps with your transition here then?
Speaker 2: It did, it did.  And I was, I went--I always liked the secondary level or so I like that.
Speaker 1: You know I had the same experience with Rollins--
Speaker 2: You did?
Speaker 1: --when I first came to Boston.
Speaker 2: Is that right?
Speaker 1: And met him and he was the principal of the Martin Luther King Middle School.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And he just opened his door to me and we were close friends up until the time he died.
Speaker 2: Right, right, he's a church organist too.
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: He was a church organist too.
Speaker 1: I know.
Speaker 2: He's a church organist.
Speaker 1: Oh I remember when I was in college and we used to have our little weekend parties and dances the Rollins Griffith band we'd hire him and his band to play for us.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Go ahead.
Speaker 2: Fantastic.  He's a fantastic musician or so--
Story_ID: 331084
Speaker 1: I began to, at the Jeremiah E. Burke High School [Dorchester, Massachusetts], which was in a transition so it was an all-girls at that time that's the way they characterized this an all-girls school, it was going into--it was transitioning to an all-black school that's in Dorchester, Massachusetts [Dorchester, Boston, Massachusetts] or so.  Some white girls were there but not that many or so it was going through that transition and I was the music teacher there.  I must confess to you that I did not, I did not, I didn't like Boston [Massachusetts].  In fact I had made plans that I would finish the year (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You didn't like Boston?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Why?
Speaker 1: It was a cultural shock to be honest with you.  I had sort of formulated within my mind this creator of liberty of liberty was such a vast opportunity to, to become immersed in freedom and, and, and great education programs of the universities. This is at the top of the world in terms of the educational system, the universities, the health, the hospitals, I heard about that, read about that or so.  I also read about growing up or so that the further north you got the, the greater freedom experience you had.  I, and here's a person coming from the South, and so very much southern. Southern in mannerisms, southern in speech, homespun phrases and just antithesis of a northern person who was born and raised here.  I didn't have that and also certain things I was accustomed to that I didn't find here the living, the way of life. I didn't, I didn't find a great black cohesiveness in terms of business.  I had gotten used to that.  I had grown up in that so I thought that I would see the, the great banks and business community and, and I was disappointed that was not present.  I did not see a great massive involvement and this was during the Civil Rights Movement or so that I was seeing in the South or such.  So I had to come so southern oriented that coming to Boston or so was a culture shock.  I didn't see that much involvement of, of African Americans in certain other kinds of programs that I was a part of in the culture.  I had to learn and later find out it was there.  I just didn't see it initially.
Speaker 2: And I told my headmaster or so whom I--Douglas Foster [Douglas G. Foster] whom I had immense respect for and that was a mutual admiration we had for each other because that was his first year at--as a headmaster at Jeremiah Burke school and my first year as a music teacher.  He had taken to me and so practically everything that I ask of him he got it for me.  But I wanted to be honest with him and I told him at the second semester so we were sitting around I said, "Mr. Foster, I want to be open with you, so I'm not planning to return to Boston, I'm going to Atlanta [Georgia].  I'm going home."  And that hurt him that--said, "I haven't given the kind of leadership let's talk about this."  It wasn't--he wasn't.  It was a whole, the whole atmosphere that was so different from the culture that I was in, I didn't like it at all.
Story_ID: 331085
Speaker 1: That changed, because the summer the following, I finished out the year [at Jeremiah E. Burke High School, Dorchester, Massachusetts] then the following summer or so Peter [Peter C. Siragusa] asked me, Siragusa the music director asked me to take a job teaching summer school music program called Surrell [ph.] summer enrichment program in the Boston Public Schools.  So I agree to do that and I met an administrator who was from Texas and I was sharing it with him and so I said, "Well, it's just a matter of time sometimes just after this session I'm going back," and he, he said, "Come on let's talk."  And he had been in the system for a while and he said, "Look Mr. Winfrey [HistoryMaker Robert Winfrey], you haven't given yourself time.  There's a lot more to where you live or so that you haven't seen.  But give yourself--then you make a decision but you're here, now your family's here and you gonna hop up and and leave so do that after you're in a position to make a decision and compare."
Speaker 2: Who was that person?
Speaker 1: Let me see, the name escapes me now.  I think it was Smith or so he was a principal of, of a school and he--we worked together there for about six weeks closely.  Got to know each other as he originally from Texas or so but we got to know each other pretty well and I began to feel a little bit different after working in the summer program.  So and another thing too I had before I came brought my family here, I purchased a house in Mattapan [Boston, Massachusetts].  I didn't wanna come and and I had a young family there so I wanted the security of comforts of my family.  So I was gonna have to unload that house as such so I said, well I'll try another year and this was in 1972, now so this is in 2000, almost 2006, and I'm still here so (laughter) so something must have changed.
Story_ID: 331086
Speaker 1: And there were opportunities that began to open up for me to do things.
Speaker 2: For example?
Speaker 1: Well one of the things that I wanted to do is I've always wanted to be I was turned on with young people young minds and I did this in Lynchburg [Virginia] when I worked with some young people who went on to greatness like Carl Anderson and some of the others in fact they're now teaching in the colleges.  I've always found that fascinating to motivate achievers, youngsters to achieve and to rise high.  So that I, I found myself limited here until I got to know more people.  I was introduced by some parents to a METCO [Metropolitan Council for Educational Opportunity, Boston, Massachusetts] program and they said those youngsters could benefit to what you bring so I was interested in developing some kind of music program, maybe a choir or something like that with that program and then other things began to open up, Model Cities.  I became a creative arts director for Paul--the executive director by the name of Paul Parks or so the executive director of Model Cities or so and one of the divisions so I became a creative arts.  That brought me closer to young minds there over and beyond school.
Speaker 2: This is outside the schools?
Speaker 1: Outside the schools.  You see one of the discouragements in schools and this was the thing that really frightened me was when I was accustomed to after school you had after school programs you know rehearsals and other activities.  School was just a way of life and in the South.  I was accustomed to that and the first thing that my first day of school they told me among and all the new teachers, "Look when the bell sounds for your last class, pack your bags and get out of here."  And I said what?  I was not accustomed to that.  I was accustomed to saying okay young people we'll get together we'll plan a program, we'll plan some activity, we'll do some rehearsing or so for an hour or two.  I didn't find that here.  And I found that very, very discouraging but this town, this city was going through a transition or so and I guess for safety sake and I still didn't understand that, nobody's gonna bother me or so I wanna stay here.  But they told me I couldn't do it, that fifteen minutes I have to get out of the building and that was one of the discouraging aspects of my teaching school here.  That changed also.  So I began to make other changes began to take place and I felt more like I could contribute to the, to the cultural life of the community, the educational life, motivate youngsters and that bit.  And that's why I, I stayed.
Story_ID: 331087
Speaker 1: The arts program that you created and directed through Model Cities outside of the school system [Boston Public Schools], where was that located and based?
Speaker 2: That was located at the Roxbury Presbyterian Church [Boston, Massachusetts].  That was, I think, it was called area four if I'm not mistaken.  Model Cities was broken down in a different area or so and Roxbury Presbyterian Church had a cultural arts program at church not far beyond Roxbury called Twelfth Baptist Church [Boston, Massachusetts], they had a fine, an outstanding program.  So those two churches along that Warren Street had good where they would take youth in after school so take 'em in and do various kinds of educational program, tutorial programs, arts programs and that bit.  I felt very, very comfortable working in that, and that, that helped sustain my experience.
Speaker 1: Did things change for you?  Did you, did things open up for you at Burke High School [Jeremiah E. Burke, High School, Dorchester, Massachusetts], did that scene change for you?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: What happened?
Speaker 2: I--my first year here was it bordered disaster because I was--I had a glee club here.  It was an all-girls glee club but it was before I had a mixed of male and female but that was not major or so.  And my first year there was a discipline that they needed to have in order to stand before an audience and share a musical experience.  The discipline and one could look the way you stand, your decorum.  They didn't have to hear you sing but the way, way you carried your, your, your presence, stage presence, or so was absent and they had not been, they had not been prepared, trained.  I had to do that and so what I did was the first year or so was not good.  But I worked with them the second year and then they, we sort of bonded, the young women at the school, we bonded or so.  And they began to rally around what I wanted to do.  I could start having classes after school now.  They would come.  I even had something, probably was unheard of, I would have classes thirty minutes before school and they would be there.  I had done this down south, they would be there.  I felt good about that.  And then I began to involve them in community work.  I said okay you have a choral music repertoire, let's share it, not just in the school setting, let's go out in the community and do it.  And so I, I began to do that kind of thing and I felt, I felt good about that I was making a contribution to not just the educational setting I was in but the broad community as well.
Speaker 1: So sounds to me like your work at Burke really took off.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And then you kind of--
Speaker 2: It did to the extent that I remember the music director asked me he came out to hear the glee club sing and one of the compositions I had written or so they featured in the, in the schools setting and I have a supervisor a very talented supervisor a young woman by the name of Dr. Dorsha Docket [ph.] and she heard it and she liked it so well she took the composition to the, to the music director.  He liked it and so he called me saying, "I want to come out and visit your classes, observe your classes."  I said, "Fine come on."  So anyway he heard them, he stayed the entire class or so.
Speaker 1: Who was that?
Speaker 2: That was Director Peter Siragusa [Peter C. Siragusa].
Speaker 1: How do you spell his last name?
Speaker 2: S-I-R-A-G-U-S-A, Siragusa.
Speaker 1: And he was the citywide music--
Speaker 2: Citywide music director.
Speaker 1: Director?
Speaker 2: For the Boston Public Schools and so he heard that--we had the repertoire then we went to he asked me he said, "I like to take this group to, to the Massachusetts Music Educators Convention [Massachusetts Music Educators Conference]."  So I talked with the headmaster.  He was flipped this was so great, this is good because he wanted everything good for the school so he went downtown and told everybody his school was gonna represent the City of Boston [Massachusetts] so we went to Springfield [Massachusetts] for the music national educators and we did we received very well.  So that was a springboard into bigger things.
Speaker 1: What were some of the other things then that you were able to into within your--
Speaker 2: I even brought them to the churches or so I would make, I would make arrangements, I would discuss it with the minister, Roxbury Presbyterian Church was the first church, I said, "I'd like to bring the group here to be the guest choir if I could get it approved with the parents and with the headmaster."  He said, "We would love to have them here."  So I brought them to Roxbury Presbyterian, they were the guests.  They performed as the guest choir for that worship service.  And then we began to go to other churches.
Speaker 1: Was this still all girls?
Speaker 2: Still all girls, yeah at that point.  Later on--
Speaker 1: And predominantly black?
Speaker 2: Yes, all black by the end of my second year, they were all black, it was all black.
Speaker 1: Early '70s [1970s] then?
Speaker 2: Yes and then by the time they brought the male members into the school, that was my last year because at the time I didn't know it but the headmaster was hinting to me that he called me in, Douglas Foster [Douglas G. Foster], he said, "If you won't leave us, I will recommend that you become the assistant headmaster."  Well that's something I wasn't interested that administration.  I wanted to work directly with, with the young minds you know.  So but he was doing that because he had gotten wind that I was gonna be promoted to some.  He said that, "The music director has his eye on you, I'm telling you now."  So he was picking up on certain things that I was not privileged to (simultaneous)--
Story_ID: 331088
Speaker 1: Listen we can't jump over the composition that Ms. Docket [Dorsha Docket (ph.)]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --took notice of--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and then called Peter Siragusa [Peter C. Siragusa] up--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and then now tell us about that composition, what was the name of it?
Speaker 2: That composition was 'Let's Build A City' and this was written at the request of a friend of mine.  The friend we discussed about Virgil Wood [Virgil A. Wood] who suggested to me that to write a message for the city.  He said, "Bob [Robert Winfrey] write a message for the city."  The cities across--
Speaker 1: Write a message for the city?
Speaker 2: Write a message. He said, "The cities across America some are in turmoil and all."  Boston [Massachusetts] was going through very difficult times during that time desegregation effort.  He said, "Write a message for the cities."  And I, I agreed to do that but it was all in my head.  I had not penned it manuscript and all.  I finished it--they had a Boston exposition here and I was--this was to be the launching pad for this particular composition to highlight, one of the highlights of the exposition, I finished it the night before the exposition started.  I finished it the night before I taught his daughter--
Speaker 1: Whose daughter?
Speaker 2: --Dr. Wood's daughter to sing it.  So she learned it, she sing it and she did it well.  Well then it began to--while I was in high school I said I'm gonna arrange this for the glee club and that's when Dr. Docket and Peter heard it that's when they wanted to go beyond the classroom and into the community and eventually with the Boston Symphony [Boston Symphony Orchestra] from Symphony Hall [Boston Symphony Hall, Boston, Massachusetts] and it just took wings after that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  'Let's Build A City.'  Could you recite that for us?
Speaker 2: It starts, "Let's build a city where all people can live free, safe and in peace."  It's, "Let's build a city where every child can grow and become as great as you can be.  We can make this land a place dignity, sharing our resources for humanity, come let's build a city, a city of worth and we'll give birth to a kingdom on earth."  Then it went to another part say, "Let's build a city where there was brotherhood in every race and creed, let's build a city where in each neighborhood, there are friends helping those who are in need."  It say, "No more hungry people, no more poverty.  Open every heart, let us brothers be.  Come let's build a city, a city of worth and we'll give birth to a kingdom on earth."  And then I closed it out with, "Caring for each other, loving one another, always standing by to lift a sister and brother.  Come let's build a city, a city of worth, and we'll give birth to a kingdom on earth."  That was the composition and it's performed in a nation's capital (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I first heard that Robert [HistoryMaker Robert Winfrey] when I initiated and ran if you remember the Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] birthday program for the Boston Schools [Boston Public Schools]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you and the choir came--
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes
Speaker 1: --and you were part of that program.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: That's the first time I heard it.  Now that was the mid-'80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  But before that 'Let's Build A City' had spread all over the what?
Speaker 2: Yes it had, it had grown--
Speaker 1: What had happened to it?  Tell me?
Speaker 2: --it had grown well I got a call from the director of youth concerts at Symphony Hall, Harry Ellis Dickson, who is the director of the Boston Symphony youth concerts, he had heard me.  He had heard about it because I played it for him.  He said, "I want to do that here at Symphony Hall," and the second time he did, "I want to do it for the birthday of Boston," I think it was 350 birthday of Boston.  Said, "I want that song to be the future."  So it was arranged for the Boston Symphony.  Then there was an all-city chorus [Boston Public Schools All-City Chorus] at that time that I was conductor of.  And so I prepared them to sing it and Harry would come out and work with them also and they sang it at Symphony Hall and several concerts.  And then we went on down to Tip O'Neill, Congressman Thomas P. O'Neill invited the all-city chorus of Boston to go to Washington [D.C.].  It was featured for the nation's flag commemoration of the nation's flag in the [U.S.] Capitol building so it, it took off.
Speaker 1: So you went to [U.S.] Congress?
Speaker 2: I went and conducted from the floor--
Speaker 1: All-city chorus?
Speaker 2: All-city chorus consisted of students from every high school, public school in Boston (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now when did you put that together?  That came when in the timeframe?
Speaker 2: The timeframe--that came in I believe 1977 somewhere around there yeah.
Story_ID: 331089
Speaker 1: We had a federal court order to desegregate the Boston Public Schools in 1974 and you were at Burke [Jeremiah E. Burke High School, Dorchester, Massachusetts] and the Reverend Wood [Virgil A. Wood] was one of the black clergy who was out there trying to work desegregation process, how did all that affect you as a music educator and the work you were doing in the community?  Because we went through a lot turmoil, '74 [1974], '75 [1975], '76 [1976], '77 [1977]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in terms of school integration.  It was physical--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --just as it was in the South.  How did all that affect you?
Speaker 2: Well you see it was not a new experience for me because I had experienced similar conditions in the South and what happened was that the South was surpassing northern cities in those areas of civil rights and public accommodations and all.  And this is what one would find you know baffling, totally mystified.  City of Boston [Massachusetts] or a New England city would be you mean a city like Atlanta [Georgia] or so and other areas of the South would have black mayors and, and council and school board people or so and they would forge ahead, that was almost unthinkable but that was--so I was accustomed to that kind of going through that kind of episode in the South, I was a part of it as such.   So when it came, when it arrived here or so I knew the expectations and, and the outcomes I expected that you would override that, you would overcome that and so you would be a better community, a better city, a better school system as a result of overcoming that because right was gonna prevail regardless of the obstacles that were placed there so I was not frightened by it at all because it was not a brand new experience for me.
Speaker 1: The school department and public schools in the mid-'70s [1970s] were thinking about a music program I believe for the school system and then the court order came from the judge [W. Arthur Garrity Jr.] and something else from then was established so I want you to talk a little bit about that because that was the next stepping stone for you.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 331090
Speaker 1: Mr. Winfrey [HistoryMaker Robert Winfrey], in the beginning of the 1970s or towards the middle of the 1970s there were some propositions or proposals to change or develop the music program for the Boston Public Schools on a larger scale.  Tell me how that all affected your work as a professional musician in the school system.  What was going on now that provided new opportunities?
Speaker 2: I understand that this plan was in the making before I arrived on the Boston [Massachusetts] scene.  That to have a school of music within the Boston Public School system a public school for those youngsters who are interested in music not necessarily as music majors but students who have an acumen for music who have a love for music and wanted to include that music program with strong vigorous academic disciplines.  So it was my understanding that that was being discussed and planned before I came to Boston.  I happened to be the person that on the scene that they say well this is the person we recommend to the director's program.  And it is my understanding that the music director been given the approval to go all over the city and make interviews and to recommend someone from a national posture to, to become the director.  I think he did some of that but he knew of my work before I came to Boston and my work since I had been in Boston, so he recommended that I become the director of this school to superintendent by the name of William Leary, I believe that's his name, Dr. Leary.  And Dr. Leary and I got to know each other.  He, he--I saw him on the elevator.  He said, "You are my person to do this."  Mr. Siragusa [Peter C. Siragusa] hadn't told me that.  I said oh, but evidently it had been discussed.  Well that happened and along came the desegregation of the schools movement so the judge [W. Arthur Garrity Jr.] who was presiding over the case did not know that this was being developed, an independent high school, a public high school of music for youth of Boston.  He did not know, but he knew about a music program as such.  So what he did probably as a compromise he said, "Well we have a school park here we're developing which is very important to my desegregation plan.  Put that music program--make that the major feature of the school park," that's how it ended up on Madison Park [Madison Park High School; Madison Park Technical Vocational High School, Boston, Massachusetts].  There was not the original intent.  The original intent was for it to be an independent school not associated with any other program.
Speaker 1: But the federal court order to desegregate the schools then modified that?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  And I can quote the judge as saying this will be essential to the court order because it would enhance the Madison Park complex by having an outstanding music program in its own facility on the campus.
Speaker 1: Madison Park was what a new campus high school?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, it was a campus, it was they take on what's called a park concept that you had various houses, various structures within the park complex and he made music one of those major features on the campus as such.  So it was modified to that extent.
Speaker 1: So it didn't become a high school for music, what did it become then?
Speaker 2: Well it became a comprehensive high school with a music theme.  They call it, I think that time they call it music magnet, the magnet--certain high schools had magnet programs that served as an attraction to young minds who are interested in pursuing studies in those areas or so it could be an arts magnet, which I believe is an English high school.  The music magnet was to be at the Dunbar campus [ph.] with its own separate facility and its own faculty as such.  So it became a music magnet feature of Madison Park which at that time was a comprehensive high school.
Speaker 1: I see.  And so you became what, you had opportunities to do what then?  What did you do?
Speaker 2: I well at the time I I was first called its coordinator and then that was changed to assistant headmaster and then that was changed to director.  So I became the overall director responsible for all components, budget, equipment, facility, faculty, staff, curriculum, all programs.
Story_ID: 331091
Speaker 1: So that [Roland Hayes Division of Music at Madison Park High School; Roland Hayes School of Music, Boston, Massachusetts] opened when?  When was that launched?  When did it open its first classes?
Speaker 2: It was launched in 1975 I believe '75 [1975] real serious thinking was given for it and so then the--I was pulled out from, from the Burke [Jeremiah E. Burke High School, Dorchester, Massachusetts] as a music teacher which my headmaster [Douglas G. Foster] had predicted, sort of prepared was gonna happen.  Or so I was pulled out to become the person the point person to coordinate all of those programs.
Speaker 1: Well, what did it become?  It became an institution in the public school system [Boston Public Schools], it became an institution in the music world of Boston [Massachusetts], so tell us how you developed and what happened?
Speaker 2: Well at first thought we didn't have a facility to, to house a program so on a temporary basis the court order approval said well there was a facility in the Boston YMCA [Huntington Avenue YMCA, Boston, Massachusetts] where a former high--a former school education program was called Huntington Prep [Huntington Prep School, Boston, Massachusetts].  Huntington Prep moved out and that created space to begin to initiate the music program (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In the YMCA?
Speaker 2: Yes, in the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] building on Huntington Avenue.  So that's where it started as such.  After a while I think the school say well the campus is about--is constructed, other disciplines are taking place, let's move the music program to the campus but there was no facility there.  So there was an issue that had been discussed in detail.  The compromise was there is a facility there we can convert that into a music program with the right pieces in place.  We need somebody to do that.  We need somebody to plan that and I took on another role as a facilities planner to meet with architects and engineers.  That role I was not prepared for because I had not experience in doing it.  I knew what belonged in there because as you remember that in my Lynchburg [Virginia] experience this is what we were gonna do anyway.  So I knew what belonged there but when you begin to ask some questions about you know for example I remember asking the meeting in city hall they say, "Well, Mr. Winfrey [HistoryMaker Robert Winfrey] how many per square inches should we have for a student with a desk, a student with a chair and an instrument or a tuba."  I had to do some thinking.  I said, "I have to get back to you on that.  I can't answer that right off."  So I had to do some research in order to prepare for that but we came through it okay.  So a modern facility on the campus of Madison Park [Madison Park High School; Madison Park Technical Vocational High School, Boston, Massachusetts] was planned or so and the first year or so it began to beget national proportions, national exposure.  People were coming from school assistance from all over the city.  We had a group come in from Israel to look at the facility to ask questions about it.  How was it designed and that?
Speaker 1: So you had designed the band rooms, the rehearsal rooms, the choir rooms?
Speaker 2: Yes, I met with the architect and the architect said well, first tell me what belongs in it and we can give you the space.  Now what belongs in a music facility?
Speaker 1: Specialty rooms?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes and I had to provide that information for him.
Speaker 1: And that included the library, the music library, offices (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The music library, auditorium, classrooms, studios, practice rooms you name it that--what given the space you have what must be put in there.  They put everything in there I asked for except I wanted a larger auditorium.  I wanted an auditorium that would have the seating capacity of a thousand.  But I also wanted a separate band room and a separate orchestra room.  And many schools, they have a band room and orchestra room combined.  I didn't want that; I wanted them separate so he said, "We have to compromise; we can't give you the auditorium with that kind of a seating capacity."  So that was the compromise.
Story_ID: 331092
Speaker 1: And this program, this facility became known as what?
Speaker 2: Well it was called--it was first called the Division of Music [Roland Hayes Division of Music at Madison Park High School; Roland Hayes School of Music, Boston, Massachusetts] and that was the name it was the Boston Public Schools--the Division of Music at Madison Park, which was a Boston Public Schools institution.  The name came up say what division of music, that's that, we need to put a name to this you know.  So some names were floated around and believe it or not the names float around came from such names came up from, from other arts conductors, famous conductors.  We should name it after this person.  I gave that some thought and I discussed it with some other people, not only with Dr. Wood [Virgil A. Wood], but very prominent person whom I got to know by the name of Common Fields [ph.] and others or so there were two names that put on table that must be one of the two.  It would be one who had come up through the ranks in a Boston Public Schools, Rollins Griffith or Roland Hayes.  Roland Hayes had the national, international exposure so he had the little bit beyond, but Rollins Griffith was more local so and came through the system so the compromise was the support was to name the facility in honor of Roland Hayes and had a very impressive auditorium and we named that in honor of Rollins Griffith.  That was put before the school committee.
Speaker 1: So how many years then you were the director, the leader, the creator of the Roland Hayes Division of Music?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How long did you serve in that position?
Speaker 2: Twenty-four years I served in that position twenty-four years and it has become the Roland Hayes School of Music now.
Speaker 1: Say that again.
Speaker 2: It is now the Roland Hayes School of Music.
Speaker 1: When did that happen?
Speaker 2: That happened just as I was retiring because I had always wanted it that way anyway.  The Division of Music or so came from the music director [Peter C. Siragusa] so the school board bought that.  That's, that's appropriate, would do that.  In fact they say may be better because you already with another school so that might, that might conflict so we say I didn't like that.  Well I didn't say I had a preference of calling it the school and that's what years later that's what it had become.
Speaker 1: How did you feel at the point when you were able to get everybody to agree to name this after Roland Hayes and then you had heard Roland Hayes as a youngster back at Wheat Street Baptist Church in Atlanta [Georgia], how, what were you thinking at that point?
Speaker 2: It was a, it was such a tremendous satisfaction that here I am presiding over a school, an institution that bears the name of my hero.  Years ago when I used to sit in awe and listen to that, that great voice you know and listen to him even speak address the student body at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] and I said this man and now I am the director of a school named in his honor or so that's, that's tremendous, that's awesome.  So I, I felt great about that, I felt good about it and so then to dedicate it or so we brought in this national, internationally known educator, minister, religious leader Benjamin E. Mays [Benjamin Mays] who was such a friend of Roland Hayes.  The two of them were very close or so.
Speaker 1: And your other hero mentor.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: From Morehouse.
Speaker 2: And, and Dr. Mays at that time was sort of curtailing his speak and he would accept something special or so and out of all kinds of invitations or so and this receptionist and secretary say well Dr. Mays is not likely to be available.  He only accepts.  But when he heard the name Roland Hayes he called us.  He called us.  He said, "You invited me to be the keynote speaker Roland Hayes; I will come, I plan to be there, because Roland Hayes not so much he was a great human being or so but Roland Hayes was my close colleague and friend."  So we were able to bring Dr. Mays to give the keynote address to the dedication of the--
Story_ID: 331093
Speaker 1: How many students did you influence during your directorship of the Hayes school [Roland Hayes Division of Music at Madison Park High School; Roland Hayes School of Music, Boston, Massachusetts], how many students went through your program roughly over the years?
Speaker 2: We had worked up to close to my retirement age.  We had--we were bringing in students from another school right across who was also on the campus--had moved to the campus at John D. O'Bryant School [Boston Technical High School; John D. O'Bryant School of Mathematics and Science, Boston, Massachusetts].  We were providing music education for those students and from the students who are assigned to music program through Madison Park [Madison Park High School; Madison Park Technical Vocational High School, Boston, Massachusetts].  So we had worked it as almost six hundred students daily, daily with us.  We were stretching it by far in terms of capacity but that's about the peak enrolment that we had.
Speaker 1: A number of recognized musicians locally and nationally were trained under you at the Hayes music program, who are some of the people that went on from the Hayes Division of Music to make a name for themselves?
Speaker 2: We had a group of, comes to mine that they're doing well and they have done well.  It's called 9.9.  That's what they named themselves female trio or so.  They went on to tour the name.  They made recordings.  One of the songs the leaders got into movies.  There was a movie came out some years ago called 'Sister Act.'  She was in that movie or so.  So they--many of them went on to become fine musicians and fine music educators teaching music and so then some use music as a means of personal growth and expression and fulfillment but they went into other areas, medicine.  One young lady was a tremendous violinist.
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: Karen Moody.
Speaker 1: I remember Karen.
Speaker 2: Karen Moody never played a violin before.  She came and she saw it was put in her hands.  She didn't even say I want to learn to play the violin, this was instrument the teacher put in her hands.  She developed that skill magnificently.  Very shy person.  I remember the NAACP [National Association For the Advancement of Colored People] has a program called ACT-SO Academic, Cultural, Technological, Scientific Olympics [sic. Afro-Academic, Cultural, Technological, and Scientific Olympics] and I put her in that program.  She didn't wanna be in.  In fact I had to go by her house and get her and put her in.  Long story short, she, she placed second, she's good, that's good.  We be in the next year, well the next year she plays first in Boston [Massachusetts] and then she went to the nationals that where all she plays first there with the violin.
Speaker 1: And today she's a what?
Speaker 2: Today she is a surgeon (laughter).  She went on from Roland Hayes to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and then Harvard to medical school and then she went to New York to do an internship so and she's a surgeon now.  Still plays, still plays the violin though.
Story_ID: 331094
Speaker 1: Who is Carl Anderson?
Speaker 2: Carl Anderson was perhaps one of my most gifted students, maybe one of the nation's most gifted students, actor, vocalist in 'Color Purple' ['The Color Purple'] you name it.  Starred in 'Jesus Christ Superstar' so the movie and the stage production so.  I used to get Carl Anderson, Carl Anderson was not with Roland Hayes [Roland Hayes Division of Music at Madison Park High School; Roland Hayes School of Music, Boston, Massachusetts], he was with my first position in Virginia at Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Middle School for Innovation, Lynchburg, Virginia].  I used to work at the kinds of programs I disappointed in when I first came to Boston [Massachusetts]; I used to work with Carl after school.  This when I could get to the individual attention or so after school and in addition to the classroom work after school.  Carl went on to he was graduated from Dunbar High School and then he went to Washington, D.C.  He went to Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and then he discontinued and he started singing at a church in Washington, D.C. and he formed a group and they were heard and then from there on he went to he auditioned for Broadway, big jump.  And he made it.  He was selected.  Then he auditioned for the movie.  He went to Israel and that's where they made the movie.  And he went from there to sky's the limit.  I'll be sitting in my living room and sometimes I'd be watching 'The Johnny Carson Show' ['The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson'] or some other culture program and there was Carl performing on that program, perhaps my most prolific student or so yeah.
Story_ID: 331095
Speaker 1: You went across the river, the river the Charles River and launched another twenty-five year career.  Tell me about that.  The Kuumba Singers [Kuumba Singers of Harvard College].
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Kuumba singers.  K-U-U-M-B-A.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That was another major part of your life at the same time you running the Roland Hayes School of Music [Roland Hayes Division of Music at Madison Park High School; Roland Hayes School of Music, Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Tell me about that.  How did that happen?
Speaker 2: At the time that they had the Boston exposition, which I wrote the song 'Let's Build A City' at the request of Dr. Wood [Virgil A. Wood] was running it, it was chairing that program I was asked to put together a collegiate choral, the collegiate choral.  That is students from the major colleges in the greater Boston [Massachusetts] area.  The different, those were interested.  So I was successful in putting that group together and they sang for the for this event I think Reverend Abernathy [Ralph Abernathy] came up from Atlanta [Georgia] to be one of the speakers to launch that Boston exposition sponsored by the Southern Christian Leadership Conference [SCLC] chapter here.
Speaker 1: Virgil Wood was heading that right?
Speaker 2: Right, right.  And one young lady went back to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and said, "I met someone who we ought to contact about directing the Kuumba Singers," because they had lost their director and at that time they were student directed.  They were looking for a director but they had not found anyone to their satisfaction so I got a call one night at my home and then they said the caller was the daughter of Walter Leonard [HistoryMaker Walter J. Leonard] who was at that time was the executive assistant to the president [Derek Bok] of Harvard.  She, his daughter she called me and I remember you.  You sang in the collegiate.  She said, "I'm in a meeting here at Harvard now with some students and I presented them your name.  Would you consider becoming our director?"  Well there's one thing that I had promised my wife that when we moved to Boston that I would not take on a load that, mine I had two small children [Robert Winfrey and Peter Winfrey] that would take me out of the family setting for any length of time because before we had the youngsters or so I was rehearsing all over the place.  Now mind you I had a job a church position at that time.  I had the Roland Hayes at that time.  I didn't need any more rehearsals in the evening time.  So I went to the meeting with the plan I had a nice, nice note written to express to them my gratitude for being considered.  They hadn't recommended me for hiring but I figure what they would put my name on the list with others so I had a nice note I put in my pocket to read to them.  Well when I got there, I listened to them or so then I was introduced by the president of the Kuumba Singers, Kenneth Ingram said, "Well Kuumba members I want to present to you our next director, Mr. Robert Winfrey [HistoryMaker Robert Winfrey]."  (Laughter) I was floored.  I hadn't planned on accepting it.  Any way I couldn't, I couldn't, I couldn't reject it.  I could not so I expressed the gratitude--
Speaker 1: What did Johnie [Johnie Evans Winfrey] say, your wife?
Speaker 2: She had a fit.  She said, "No, we got two children here and you're gonna be out all times of night, it's enough that you have a church rehearsal and you have the Roland Hayes, what would you need to go way over to Harvard and do that for?"  And then I thought well that's something she had to overcome because I was hooked.
Story_ID: 331096
Speaker 1: And I then I said well let me I'll work with them for a couple of years and then--but a couple went to twenty-five years.
Speaker 2: Twenty-five years?
Speaker 1: Twenty-five years, and we went all over the country, all over the nation, the black colleges [HBCUs], the major colleges of, of this country and so and performing and we performed at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] with Coretta Scott King was with us on stage at that time and she came, she approached me and she--remember I said that in a black community or so when you are going to church on Sunday that the Wings Over Jordan Choir would be on everybody's radio she came from that kind of a culture too.  So she said, "You know Mr. Winfrey [HistoryMaker Robert Winfrey] they sound so much like the Wings Over Jordan," and she knew that that was the influence that I had gathered from growing with the black spiritualist listening to how they were interpreted and performed.  So that was a marvelous experience.  Then I met the great dignitary, that people would help like Walter Leonard [HistoryMaker Walter J. Leonard] who wrote me a nice letter or so because he knew that I was struggling with the decision to rather to accept the directorship and he wrote me a nice letter encouraging me to come over and tell me what the needs of the students were, what I would bring to the students in terms of not only a musician, a music educator, a music director but in terms of, he used a word, "You will be their surrogate father," or so and at that time it was an all-black group.  Since that time though it's, it's, all interracial.  Every, every kind of facet of, of--
Speaker 2: How many students did you rehearse with every week?  How large was the--
Speaker 1: About between forty and fifty or so.
Speaker 2: And how many rehearsals did you have a week?
Speaker 1: I had a minimum of three.
Speaker 2: With the Kuumba [Kuumba Singers of Harvard College]?
Speaker 1: Yes.  Evenings.  I would leave Roland Hayes [Roland Hayes Division of Music at Madison Park High School; Roland Hayes School of Music, Boston, Massachusetts] and go to three rehearsals.  Depends upon what the--I was--I agreed with the group that I would rehearse them two weeks--I mean two times, twice a week, Tuesdays and Thursdays.  That was not enough because they came, the demand for their performances and the demand for new, learning new music, broader repertoire so it was such that I had to add more sometimes weekends and especially when they would go on tours.  I had--to learn to the music properly or so I had to go over there over and beyond the regular two evenings a week.  So I did that for twenty-five years, yes.
Story_ID: 331097
Speaker 1: You finally ended that long, long tenure.  How did you feel when you really had to make the break?
Speaker 2: I had planned it the same way I planned to retire from Roland Hayes [Roland Hayes Division of Music at Madison Park High School; Roland Hayes School of Music, Boston, Massachusetts].  It was not an abrupt decision.  I had planned it five years before and I met with my supervisor Dean Archie Epps [HistoryMaker Archie C. Epps, III] and he said, "Would you stay another five years," and it was sort of five year intervals--
Speaker 1: Five years?
Speaker 2: Yes another five years.  And I said, "Maybe another year."  And he said, "Well think about it."  He wanted me to stay and then plan to do a national search for and he didn't think that they had enough time to do that or so but anyway I stayed on an additional four or five years and I said that's it I can live with this and the group kept growing, kept developing, strengthening repertoire, popular demands for their performances as such but I had--I knew that in 1998 that that would be--
Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-eight [1998].
Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety-eight [1998] from, from the Kuumba Singers [Kuumba Singers of Harvard College], 1999 from Roland Hayes.  I had planned it to make that kind of exit.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 331098
Speaker 1: As I wanna back track with a name because I've read something about this and you talked to me about it, your relationship to the Berklee College of Music [Boston, Massachusetts] and specifically Lawrence Berk.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Who was Lawrence Berk and he played a role in, in the things that you were doing--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and was helpful to you, would you say a little bit about that?
Speaker 2: Lawrence Berk we used to call him Larry or so was a fantastic musician, fantastic musician, plus he was an engineer.  He is the founder and president of Berklee College of Music which is a school of international stature as such.  When I was given a responsibility to plan the Roland Hayes facility [Roland Hayes Division of Music at Madison Park High School; Roland Hayes School of Music, Boston, Massachusetts], I thought I need to meet with some minds or so who can provide me the kind of guidance I need.  Larry Berk president of Berklee was the first person I called on.  He and a, a music professor Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts] by the name of Lee Chrisman who was chairman of the department of music education at Boston University, I sat with him.  He was very cordial.  In fact, he tore the plans up from the school department, he just ripped them up say this is not, this is not.  He helped me plan that facility that's there now.  I give credit to President Berk because he was the person that guided me through a maze of difficult programs as such.  He enabled me to develop a plan that the city public facilities and eventually a school committee and city council and the mayor signed off on.
Story_ID: 331099
Speaker 1: It's been seven years since you directed the Kuumba Singers [Kuumba Singers of Harvard College], eight years or six years since you left Roland Hayes directorship [Roland Hayes Division of Music at Madison Park High School; Roland Hayes School of Music, Boston, Massachusetts], what's life been like for you since then, what have you been doing?
Speaker 2: Well prior to my departure as director of Roland Hayes, I would--people asked me what is that you want us to remember your, your leadership by?  I asked and I say you know what I would like for you to name these rooms after historic musicians who have made their contributions to world culture and so various genres, jazz music, classical music, the concert stage, every area blues, et cetera.  I said name these buildings after these people or so and I'll be very happy to say that I was a part of an institution that honored--some have deceased, some since the time that we named them have deceased.  [HistoryMaker] Elma Lewis was one we named after her.  Ray Charles was another we named after his decease.  So but I was glad that we--that they bought into this and the Roland Hayes friends committee chaired by Ruth Howe took that to the school to the superintendent, discussed it with him.  He saw it, he thought it was fantastic.  That every room, every space in that facility will be named in honor of an outstanding musician locally and from the national scene.  And in order to get those names or so we put it out in the community.  You have a favorite musician or so, submit the names or so.  The only thing the parent council says let it be representative of the school membership.  That is African Americans or so Orientals, Asians I should say, Latino or so let it reflect that and we were able to do that--
Story_ID: 331100
Speaker 1: What other activities have you been pursuing during the last six or seven years?
Speaker 2: Included in those activities is I've continued to do church work as a church organist.  I discontinued the, the long lengthy night evening rehearsals or so that takes its toll over a number of years.  But I continue to, to play music.  The organ for two churches, the Mattapan Baptist Church in Milton [Massachusetts] for the worship service, the regular worship service, and for an early morning worship service over at the Roxbury Presbyterian Church [Boston, Massachusetts].  So I'm still active in, in music circles within the religious setting.  And then I've done something that I have not done before and I had given it thought that when the occasion presents itself and I have the time to do it, I want to work with senior citizens, bring to them the joys of music, expressing themselves on an instrument or voice or so.  I started at this church after I came here for about less than a year or so and I was approached by some members here.  And I said my response was that's exactly what I'd given thought to over the years.  So I teach senior citizens how to play the piano, there's one coming in now, and they enjoy--most are retired or so.  Some are at the brink of retirement but they're all are senior citizens.  Now I do teach some children too because what happens is the grandparents say I want you to teach my granddaughter so that's in private teaching.  But what brought this about is that I'm teaching adults mainly retired and senior citizens to play the piano.  And I had one student who was studying the trumpet with me.  And I get a great deal of satisfaction from that.
Story_ID: 331101
Speaker 1: You had an opportunity I believe to go back to Dunbar High School [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Middle School for Innovation] in Lynchburg [Virginia]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --after you've changed your activities, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And that was a very special time for you.  What was that occasion about?
Speaker 2: That was an occasion the student whom I met and taught at Dunbar High School, Carl Anderson, passed away.  And I wanted to do something special for Carl and so I contacted the school committee and other people in Lynchburg and I think what this international renowned artist or so has passed away in the town of Lynchburg or the City of Lynchburg should do something to honor his memory, his legacy. So with a group of citizens that we were able to get them to name the high school auditorium, Dunbar High School auditorium in his honor, the very launching pad of his career.  That's where he used to sing in the Dun--chorus and that's what started him to singing in other places.  When he left the City of Lynchburg and he eventually went to Broadway and then the state so they named the auditorium in his honor and his, his friends and his colleagues and many from the, artists from, from the entertainment field came and participated, and Mayor Johnson [William A. Johnson, Jr.] of the City of Rochester [New York] came and spoke because they were friends during this time, and and I was the keynote speaker so that was a great deal of satisfaction that brought not only to the City of Lynchburg and to the family of Carl Anderson but his students, his classmates, his schoolmates, the Lynchburg community and to me as his teacher.
Story_ID: 331102
Speaker 1: We have some wrap up questions and we're just gonna move them fairly quickly.  Is there anything else you'd like to add to this interview or something that I didn't ask you about?
Speaker 2: Well I think you covered it pretty well.  I just is a state a sense of gratitude that I've had that I come from very humble beginnings, so limited resources in terms of growing up in terms of material but a lot of love and caring or so and I guess whatever I have accomplished or so is a real tribute to my mother [Ethel Clark Winfrey] and father [Pete Winfrey] who made so many sacrifices and these are the ones and my teachers I won't forget my teachers, public school teachers, through Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] and Columbia University [New York, New York] and other schools I have attended.  Sunday school teachers, church mentors or so who sort of kept me on that path or so which I could have easily veered off.  So whatever achievements I've had and among them I would recall when my composition was first performed at Symphony Hall [Boston Symphony Hall, Boston, Massachusetts] or so, I, I flew my mother here because I wanted her to see what her labors have produced.
Speaker 1: How do you feel about the way you have lived your life?
Speaker 2: I feel good about what I have done, what I've been able to do and the blessings that I have received and those whose lives I've been privileged to touch to enhance their lives and hope that they will enhance other lives.  So there's a sense of gratitude that I have or so I think you always wanna do more.  You always say well I would like to do this but overall or so I'm pleased that I have realized some successful achievement and practically every endeavor that I've, I've been privileged to undergo as a youth, as a child, as a youth into maturity, education, the arts, church work.  I've, I've been able to rise high and I'm very thankful and grateful the good Lord has enabled me to do this.
Story_ID: 331103
Speaker 1: What are your hopes and concerns for the African American communities today across the country?
Speaker 2: My hopes is that they would continue to strive to what Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] admonished us to do.  And that is as part of the song that I wrote to lift brothers and sisters, to bring to their lives and the lives of children so greater opportunities for them to grow so that they will pass on to other generations, those opportunities to realize good, to realize that which makes us better human beings and to certainly strive toward freedom and equality and honor and respect for human dignity.
Story_ID: 331104
Speaker 1: Last question.  How do you want to be remembered?  What do you want people to say about you?
Speaker 2: That I made a difference, a positive difference in their lives.  That some good was realized as a result of me being their teacher or mentor or helpmate or so.  That something good came out of that relationship and beyond.
Speaker 1: That's it.
Story_ID: 331105
Speaker 1: This is a picture of students at the Roland Hayes School of Music [Roland Hayes Division of Music at Madison Park High School; Roland Hayes School of Music, Boston, Massachusetts] and with their performing medium violin, double bass, percussion, bass guitar and the young lady is--was a fantastic pianist who went on to the conservatory of music and I'm with them.  This was at the time close to my retirement and the magazine, the Boston Magazine wanted to feature these students in a story about them and as you can see in this photo behind me is a painting of Roland Hayes for whom the school was named in honor of.
Speaker 2: This picture is in the hall of [U.S.] Congress, United States hall of Congress.  I am conducting the Boston Public Schools All-City Chorus.  These are youth who attend all of the high schools in Boston [Massachusetts].  They represent their schools and this was through an invitation by the speaker of the house at that time, Thomas P. O'Neill [Tip O'Neill] who invited the Boston Public Schools All-City Chorus to perform in commemoration of our nation's flag.  This was on Flag Day.
Speaker 1: The picture of the Boston Public School students shortly after our arrival at the [U.S.] Capitol building in Washington [D.C.].  So we were greeted by the Congressman O'Neill and Vice President Walter Mondale and Congressman Cokely--Moakley [Joe Moakley] I should say and director of music Peter Siragusa [Peter C. Siragusa] and I on this photo.  So this is a relaxing moment when we just got off the buses and was sitting on the steps of the Capitol building.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of me conducting the band in a concert at the Roland Hayes School of Music.  This is one of concerts we present to the school and to the greater Boston community for students expressing themselves and different performing medium instruments and voice and I'm conducting the band on this occasion.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my final concert at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  I'm acknowledging the applause of an audience when I entered the stage so the audience arose in Sanders Theatre on Harvard campus and I'm acknowledging that applause and so you see the students behind me were getting ready to perform.  This was my farewell concert in 1998.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of some of the students from the Harvard Kuumba Singers [Kuumba Singers of Harvard College].  This is my nearing my final moments at Harvard.  I'm presented with a plague by Dr. S. Allen Counter [HistoryMaker S. Allen Counter] who is the president of Harvard Foundation [The Harvard Foundation for Intercultural and Race Relations].  This is in 1997 close to the year that I retired.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of young children at Fenway Park [Boston, Massachusetts].  I was asked to conduct some children in a community children's chorus and at the park this was one of the playoff games of the Boston Red Sox and the Oakland Raiders [sic. Oakland Athletics] and I'm conducting these children in rendering 'The Star Spangled Banner.'
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my former student and me.  Carl Anderson came to my retirement ceremonies and as I said I taught Carl as a young student growing up in Lynchburg, Virginia at Dunbar High School [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Middle School for Innovation, Lynchburg, Virginia] and this was in the year 1999 and for this occasion, Carl came back to sing at my retirement ceremony.
