Story_ID: 622999
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My, my name is Harrison Benjamin Wilson, Jr. [HistoryMaker Harrison B. Wilson].
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My date was April 25--April 21, 1925.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had a birthday last month.  I'm eighty-five years old.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where were you born?
Speaker 2: Amsterdam, New York.  Most people that are not from Amsterdam would not know where that is, but it's up, what we call Upstate New York.
Speaker 1: Okay, and sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: My occupation was that of my, my last job was president of Norfolk State University in--here in Virginia, Norfolk, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I was president for twenty-two years.
Speaker 1: Right, and what is today's date.
Speaker 2: Today's date?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Oh gee, oh man I haven't even read the paper.  Oh god, May 11th.
Speaker 1: Okay, 2010 right?
Speaker 2: Two thousand ten [2010], right, I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're here in my home in, in Virginia and just outside of Norfolk, Virginia.  Boy, I froze on my names.  In Ports, not Ports, oh god.
Speaker 1: Chesapeake [Virginia] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Can--
Story_ID: 623000
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type of questions that management always requires us to ask of everyone, and they only take a, you know only require a brief answer.  The first of these questions is, oh, sir do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: School?
Speaker 1: Food?
Speaker 2: Food?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Well, my problem is I just like food.  I like ham, any, anything ham.  I like chicken, of course, anything baked.  I just don't have a real, real favorite.  I just, I like food that's prepared well, and I just enjoy eating food, period.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Color?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I would say blue, blue and then of course blue and various shades of blue, dark blue, navy blue and so forth, but blue would be my favorite color.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Well spring of the year is my favorite.  Spring and then fall, those two areas.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I love Saratoga, New York.  They have horse racing there every summer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's, that would be my favorite place.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: A, a, I didn't, I'm sorry I didn't hear you.
Speaker 1: Oh I'm sorry.  Sir, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Saying.  Well, I love God bless America.  That's, that's always been a real favorite of mine.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Freedom for all would be another one that I love.  Anything that's connected with life and people--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --would be a favorite phrase.
Story_ID: 623001
Speaker 1: Well, I, I'm gonna ask you about your family history, and I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Harrison Wilson, Sr.] side, but we'll start with your mother's side first.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Marguerite Ayers, A-Y-R-E-S, Wilson [Marguerite Ayers Wilson].  Her maiden name was Ayres.  She was from Falmouth, Kentucky, originally and for people that aren't up on the geography of that part of the country, it's twenty miles [sic.] from Cincinnati [Ohio].
Speaker 1: Okay, and what's the, her date of birth?
Speaker 2: April 4th, oh god let's see.  April 4th, 19--1910 I believe.
Speaker 1: Okay and, well what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them, and what are the stories that are from that side?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother's side of the family, the early part of her family they were teachers.  Her mother [Elizabeth Price Ayres] was a teacher in Ohio.
Speaker 1: Was it her mother that went to Wilberforce?
Speaker 2: Her mother went to the Wilberforce.  It was a church school at that time.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it still is, yeah.
Speaker 2: Wil- Wilberforce University in Wilberforce, Ohio; that's where she went.  In those days, a teacher, at least the African American teachers for the most part, only went to school for two years and were certified as teachers.  So, she was there, my grandmother was there for years and her, and her first job assignment was Falmouth, Kentucky, which as I said would be, I'd say Wilberforce was about no more than sixty miles from Cincinnati and then twenty miles, that's about eighty miles from, from Wilberforce, Ohio, where she lived and where she was born.
Speaker 1: Okay, now she was, she started at Wilberforce right after the Civil War or just, or before?
Speaker 2: No, it was after.  She started--
Speaker 1: After.
Speaker 2: --it was after the Civil War.  Her mother, yeah we're talking about my mother's mother all right.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Boy, that history on, on my grandmother she started after the Civil War about 1890 something, I think 1890, '94 [1894] or '95 [1894], something like that.  She went to Falmouth, Kentucky and, and taught in an eight room, the school that went only to the eighth grade.  And that was, of course, the school for African American children.  And if they wanted to finish high school, then they had to go, some went where they had relatives in, in Cincinnati or Covington, Kentucky, or places like in Louisville [Kentucky] where they had schools and had relatives as she did and they would go there and stay with them and finish high school.  But that was one thing that she always, my grandmother, according to my mother, I didn't know her very well, my grandmother, but according to my mother she always regretted the fact that they didn't have a school through twelfth, kindergarten or pre-school through twelve.  But, in those days, that was, that was a rule in most rural areas in Kentucky.  And it was, it was not an integrated school.  It was for colored students or Negro students and, and of course that was the situation of those days.
Story_ID: 623002
Speaker 1: Do you know, the story you were telling me before we got started about the ancestor born in 1839 is that on your mother's [Marguerite Ayers Wilson] side or your father's [Harrison Wilson, Sr.] side?
Speaker 2: That's on my father's side.
Speaker 1: Okay, so I'll wait I--all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, my father it's interesting my father's family is a lot older going back and even in history and it'll be obvious as I talk about it why.
Speaker 1: Okay, we'll get to that story when we talk about your father, but--
Speaker 2: Right, I'll be glad to.
Speaker 1: --all right so your mother was raised in Falmouth, Kentucky?
Speaker 2: It's Falmouth, F-A-L-M-O-U-T-H, Kentucky.  As I mentioned earlier, it was very close to Cincinnati [Ohio], and when they called themselves going somewhere for a big time, that meant taking a horse and buggy in those days and going to either Covington, Kentucky, which is right across the river, the Ohio River, into Cincinnati and that was, that was when they had a big, a big day when they could do that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did she have any other stories about growing up in Falmouth or--?
Speaker 2: Well, the main stories that my mother told me was, 'cause I, I never, I understand that I met my [maternal] grandmother [Elizabeth Price Ayers] when I was very little.  I don't remember her at all from meeting her, but she was a very staunch person on education.  She believed in education.  I think that's where it all started for, for my family on my, on my mother's side right there with her mother.  My, my mother had a brother [Willis Ayers] that was a doctor, a medical doctor, and you talk about unusual he was in the class of 1895 and he went to Meharry [Meharry Medical Department of Central Tennessee College; Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee].  And in those days, many of the students like he that didn't have money they would work a year and then go to school a year.  And you can imagine how difficult that was to finish medical school in those days when they had to stop and go to work full time and then come back with money and, and go the next year, and that's the way he did.  As a matter of fact, he was a me- he was a preacher and he had a church and he preached.  This, this is one of my uncles, and he saved his money, of course, and then he'd go back to Meharry and he, he did that for a couple of years and then he saved enough where he could go and stay until he graduated.
Speaker 1: Now is this your, your mother's brother or your grandmother's brother, which one?
Speaker 2: This is my mother's--
Speaker 1: Your mother's brother?
Speaker 2: No, it's my--oh, what am I saying--my, it was my mother's brother.
Speaker 1: Oh okay.
Speaker 2: He was one of the children of, of my grandmother, my grandmother that went to, that went to--
Speaker 1: Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio].
Speaker 2: --Wilberforce and then left there and came into Kentucky to teach.  I may be a little lost on that date because when you, when you go into talk about my, one of her brothers finishing in 1895 or 1896 medical school I know I have my mathematics kind of wrong on that, but anyway it's a fact and I can get those dates for you.
Speaker 1: Okay good.
Speaker 2: I'd be glad to do that.
Speaker 1: Okay good.  That's what I was concerned about 'cause I didn't--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I, trying to match the dates up.
Speaker 2: Right, I understand.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay so, did your, where did your mother go to school?  Did she have a chance to go to school there?
Speaker 2: No, she didn't, she went through, through those eight years and then you know you found a job and did whatever you could get right there.  My father was, was a--my father's father [John L. Wilson], you know, I'll be, we'll talk about him, but he was the baby of a family of, oh golly, it must have been thirteen or fourteen children and he was the baby of that family.
Speaker 1: This is your father?
Speaker 2: My father--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --was the baby.  We'll, we'll talk about him later.
Speaker 1: Now, yeah we'll get it later, but, but your mother now she completed eighth grade and then did she get married or something (unclear)--?
Speaker 2: Well after a year or two of working she married my father--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and he was, of course, as I said, it'll all come clear when I talk about him--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and how they met and where they met.
Story_ID: 623003
Speaker 1: Well let's go to him and can you give us your father's full name and?
Speaker 2: Harrison--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Benjamin Wilson [Harrison Wilson, Sr.].
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Same thing, right, that's right.
Speaker 2: And my grandfather [John L. Wilson] named all of his sons after presidents, and we--I always thought that was very interesting.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: He was born in 1888.
Speaker 1: And where was he born in?
Speaker 2: He was born in Falmouth, Kentucky.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And his father was, was a Civil War veteran.  And all these stories are so mixed up that when you start talking about one of the children, you naturally have to bring in their father and mother.  But--and it may not be the smoothest way to tell the story about my family, but he, he finished, well I don't, I don't think my father even finished the eighth grade.  It was interesting.  It was interesting because he was the baby of that family, I mentioned that had all these brothers that were 6'5" and 6'6" and he was the shortest one of the bunch.  He was six feet tall, and was the last, was the last of the children.  It's, it's hard to talk about the children, because even in talking about how many children or brothers and sisters my father had it was way in those days of men that didn't have jobs they'd wander into a farm and ask for work.  And my grandma [Martha Wilson], my grandfather would, would say, "Now you can work, you gotta work though."  And he'd try them out and if he worked, they'd say "Well look you could come here and stay and I'll take care of you just like you're a member of the family and you'll work and I'll pay you a certain amount of money," and, and that fee wasn't that much, but he took them on as though they were his own children, my grandfather did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, but anyway my father, actual born from my, my grandfather and his wife, my father was the baby of the family, and he lived to be ninety-five and he dropped in and out of school because of his father having this big farm--it was bigger than a farm more like a ranch--he was spoiled by his mother.  He was the last boy, last, last baby.  And he had things like a buggy, like that would be an equivalent to a small sports car of today with red wheels.  He'd ta- he would tell us about it, and he had this fine horse that would, that was a thoroughbred and he'd, he'd ride that around Falmouth, Kentucky, and he'd go out on dates with that, with that red and white painted buggy that his mother gave him.  So, his father was, was very affluent.  As I said, he had this big ranch.  We don't even know how many acres he had.  It was, it was over 100 acres of land to the point where in those days they had, mostly they had their own cemeteries on their own property and they have their cemetery that I visited.  I visited the farm myself.  I took all my children so they could see what their great-grandfather was like.
Story_ID: 623004
Speaker 1: Well can you, what was your grand, great-grandfather's name?  And you said he fought in the Civil War.  Are there any stories about him and the Civil War (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, golly, yes.
Speaker 1: --how he got that land, you know?
Speaker 2: Right, that's, that's exactly right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, I, I, the, the story I'm gonna tell you when I was a young fellow and knew all this I, I'm a little ashamed to tell it, but more education the more I understood what was happening in those days, I wasn't.  My [paternal] grandfather [John L. Wilson] was, was the child of a slave who was estimated to be sixteen years old, and the owner of the property who was fifty or sixties, they don't know exactly how old he was, but he was a very wealthy Virginia landowner.  And as the story has been told to me, he was, he, he found this slave very attractive and as a result of, of this union, which was very, a very common practice in those days, that that was a result of my grandfather was born as a result of my grandfather or my, his father, I get mixed up, who was the owner, who was a plantation owner who was white and this African slave that he bought right off the ship and my grandfather was the produ- prod, the prodigy of the product of that union.  It wasn't really a union, but in those days that was the way it was done.  He had his own--he had, the owner had his wife and children, they were white.  But, it was fairly common practice for them to have slaves that were attractive to them, women slaves that were attractive to them, and they, and they had children as a result of that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is nothing new and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, it's really nothing new.
Speaker 1: But we don't talk about it much, but it's, it's nothing new for us.
Speaker 2: No, it really--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --it really isn't anything new because we have people who have become senators, U.S. senators who have great-great-grandfathers or they wouldn't be a legal grandfathers or grandmothers who were, who were the, who were really their grandmother.  They, they really was what brought their father into existence, and so anyway as a result of that was, was the birth of my father [sic.] and, and the stories about that union are all word of mouth, but they're like a story book.  And it took years of investigation and going through and wanting to face the issue of, of those things, and I'm sure that was why my mother [Marguerite Ayers Wilson] and father [Harrison Wilson, Sr.] didn't tell me.  They would never tell me much about my grandfather and who his father was.  I never knew that.  I knew that, that his parents were the owner, his owner and, and a slave and his owner really took a liking to him, because he, as, as things will happen and we know that about genetics, he looked just like the owner and he was very fair skinned and I would say he passed for white, but all the stories that I, I hear, word of mouth stories, that it would appear that that's what the situation was that my grandfather was, was fair and he brought him up almost like he was his son.  Wherever he went, my grandfather went, and he carried a pistol.  His owner taught him how to read and write.  It wasn't any place he couldn't go in that his grandfather went in, in those days.  So, he was really the top man during those years.  When the Civil War came, his owner, my grandfather's owner, had his own company of soldiers that fought in the Confederacy.
Speaker 1: What was his name, do you--is it passed down?
Speaker 2: His name would have been Lyles, L-Y-L-E-S.
Speaker 1: Lyles.
Speaker 2: And we've done research and we get to certain areas and we, we, we hit a, we hit a post that we can't go any further at this time, but it was his, his, his father was his owner, my, my grandfather's father was his owner.
Story_ID: 623005
Speaker 1: Now, his company of soldiers served on the Confederate side of the war?
Speaker 2: Served on the Confederate side during the Civil War, and my [paternal] grandfather [John L. Wilson] went wherever he went.  In those battles, he was there.  He fought against the North, because his owner fought against the North (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And his owner was his father, actually so that--
Speaker 2: That was, that was the case, and everybody knew it.  Whether they talked about it or not it was obvious because that's the way life is sometimes.  You couldn't deny that he was his son, he looked so much like him, and then he loved him.  That was the other thing.  He taught him to read and write, and really taught him to be a powerful man, which he couldn't have learned to be that way if he had been in an African American environment.  So, you know I, I skip along from my, my grandmother [Martha Wilson] to my grandfather and then to his father and to his father's father.  I'm going kind of fast on that because that's the story.  That's the main story.  That's why my grandfather was the way he was, was a product of his, of the owner, his owner, and, and my grandfather was, was with him when they were in the Battle of Gettysburg [Gettysburg, Pennsylvania].  This was one of the most interesting things that my grandfather was there on the South side and of course I've studied the Battle of Gettysburg and what, where the North had these cannons, about ten of them up, mounted up on a hill and I've been there to visit it, visit that spot.  And the South kept coming, charging on and they kept just battering them with those cannons.  I mean just, it was just a mass of, of human flesh and blood and so forth in that particular battle.  Usually you can't get that kind of information unless it comes through from one family to the next, to the uncle, to the father and so forth.  And that's why I learned about the Battle of Gettysburg.  Because after that battle I don't know whether they retreated to Cincinnati [Ohio], what was Cincinnati now or, or what, but his owner gave him some money and told him that he ought to leave because they can't win and I want you to go to Boston, and he went to Boston.  He, he asked him, "Do you have a map at all?"  He said, "No," he said, "but you follow this river north.  Keep that river on your right side and go, continue to go north and if you follow this river and all its, all its areas or it might spring off into, into cities this will end upon in Boston or in that area of Boston, Massachusetts."  And he followed it.  My grandfather followed this, this whole trip with that money he had.  And we don't know much about that trip, but we know that my, my, my grandfather had a pistol and probably a gun.  He spoke very, he was very intelligent.  He had equivalent to a college education where he was trained by his owner and by other people that were around his owner.  He went wherever he, wherever his owner went, it was his father.
Story_ID: 623006
Speaker 1: And when he got to Cinc- when he got to Boston [Massachusetts], would you believe he joined the Union Army.  And when the, when the orderly was taking down his name, he told him it was John R. and he saw a sign that was advertising Wilson Cigars [Wilson Adams Cigar Company], and he said, "My name is John R. Wilson," and he joined the Union Army and he was in a company of, of all black unit as they had in those days and he fought and without the fear of not knowing exactly what battles they were I'll just have to leave it to the fact that he fought in several battles.  And when the war ended, of course, he was on the North side.
Speaker 2: Now was he in the, do you know if he was in the 54th Massachusetts [54th Massachusetts Volunteer Infantry Regiment] or the 55th Massachusetts [55th Massachusetts Infantry Regiment].
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: Those are two black units.
Speaker 1: I, I, well that's the thing I have a brother that's a lawyer and he's, he's retired and he's still trying to find out which of those outfits he was in.  And, and the reason for that is he was taught to do whatever he had to do to, to exist.  If that meant changing his name at a particular point, he would change his name because he had fear of him being traced back to being with, with the Confederates.  And so you could imaging it was, it was pretty tough for a man at that, at that time, a young man at that time, to be able to make it having served with the South.  And then when the war was over, and, and just think to hear Lincoln [President Abraham Lincoln]--I wish I'd have known this when I was in high school.  I didn't know any of my background except for my father [Harrison Wilson, Sr.] and my grandfather with just a little bit of info, information about them.  My father never told us all, all of this, and they knew it.  They knew the story.  And, but anyway I'd would have been proud, really.  I think I'd been proud if when I was in high school to have been able to say that my grandfather was there and heard and, and saw the battle and heard the Gettysburg Address from Lincoln.  That's something.  And it, it made me proud and sometimes I wonder why I'm proud.  You know you, it's hard to, you fe- you feel good about certain things and some of the, some of it is not so good and but you have to try to feel that, that it was all worth it because when he could do the right things he did and when he couldn't, when he couldn't tell the truth he didn't.  And that was, that was, that was really the way he lived, and when he, when the Civil War ended he went back to, to the part in Virginia.  And that's so interesting because I know that part of Virginia that he went to it was up near Virginia Tech [Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, Virginia] up near, oh my memory has really slipped on--
Speaker 2: Is that where his father lived up, up--
Speaker 1: That was where my grandfather's father--it gets a little complicated, where my grandfather's father, not legal father, but--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --he was a slave and he knew that, that, that this man raised him and he assumed that he was his father, I guess.  That's the best way I can say and try to be honest and accurate.
Speaker 2: So, this is where Lyles is--
Speaker 1: Lyles, yeah and, and that was the name he kept, that was the name he used.  Before, it was Harrison or John L. Lyles.  But then when he went to, as I said earlier, when he went to Boston on that trip to join the Union Army he changed it to Wilson, John L. Wilson, John Lyles Wilson.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And, and then of course he would change it and I know how that was during World War II [WWII].  You changed it if you were in what you considered enemy lines or whatever.  You would change your name to exist, to stay alive.
Story_ID: 623007
Speaker 1: We were talking about your great-grandfather [sic. paternal grandfather, John L. Wilson].
Speaker 2: Yeah, where was I on that?  Do you know?
Speaker 1: Well, we--the Civil War was over and he, he had just gone back to Big Island, Virginia.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, the picture I got was his having this wagon with these two mules or whatever they gave him going back to look for his wife [Martha Wilson] really.  He got married and then went, went to the [U.S. military] service, so he didn't know where his wife was.  So, he, he went back.  That's what he was doing he was looking for her really.  And he went back to where he had his beginnings in Big Island and different ones that were still living and still around there, you know, things were just in a turmoil as you could imagine after a war and, and some of this is mine own reasoning that when he went there and couldn't find, couldn't find them he went to the various cities that were around that area and boy, I'm, I'm trying to think of the names of the cities.  But anyway there were three or four places that he went.  And finally, in describing a guy I knew who he was talking about--oh I'm sorry, I forget I was on it, he knew he--who he was talking about and found her, found her working in some place.  I wonder, I don't, I can't imagine where it was, but anyway he found her and they got back together again, and that's when he went back to Big Island and things were never the same.  So, not only that he knew there was a law that if you'd been a soldier in the Civil War, you never could be a slave again, at least I don't know if it was a law or whether it was what they were told.  If they were, if they had been a slave and they served in a Union Army, they could never be a slave again.  And you see, you look at the history you never knew, you know we know what happened now because we can, we can go back and read about what happened, but he didn't know.  So what he did he, with this same horse or mules and this, and this buggy he had, he went to Kentucky.  He didn't stay in Virginia, and, and I don't know, he didn't stay in Tennessee.  He went through Tennessee.  But, he got to Kentucky where they had all this, a lot of land, what is today Falmouth, Kentucky, and that's where he used money that he had and I imagine money that he was told where, where he'd find some money, his money or whatever.  But, he had money, not a whole lot of money, but he had American money.  He had--
Speaker 1: So, this, was this money provided by his father, the former slave master?
Speaker 2: Yes--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --provided by his father.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, it was just, it was more money than people had.  It wasn't, it wasn't a whole lot of money, but it was--in those days if you had, if you had American money, it was legal and it was, you could, you could, you could use it to, to buy things and all.  If you had Confederate, of course, that was no good anymore.  But, he had this American money and he found his way to Kentucky.  And they had a law or whether it was unwritten or what, but if you'd ever been a slave and you fought in the Union Army, you could never be a slave again.
Speaker 1: Well, everybody was freed after 1865.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but they didn't know, they didn't know what was gonna happen in those states.  You see, they would pass a law and it might not mean much if you'd lost a war that you had fought and they were your enemy and they, and they had these laws.  You didn't know how, how much of it you could believe or how much of it would be accurate or anything.  So, you, you had to assume you, they would be okay, but then you had to protect yourself or at least realizing that you never knew what was gonna happen, whether they were gonna fight again, whether you--they could catch you and make you a slave again.  But, in history you read that it seems like you're just going just smoothly in this transition from one feeling or one attitude to another, and that wasn't the way it was.  People that had been under the other rule and the other laws wondered if it could ever change.  I mean that was a logical thing to do, and he thought logical and they had some kind of a rule or something, law, in Kentucky that if you were a slave and you fought for the Union Army you could never be a slave again.  That's why he stopped there.  Now when I checked to find out nobody can tell me that, that they did have such a thing.  You know that might have been word of mouth, but nevertheless that's what he believed.  And, of course, we know that he never, you know, they never did retract that.  Those that were freed or all of them were freed and, and were never asked to go back into slavery or never taken back into slavery.  Some willingly stayed after the war and worked.  I guess they worked for compensation that they, that they would agree upon.  Some, some of them got their own property as my grandfather did, as my great-grandfather did.
Story_ID: 623008
Speaker 1: So, anyway he, he started his own farm and the town that was right near was Falmouth, Kentucky, and, but this is outside of Falmouth.  I took all my children and their children back to check our roots out, and we had to have several cars to go out where my [paternal] grandfather [John L. Wilson] had this, this farm.  And you could tell it still had a road but wasn't--hadn't been fixed in years and years and years.  So, cars were not the best way to go, although that's what we used to go, trucks and cars, to go out there.  And the farm had been sold several times, and remnants of this, well it remind you of these cowboys that had a bunk house, that's what he had for all his boys and, and, and the other men that came through there and wanted to work that he adopted stayed in this bunk house.  So, the people that own it now were very friendly, were very nice.  They knew some who had owned it.  They had told me that other people had been there, my relatives, some of which I didn't even know, to see where their grandfather, yeah their grandfather, all of them were grandchildren or great-grandchildren, lived.  And I guess they were trying to investigate if any of the property was still available.   And it was taken over and sold by the sons that, that inherited it after the war.  They got together and sold after the, after the mother [Martha Wilson] died, they sold it all and split up the, the money that they got from it.  But my father [Harrison Wilson, Sr.] had gotten so much from his father that they didn't give him anything.  They, they let--he, well his, his mother built him a home, started him a business there, and all that was he had and they didn't have all that.  It was just one of those things I guess that happens in a family.  It's hard to explain, but that, that was what happened.
Speaker 2: So, so when you father when he was, when he reached I guess adulthood his mother had bought him a business, a home and--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --he had that buggy and all that and so he, what kind of business was he in?
Speaker 1: Well, he had laundry.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Laundry business.  I don't know he had another one, but I, I don't know.  He probably didn't run them very well, but anyway he had the laundry.  And of course by then he married by mother [Marguerite Ayers Wilson], her, his classmate and my father didn't go to school that much.  And mind you, they didn't have but first grade, first grade through eighth grade, that's all the schooling.  If you stayed there, that's all you would get, and you had to go somewhere else to finish, and my father didn't.  But it was amazing what my father did with his life, amazing with that little education.  We never knew how little education he had because of how he handled himself when we were growing up, the things that he was able to accomplish himself and do.  Didn't speak of him messing up (laughter) or not handling businesses very well.  That was probably my, my mother who, who was very smart and, and she loved him and, and, and she is the one person that made him, I think, made him the person that he was.  My mother made him the person that he was.
Story_ID: 623009
Speaker 1: Her [Wilson's mother, Marguerite Ayers Wilson] side of the fam- her side, her family, that side of my life, her family were--got education.  She had a brother that was a doctor.  In those days, that was so unusual.
Speaker 2: Yeah, what, do you remember his name your, your uncle?
Speaker 1: His name was Willis--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --T as in Tom Ayres, A-Y-R-E-S [Willis Ayers].  That was, that was my mother's maiden name, Ayres.  I haven't told you anything about my mother, but and wanna stick with my father.
Speaker 2: And her, her mother the grand, the grandmother [Elizabeth Price Ayers] that went to Wilberforce what was her name?
Speaker 1: Oh god. I don't know, I can't remember it I'll be honest with you I should have--
Speaker 2: Don't worry about it we can, we can always get it later.
Speaker 1: We can--I can get it.  I can get it for you.  Yeah she, her maiden name--because we had seen some of her relatives that are our relatives that, you know, you never saw them before and you know you don't feel like you're related to them, you just nice to meet you that kind of thing.  But, in Wilberforce [Ohio] one of the, one of her, one of my grandmother's relatives was a plumber.  They had trades, and they were better educated as a, as a whole.  They were never slaves, and--'cause they were born and raised right there in, in, was it Xenia?
Speaker 2: Xenia, Ohio right?
Speaker 1: That's where they were Xenia, Ohio.
Speaker 2: Are you related to the, to Randy Ayers who used to be the coach of Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio]?
Speaker 1: Well, we've tried to find a lot of the Ayres that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he's real tall.  He's about 6'6".
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, well not only that there was an Ayres that had a band, orchestra, musicians, you remember that Ayres.  Some of them won't admit that there--
Speaker 2: Roy, [HistoryMaker] Roy Ayers, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's right.  Some of them will admit that they're related very, very carefully and some do not to be honest with you.  And it didn't make any difference to me whether they did or not really.  It was nice those that did.  I guess they were worried about those that they never knew that might not have been able to do as well as they did.  I'm, I'm just guessing at that, I don't know.
Story_ID: 623010
Speaker 1: But I met one of my father's [Harrison Wilson, Sr.] brothers.  He was living during the war.  I went there to--he was living in Detroit, Michigan, and I remember taking a trip myself on one of the weekends I had off when I was in the [U.S.] Navy going there to see him, my uncle--I never met him before--and I called him and, and they were very gracious.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: So you went to meet your uncle (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But, it was, it was a thrill meeting, meeting my father's brother, and he had a different, different vocabulary in a way.  He had been a--he had, he had worked on the, the trolley, the transportation department, first when they had horses and, and things that looked like trolley cars.  He was there working with them then, and he worked through right up to World War II [WWII], working with that same company that started, you know, different names and, and it became the transit department or part of the transit department that he worked for.  Whether they had ever admitted that they were a part of that early one or not I don't know, but the only way I knew that it was part of it like my uncle in talking to him to get just, being friendly he told me that, that he retired from the transit department in, in, in--where did I say-- he was from St. Louis, from St. Louis, that's where this uncle was, St. Louis, Missouri.  And so he retired from that.  And he had children.  I met them.  They were well educated.  They went to college there in St. Louis at a junior college that a couple of them went to and, and my aunt, my uncle's wife was just as nice as she could be.  Remind me so much of my own mother [Marguerite Ayers Wilson].  Spoke a lot like they did.  It was just amazing.  That was the first time I ever met them.  And I, the other thing I remember I was in the Navy and, and, and I couldn't get home 'cause that was too far home, but this, this aunt of mine that I never met before cooked and oh boy it was just like my mother's food and it was just great.  But there my uncle told me a lot of things that I, that I have mentioned here today that he knew.  He was older than my father.  At that time, there were three, three brothers and my father is still living during World War II.  The others were deceased.  I was, I was going to say that two, he had two sisters.  They weren't all boys.  And they had blue eyes, hazel and blue eyes.  You, you'd wonder, if you didn't know the background how the heck did they--would they have these blue eyes.  And the aunt that I got to know was, was my, my father's sister who had those blue eyes, and this daughter had hazel eyes and I had, I had one of my sisters that had hazel eyes.  You know it was kind of a cross between brown eyes and blue eyes--
Speaker 1: Kind of grayish.
Speaker 2: --what they call hazel I think.
Speaker 1: Yeah, gray.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But anyway I got to meet relatives that way during the war and I'd never met the uncles though in Detroit.  There were two of the uncles in Detroit, and one of them was in my, my hometown [Amsterdam, New York] that I grew up in, and that was why my father went there, his older brother [Albert Wilson (ph.)].
Story_ID: 623011
Speaker 1: That's a story we need to get, get to how did your parents, how did, when did they decide and how did they decide to (unclear) to New York (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) How, okay and you see it, it all came to me as I was talking because I didn't remember how, how it was that he got there, but I do now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That by my father [Harrison Wilson, Sr.] being the youngest and this brother that was in Amsterdam [New York].  Why he went there I don't know, but he was in the Spanish American War and he, when he left the Spanish American, he was an older brother, when he left the Spanish American War he somehow stopped in Amsterdam, New York.  Now how, why I never did find out, but he started his own business with a, with a, with a horse and a wagon he started moving people; that was his business.  And then when he died, he had the rights to go into, I didn't know anything about transportation, but you couldn't take your trucks into certain states unless you had some kind of documents that said you, you had paid for them and you had the right to, to transport products into these different, different states and different cities.  And of course his wife and daughter sold his rights to some other companies.  I thought, after I came of age and all that, I thought that was a mistake because there, that would be worth a whole lot of money.  But, anyway that was my father's, one of my father's older brothers.  And that's why he went to Amsterdam because this brother, named Albert [Albert Wilson (ph.)], that was in the Spanish American War had stopped in Amsterdam and developed his business in Amsterdam, moving business, that he started with a horse and wagons and then he had trucks, then he had big trucks.  When I got to know them, he had big trucks, huge trucks, and they were moving people from one state to another or within the city or within the State of New York, that was, that was my father's brother.  And of course, that was what my father did when he came up, the youngest, the baby of the family, his brother gave him a job and that's why he came to Amsterdam, New York, because that's where his brother was.
Speaker 1: Now was there some, some, any trouble in Kentucky in Falmouth, 'cause your father had a house there and his own business?
Speaker 2: Yeah he had a house--no didn't have any real trouble because we still owned the house that I was in.  I never stayed in it, but I was in, it was built beautifully and it was just as strong, and this was after the war, after World War II [WWII].  I went to college in Kentucky [Kentucky State College for Negroes; Kentucky State University], and, and I wasn't very far from Falmouth.  I was in Frankfort [Kentucky] and, and this home was in Falmouth.  And during, not recent years, but some, oh golly I go back when my mother was still living one of the storms they had and floods they had, the Ohio River would flood that part of Kentucky, and it didn't always flood, you know how floods are.  Some, some of the years are real bad and other years it's not.  Well, this year it was awfully bad.  I, I used to know the year that it was because it even affected Cincinnati [Ohio], the Ohio River, and so it, it destroyed much of the house and so they, they tore the rest of it down.  I don't know what happened to the land or, or what not, but Falmouth is a small town.  It probably wouldn't be worth much anyway.  But my mother let her sister rent the house.  That's where Big John's [John Merritt] mother, the guy that was, that I coached with and all that, he was in World War II, his mother handled the house and rented it.  That was, that was her money 'cause she kept the house up until the storm.  And I was only there that way two or three times to see the house that, that we owned, but we never, we never claimed it or the church that my [maternal] grandfather [Robert Ayers] and mother [Marguerite Ayers Wilson] that's still there in Falmouth.  I, I attended that church.  That's the, that's the church where my Cousin John's mother had their funeral, father had their funeral, and I went to those funerals.  And as I said the church is still there in Falmouth, Kentucky.
Story_ID: 623012
Speaker 1: When you think about your parents' personalities, your, their talents and their dispositions, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, my mother [Marguerite Ayers Wilson] always said I took after my grandfather, my father's father [John L. Wilson], and I used to wonder why I'd fight.  I had to fight.  It was fist fights first.  If you called a name I didn't like, I would fight.  That's pretty natural, but then they would bring their relatives and these would be usually Italian Americans that lived in the same community that I grew up in, Amsterdam, New York.  And in those days you had just, just regular fist fights with anybody.  It didn't have to be Italians or Lithuanian or whatnot, but they may have called you a name you didn't like or whatnot, but I was just a fighter and I had an awful temper my mother said, just like my grandfather.  My mother as a little child was afraid of my grandfather and so was her sister, and I lived, they lived to tell me about how people were afraid of my grandfather, the one that was in the Civil War, how he'd come to town.  He, of course he was tougher and had more money than the rest of the community did.  And he always voted.  He was a veteran of the Civil War.  They couldn't keep him from voting.  He was just a tough guy.  He had these wild dogs that followed him.  You know, they weren't wild; they were his dogs on a farm and he'd come to town with this wagon or buggy, whatever he had.  He had these horses, and these dogs followed behind him.  He always carried his, his pistol.  That was his reputation.  This is uncle.  I mean my go, my grand, my, my grandfather.  And so it was a mixed kind of reputation.  My father was a fighter, but, but when he married my mother he changed.  You know she, she, he loved her, and she controlled his behavior.  His friends that he grew up with would come, when they lived in Falmouth [Kentucky], would want to know where my father was and it was a Sunday and they, and they, she, they would say well he's at the church social.  That wasn't, wasn't like my father.  My father wasn't going to any church socials, but he loved my mother, so he went to the church socials (laughter).  And, and you could see a man loving what a woman can really do for a man and bring out his talents because that's what really happened.  When my, my, my mother being from an educated family, so called educated, and my father not being from an educated, but a business industrial tough kind of life that was my mixture.  And my mother was always that way.  School was the most important thing.  And when they looked for my father, he was at a church social.  "Harrison [Harrison Wilson, Sr.]?  No, he in no church social," and that's where they would find him, my father.
Speaker 1: Okay now--
Speaker 2: But, but the effect of him marrying the lady that he married, as we know those stories today changed men, and that changed my father.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 623013
Speaker 1: Now, can you kind of tell us what the neighborhood--you, you said you grew up in an Italian neighborhood basically in Amsterdam.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah what, what kind of housing was there and what was the neighborhood like.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well that's, that's an interesting story.  They were usually the worst house in that community.  We--my mother [Marguerite Ayers Wilson] had to, and I'm growing up I'm a little kid, I'm, I'm living wherever, wherever we moved to.  But what I found that my mother would take the house whatever it was and beautify it (laughter).
Speaker 1: So you lived in several different places?
Speaker 2: Several, you had to move when they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And this is, just so people viewing this will understand this is during the Depression right when you were--?
Speaker 2: Right, during the Depression.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you were five years old, old I guess--
Speaker 2: Well, let's say--
Speaker 1: --or four or five when the Great Depression hit.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And, and you have to look at, look at what I'm seeing through my eyes too; that's the other thing.  And what I'm seeing is my father [Harrison Wilson, Sr.] being respected in that community, Italian community where you had Italian people who were just over from Italy.  They were immigrants.  They were clannish.  They were friends.  They were Catholics, and they would have a vineyard that they'd build like they had in Italy and on Sundays the old guys would get under there and drink their wine that they, that they made.  They made wine.  And they had a Italian spaghetti, and what you call pizza today was a poor man's food because what they did the mother would, would bake bread and they had vegetables and she'd cook tomatoes and she'd throw whatever they had on that piece of bread and the kids ate that.  We used to laugh at them when I first saw that, and then I got nerve enough to taste it and it was good.  It was good.  And then later, you know years later, that was pizza.  You know, I don't know how many will admit that, but that's, that's, that's the Amsterdam, New York, story.  And anyway, my father had the great respect of, of the Italian people, and I can tell you why because he worked hard, he loved his family and protected them, and loved my mother.  My mother ran, ran the house.  My father thought he was in charge, but my mother was always in charge.  And it was amazing how he changed.  Even my father changed from being somewhat--coming from a family where he had everything to having a family during the Depression years.  My father, people won't believe this, but my father would walk five miles in snow to catch a ride to go to a job thirteen miles away.  My father was a bricklayer.  He was a plasterer.  He was, he, he cleaned up.  He started with a job, if it was a matter of working on the foundation he did that.  And when, if the matter--you needed a man to plaster he could do that.  He could lay brick.  They didn't have unions then.  And then he'd clean up the area around it.
Story_ID: 623014
Speaker 1: I just wanna stop right here and tell you this story in a hurry that, that when my father [Harrison Wilson, Sr.] passed away, I took him--he, he lived with me for ten years in the president's home at Norfolk State University [Norfolk, Virginia], that's another story.  He loved that.  Oh, he loved those years.  Oh gosh my father loved, he loved ladies.  My mother [Marguerite Ayers Wilson] was deceased, and we had to place my father somewhere, and we weren't gonna put him in a home.  The idea was for him to live with each one of us until they got tired or he got tired, then he'd go to the next one.  Well, I was the first one that he lived with, and I built the president's home at our university.  When I say I built it, I got money from the governor [Mills Godwin] 'cause I convinced him that the president should have a home like they have at UVA [University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia], and he agreed with me.  He said, "Well, how you gonna build that home?"  Well, he didn't know the history of Tuskegee [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] where the students and the presidents built Tuskegee, a heck of a story.  And I learned, I learned my history well and, and they had courses in bricklaying and stuff right there at this, at this university at one time when I first got there.  And I told the governor that we would, my students are willing to work and we're gonna build this house.  I showed him the plans.  He said, "Oh god, you can't build that house."  "Yes, I can."  He said, "Well, we don't have but one hundred thousand dollars."  I said, "Well I'll get the rest; I'll build it."  I mean this is modern time.  The governor gave me that, the guarantee for the money of the president home in Norfolk State University.  My students that were in those fields of bricklaying and plastering and carpentry and, and all the things that you do that when you wanna build a house.  And that was one of the things they did in the South with their students early on.  They, they taught them trades, so they could leave and go and make a living.  So, that carried on for a number of years, even to when I became president and finally they didn't teach it anymore.  But the students and teachers agreed to build this house and also I was able to get money from people who built, built buildings on our campus; they chipped in.
Speaker 2: Okay, but you said your father stayed with you the entire time he--I mean the last few years of his life.
Speaker 1: The last years of his life, but I wanted to just where I was talking about him dying and--
Story_ID: 623015
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, the only thing I wanted to say was about my dad and I'll, I'll get off of that was that when, when he, when he died and then we took him back to Amsterdam [New York] to be buried next to my mother [Marguerite Ayers Wilson] at the funeral home a, a, an elderly fellow was gazing at my father.  And I was standing there already looking at my father thinking about all the things he did and how good he was, what a good man he was, and what a man he made out of me.  I wouldn't have been what I was without him.  And I was trying to talk even about how I became a fighter and all.  I was a fighter; I couldn't help that.  It was just something that was, that was in me, 'cause he was a fighter, my father was.  And nobody messed with my father because he was so tough, but then he was so gentle on top of that.  And this man standing there looking at him and he's staring and I walked up to him I said, I, I told him who I was and all.  I said, "Did you know my--?"  "Yes."  He said, "I was staring at him because it didn't matter how hard he worked, he was always singing."  He said, "And I asked him--," this is this man staring at my father--he said, "I asked him one day, 'Why you sing all the time?  You working all this hard work and you're singing?'"  He said, "Yeah because I got a job, and I can take care of my family."  This is during the Depression [Great Depression].  He wouldn't go on welfare.  That was part of his background.  He didn't let nobody give him anything.  So, he wouldn't go on welfare, but he worked hard and this man whom I didn't know staring, smiling at my dad and what he was thinking about was Wilson [Harrison Wilson, Sr.] singing as hard as he work, singing and was just as happy because he had money to take care of his family.  If I'm anything today, that's, that's where I got it from right there, my father, that part of me, the fighter, the, the worker, the love of my mother, the love of, respect of people.  I got it from my father.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I'm sure he got that part from his mother [Martha Wilson], because she loved him and my mother made him a man.  Made a, made him that kind of a man.  They didn't argue.  They didn't fuss.  He, he--I better not say anything out of the way to my mother if he heard me and I wouldn't do that.  And the last time--I'm not going to (unclear) this anymore, but the last time at least, to my brother--I'm home.  The war [World War II, WWII] is over and I'm home.  I'd come home every summer and my mother wanted something built onto the house, I'd get it built.  If she wanted this, I'd take her for rides, whatever she wanted.  And my younger brother said a bad word and was mad at my mother and didn't act right, and I almost killed him.  I mean in thirty seconds I almost killed him because he was being disrespectful to my mother.  And you know he never did that again.  I taught him a lesson right there.  I almost, my, my mother had to squirt water on me to stop me from fighting him, I 'cause I would have killed him just for talking bad to my mother.  I, I never heard of that, nobody, and that was my father.  My father was deceased then.
Speaker 2: So those were the values that you--
Speaker 1: Starting with my [paternal] grandfather [John L. Wilson].
Speaker 2: --you were raised with, yeah.
Speaker 1: Starting way back with my grandfather and then my father and his mother that loved him so, my father's mother.  And he was a, you could call him a ruffian, he fought.  He always had nice things.  You know everybody else was poor at that time.  But, then he became poor during the Depression, and the truth had to be told about him and if it was, the, the score was then the fellow didn't know me he asked me, "Are you his son?"  I said, "Yes."  When he, when he said that this guy Wilson was a heck of a man.
Speaker 2: Now--
Speaker 1: We--but we never knew why he sang.
Story_ID: 623016
Speaker 1: Tell me this I didn't get--now how many siblings do you have?  Can you name 'em and you're the youngest right of your siblings?
Speaker 2: No, I'm not the youngest.
Speaker 1: You're not the youngest all right.
Speaker 2: No, I'm far from the youngest.  I had a sister, well I'll just name the ones that are still living.  My sister [Virginia Wilson Howard] who is one year younger than I am and oh now, I had a brother, that same brother that was talking bad to my mother [Marguerite Ayers Wilson], he died not so long ago and he has a son that coached at Rice University [William Marsh Rice University, Houston, Texas] in Texas and coached, he's at, right now he's at, he's with the pro team [Memphis Grizzlies] in Memphis [Tennessee] as assistant coach, my brother's son.
Speaker 1: What's his name?
Speaker 2: Willis Wilson.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Willis Wilson, he's there now with the, with a professional team as an assistant basketball coach.  But I was saying that with all, with all of that I, I think of--oh I was telling you about my brothers and sisters.  And then my youngest brother is Albert Wilson.  He's a retired lawyer.  He went to Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana], basketball scholarship.  And he, he got in a frater- I was working on my master's [degree] when he was there as an undergrad; that's how much younger he was than me.  I'd been in the [U.S.] Navy and everything, and he was a freshman at Indiana U when I was getting my master's at Indiana U.  He's still living.  He's retired.  He's the one that did research and only got so far.  You know he, he didn't have patience, and we're trying to, I'm trying to finish it up.  That's, that's what I'm doing now.  But, that's, that's my family.  And I was saying that unfortunately my sister, that's one year younger than me, we didn't get along very well and it was because I guess she took this from one of my relatives because you know she always wanted to be a big shot.  She went to Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee].  In those days, that was the school for minorities.  They weren't going to white schools like they are now.  Fisk was that school, and she had to go there, and I didn't think it was fair.  I told my parents I'd help her, but then she, she didn't treat me right because you know she thought well I, I won't go into that part of it, that's personal, but anyway she's, she's still living but she's in a nursing home in, in Minnesota.  And she had, she had, but anyway she had, she had a daughter and a son, and the daughter is in drama in New York City [New York, New York], and the son is, I'm, I'm not sure where he is now, but he lived with me and I got him through, I got him through college at Tennessee State University [Nashville, Tennessee] and with this, the wife, my wife [Wilson's second wife, HistoryMaker Lucy R. Wilson] and I helped him a lot, 'cause that family.  But, that's, that's where we are actually and where my siblings are and what they did, but we all helped each other to get through college.  We didn't have a whole lot of money at all.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 623017
Speaker 1: What were, we always ask this question this way and you've, you've related to some of it already, but what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Lord the New York Central Railroad train went right through Amsterdam [New York].  I was far enough away not to, you know not to smell like it or anything, but I could see the trains.  And I'll never forget the 20th Century [20th Century Limited].  I gotta tell you this story because it's like wanting to achieve and it would go through Amsterdam; it didn't stop.  That was the train that Lena Horne in the movies talked about. She, "Had to catch the 20th Century," and when she said that I knew, I used to see it go through my hometown at night.  You'd see the waiters serving in the dining cars, and I'd look at it and I'd, boy I'm gonna ride that thing someday, someday I'll be there.  That was one of the ways I got my ambition.  I saw people achieve.  People in my hometown, they weren't blacks.  My hometown, most of them didn't go to college or school, but my family did because of my father's [Harrison Wilson, Sr.] background, my mama's [Marguerite Ayers Wilson] background and just the way she taught us and trained us.  My father was a disciplinarian, and my mother was the educator.  I mean that's the way it was, and that's why we just all loved our mother, I did anyway, and she and I were very close.  So, I always wanted to go to college.  I was going to go to college.  I, I knew the way I was gonna go was athletics.
Speaker 1: Now where did you, where did you start school?  What was the name of your first school?  What was the name of your first school?
Speaker 2: School?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: We're talking about elementary schools?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  The name of it was West Spring, West Spring Street Elementary School [Amsterdam, New York].
Speaker 1: West Spring Street.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: How long did you go there?
Speaker 2: He went there from--I went there from kindergarten through sixth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then when you, when you finished that you transferred to a junior high school that took--
Speaker 1: Okay, let me ask you some questions about West Spring though before we move on--
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: --like how, how did, were there many black students there at West Spring or?
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't many, very few.  I was the only one in my class from kindergarten when I was five years old through high school.  The only African American in my class, and my sister [Virginia Wilson Howard] was the only African American in her class.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was one year behind me.
Speaker 1: Did you have any African American neighbors when you were growing up hardly?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When we, when we made our final move we moved almost into a black neighborhood and my mother could buy a house and she bought it.  People were leaving and she bought the house, and the man, during the Depression [Great Depression], and the man said, "Well how you gonna pay me?"  She said, "I'll pay you what you want me to pay a month like rent."  She was smart enough to do it that way.  You know how much the house cost? Two thousand dollars.  This is during the Depression.  She wanted to own something of her own, and, and we grew up in that house.  I, I hate to say this deep in my heart, I was ashamed of the house.  Why?  Because I'm going to school with these kids, I'm not in an Italian neighborhood with some of those kids, but when I was West Spring Street I was Italian, well that's my neighborhood, that's why you went to that school.
Story_ID: 623018
Speaker 1: When you went to junior high everybody in the city that was gonna go to a city supported, tax supported junior high went there.  You know you had Catholic schools and all that like you do today, but the majority of the people went there and so I when I went to junior high it was a broader niche of students, it was tougher, seventh, eighth, and ninth grades were there.
Speaker 2: What was the name of your junior high school sir?
Speaker 1: Theodore Roosevelt Junior High School [Amsterdam, New York].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: There was three grade, three grades, seventh, eighth, and ninth.
Speaker 2: Okay so--
Speaker 1: There I met a guy.  He and I competed the rest of our careers.  He went to--we met in junior high school.  They even had seventh, eighth, and ninth grade for those who were gonna go to college, and the others were gonna go into business had other grades and the others weren't gonna go to school had another grade.  Well, I was gonna go to college.  If I hadn't said that, they'd had me in the lower group.  But I knew, I had an uncle [Willis Ayers] that went to college during the Depr- (laughter) during the years when you didn't go to school.  That's the doctor was, was my brother [sic.].  My mama [Marguerite Ayers Wilson] was, she went to eighth grade I'm sure.  We never talked about it, but that's what she went.  But, I knew I wasn't gonna, I was' gonna stop at no junior high school.  I met a guy named Petrone, Rocco Petrone.  He became a four star general in the [U.S.] Army, and we competed academically and athletically.  You wanna know how, what, what my, what cau- what drove me on besides my parents?  Rocco.  His parents were immigrants, but Rocco was a genius.  He was a genius.  They never wanted to call him that because he was an Italian.  They had prejudice in those days.  Blacks were at the bottom of the list, Italians were next, Polish were next, I'm going up now, Polish and Lithuanians they were together, and then Irish were at the top.
Speaker 2: Okay so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's the way the teachers were.  No, none of those first categories, one or two Italian teachers, and the rest were usually Irish.  And they had Jewish teachers, but that wasn't, we didn't consider that a race.  We, we considered that a religion, and I'm still a little confused because you know Ju- Judaism is a, is a race.  When you say Jews, that's, that, that's not, that's, that's people, that's what they are.  But, how could people be a religion?  That's, that's the only thing I'm, but I don't want to get into that, but this, this is what I'm learning and wondering and asking questions about, and the Jewish kids were my best friends.  I never knew why, but they, at that time they were my best friends.  If anything looked like it wasn't right, they were, they were standing right by me.  Now here I am all by my, no other black kids.  You gotta be kidding.  I know that's what you're saying, you gotta be, how, in seventh grade no, no black teachers, not black nothing, not even janitors.  That was a good job (laughter).  But there I was.  What the heck does a, does a black kid do in a situation like that?  How does he find his own, his own worth?
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: You know, look around.
Story_ID: 623019
Speaker 1: Joe Louis was helpful when he came on the scene.  He was a boxer.  It helped us.  That's why we all were, felt so great, Joe Louis.
Speaker 2: Yes, did you have a radio growing up?  Could you hear the Joe Louis fights?
Speaker 1: Yes we, well at first we didn't have a radio.  You--that's a good question.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But you know what the downtown, the newspaper place had a direct broadcast and everybody that didn't have radio went down there to hear Joe Louis fight Primo Carnera.  Me and my father [Harrison Wilson, Sr.] went together.  My sisters weren't interested.
Speaker 2: About how old were you when he fought Carnera?  Was it--
Speaker 1: Let's see, if you tell me the year he fought him, let's see what year was it?
Speaker 2: I'm trying to think, I think Joe Louis emerged around 1936 or so--
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: --as the champion.  Was that (unclear)?
Speaker 1: Well, it was about '36 [1936] I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah 'cause that's when Jesse Owens won the Olympics [1936 Summer Olympics, Berlin, Germany].
Speaker 1: Okay I was in elementary school [West Spring Street Elementary School, Amsterdam, New York].
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: I was in elementary school when Joe Louis was fighting.  But it was a burden too because I was living in the Italian neighborhood so Joe Louis fighting Primo Carnera who was Italian.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And two or three other guys, the guy that was so sloppy I, I can't think of his name that Joe Louis had to fight and beat him two or three times, talked a lot.  I can't think of his name either, but anyway it got to be personal in our neighborhood.  The guys who were my friends knew they couldn't beat me, the guys my age, maybe a couple of years older, but they'd bring their cousin from New York, New Rochelle [New York] that comes up on the weekend to visit.  "Here's my cousin from New Rochelle you think you can beat him?"  I said, "Yeah I can beat him."  "Okay let's fight."  Can you imagine that?
Speaker 2: So y'all would just have a fight?
Speaker 1: Yeah, fist fight.  I didn't even know him.  I had to fight him.  And they brought two or three or four in my time when I was growing up.  Then I hit my growth age, conditioning, oh I could swim across the river.  I could dive off of bridges, run track, fight.  I'd slip out of the house and box for money.  But they had these weekend, Friday night fights, and they'd have a place where they'd have a bar and grill and they put a big ring, fenced it in and sold tickets.
Speaker 2: You were a teenager when you were doing this.  You're a teenager, right, doing this?
Speaker 1: I'm, I'm twelve years old.
Speaker 2: About twelve years old.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm twelve, twelve years old.
Speaker 2: How big were you when you were twelve?
Speaker 1: Well, I was always tall.  I guess I weighed maybe 120 pounds maybe.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but you, okay.  Just for the record you're about, what are you about six what?
Speaker 1: 6'3" and a half.
Speaker 2: 6'3" and a half okay.
Speaker 1: And in college [Kentucky State College for Negros; Kentucky State University, Frankfort, Kentucky], I weighed 200 pounds, nothing but muscle.  I never drank, never smoked my whole life.  I went through the [U.S.] Navy and never drank anything and never, never alcohol (unclear), never smoked.  I, I didn't, that's why I guess I'm still living because that's the only thing I didn't do, I didn't drink or smoke.
Story_ID: 623020
Speaker 1: Now, you were telling me off camera before we started that your father [Harrison Wilson, Sr.] didn't want you fighting for money.
Speaker 2: No, he, he wouldn't, he, he--I, I didn't understand why, but I was learning to fight.  I'd go to the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] where they had, guys would be working out there, fighting, and I'd watch them, the way they jabbed and all.  Then a guy, a young Italian guy said, "You wanna learn to box?"  I said, "Yes I do."  I wasn't a member of the Y, but they were, so they'd take me in there with them and that's how I moved from that to boxing Friday night.  They sold pizza, beer, and oh man those guys, and it was, it was a carpet town.  We had mills, and that's where they all worked.  So, the economy even during the Depression [Great Depression] wasn't bad for those who worked in the mill, but they had no African Americans working in the mill, none.  So, I'm just trying to paint the picture for you during the Depression.  I shined shoes on the street, that's eight years old, nickel a shine, seven years old, nickel a shine.  There again you had to get corners, you had to get everything that went with taking over your spot.  And, and the law didn't protect kids.  You had to take over your own spot and protect it.  I won't go into that.  We'll talk about that some time, but.
Speaker 1: I imagine it was about fighting I guess.
Speaker 2: That was, exactly about fighting.  Yeah, I had to fight.  And of course I told you I loved to fight.  That was right up my alley, and I had, as I got older the areas on my eyes would, they were cut and I didn't have sutures to su- to tie them up, were pretty big, you know, and they get, they've gotten smaller as I've gotten older.  You can see the cuts, my nose, cuts here, here and, but anyway my father told me if I boxed again what he was gonna do to me.  Now, by then I'm fourteen, fifteen I'm boxing 160, 155 [pounds], but I'm, I'm a child yet.  These men were 150, eighteen, I call them, eighteen years old hair on their chest.
Speaker 1: You were boxing grown men?
Speaker 2: That's right, right in Albany, New York.  That's the capital.  That's where they had fights and they had Friday night fights there where they sold this pizza, then they had neighborhood fights.  I graduated from eight, nine years old to, to fifteen and sixteen and seventeen.  There was a break in between there, but then I'm fighting grownups.  I mean they weren't, you know, they weren't old, old.  They were twenty years old, but they were seventeen, eighteen, had hair on their chest and beard, they had to shave.  And I'm, I'm a kid even though I weigh as much as they do, I'm still a kid.  And, but the money was attractive.
Speaker 1: So how, how did you do, did you win a lot?
Speaker 2: I won a lot.  I won a lot and I lost, and when you lost your eyes were cut, bleeding and they didn't always have officials that would stop the fights.  And that's why my father didn't want me to fight.  I didn't know, he never explained it to me that you get taken advantage of.  You get, you'll get beaten to death.  You, you, you'll lose your thinking power.  He knew all of that.  He didn't tell me all that.  He just said I don't want you boxing.  So now I'm slipping out of the house where Pep, Jimmy Pep [ph.] who ran the bar and grill in my hometown, he looked like Little Caesar in the movies.  And he had a hearse that he made into a van where you put seats in there, and we'd go from there to Schenectady [New York] or no, no further than Albany, New York, and that was what we called the big time.  I had to go there until I was sixteen or seventeen and all, but anyway I boxed.
Story_ID: 623021
Speaker 1: So finally my mother [Marguerite Ayers Wilson] was, was, you know what she'd do she'd go through all our, all our dressers, the boys, to make sure the clothes were all clean because you might take off a pair of shorts that you wore one time, just throw in there you're gonna wear them again and you didn't, you didn't think to wear them.  So, she'd go through the drawers every so often, take out stuff and wash it again.  She found all these, all this money, one dollar bills.  Sixty something dollars was a lot of money.
Speaker 2: In 19--what '30 [1930], in the '30s [1930s] right.
Speaker 1: That's what I'm talking about--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I'm still in the early '30s [1930s].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And she told my father and he asked me, and that was one thing he hated for you to lie to him, and I didn't want that whipping I knew was coming, 'cause he told me not to go and I went.  I'd go out the window, fight early and I'd come in early, or I'd go to bed go out the window and meet the guys and I'm in bed.  My brother [Albert Wilson] would fix it up like I'm in bed and all that, my younger brother, the one that just died recently.  And we were close; that was the one I almost killed in talking back to my mother later on after World War II [WWII].   And he knew better than that 'cause he, he start going out with me.  He was old enough to go around with me.  But anyway, all this money--I got one of the worst whippings, not a beating.  My father would kill you if he beat you.  My father was like Popeye, arms strong as a mule.  He could take a, a stove, the black stove, kitchen stoves, when it was broken down and, and they couldn't go up the stairs with them because you couldn't get four people 'cause the stairs were too narrow, so they'd put it on his back and hold it so it would fall.  He'd walk it up the stairs on his back, actually walk up a stove on his back, my father.  And I skip around because things come to me and wonder why my father--
Speaker 2: Sure, yeah.
Speaker 1: --why my father would, why the kids, why the older guys that usually were very disrespectful to older people were so respectful.  I didn't know why.  "Hello Mr. Wilson [Harrison Wilson, Sr.]."  They didn't call no Mr. nothing.  These would be you hoodlums of today.  They weren't as bad as today, but they were bad enough.  They would fight a guy that was fifty, forty.  They were twenties.  But, not my father, oh god.  I saw my father once, it scared me.  He was something.
Speaker 2: You saw him in a fight with someone?
Speaker 1: Fighting, yes, fighting.  I'd see why they backed off on my dad.
Speaker 2: Well what happened when he--
Speaker 1: I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: What happened was there a story attached to that?
Speaker 1: What happened?  I--
Speaker 2: Is there a story about that, about him being in a fight?
Speaker 1: Well, the, the biggest thing that I, I wanna say about my father as a result of me lying to him and finding all that money is he gave me a whipping.  I only had five in my lifetime from him, five.  I remember all five of them, and I have to switch because things, like in a movie we're talking about five and I'm bathing my father one day, he's staying at my home, I'm president of the university [Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia] and the two ladies working for him and he wouldn't let them bathe him, bathe him.  So, they called me at my office, you gotta come and give your father a bath, he won't let us do it.  And here I got a meeting across town in the next hour.  You know, you're cleaned up, you don't wanna sweat and all that.  But I went home, took down to my tee shirt and I had the, I had the lady to put the water and stuff in the tub.  I got him to the tub.  He's mad at me all the while I'm doing that.  And so I'm in a hurry.  I gotta tell this story because it means something to me.  I'm giving him that bath in a hurry, and I don't realize I'm rubbing him too hard, you know his skin.  He's ninety, it's tender, I know what it's like; mine is getting that way.  And he said, "I know why you're rubbing me this hard," out of the clear blue.  I said, "Why dad?"  He said "'Cause of those whippings I gave you."  You know what I told him, and honest to God I never thought about it before you know what I said, I said, "Dad, if you hadn't given me those whippings I wouldn't be here to give you this bath," and I felt that way about it.  That finally it dawned on me that, you know, my father doing that was a, was a service to me.  He knew what I, my mama knew what I needed.  She's the one that kept score.
Story_ID: 623022
Speaker 1: Yeah I, I think that we, we, yeah we, we need to bring in a couple other things here, 'cause when you were telling me before we got started that you were kind of a reckless teenager.  You would hitch rides on the back of semi-trucks with--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --roller skates.  Tell us a little bit about that before we--
Speaker 2: Well that was, that was what worried my mother all the time, her part of it, because her friends would call us, would call my mother and I was Junior 'cause I was named for father [Harrison Wilson, Sr.], and instead of Junior it was June [HistoryMaker Harrison B. Wilson].  I hated that.  And they say, "Ms. Wilson [Marguerite Ayers Wilson], I just saw June he was riding, he's hitching a ride on a tractor trailer going through town on his roller skates."  And I didn't think he even knew.  I didn't think anything about it.  When I came home, she asked me did I do it.  I said, "Yes ma'am I did that."  "Don't you know you could get killed?"  And she told me I wouldn't live to finish high school.  You're not gonna live to finish high school, but I kept doing it until I got out of the roller skate age.  Bicycle I did it, hanging onto tractor trailer, riding, swimming across.  We had the Mohawk River.  I'd swim across the river with no tire, no nothing, by myself.  That's, you don't do that.  In the middle of the river is where it's the deepest.  You can feel the water being deep, almost like it's drawing you down.  And when you got passed that area you were okay, you know, but if, if I'd gotten a cramp or something I couldn't have made.  There's no way I could have known how to handle a cramp.  I never had one, and that's probably what kept me in good stead was the fact that, that I could go across the river and, and you know I, I didn't get a cramp, I didn't get tired or anything.
Speaker 1: But you took a lot of chances?
Speaker 2: I took, dove off of the bridges there at the Mohawk River.
Story_ID: 623023
Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you about school.  Now you're, you're in high school, but you finished high school early, and there's a story around that, but how were your grades in school?  Did you like school?  Were you, were you good in school?
Speaker 2: I loved school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I did well in school.  I mentioned Rocco Petrone.  To get back to him, I have to, this is a perfect place because Rocco and I start competing academically in, in junior high [Theodore Roosevelt Junior High School, Amsterdam, New York].  We were in the same class.  And I, I keep telling, saying he's a genius.  Nobody knew anything about geniuses or anything like that, but he and I studied, and I competed with him.  I never beat him.  I could make a ninety; he'd make a ninety-five.  I'd make an eighty-eight; he made a ninety-two.  And we just, I mean we talked about the [U.S.] military.  He wanted to go in the military, and I wanted to go in the military.  We used to see Hitler [Adolf Hitler] in the 'Movietone News' and how the men were, young kids like our age were training to fight and kill, and that's what I wanted to do.  I, I don't know what he wanted, but he wanted to, you know, get in the [U.S.] Army and fight for the country and all that.  So, we went through school that way.  We lived fairly close to each other and we'd walk home even though we, we got so we'd have, some of us, some of the, most of the class we were together.  In junior high you passed from one class to another, getting you ready for high school.  And like I said I'll never forget I didn't do my lesson in, in, in Latin and it was my turn to read from the book that was in Latin.  I had to read it, translate it and read it.  So, I said, "Rocco," I said, "Man I got caught I didn't have time to study this," and I said, "Translate this for me."  And as fast as I could write underneath the words, he translated it.  This is the same guy, now did I say was a genius.  Nobody said that.  Nobody tested him.  So, I got in the class and the lady I know was an Italian woman that grew up with my sister [Virginia Wilson Howard] and I knew, I knew that because I used to see them and, and she, now she's teaching school.  My sister is a nurse, but she's teaching school, and so she didn't act like she recognizes me or knows who I am or my sister or anything, but anyway it's my turn.  Man, I translate that stuff just like I'm re- I'm reading English, and she said, "I'll never forget, that's enough don't read anymore 'cause we gotta save some for somebody else."  That's the truth and I looked at Rocco, and he looked at me and we kind of smiled.  And--but anyway that's the way our relationship was academic.  He played football, but he wasn't a real good athlete.  I played football.  He played tackle.  He weighed more than I did.  I played end, wide receiver, and we played that all four, you know all our four years in high school, three years 'cause we didn't move up to--high school was sophomore, junior, and senior.
Story_ID: 623024
Speaker 1: Now, there's another story, the story I want you to tell about taking a test to get into West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York].
Speaker 2: Right, it's--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  That's (unclear)--
Speaker 2: --the same Rocco again.  And then I can tell you what happened to Rocco too see, that's the beauty in it having a--I hate to leave a movie, you don't know how it's gonna end.  I always wanted to go in the mil- I always wanted to go to West Point, and I didn't know they didn't have any blacks at West Point, I didn't know that.  I'd see movies about West Point, cadets, that's what I wanted.  Oh, I loved them.  See I got that from my [paternal] grandfather [John L. Wilson].  He loved the [U.S.] military and probably from his father see.  They, they were great buddies, I mean his so called father.  So, anyway I tried to, to do the things that, that would make me a good soldier so--but anyway now we're ready to graduate, well we're not really ready to graduate.  What happened was they were letting you out of school early.
Speaker 1: Okay, the war was going on right because--
Speaker 2: The war was going on now and I'm, I could graduate in another year and I wanna go to West Point.  So--but what they were doing, they were taking them pre-graduation 'cause Rocco was pre, pre-graduation.  They needed more guys in West Point.  They saw the need for them the way people were getting killed, the early, early fighting in all and they just knew they had to start broadening their base of cadets from West Point.  While they were great leaders, there wasn't many of them, not when you're in a full class modern war.  So, they would, they had classes for guys who wanted to go to West Point, and he and I were in the classes.  You didn't get credit for it, but we were in the pre-West Point.  You had to have a certain average and all that.  Here I'm black, African American, and nobody had ever--oh they had one guy there and his father had been a general, one star general and this guy became a pilot.  I, I can't even remember his name.  I used to know his name.  In War World II [WWII], he was a pilot and he became a general after that.  Not Powell, what the heck, well, but anyway so Rocco, and now we're graduates, so called graduates and he I go, go downtown to take the test, go to Albany [New York] to take the test to go to West Point.  They're gonna choose them, pre-graduates because the war was killing so many of them.  They didn't say that, but I know that's what it was.  And so we're down there to take the test and boy we took it, and then they said we're only gonna take one, and Rocco was number one and I was number two.  Rocco got the go.  Rocco became a four star general.  He put the missile on the moon.  He was in that group that put the missile on the moon, the first one.  Rocco Petrone, four star general.
Speaker 1: Right, well known figure right.
Speaker 2: And that's facts, that's history.  And I was so disappointed.  They were letting the guys go early to the service, and all my friends were going.  But that's what hurt me more than anything else.
Story_ID: 623025
Speaker 1: And so I couldn't go.  My mother [Marguerite Ayers Wilson] wouldn't let me go, and I'm the only guy left in my class.
Speaker 2: Other students were op- were going to the war [World War II, WWII] while you were--?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yes the teacher, this, this one teacher, history teacher's son-in-law went to West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York], and he got killed in Europe and that was her daughter's husband.  Now I saw her daughter.  Her daughter was twenty-two, twenty-three years old, looked like a movie star.  But her husband is dead, killed, so she's recruiting.  She's actually recruiting.  You look around in her class and all the boys are gone.  They were of age, and she came and asked me, "How come you're not gone?"  I said, "I can't go my mother won't let me go 'til I graduate.  That's what she said, I have to graduate."  Well, they gave me a fake diploma I guess.  They told me I graduated.
Speaker 2: So, they, they went out and you were telling they, they went upstairs and made a diploma and gave it to you.
Speaker 1: Gave me a diploma.  Gave me my diploma--
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: --and I went to war.  I--
Speaker 2: So, you were sixteen years old.
Speaker 1: Yeah sixteen, now.
Speaker 2: Sixteen years old in 1941.
Speaker 1: That's right.  No, this wasn't '41 [1941], this was '43 [1943].
Speaker 2: Forty-three [1943].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: This was '43 [1943] see.
Speaker 2: Okay, you would have been eighteen in forty, forty-three, I think, yeah.
Speaker 1: No this wasn't forty, you're right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You're right it wasn't no forty, that, that's when I was supposed to graduate.
Speaker 2: Yeah '41 [1941], it was '41 [1941].
Speaker 1: It's '41 [1941] that what it was, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's yeah, right so 1941 is the beginning of the war basically and so--
Speaker 1: That's right.  All the guys are gone, I'm in there by myself.  I mean when I say by myself, girls and a few other guys who were underweight, you know what, whatever their reason was they--
Speaker 2: Are declined.
Speaker 1: --and I don't have a right to even judge that at all.  And so I go down and I join the [U.S.] Navy.
Speaker 2: So, okay well why did you choose the Navy?
Speaker 1: Well, there's a dumb reason because a couple of my good friends in Gloversville [New York] joined the Navy, and they were getting better breaks, they felt they were eating better food, and you could get action, you know.  Well, un- unfortunately one of my friends went, could pass as a white guy, and he was aboard a ship fighting, and he made it out, he made it, he and his brother made out, out of war.  And during the war, he passed because he could, he thought he was gonna get a better break.  He did get to fight more in terms of, of being aboard a ship.  Mine was different.  I had to, mine was (unclear).
Story_ID: 623026
Speaker 1: I joined the [U.S.] Navy and I was at Pearl, and I had taken two courses.  One is the--
Speaker 2: This is Pearl Harbor [Naval Station Pearl Harbor, Hawaii]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was at Pearl Harbor.  But I take, I took, had taken two courses in my early training and had my certificates and different things happened between that time and when I was ready to go overseas.
Speaker 2: All right now they had already had the attack on Pearl Harbor?
Speaker 1: Oh they, they had had the attack on--
Speaker 2: That was over?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But you, so you were there in--what was the atmosphere like at Pearl Harbor when you, what did it look, did, could you tell where they--
Speaker 1: Well, yeah you could--
Speaker 2: --bombed and that--
Speaker 1: You could tell, but what happened was when I went to Pearl Harbor, when I got to Pearl Harbor it was 1943, and they bombed it in 1941.  So, where, the munitions areas were, where the ships were, where the training buildings were.  They, they, they knew exactly what to bomb.  They had done one of the greatest jobs you could ever imagine.  I went to the buildings and saw where they had hit the buildings with bullets and with other.  They had fixed up most of it, but not the bricks and things that they hit.  You know you could see the holes in the windows and they, they put new windows in--as much as they could, but the Arizona [USS Arizona], one of the ships was still in the harbor part and you could see, oh I'd say fifteen feet of it sticking up with the bow up.  I think it was the Arizona, but there, there I was at that, at that time.
Speaker 2: Okay you said you took two courses, right?
Speaker 1: I took, I took three courses--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --because I wanted to, I wanted to go with the Marines [U.S. Marine Corps]; that's what I wanted.  And I'm not sure I wanna tell this part on TV, but--well, anyway I really am not sure on this, because I didn't think I was gonna do it this way 'cause too many people will hear.  But well the part that I, that I didn't wanna tell you was I had to again be something other than an African American.  They were against ever- everybody but an African American.  Filipino could go, aboard the ship and do what they wanted to do.  Even though one of the presidents had declared, Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] had declared and then it was after Roosevelt died that president was from Missouri.
Speaker 2: Truman [President Harry S. Truman], yeah.
Speaker 1: Truman declared the Navy was open.  There were no, there were no parts of the Navy that you couldn't serve in, African Americans couldn't serve in.  So that was stopped, and as a result I was able to do some things that, that even then I wasn't supposed to.
Speaker 2: So, so you're saying that you had to like pretend to be, be a different race or something
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: So what did you get away with pretending to be (laughter)?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Well, I'm, I'm not sure I wanna tell this 'cause this was exactly what they'll put on TV and you know.
Speaker 2: Oh, this is going into archive.  I don't think it's gonna be on TV.
Speaker 1: Well, you never know, you never know see.  In other words, I could tell some things that could hurt some people right, even today or hurt their children.  I really could.  And I had decided whether I wanted to do that and I'll be honest with you, I hope we could take a break maybe.
Story_ID: 623027
Speaker 1: I was very fortunate that I was able to take the various courses that I needed to that prepared me to be a corpsman in, in the [U.S.] Navy at this stage in my career.  I was able to go in where there was action in the Pacific and take care of many of the Marines [U.S. Marine Corps] that were wounded and would, would have died had I not been there or someone with my experience were not there.  I was not the only one that was, that was there as corpsmen.  You had so many corpsmen to so many marines, and no one cared there what race you were at all.  They had the greatest regard--the marines had the greatest regard for all medic, medical staff because we'd save their life.  When a fella was hit, I would, if, if he was hit and had pain and was bleeding, the first thing we were taught was to stop the bleeding and I did that.  You stop the bleeding and you, and we had little tubes of morphine like toothpaste tubes, only they were small and had one dose in each one of them.  So if, if a guy had a wound where, where there would be pain, you wanted to stop the pain immediately, want to stop the bleeding and stop the pain.  Those were the two things we did first.  You, the way the stop the pain you hit him with this one dose of morphine, you put a M on his forehead with a pen, pencil that, they gave a special pencil put a M and the time, 10:05, that's ten o'clock in the morning, five after ten, so that the next man coming through you didn't pick them up and take them anywhere.  You might move them out of the way so they, so they wouldn't be run over, but they, they stayed right where they were and later there were guys coming behind you that would take them put them on a, on a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Gurney or something like that or.
Speaker 1: --thing they carry them out with, put them on a--
Speaker 2: Stretcher, yeah.
Speaker 1: Stretcher, that's the word, put them on a stretcher and take them to, to the shore and then from there if they had a hospital ship, we had a hospital ship and the name of it was USS Repose [USS Repose (AH-16)], R-E-P-O-S-E.  And I understand that they're not using that.  It has been decommissioned a long time ago.  But that would sit out there in the harbor in the safe place away.  They had the fast boats that would take patients from the landing that needed immediate, further immediate attention, right to this hospital ship where they had doctors and other, other medical people.  But the key of my job was to keep them from dying, and they would have died before they could even get to a hospital ship if you don't stop the bleeding and you don't stop the pain because there, there again that's the cause of death that people have so much pain that the strain causes them to die.
Speaker 2: So, so you had lots of soldiers who were injured in battles in the Pacific coming to Pearl Harbor [Naval Station Pearl Harbor, Hawaii] to, for medical attention.
Speaker 1: No, this is coming to Pearl Harbor to, to be, be aboard a ship to go to Guam or Saipan or Tinian, Midway [Midway Atoll] at first.  Well, not Midway they had already won Midway.  But from there on down I was with them three different times.  Unfortunately, I didn't, I had interest--
Speaker 2: Okay you all took the, took the medical boats to these islands, to these other islands where the fighting was going on.
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right I got you.
Speaker 1: And we took care, we took care of them on the field where they were hit.
Speaker 2: On the, on the Repose, yeah, the Repose, the ship.
Speaker 1: What I'm saying is we went in and if you were hit by, by a shot or by shrapnel or anything we would immediately do the things that kept you from dying.  If you didn't have those things, you might die because of last, lack, the loss of blood and, and--
Speaker 2: Yeah so, yeah.
Speaker 1: --the pain that you would have and all that went--
Speaker 2: And then you would transfer them to the ship.
Speaker 1: Then we transfer them--
Speaker 2: To the Repose.
Speaker 1: --to the Repose.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And they carried out through each landing that they had in the Pacific.  Often they had two hospital ships if there was going to be a landing that required a lot of men to go in.  So, that, that was a way, that was the practice and there it didn't ma- didn't matter what race you were, what color, what color your eyes were, didn't matter.  All they wanted to do, corpsmen, to help them stop hurting so bad or stop bleeding or needing this or needing that and so forth, and we did that.  They never put a figure on it, but there were a gang of men that were saved because of the immediate attention.  Now, that immediate attention came when you went in as they went in, not late.  As they went in, you went in.  That's, that's what made this different.  So, we're going in, I could get shot too, see but as we went in guys next to me would get shot or hurt.  I was hurt a little bit, but you don't even think of that.  And so, so you, when a guy went down you'd hear, you didn't have to worry if you didn't see them they'd let you know.  They'd holler for corpsman.
Story_ID: 623028
Speaker 1: So not everybody has the, the temperament or the, some say the stomach for dealing with severe injuries and that sort of thing, but you were pretty good at that.
Speaker 2: I, I was good at it.   I'm not, not saying that in a bragging way that was my niche I thought.  I wanted to be a doctor then, and that was my niche and, and feeling that I was being of service.  The funny thing about it I, I also carried, I'll tell you I carried a .38 [.38 caliber]; I wasn't supposed to.  People think I was crazy today if you tell somebody that, but in World War II [WWII] they didn't, they didn't have all them regulations that kept you from being a soldier.  If you killed the enemy, whether you were supposed to or not, didn't matter, they went onto the next thing.  You didn't have reporters there checking on what you did and immediately saying these twenty guys killed fifty civilians, 'cause I, I can tell you we killed civilians because you didn't know they were civilians and you just, you, you, you saw them as enemy and you just went on through.  Nobody made a big deal out of it.  They had one guy who was in the Pacific, and the reason I know him, he went to Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana].  He was a famous correspondent [Ernie Pyle].  I wish I could think of his name.  I can get his name.  They have a building named for him at Indiana University, but he was a graduate and he didn't--well this is, see I, I don't wanna make a guy look like he's not telling the truth you see, but it was not telling it in favor of us.  He didn't tell that these guy--like you're doing now.  The guys have shot some enemy or did something to some enemy in the, in the prison where they were keeping them.  Well, you don't know what goes on in those prisons.  You don't know how bad they try to treat the people that are working and some don't stand that.  Some have done, have, have done things that they're not supposed--that are, that you know you're not supposed to do, that's kill somebody and that, and that's happens, that happened during War World II frequently.  But there was nobody checking on that.  We, we've fighting the enemy and you couldn't win 'cause people look like other people.  And that, that was a weakness, this, this thing where some many of the kids got on drugs.  The, the battle we had not so long ago, maybe five, eight, nine years ago what was that, what did they call it?  Oh, it was a terrible--the French went there, in twenty years they couldn't defeat the enemy.
Speaker 1: Vietnam.
Speaker 2: Vietnam.
Speaker 1: The Vietnam War.
Speaker 2: Vietnam.  That, that's a good example of what happened and, and of course a lot of it they told, a lot they didn't tell.  Still a whole lot of stuff that was unreported, because it was so--civilians wouldn't understand it.  They wouldn't understand you get to a point where you do certain things.  You see your friend killed, and that's the enemy you'd shoot the heck out of them even if he just wants to quit.  You know, you, you shoot them anyway.  And that isn't for me to tell that kind of story.  I don't think, I'm not, I don't, I don't wanna tell that kind of story at all, because you have people today that wouldn't understand that, but you, you have to be there to understand why people do what they do.  You know in those camps they had in Germany the, the prisoners did all kinds of things to kill the enemy, and they should have.  I don't believe you, they need to report what they did.  They need to report why they did it, who, who was do, what they were doing to them that caused them to want to kill them in the prison camps.  They, and that's the way it was in, in fighting.  All you saw was a, was a person with a different uniform on and that you shot first and asked questions later.  And civilians cannot understand that all the time unless they had somebody that was in the service or somebody that got killed.
Speaker 1: Okay, well--
Speaker 2: And that's still a problem and I don't want to be a part of that--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --discussion because I, I, I think differently.  When you're there it's different than when your home reading about it in the paper.
Story_ID: 623029
Speaker 1: Now you became a surgical assistant, you, you assisted a plastic surgeon at (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I did that, I did that at one of the largest hospitals, this was later, at Pearl Harbor [Naval Station Pearl Harbor, Hawaii].  Plastic surgeon was from Boston [Massachusetts], and I can't, I don't know his name, now he's a doctor, medical doctor.  I used to know it and used to have it written down because he--
Speaker 1: It starts with a S, it's it Sara- Saragosa [ph.] or Sar- starts with an S, but anyway I, I have it written down, so.
Speaker 2: Well, anyway this guy was, he was so good, he was an artist.  If you had a bad lip that had been hit by a bullet or something, he could pull your skin together and graft skin and you could barely see it the way it was.  Well, you're beginning to see now with harelips and all that stuff.  Well, that's minor compared to--that's not minor either, but I mean compared to what I'm talking about it's not, it's not a big deal but, but this guy could do that and we had prisoners, Japanese prisoners is what we had then, and we used these torches, these flame throwers and you know there were Marines [U.S. Marine Corps] that had their best friends and their whole companies that, that went in ahead of them that were burnt up like that.  And don't, nobody could expect the Marines coming in and saw, they didn't ask questions about civilians or who, they had different uniforms on they used the flame throwers too and did the same thing.  And if you tell it to a person sitting in a room like this that does not, that doesn't really understand or want to understand, then it could look like you were an awful cruel and awful brutal guy, but that was what you did and maybe that was true, but you, they, they couldn't, you couldn't do it unless they made you into somebody who could do it.  Am I making any sense on this?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: These dogs, this is a good example, the dogs that trained were ferocious, and they got them now that they have them trained.  And they'd almost kill as many men and kids and women that were with the enemy as, as, as your gun did, not that you wanted them to, but they, they couldn't, they just knew they smelled different.  They were different.  They were trained.  They'd just there and open up things, I'm talking about the dogs.  And we had them and that story hadn't been told, and I don't wanna be the one to, I'm talking about something else here and I don't want to get into that discussion that I mentioned, even though I feel strongly about it.
Speaker 1: Sure, it obviously has deeply affected you over all this time.
Speaker 2: That's exactly.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It did, it did and it still right to this day--
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: --when I go back and think about it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, war is not a lightweight thing in anybody's life.
Speaker 2: People, I'll tell you if a person could experience it in a way where they wouldn't get work and they just see it one time, they'd understand.  When you're home and it's a long, long way off and you don't understand, just the words.  They had this prisoner and they killed him, and he, he wanted to give up.  If you saw your, your buddy that you went out drank beer with, knew his family, and he got killed, you're not gonna spare him.  You shot him.  Now the officers didn't say anything, nobody said anything; that's the way it was.  But, we got people who don't believe in that, and I, you know the other thing you don't want your family.  Some of the family may carry that on, I'm gone, dead, I'm gone and they remember uncle so and so or they may, cousin and so on, I, I don't want that kind of memory.  I could have right after things happened and it wasn't popular, nobody even talked about anything then at all, but I couldn't now.  I couldn't stand it.
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: I can stand what we talked about thus far.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I could stand that.
Speaker 1: The plastic surgeon--
Speaker 2: I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: I'm saying the plastic surgeon you were trying to think of was Dr. Sorenson [ph.], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that sounds like it.
Speaker 1: Sorensen, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.  He's now a succe- he's a nationally known--
Speaker 2: He's a top plastic surgeon.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Of course, he might be deceased now because see that was, that was 1944 and he was, he was a man then, had gray hair then, some gray hair and how many years is that.  I don't even want to count.  That's eighty, sixty years isn't it?  How many years is that?
Speaker 1: It was a long time ago.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well let's sixty, if he--
Speaker 1: Sixty-seven years ago I think.
Speaker 2: Yeah, let's say he's forty and it was sixty years ago, he's 100, he's dead.  But he told me the last time we were together he said, "Wilson [HistoryMaker Harrison B. Wilson] if you ever or anybody, any of your people ever have a problem, need plastic surgery, I'll take care of them, don't have to worry about paying or nothing."  And I just never encountered any of my friends or family or anybody and I used to keep my book with all those addresses and names in it.  I don't know where it's gone.  It's been lost and moving or something.
Speaker 1: So, your plan after the [U.S.] Navy was to go to medical school, go to medical school?
Speaker 2: My plan was to go to medical school and of course that was changed.  It was, it was changed in a silly way because when I went to the, when I went to college [Kentucky State College for Negroes; Kentucky State University, Frankfort, Kentucky] the head of the department said if you're an athletic you can't pass this work, that's right.
Speaker 1: Now, now we (unclear)--
Speaker 2: And this is an African American that said that to me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 623030
Speaker 1: You're leaving the [U.S.] Navy and you're going--how did you choose Kentucky State [Kentucky State College for Negroes; Kentucky State University, Frankfort, Kentucky]?
Speaker 2: It's an interesting way.  I was gonna go to Syracuse University [Syracuse, New York], and really I was, I was a mixed up guy like a lot of guys were.  I didn't know how mixed I was.  Like I jumped on my brother [Albert Wilson] for talking, not in a nice way to my mother [Marguerite Ayers Wilson], to our mother.  You know I was, you know I shouldn't have done that.  I, I should have done something, but not that.  And so you know I'd made mistakes and I went up to Syracuse.  God, I wish I hadn't (unclear) the name, but the big thing about it was I wasn't the same guy that, that was gonna go there before I went in the service.  I didn't think the same, I didn't feel the same.  I didn't, I didn't, at that point in my life I wanted to be one of the guys, that's what I wanted to be.  I wanted to be whatever I am, that's what I wanted to be.  And I was still going to go to Syracuse, and my mother, wonderful lady, she says, "I have, I wanna go and visit my relatives, this is my last chance, June [HistoryMaker Harrison B. Wilson]--," they called me Junior, June--"and I want you to take me to visit them."  And I didn't wanna go to visit.  I was tired of traveling.  I wanted to go to school.  But I, my mother like, I don't even hesitate to say whatever she wanted I would do and I did that.  It was the best thing that ever happened to me because I got to see the South firsthand.  And not the people that just doing the low jobs, I, I got to see people who were doctors and lawyers and teaching school, had responsible positions and fairly nice homes.  I didn't see the people picking the cotton or not having this and didn't go to school and all that.  They, they were there, but that wasn't where I was.  And so when we got to Columbus, Georgia, this is where my, my mother's brother [Willis Ayers] and sister were, the brother that finished medical school was well known in Columbus, Georgia.  He, he was one of the few doctors, black doctors there, and at that point you had to use your black doctors or you didn't get anybody.  And so, of course, they had their own little fraternity there where all the people that, that were professionals they, they, they'd go to the same places and they'd go to each other's home and they had basements where they had, they could play cards, they could play poker Friday night.  That was their business, no police are gonna come in there.  It was just a wonderful atmosphere, and I'm seeing this for the first time.  I've heard about it, but you know you don't believe things until you see them.  And of course my, all my uncle's friends were people like he was. They were either professionals or they were doing very well in life and they all had their beautiful homes and they went there on Fridays and they played cards, they played poker or they, they went through this girl or that girl and it was just, that was the way it was.  And I got a different opinion of the South.  I really didn't believe anybody lived, any black Americans lived like that.  You could tell me, but no I don't.  All the picture I saw was the guys out there working hard out in the fields and all that stuff and I didn't want any part of that kind of stuff.  I took my mother and I couldn't help but to see all of it.  And like I said, I'd been all over and here I am in another experience.  The people were wonderful.  Even those that were undereducated were just wonderful people.  They had good hearts and they meant well, even though they make mistakes and grammatically incorrect speaking and all that they were people and I loved them.  I had--some of my relatives were like that.
Story_ID: 623031
Speaker 1: So, I saw all sides of the South and I knew I could live in the South.  I knew what the rules were and if, if the South was where I had to go to get what I wanted, then, then I would do it.  It was gonna be a temporary thing.  I was gonna go to school there.  I hadn't decided yet, but when I did decide I said to myself I'm gonna go here, I'm gona do this, I'm gonna get the heck out, go back up to New York someplace.  Well, you don't, you don't live with people and people who wanna do the same things you wanna do and those that have made progress and are doing very well economically and socially and everything, man this is for me.  So and then I visits uncle, another uncle, an aunt that, that didn't get the education.  They were at a different level, but still they had their nice little home and so a person could almost get what they wanted if they worked hard enough for it, even down in the South.  That was the conclusion I came to.  And the police let them have their thing and that will change some way.  That's not gonna, that's not gonna be, I knew within my heart I'm saying these things to myself.  This will not be this way forever.  Anyway I'm gonna go to college in Kentucky and grad school somewhere else and I'm gonna get my head on and never go in the South again.  That's what I was telling myself, and I did that until went south and golly, met good people and good friends and just good food and good stories and churches with good music, and bad things, but so much good things, so many good things.  So, and if you worked hard and all that, that even meant more in the South than it did in the North 'cause you could move and, and really where you could go, you could go to the top in that.  So, I, I began to see that.  Began to see (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So what was it because Kentucky State [Kentucky State College for Negros; Kentucky State University, Frankfort, Kentucky] was near where your mother [Marguerite Ayers Wilson] and father [Harrison Wilson, Sr.] originally came from is that why you chose Kentucky State?
Speaker 1: Well, my cousin [John Merritt] was going there--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --the same guy that in the end kind of double crossed me.  He was, he was trying to keep me there as a coach and was hurting me with, with the greater jobs I was seeking because I was qualified.
Speaker 2: Okay, well let's wait to get to that story, but, but your cousin was there and what was he doing, was he an administrator there or was he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, no my cousin was getting out of the [U.S.] Navy too, but he didn't go overseas and we were meeting again for the first time in several years.  His mother and my mother were, were, were sisters and they were so close they just loved each other and I went to their home, very mild and humble home, clean and everything, church.  I saw where my father was, went out to the place where they were, could imagine what it was like.  I saw the cemetery with this clock, cemetery with just, with from twelve o'clock right on around.  And if you, if you died at a certain time you pointed the clock and you, you were buried there and you moved right on around a circle.  He was at the head, and his wife was at the foot and that's the way they were buried like that.
Speaker 2: Like a sundial clock?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But that's what, that's what it was.  It was a copy of it, but it was in the earth.  See it was, that's the way, it was his own private cemetery see.  So, anyway I saw, I, all of that influenced my thinking about the South.  It was, it was just the opposite of the negative attitude I had.
Story_ID: 623032
Speaker 1: Now, when you got to Kentucky State [Kentucky State College for Negroes; Kentucky State University, Frankfort, Kentucky] you said that you majored in physical education?
Speaker 2: I was going to major in, in, I was gonna in pre-med, and that's where the fellow told me that I had to, I had to--I, I couldn't be an athlete because you couldn't handle it.  "Nobody can handle this work and be an athlete."  That was very negative.  But having been in the [U.S. military] service and all that, I said I don't wanna go to school here, why fight that.  You know I said maybe I'm not supposed to be a doctor, all of that stuff.  Well it's gonna be hard anyway, you know heck why should I do all of that.  Just because this guy it was a good excuse for me.  I'm not gonna say it was, it may not have been.  I didn't like it, I didn't think it was right, but I kept my mouth shut.  You learned to do that in the service, and I majored in psychology, sociology, and physical education.  I had three majors, took all the courses in those three majors.
Speaker 1: Okay and you came out pretty fast though, you finished pretty quick from what I understand.
Speaker 2: No, I finished in 1950.
Speaker 1: Okay was that four years from '46 [1946] to '50 [1950]
Speaker 2: Yeah four years--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --'cause I, see I got out, whatever, whatever made it four years.  I got out of the service in, oh golly, what in the world, in '45 [1945]?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: It was after that when I got out of the service.  Well, it was '45 [1945]
Speaker 1: So you started in '46 [1946] and got out of college in '50 [1950].
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So it was just before '46 [1946] I guess.  Yeah, I guess, it was '46 [1946].
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was out before that, but I, I wasn't in college.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.
Speaker 2: I was waiting for college to start.  I was waiting to decide whether I was going to Syracuse [Syracuse University, Syracuse, New York] or where.  On the trip my mother [Marguerite Ayers Wilson] took me on that helped me take a decision, and I think she knew it would and cleared up my mind about what I wanted to do and where I wanted to go.
Speaker 1: Okay, who were, now, you played ball, you played, what sports did you play?
Speaker 2: I played basketball and football--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --at Kentucky State, and most of my teammates are deceased now.  I hear about some of them and some of the kids that I coached are deceased.  It's unbelievable.
Speaker 1: What position did you play?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: What positions did you play?
Speaker 2: I played forward in college, forward mainly.  I could play center too, but see I was only 6'3" and I could jump.  You know a lot of that you, you compensated for your ability to jump and nobody else.  We had a guy 6'8" on our team from Indiana, and that was the beginning.  He played center (laughter) when he came.  And he was from a little town that won the state championship, Shelbyville, Indiana.  Can you imagine Shelbyville winning the state championship?  Country, little old country school and this kid came.  One of them went to Indiana U [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana], was the first African American to go to Indiana U play football, played basketball, Bill Garrett, in the Big Ten [Big Ten Conference].  He was the first one from Indiana.  They had him I think from Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan], maybe one other school, but that's the way it was.
Story_ID: 623033
Speaker 1: And when I went to Indiana to get my master's degree, I worked out with some kids that were in college, white kids, bla-.  Didn't matter to me what they were.  I'd work out with them and I'd tell them what they were doing wrong, they start listening to me.  And, and the kid told the coach about me.  They, they didn't know I wasn't, I had finished college.  See I played some in the [U.S. military service] service and I finished college and so I was telling them, you know, what they were doing wrong.  They're outdoors and they would listen to me.  And these guys had scholarships, and this kid told the coach, his name is Branch McCracken, big, tall, gray haired guy.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he is a famous coach.  He was coach at--
Speaker 1: He's very famous.
Speaker 2: --Indiana University.
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is where we were, Indiana University.
Speaker 2: Branch McCracken, right.
Speaker 1: That's right.  That's where I was.  I decided to go to Ind, University of Indiana in Bloomington [Indiana], and so this kid wanted me to show some stuff and he had gotten some of the boys together and I wore my practice stuff and this guy was standing up over looking down at us playing, 'cause you're not supposed to practice in the summer, but he wasn't there, so I didn't know who he was and one of the kids later said, "That's, that's the coa- Branch, Branch McCracken."  I said, "Hey coach, how you doing?"  But I'm, here I'm teaching these guys and I'm just a grad student, basketball I'm talking about, and Branch hears me.  So Branch says, he offers me a scholarship, "Do you wanna come?"  And I laughed and said, "Coach I finished college. I'm in grad school here."  And I'll never forget that, and that story is worn out now because most of the guys are dead that used to hear it.  And that was it I, I got my master's degree.  And by the way, I got home and my youngest brother [Albert Wilson] who was 6'6" and weighed about 220, 225 [pounds] and he had a scholarship.  Where to? Syracuse [Syracuse University, Syracuse, New York] (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay. Let me--let me go back, back a minute.  Now what was your degree at, at Kentucky State [Kentucky State College for Negroes; Kentucky State University, Frankfort, Kentucky]?
Speaker 1: Health and physical education--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and psychology, two degrees.
Speaker 2: Okay and at, this is Indiana Univer- University of Indiana or Indiana University, which one?
Speaker 1: Well, they say it both ways.  Either way I guess is probably--it's the one in Bloomington.  There's only one.
Speaker 2: University of Indiana.
Speaker 1: Yeah, some way University of Indiana, but I don't think they use that.  I think it's Indiana University.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I think is the way they say it.
Speaker 2: And what was your degree, your master's degree in?
Speaker 1: Health education and psychology.  I had two majors at Indiana and a master's degree.  And then I had, then I got a degree in between the master's and the doctorate.  They call it a director, director of health education.  You could be a director of hospitals, educational program.  A lot of guys were doing that.
Speaker 2: Where did you get that from?
Speaker 1: Indiana University.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: All my degrees were from Indiana U, and then my third one was a doctorate of health educa- well major in health education, health and science.
Story_ID: 623034
Speaker 1: Now, when you finished that--the master's degree at Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana], the first master's degree, is that when you, you went to Jackson, I mean when did you go to Jackson State [Jackson State College; Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: That's right, as soon as I finished that.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Before I finished, I met the president [Jacob L. Reddix].  I told you that story I think.
Speaker 1: Not, not on here.
Speaker 2: Well, I met the president of the university, I mean of the--of Jackson State.  He came up there with his choir.  They used to make tours like that to recruit here, the teachers or students, and I, I met him and talked to him about Indiana U, about his school and that I was looking for a job, I was finishing my master's degree.  I finished it the summer.  He didn't know he was gonna lose a coach and a teacher.  Another man told me about, about the school, and a lot of guys get, decide to go to grad school they don't tell the president.  You know, they decide to go and they might tell the head of their department or something.  But anyway the president didn't know about it.  So, when he got back to Jackson and found he, he needed a coach, he remembered this young guy that told him he'd bring him a championship like a jerk.  That's what I told him.
Speaker 1: So, well know, now wait a minute now, now were you an assistant at the University of Indiana as a coach, I mean did, were you an official--
Speaker 2: No, no, no I just did that on my own.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you had never officially been a coach.
Speaker 2: Never officially been a coach.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he was making a--
Speaker 2: Never.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And the president met me in the session and, and it was an informal thing 'cause he, he didn't need a coach.  I just happen to be at the, I just happen to be at the, at, at the man's house that he was having lunch with was a friend of mine was in school there, grad school.  So, that--so it was perfect for me 'cause I didn't have a job yet and the summer session was coming in, I was gonna take some more courses while I was there.  But I'd say within ten days he sent me a telegram, "If still avail--," I saved it, oh I don't even know where it is now, but I think I got it in my drawer, but I  saved that telegram.  If still available, will hire you for nine months, $3,400 (laughter).  You didn't hear what I said thirty--
Speaker 1: Yeah $3,400, yeah.
Speaker 2: I used to make more than that waiting tables (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, so but you decided--
Speaker 2: With a master's.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but you decided to go anyway right?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah I went, that's right I needed, I was gonna get a start somewhere and I went there and I stayed until he retired I guess it was fourteen years, fifteen years.
Speaker 1: Okay so you went there in what year was it?
Speaker 2: I was there, I went there in 1950, '50 [1950], right?  No, no it couldn't.
Speaker 1: No it couldn't be '50 [1950], no.
Speaker 2: No, well-
Speaker 1: You got your master's degree at Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana] so--
Speaker 2: Let's see '50 [1950]--
Speaker 1: --it's going to be--
Speaker 2: It must have been '51 [1951] or '52 [1952], I guess '52 [1952]--
Speaker 1: Fifty-two [1952].
Speaker 2: --whatev- whatever it was when I finished my master's degree, that summer, I went that, I was there that late summer to start helping with football practice.
Speaker 1: Okay, it's 1960 to '67 [1967], yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's right.
Speaker 1: Sixty [1960] to '67 [1967].
Speaker 2: Nineteen-fifty [1950] to '67 [1967].
Speaker 1: Wait a minute, okay I'm sorry '51 [1951], yeah 1951 (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah I graduated from college in '50 [1950], and I got my master's in '51 [1951].
Speaker 1: Right, 1951 to 1967.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So you're at Jackson State.
Story_ID: 623035
Speaker 1: Now did you have any trepidation about going to Jackson State [Jackson State College; Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi]?  This is the capital of Mississippi, a state, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And not only that they were having all kinds of trouble then too.  Well, the trip I made with my mother [Marguerite Ayers Wilson] to Columbus, Georgia, was one of the greatest things I could have done, 'cause I saw what it was like.  I saw, I knew what the challenges were.  I wasn't going down there--see the thing you gotta understand all my experience, my young experience was with white people, really.  Just all of it until I went into the [U.S.] Navy was the first time I met and was with a lot of blacks.  I got an education in blacks, I got an education in whites in the Navy.  I took that education to Indiana U [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana] and got my master's [degree] in one year and started on my, what I had to get a doctorate's degree.  I got my doc- I got that degree in '50 [1950], I got my doctorate in 1960, one year.  I mean whatever that was ten years.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So that, that, all of that came, pulled together, my mother taking me south and getting firsthand experience in the South.  I was gonna be in the same shape, I felt like, as my uncle was.  I had my own friends, my own everything, and heck I wasn't going there to socialize.  I was going there to make a living.  I didn't know where it was gonna take me, but that was my attitude.
Speaker 1: What was your impression of the campus when you first arrived?
Speaker 2: Jackson State?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Jackson State.
Speaker 2: Very clean.  When I got there, there were no students there, no faculty.  I was there, you know, late summer, but not time to go to, for school to open up in the fall.  I got a chance to look around and see and see where I was gonna live and talk to the pres and all that.  But, I was young and had a wife [Wilson's first wife, Anna Wilson] and a baby, and I was ready to go to work.  And the first year was the toughest of all the years.  I managed to make friends not just with African Americans, I made friends with the chief of police, made friends with the senators.  I made friends with any of them, the doctors, some of those tom- time, top doctors in Jackson, Mississippi.
Story_ID: 623036
Speaker 1: Former athletes of University of Mississippi [Oxford, Mississippi].  One was at the bank I was using.  He was a quarterback at Ole Miss when they won something, and when he found out that I was coaching, gonna be assistant football coach and head basketball coach, this is at the bank now, man he took me in his arms, white guy, and we remained friends all the way through my time in Nashville [Tennessee], 'cause he had some relations with the same bank I was on the board for.  And he not only went there, but he went to, this same guy ended up playing with the Chicago Bears that I made friends with in Mississippi.  He was quarterback with the Chicago Bears.
Speaker 2: What--
Speaker 1: I wish I could think.  I know his name when I hear it.
Speaker 2: Not Rudy Bukich or--
Speaker 1: I can't, can't hear what you.
Speaker 2: Rudy Bukich or--
Speaker 1: No, no, no it was American, more American name.
Speaker 2: Oh re- okay.
Speaker 1: It was, I'll tell you it was, it had to have been in the mid '50s [1950s]--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --at the latest.  He was, I'll tell you who he, he was there with all those top players though.  He was there with, with this polish guy that oh man was just--he was one of the, he was, he coaches, he coached at the Chicago Bears, Polish fellow that talked real fast.
Speaker 2: Ditka?
Speaker 1: What'd you say?
Speaker 2: Not Ditka, you know Mike Ditka.
Speaker 1: Ditka.
Speaker 2: Ditka, okay.
Speaker 1: Ditka was the coach.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: He is Polish or Lithuanian and he, he had connections with the bank in Mississippi.  You know those guys were making money, and they were learning how to, to you know diversify their money.  But Ditka was the guy and that, see that was before, well some of the ath- black athletes began to come a little later in Ditka's life.  When he first went up to play football, there weren't any on the team.  But then they start getting a kid that played, that died, that played, not the one that died last, but the, there was a player that died was playing with the Chicago Bears.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Payton you're talking about.
Speaker 1: Who?
Speaker 2: Walter Payton.
Speaker 1: Payton.
Speaker 2: You mean the star halfback (unclear)--
Speaker 1: No, see the kid from Mississippi, Jackson, I knew him.
Speaker 2: Oh you're talking about the white guy now from the--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm talking about the white guy.
Speaker 2: Yeah okay, yeah, no I can't remember the quarter, that quarterback, I guess--I don't know (unclear).
Speaker 1: Yeah, no--
Speaker 2: Let's just keep going.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but anyway that was, that was the whole ballgame that, that he now, that--
Story_ID: 623037
Speaker 1: I was able to finish my degrees early, though that, there were no problem, financial problem.  When I went up there, I had a 1949 Buick and I graduated from college [Kentucky State College for Negroes; Kentucky State University, Frankfort, Kentucky] in 1950.  When I went to Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana], I got a job.  I had a G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944], saved all my money through college 'cause I had a scholarship and I waited tables in a, in a nightclub and wherever I could make big tips.  So, oh yeah, I also had a kit about that big that I carried.  I could make you a suit, show them to you, to let you pick out which one you wanted.  I'd size you up, send the down payment to Chicago [Illinois] with your measurements and all.  They'd send a suit back, perfect.  If I sold five I got a suit free.  I got a commission on every suit I sold.  His down payment, half of that was my money, the other half went directly to, on his suit.  That was the other thing.  I did all those things while I was in college and when I left, when I went to Indiana U I didn't have to worry about, I didn't have to work.  I didn't have to do--I could have gone to college like a rich boy 'cause I had all, I had all that money that I made, and, and I saved what I had left from my money in the [U.S. military] service, I had that.  And I had a G.I. Bill now, see money, G.I. bill every month.  And Indiana was very inexpensive then.  My god, you wouldn't believe how che- I can't remember what it was now, but it was very cheap.  And so the story that I have is when I left, when I left Indiana U the first time and came to Jackson, Mississippi to coach and to teach [at Jackson State College; Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi], I was in awfully good shape physically and mentally and I knew how to handle myself in Mississippi.  I never had a problem that I wasn't able to handle.  I may have told you this I, I made friends with the chief of police who was, who loved athletics.  People couldn't believe that he and I were friends, I mean friends until I had him come to one of our games and he was the only white person there.  And I told him to be sure to wear your uniform 'cause I wanna make a point of it.  And I introduced him at half-time.  We were playing Grambling [Grambling College; Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana].  And to my students, I had told the president [Jacob L. Reddix] before I did, but I introduced the students to the chief of police and put my arm around him, he put his arm around me.  I told him he's one of the best friends I have in Mississippi.  I wasn't telling a story.  We didn't have any problems after that at all.  All--he was so impressed he didn't know we had those kind of crowds at our games.  They'd go by and see cars, but that's as close--he came to the game, sat on my bench.  Can you imagine a guy that loves athletics sitting on my bench, and these guys, Grambling had these big jokers they looked like gorillas playing basketball, long arms, tall, 6'9", 6'8", 6'10", oh my god.  I was beginning to get the same kind of players out of Kentucky and other places.  And so I built my team to, to where we played the teams in Indiana, teams in Kentucky, you know before I left.  And then when I got my doctorate and I was still there teaching, I wasn't coaching anymore, my cousin [John Merritt] wanted me to, I said, "No you gotta do it without me."
Story_ID: 623038
Speaker 1: When you were coaching did Kentucky State play all, all-black teams?  Were they in the NAIA [National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics] then?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we're in the NAIA (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, with Central State--
Speaker 2: Sure, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and some other I mean--
Speaker 2: See Central State [Central State College; Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio] was in our conference.
Speaker 1: --Jack- Jackson State [Jackson State College; Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Jack, Jackson State was an NAIA school.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, see, but the funny thing about it the first time we were eligible to go, that's a story in itself, they wouldn't let us go because Ole Miss [University of Mississippi, Oxford, Mississippi], Mississippi State [Mississippi State University, Starkville, Mississippi] couldn't go.  What happened Mississippi State played Michigan State [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan] in the finals of the one of the tournaments.  It was, it was held at Mich- Michigan State.  They, they had an all-white team, and Mich, and, and Mississippi State beat them.  Boy, that coach had a tremendous team, and a lot of coaches copied his style, but I won't go into that, but anyway and he was pretty famous in Mississippi after that.  And he moved around after he left Mississippi, went to a couple other southern states and coached basketball, and he got into some trouble with betting and that kind of stuff.  But they--it's, it's funny my, my boss, the president [Jacob L. Reddix], told me and I was like his son, his adopted son he didn't have, he told me that Mississippi was gonna be as fine as any state in the country where African Americans are concerned.  Doc, you may not believe me, but you may not believe me, but I believe it's true that Mississippi now for African Americans is one of the finest states in this country.  You know, it's still got that image, but the things they're doing the players look like this Jackson State's team.  Mississippi State, half their players are African American.  Ole Miss half of their players are African American.
Speaker 1: Or more, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Or more.  And just think they had the National Guard, the president had to turn out the National Guard to keep one back kid out of Mississippi State, but then they had nothing but black athletes and students.  And, and my boss told me, he said someday Mississippi, and I believe it, Mississippi has still got some problems, but you know they, they, they, you don't hear 'em, you don't hear, hear about problems like you used to at all.
Story_ID: 623039
Speaker 1: Now, you knew several of the key players in the Civil Rights Movement in Mississippi?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You, first of all I guess we should mention Medgar Evers.
Speaker 2: Where did you get that information from that you got there?
Speaker 1: Oh from--
Speaker 2: I gave--
Speaker 1: --from the office and--
Speaker 2: Oh you had--
Speaker 1: --they got it from various sources out of you know, some of it you get--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well that's good.
Speaker 1: --some of it from, yeah.
Speaker 2: There's no problem.  I, I, just wondered, yeah well Medgar Evers was one of my best friends.  We're about the same age, and we got our cars tuned up at the same station.
Story_ID: 623040
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Medgar Evers (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'll sit up, too.
Speaker 1: You were saying you were good friends, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Medgar Evers and I were about the same age and while I would be recruiting [for Jackson State College; Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi] on the road we'd run into each other in some little town.  And he's up there getting the farmers together, going to these plantations.  They still had them, have them in Mississippi where blacks live on them, but their free of course.  There's none of that stuff.  They go to school, but they still don't like, didn't like outsiders coming in there.  They call it harassment of their workers.  So, they all knew through the way I set it up that who I was, 'cause of what, having a car and all that stuff, nice car and dressed in a suit they wanna know is this guy out there getting voters or stirring up the public.  See you had to run into that problem, you see, and I wasn't doing that.  I would be running to different places to recruit, and I think 'til this day that the, that this chief of police gave my, my license number, my name and sent it all around, I believe he sent it all around to the states.  So, if they saw my car they didn't, they, you know, and I, I have a yellow, get this no, yellow and black Mercury, the Ms they call them with a tire on the back.  Then in two years I had a blue and white Mercury with a tire on the back, and then in two years my kids were so big now I got so many, I got a station wagon from there on out.  But those were so obvious you would think the police would stop me if they were doing that kind of stuff down there, wouldn't you, but I never got stopped.  One time we were speeding, and the police officer stopped me and, and I kind of, I kind of used my one call to call the chief in Jackson [Mississippi] and asked when I hang up if you can call them as soon as possible.  I told him what was happening.  I pulled, I'd followed behind, ever follow behind a slow school bus and two or three other vehicles right behind it and every time it stops the whole line has to stop and then when you see open roads and no houses you, you get around it right quick so you can go.
Speaker 1: It's two lane highways we're talking about?
Speaker 2: That's what I'm talking about--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --two- lane high way.  And they stopped right on the highway, they didn't pull off the highway, stopped on the highway.  You could still go around if nothing was coming.  So, I looked around and didn't see anything, so I shot around them and by the time I got almost tied with the bus here's a car coming and I hit the gas and shot (makes sound), and this car passed me.  And I said, I had a football player with me, we were going to scout somewhere, and I said that's the police they're gonna come back.  'Cause he was scared to dead we'd had a head on collision.  You can see, you can understand that, and I can understand him you know seeing this car going around a bus, but I didn't see him.  He pulled out from a parking place onto, onto the lane as I pulled around the bus.  Well, I didn't see any of that, but still I'm in Mississippi and this is where I don't have any protection truthfully.  And, of course you make one call and you know that call wasn't to no lawyer, that call was to the chief in Jackson.  I think, I don't think he was in.  I think he was out.  I said, "Well, you tell him it's Coach Wilson [HistoryMaker Harrison B. Wilson] and it's of utmost importance that he get in touch with me because I'm in trouble up here in So and So and So and So," and gave them the phone number, and they got that to him.  We got a lot of publicity about the chief being at my basketball games standing up and the kids giving him applause, me and my arms around him and all that stuff.  That set a tune for Mississippi.  But now I need him, I'm in trouble.  The guys don't know I'm up, way out of the, almost into Tennessee and so man I mean they're tough.  I could see how.  I said, "Well gentlemen just wait a minute, my lawyer is gonna call you back."  I didn't tell them, I told them the chief of police of Jackson is gonna call.  "We don't care what damn chief of police.  You almost killed us," you know, and they didn't want, you couldn't talk to them.  This is the time I got pulled over.  And anyway the chief called and laid it out for them.  They were still angry, but they gave me my license and everything back and said go ahead.  That was scary.  Can you imagine a little town like that and, and I was innocent, but I was guilty too, because I did pull around the bus.  It, it wasn't stopped, it was moving.
Speaker 1: Yeah it's one of those things that's hard to avoid, I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 623041
Speaker 1: What kind of man was Medgar Evers?  You were talking about Medgar (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, I was talking about Medgar.  Well, Medgar was, he was one of the calmest, one of the nicest guys I ever met.  He had a demeanor about him.  He, you know he was, he was a guy you'd wonder how he could be a fighter he was so calm and kind of serene in a way.  And I would tell him, I said, "Man you're gonna get killed.  You know you got these kids, what you gonna do?"  I said--we're about the same age, and he had two children.  And he said, "Well that's it, if I do, I do that's part of it."  I couldn't believe.  I could not believe that, and--
Speaker 1: What do you think motivated him to be that?
Speaker 2: Wanting to do the right thing.  He was one of the few people, he was disappointed I'll be honest with you, well I wouldn't want this to be put in I'll tell you, in any form of fashion because they don't know that he was disappointed with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  He was disappointed because the things he fought for, some of them they didn't do and didn't try to do.  As your leadership changed, their, their ideas changed and what was important changed and some of them, to be honest about it, some of them didn't feel the same way as you or I might have felt or Medgar felt.  Be truthful about what you're doing.  Don't try and make money off of this, you know.  So, he was disappointed with the kind of things some of them wanted to do, which were not only illegal, it was against the people really.  You were gonna take advantage of situations.  And I--and because he's dead and a whole lot of them are dead I wouldn't want to even go into what that was.  I don't wanna say anything else except that he was disappointed in them, but he was like, he was like a church man that's calm, like a man who's heard service and the service just, just hit him just right.  He was unbelievable the way, the way he could take--I, I didn't think he was for real.  I think he, I would think sometimes that he was bulling me, but he wasn't.  I, I, I didn't know his wife.  I met her when he was, at the funeral when they had killed him, and I went to the funeral and I sat up front with the family and I met her.  She was a tall lady, smart.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Myrlie Evers [Myrlie Evers Williams].
Speaker 2: Yeah, and she wasn't no country girl she was, she was very aggressive, more outwardly aggressive than he was.  So, I guess he knew she would be able to take care of herself.  She was educated and, and was aggressive and could, would make it.  And I imagine he thought the organization would help take care of her, I'm sure of that, but they didn't.  I can tell you they did not.  I wouldn't go to, I wouldn't go to court and prove that they did not, but I know what they did too.  But they, they may have slipped her something, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Now did you hear the television broadcast?  It occurred either the same week or the same couple of days, I think a day or so before Medgar Evers was killed where President Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy], you know gave a message to the nation about civil rights--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --when he said to, to be against is to go against history, is going and things (unclear)--
Speaker 2: To be, I didn't hear that about--
Speaker 1: To be against civil rights is to be against the flow of history I think.  I'm paraphrasing.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I understand.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, I think he was right, absolutely right.  I'll tell you, Medgar--I don't think anybody else could have done that.  I couldn't have done that.  I really couldn't have.  And I told him my conscious would have hurt me sometime.  When I'd say I could not do what he's doing.  I could do it, but I wasn't ready to risk my life for an organization.  I felt I could do more teaching men how to be men, you know how to, how to treat people and get their education and, and, and no bull.  You know, be honest with each other and help each other.  Don't lie to one and tell somebody else something else.  We do that, we do that, we have done that a lot, I'll put it that way.  But I honestly could not have sacrificed my lu- my life for that.
Story_ID: 623042
Speaker 1: Explain to us kind of the dynamic.  There's a dynamic going on in Mississippi in those days where Tougaloo College [Tougaloo, Mississippi] was like a meeting place above, right above Jackson [Mississippi], about ten miles north of Jackson and the--just explain some of those dynamics and, and the SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] people would come in SCLC [Southern Christian leadership Conference], other people would come in.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah so--
Speaker 2: I, and I met all of them.  Well, the reason they had to do that, and he wasn't telling any story, they had to do that because it was so dangerous.  You know, I had a station wagon for instance, and I would pick up clothes from my faculty [at Jackson State College; Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi].  They had children that couldn't wear them, and they were good.  I told them just have them cleaned, that's all I ask and they would donate it.  Maybe they were taking it out of their income tax, I don't know, but I would take station wagon full of clothes around where I recruited boys for their, for their brothers and sisters and you'd be surprised they'd have a big old boy that's in high school and then they have one in junior high and they four or five of them in a row in ages wise.  And I'd take clothes.  I'd take a refrigerator, old refrigerator that was working, washing machine.  I don't know how many washing machines I took, and you know where they'd put them on the front porch and they could plug it in with, with an extension cord in the house when they wash clothes.  But they wanted it to be seen.  That was, that got to be a, a, a signal of wealth or a signal of doing better to have a washing machine.  I don't mean that scrubber, I mean you throw you in there and you had a wringer and that--okay well that, that's how I got a lot of the boys I took washing machines and I took clothes.  I took anything that was good that I thought they could use.  And any of my boys, somebody died in their family I was at the funeral.  I always took food.  I'd get Kentucky Fried [Kentucky Fried Chicken] or something like that, 'cause I couldn't cook, I'd take that and you couldn't tell what it was once they took it out of the containers and put it with the other food.  It tasted good, you know.  But I did everything, but what Medgar Evers did in terms of people.  I could not, I didn't come out because I couldn't, I didn't I could afford to die.  And I, and I, I've, I told me that.  I, I told, I told NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] that years ago because you know your conscious bother a little bit where here a man gives his life.  I say I'm not willing to give mine.  I'm willing to do all of this, but I'm not gonna give my life.  Now and that's the way I was.  And I'm not gonna tell--now I'll die for my mama [Marguerite Ayers Wilson].  I'd die for my country.  That's the whole, that's saving all of us, but I couldn't die for an organization, no.
Speaker 1: Now did you know Bob Moses or Fannie Lou Hamer or--?
Speaker 2: Who?
Speaker 1: Bob Moses or Fannie Lou Hamer or--
Speaker 2: Oh, I knew Fannie Lou Hamer, she was a lady in Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Andrew Moore.
Speaker 2: No, maybe I did and I don't get the name.
Speaker 1: He was one, I think he was further south in Mississippi, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I knew, see I, I coached all through--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --Mississippi, Louisiana, Alabama, all those states.  All the southern states is where we, where the schools were that we played except Central State [Central State College; Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio] and, and Kentucky State [Kentucky State College; Kentucky State University, Frankfort, Kentucky] you know they were upper north, south, north south, but I just couldn't get myself to do that.  Now here I would die for my mama, my uncle, I'd die for you.  If I knew you and we were friends and went to school, I'd die for you, but somehow I couldn't just die, I couldn't see the big picture.  And I thought that was bad, 'cause I could die for my country, you know, of course my mama is in it.  See my, see my family was so important to me individually.  I didn't anybody to hurt my mother, and I could see Hitler [Adolf Hitler] send somebody over here having school, Hitler is doing what he's doing over there.  No, I feel, I felt more close to the Jewish group and there was two or three reasons.  We're talking about families being murdered, families.  People who didn't do a thing to them, and it was political.  We know that.  It was, it was a lot of bull.  I don't know about Hitler, but, whether it was just, but it was political.  We know that the Jewish people owned the banks.  I mean this is big.  I'm not talking about they're thousands and thousands that were poor, don't get me wrong, that didn't have that kind of wealth, but the educated people, the education in Germany was headed up by Jewish people.  The banks were run by Jewish people.  That's what Hitler wanted.  He, so he found a scapegoat and that's what he found a scapegoat, and that's what they were doing in Mississippi and in the Deep South.  It got to be political.
Story_ID: 623043
Speaker 1: Tell us how you left Jackson State [Jackson State College; Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi]?  How did you come to leave Jackson State?
Speaker 2: Well, after my wife [Wilson's first wife, Anna Wilson] passed and I, well after my wife passed I decided really I was gonna get out of coaching because I knew I couldn't coach and, and do the things I'm, I was, I wanted to do with my children.  There's no way I could do that.  And of course Lucy [HistoryMaker Lucy R. Wilson] didn't know this, but my, my best friend that was my office mate at Indiana [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana] the fellow she mentioned but--came by to see me one day, but he was, show that, he was on his way to, to the University of Tennessee [Knoxville, Tennessee] for an interview for a job that I recommended him for and he just stopped by to see me on his way, on his way north, well to Tennessee on his way further south.  And he just kept talking about, about what was--
Story_ID: 623044
Speaker 1: This friend of mine that we were in grad school [at Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana] together stopped through to see me on his way to the University of Tennessee [Knoxville, Tennessee], and this was my old office mate that he and I used to talk about Lucy [HistoryMaker Lucy R. Wilson] and her friends when we were both writing our dissertations.  That was our, that was our recreation, that was our break that we had from writing, you know, to, to relax and all.  And one of the things I think he stopped by to tell me was that they were gonna have this big, it was the Fourth of July picnic, and they were gonna have this cookout and all the, you know they, all the ladies were getting together to cook and guess who is down at, at, at Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]?  I said, "Who?"  "Lucy Cutliff."  That's the way he used to pronounce her name.  I think he liked her too.  But he didn't know I already knew she was down there, but nevertheless just through the coaches that would--coming in from that school [Jackson State College; Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi] when I was coaching those years and all.  So, he said well you come down you know, you heard her tell it they're gonna prepare all kinds of food and everything and bring your boys down of course and let them meet everybody and all that stuff.  And so I, I, when he left, I said to myself heck I don't wanna go all the way down there.  What the heck I wanna do going down there you know to my, just--I couldn't--I didn't have anybody I could really talk to, so I'm just thinking these things and, and then the more I thought about it the more practical it became.  I said well he must have some reason to think that maybe something could happen down there.  You know he's inviting me down and I was in, in the dumps also.  I was really in the dumps.  I didn't even know what side was up.  So, but what Lucy didn't know when it came time to go down there I, I was down, I was just way down, and I didn't wanna go anywhere.  There wasn't anything, had anything to do with Southern or anybody there it was, it was just that, you know, I was going through that period of it would be okay for maybe a month or two and then you start thinking about different things and the kids, what, what future were they gonna have and all that and so I, I, which I explained that to, to Kirk [ph.] and so he said, "Well okay."  And evidently he went back and said something to them.  I heard Lucy's, Lucy's side, and man, they, they went back and said, "Well invite him again, he'll come down."  She said they didn't do that, but I think they did.  It doesn't matter, at least I was invited and I was happy to be invited back down to Southern.  And when she called, she wrote and it was a beautiful letter, then I called, then she called and said, "Well you know you might wanna come down you know--," no she didn't, she was just telling me that she wasn't angry, because I didn't, that I didn't come down even though they had cooked and all that kind of stuff.  But to, to move on I decided I would take the boys and go down there, 'cause if I had anything in my mind she needed to know this whole crew that I had (laughter).  And it was interesting I'm, I'm a little retrogressing just a little bit, my sister, my oldest sister came to the, to the funeral when, when my wife [Wilson's first wife, Anna Wilson] died and I was taking, she and I were close, she was ten years older than me, and she was like my mother, my, like my young mother and so on our way to the airport we were talking and she, she said, about halfway there, she said, "You know you're gonna have to get married again."  I said, "What did you say, sis?  You, you gonna--."  I would have been upset, "I just buried my wife you're talking about I'm gonna, you need to get married again?"  I said, "Why do you say that sis?"  "Because you can't raise those boys by yourself.  You gonna have to find somebody who is willing to help you raise them."  This is my sister (laughter).  This is my side of the story what I was thinking.  And when, and when Kirk came by on his way to University of Tennessee [Knoxville, Tennessee] and told me how things were going down there and what was happening and that she had, she had gotten a divorce and all that stuff, stuff I didn't know for sure that--it just got on my mind.  You know how something just wears on your mind, what my sister said and what, and what my best buddy said and all and I, so I decided anyway to go down there that way.  All that went into before I went down there.  It was really, and I, and I wanted to take the boys.  I wasn't playing, I mean (laughter) I didn't know what my next step was, but I, I could get that step out of the way if, if it wasn't anything happening.
Story_ID: 623045
Speaker 1: Now I heard somewhere that, that you when you got down there the, the boys were sent in one at a time is that, is this true?
Speaker 2: That's, that's very true.  And I thought it wouldn't seem like as many, all of us bunching in at one time going up to her apartment, see.  That was my idea of, of, of not letting it hit all of a sudden.  Maybe it would, it'd be a gradual affect it would take on her, see- seeing them come up.  So, I, I sent the oldest one up and then the next one and the next one.  Finally the youngest one was, he was only two, Richard [Richard Wilson], and, he was three I'm sorry, Richard was three and, and Richard had this baseball cap she mentioned with double zeroes on the back, that was his number, and we were into athletics and that's what I was doing with them.  I was coaching them in softball and you know just anything to get my mind off of things.  And I did I sent, I sent them in one at a time and I, I don't, and when I thought about that, that was awful dumb.  But, it, it just seemed like it would be a whole horde of people coming in at one time if we all went up at once, you know, and everybody talking loud and all.  I said, "Well okay, Benji [Benjamin F. Wilson] you go up now, act right."  They didn't know what I was doing.  They really didn't, my boys didn't.  So, I sent my oldest boy up first.  I figured he could kind of soften things if he had to, he knew how to talk to and all.  And then, then the next one, Harrison [Harrison Wilson III], went up, the next and then John [John Wilson] and then Richard who was, who was the youngest, three years old.  And then I went up after they got settled up there.  I acted like I was unpacking stuff and all (laughter).  I really in my heart was feeling a little guilty too 'cause I had been thinking since my sister told me that.  She put that, that bug in my, in my heart and my mind and I couldn't get rid of it.  So then I went up and we just had a good weekend with, with her and her daughter [Jennifer Wilson] and my four boys.  And we went bowling and we did, went swimming at a pool there and we went swimming, just that, that weekend and it was, it was, it was a softener for me.  I--Lucy [HistoryMaker Lucy R. Wilson] said I said something then, but I think that was another trip.  I made another trip down there.  It wasn't the first trip, and as summer went on I had a lady to take care of my boys and, and cook for them, a lady that was a good friend of my wife's [Wilson's first wife, Anna Wilson] and, and cooked for us even then.  And so she, I kept the boys there that next time I went down.  I don't know it might have been two or three weeks after that.  I went down and oh we just had a great time.  Kirk [ph.], I told him I was coming, my buddy, and he and his wife and Lucy and I went out and we bowled and did, did things like that you'd do.  And heck she wasn't, she seemed like you know, she, she seemed like she was maybe ready to do something.  I didn't know, because I knew she had gotten a divorce and I knew, that, that word spreads around the universe.  It doesn't matter whether it's one school to another, one coach's group to another that play up there.  You know they just, they gossip just like women gossip.
Story_ID: 623046
Speaker 1: And so near the end of summer I, I hit her with the question because boy she was, she was hitting right on, right, she was hitting right on time for I could see with all the psychology courses I took and all the, all those courses for defining people's behavior.  I said well god, I look like a--I didn't wanna, I didn't wanna ask and then loo- not get it, not be able to.  I'd rather not do it all if I was gonna, you know, be turned down.  I couldn't stand another defeat right then.  I felt like the other was a defeat with my wife [Wilson's first wife, Anna Wilson] dying and all.  And she had a tumor too.  She had a brain tumor.  So anyway I think the next time I went down I think I, I told Lucy [HistoryMaker Lucy R. Wilson] that, that my boys, "I gotta raise these boys, and you know I'll be honest with you it's a tough job and I, I, I just gotta do it and one of the things I can't do is I just can't cook, but I got a lady that cooks for me, but then I, I don't know how to do this.  I just wanna know if you'd help me raise these boys" (laughter).  I thought that was dumb, I'm telling you.  I really thought that was dumb.  But, I, I couldn't say anything else.  That was the truth.  I mean it boiled right down to being the truth of the whole matter.  And if, if I blamed anybody it would be my sister who put those ideas in my head when she told me you can't raise those boys by yourself.  Nobody had, had introduced that idea to me at all.  I hadn't thought that I couldn't.  Except the big thing I couldn't do was cook, and now I'm coaching, I'm on the road, scouting and all that.  How the heck can I, can I raise boys doing that.  So, that would mean I'd quit coaching, and I was willing to do that.  So, I didn't know how she was gonna take it.  I was ready to run down those stairs and (laughter), and get away from getting kicks.  Bu, she, she was a professional, very much a professional.  She, she was very polite to me.  I didn't, I didn't in any way feel embarrassed, which was good and 'cause I, in those, in that, at that time I could have been embarrassed real easy 'cause I knew I was sticking myself out there and--
Speaker 2: Do you think you had a sympathetic psychologist dealing with your behavior (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, I'll, I'll tell you she was a professional, let me put it that way because everything that we heard--you know Indiana U [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana] is a big university, but there weren't many African Americans there and fewer doctorate candidates, few or very few.  I was the only one in the whole school of hyper, the only African American.  And the field I was in I, I would have been the only black ever received that degree, and well I'm, I'm thinking about that and she's up there getting, you know trying to get her degree finished and all and so I, I was just, I just pray; I'll be honest with you.  I knew, I knew to get on my knees and pray that, that it would be, that it would be fruitful, that if it wasn't then I know that it, it wasn't intended for me to do that.  You know I'm, I'm really putting it on to my religion now that it probably would turn around if, if it was in the book for me to, to get, for her, to her to accept me.  I was go- I was ready, but I tried in every way I could to let her know that it's a whole lot of business, you know.  It wasn't, at my age I wasn't talking about I love you or this that or the thing.  You know a lot of women like that I know and of course she wasn't either, but I knew she'd just gotten a divorce, so I'm betting everything on, on my religion really (laughter).  And she told me she had to, she had to go talk to her mother [Christine O'Neal Nicholson] about it and I, I said to myself well she just need some time.  I probably shocked her and everything, and she needs some time to think about it because I, I couldn't see her at, at her age and all and a professional psychologist to have to go to her mother and ask what she thought, although your closeness and believing in religion and that these are things that God wants you to do makes a lot of things easier if you're trying to do the right thing, and I know that.  So, she told me just what she told you.  I listened to her talking to you.  For a while, I was wishing I was outside, but I couldn't get up and leave and--'cause I thought it sounded, you know I just felt embarrassed or something.
Story_ID: 623047
Speaker 1: But everything worked out though, then so you got (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh golly, it was the best thing that, and, and the funny thing about it, it wasn't, it wasn't just straight out of love or anything, but it was respect.  It was, it was the fact that she [Wilson's second wife, HistoryMaker Lucy R. Wilson] was willing to do it.  I knew her reputation.  You, I can tell you coaches they may be wrong, but they know reputations of people, and hers was just, I mean, I, I don't mean them, I don't mean right at that time, but I mean she didn't know I used to check where she was you know where, where was she working and this that and all that.  You know you do that when you're a coach and you're a scout and all, you know you just put things together.  You wanna know ahead of time what's going on around and for no reason other than being curious and so I knew all that had happened and everything and, and my friend had called me and told me that she was down there and all that, so.  So with me I was, I was planning, I was gonna get the boys a mother and that was the first thing and I told her my boys need somebody that, that I can, that I can have to help me raise them and I'll help you raise your daughter [Jennifer Wilson].  One thing she'll go to school.  She'll go to college.  She go whatever, 'cause I was just that kind of guy.  I, I didn't mind working two jobs with coaching and doing this and doing whatever to, to make it pay off and I was, I didn't save a lot of money during those early years, but I was sending my boys to the best schools to prepare them for a good life.  And even the one that doesn't have a job, he's just looking for a certain kind of job.  He can get a job, and I tell him that, and of course he got good benefits when he, when he left after eighteen years with, with the company, with the company he was with.
Speaker 1: Okay, so now tell us about moving to Ten- now you moved, you, you all got married right--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah well we--
Speaker 1: --in August of '67 [1967]?
Speaker 2: --when she, when she, when she told me what her--see I was, I was home and she called me and told me what her mother [Christine O'Neal Nicholson] said.  I wanted to know what did her mother say, and she told me what her, I wish I'd been right next to her I'll tell you.  That was one of the happiest moments of my life, and, and I tell that, I've told this before to some of my best friends that I have, guys that I've known all my life and, and I like to tell them what a person can do if they, if they believe in you, what they can do and what you can do if it's straight down the line and that's what that was.  I recognized that I had a real professional.  I knew she was even better than she thought she was, because you know some people themselves don't--you know I, I didn't think I was quite as good as I, I really was, really.  I'm not bragging, but I thought that, that you know that I was okay, but I wasn't nothing unusual really.
Story_ID: 623048
Speaker 1: But anyway when she [Wilson's second wife, HistoryMaker Lucy R. Wilson] said she would, I figured, I'm always the figurer, I figured that my man up at Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State University; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee] would also hire her and, and I believe in telling, telling her right down the line and I knew how they figured a couple.  They, they figured a couple that they'd pay you top price if, if your wife was equally qualified they wouldn't quite pay her that much.  They figure that's enough money, you're making, you'll make as much money as I'm making.  And this is the truth.  So, I told--
Speaker 2: That's why you kind of kept it, kept it a secret.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry?
Speaker 2: You kept the marriage a secret until you moved up there right?
Speaker 1: I'm sorry?
Speaker 2: Is that why you kind of kept your marriage a secret until you moved up there?
Speaker 1: That was, that was why, but then I wasn't satisfied with that when she told, that was the part I wanted to correct.  Because we, we made a payment on the, on the apartment that I got her, a good safe environment, but I was not satisfied even then that it was as safe as it should be.  And not only that, I didn't believe in--you know the main thing was she deserved a certain amount of money, not because she's my, my wife, but if she had been my, just my friend and she was coming up there I would have told her how to negotiate with, with them 'cause the president [Walter S. Davis] was my, was like a father to me and he was always trying to teach me something and I would always beat his team even though they had some of the greatest athletes in the world.
Story_ID: 623049
Speaker 1: Now, what's his name, the president of--
Speaker 2: Dr. Davis [Walter S. Davis].
Speaker 1: Dr. Davis of Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State University; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee].
Speaker 2: Dr. Davis used to be the, he was the coach at, at Tennessee State, and then he later became the president of Tennessee State and from the time he saw me play basketball against his school and football, he said, "I wanna make you a president, won't you just get out of athletics--," I was coaching by then--he said, "Get out of athletics and let me make you a president.  You need to be a president."  And I thought all he was trying to do was get me out of coaching because I was about the only team that could beat him on a regular basis, his basketball team.  They won the national championship three years in a row.  Well, the first year they were to go, I mean the first year they went, I was to go, my school [Jackson State College; Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi] was to go.  We, we beat them twice, so we were the top team among the African American teams in our conference.
Speaker 1: NAIA [National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics].
Speaker 2: I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: NAIA.
Speaker 2: This is the NAIA yes.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: This is the NAIA and, but anyway the bottom line was the team from Mississippi State [Mississippi State University, Starkville, Mississippi] went the year before and the governor of the state told them they could never go back.  They, they played against, against Michigan State [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan].  Jumpin' Johnny something was one of their, one of their rebounders for Michigan.
Speaker 1: Was it Johnny Green?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Jumpin' Johnny Green.  Didn't he go to Michigan?
Speaker 1: He's from Dayton.  He's from Dayton, Ohio, too, yeah, yeah, Jumping Johnny Green right, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah he went--he was, he was tremend- I didn't never know him, but I knew his, his athletic powers.  But, anyway they, this team went up there and beat them,--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --beat Michigan State.  This was oak--
Speaker 1: This was in the NCAA [National Collegiate Athletic Association], right?
Speaker 2: No, this, this, this year, this is the NCAA.
Speaker 1: Right, that's what I said.
Speaker 2: Yeah, this was NCAA, yes sir.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: And the thing about it, this guy had an offense that they didn't do any dribbling.  They bounced and they picked and they backdoor you, and this was the real first issue on backdooring in, in big time basketball.  When he came in, I don't know where he got it from, but his, his nickname was Babe [ph.] something and he and I got to be pretty good friends.  But, anyway I don't know how I got to talk about--
Speaker 1: Yeah, you've moved off of the NAI, well, well, Tennessee State you were talking about.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause we were talking about NAIA.
Speaker 1: You were talking about Coach Davis who became the president of Tennessee State being your friend and trying to nego- to negotiate a proper salary for your wife [Wilson's second wife, HistoryMaker Lucy R. Wilson].
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And I, I wanna go back to that except just to say this that because of, of Dr. Davis and seeing what I was able to do against his team, and we always beat them at home, but in Nashville [Tennessee] you just didn't get a team to go in there because he always had the best athletes, best football players that were available.  Even Brud Holland [Jerome H. Holland] coached there a couple of years and he later became president of, of Hampton [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia].  And of course Brud Holland was, was one of my idols and I always wanted to be like Brud.
Story_ID: 623050
Speaker 1: But anyway to get back on track, I, I got, I got to where I could ask Lucy [HistoryMaker Lucy R. Wilson] to marry me.  And boy you talk about a tough assignment.  I'm telling you I fumbled.  I talked like I do now, I talked, I rambled a little bit and sloshed my feet a little bit.  No, I didn't do that, but--and I told her I said, "You know I mentioned to you that I need someone to, to help me raise my boys, and I'll help raise your daughter [Jennifer Wilson] and I wanted to ask you to marry me."  And I didn't put no love in it.  I didn't say anything about love.  I said that, that, "You know I've always respected you even though I acted like I didn't with my best buddy because I always wanted him to talk about you."  It was just one of those funny things that I enjoyed hearing him talk about her.
Speaker 2: Yeah now we, we already talked about that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We've got you at Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State University; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee] trying to negotiate a con- a salary.
Speaker 1: Oh that's right.
Speaker 2: Right, so, so you're already married at this point, so just--
Speaker 1: That's right we're, we're already there and I told Dr.--I had the appointment, of course, and I had--Lucy and I got married on our way up to Tennessee State.  We, we, I didn't tell but I have to tell you this, we stopped by an old country place, a county house, one of those county places and had the county somebody marry us.  I don't know how much it cost, it wasn't much, but I know after we got married they gave us a small bag of soap, Oxydol, toothpaste, stuff like that and Lucy tells this better than I do, but, but when we were driving to get to, to the county 'cause I, I didn't just believe in going all up there and not being married, I called, I got the idea of calling the county courthouse I know they marry people, and this is in Tennessee now in the mountains part.  And when I called them they said no we're, the first one we're closed, and then the second they said but there's another one that stays open for another half hour and if you can make it there I'll call them and tell them a couple is coming over there and so I said okay and I thanked him and all, hung up and we drove to make it to that place, that, the other county courthouse.  And, well the lady, the other thing that was amusing, the lady asked me on the phone, the clerk that I was talking to, said, "Well how old is the girl?"  I said, "Well she's thirty-two."  He said, I mean she said, "You hurry up and get her here now" (laughter).  'Cause she thought she was old to be getting married, you know even though thirty-two is the way you look at it, but you know people thought that maybe, maybe we were a couple running off of fifteen or sixteen or seventeen or something like that.  But anyway, and my wife had bought oh a nice pretty little dress we were gonna get married up there somewhere, but to wear and all, shoot I drove that, that Mercury around those mountain hills and we made it there, we got married and all and we had the book number.  And I didn't wanna anything back--I didn't want any backlash later on.  And so we, I felt great.  I felt that I really had someone that was gonna really help, who was gonna really be a real wife to me.
Story_ID: 623051
Speaker 1: But anyway I told, I told, I lied, I, I, I only lie when it's just absolutely necessary, otherwise I don't lie.  If you believe that, I just told one.
Speaker 2: I believe you.  So, well let's go--
Speaker 1: I told her--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --that I was, that I was gonna tell Pres.  This guy was like my father, and I was gonna tell him this lie that while I was at the airport I met a young lady that was going to Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] to be interviewed for a job.  And I knew Dr. Davis [Walter S. Davis] he was a competitor.  I said, "Heck she's got a Ph.D., she's a, she's a specialist in testing."  He said, "Oh geez, we need a tester for our test," and he's ta- and, and I said, "Now I don't know anything about her or anything."  See I'm thinking well when they ask for the salary that it was gonna be right (laughter), this is the absolute truth.  And so and I told her I said just act, all you have to do, don't say anything, all you--she didn't want to lie see.  I said all you have to do is just don't say anything, just let me, let me be the bad guy telling the lie, but you'll be glad afterwards I'll tell you.  So, this was after, he didn't interview me.  He saw me and welcomed me and gave me the details on all what I was gonna do and all, and after he got through with me and then, then he asked me how much I wanted and I told him how much I had to have (laughter) and--'cause see I'm going to do all his work for him for the next few year, four or five years see.  So, I told him about this lady I met.  I said, "She's attractive, doctor, I'm telling and she's professional, my god she's, but that doggone Fisk I think has got, got an edge on you."  He said, "You think you can get her here [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State University; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee]?  Can you contact her?"  I said, "I think I can.  I think I know where she's staying and I'll call and see if she can--.  When, when do you want her?"  "I want her today.  Have her come today."  That's the kind--I counted on his competitive spirit, see.
Story_ID: 623052
Speaker 1: Well, after they, they signed her [Wilson's second wife, HistoryMaker Lucy R. Wilson] contract and when she was director of testing and head of the counseling center [at Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State University; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee] and oh two or three other jobs--but she, they paid her what she was supposed to earn.  It wasn't, I didn't have anything to do with it.  I was just a friend passing by.  And later on while we were there, I was in the office and he came in there, and he said, "I wanna ask you something, coach."  I called him coach and he called me coach and this is an old gentleman, he's seventy something years old, and he said, "I wanna ask you something and I want you to tell me the truth."  This is Dr. Davis [Walter S. Davis], he said, "Is that young lady I see you with, were you all together before you, you told me that story?"  And I laughed like that and I said, "You know you told me not to lie; I gotta tell you the truth.  She deserves every penny, yes we're married."  You know I wouldn't bring her up here unless we were married, and, and that's why I wanted to get married before I got up, that was important to me that we would be married and, and, but that was a lie and I felt a little ashamed of it, but not too much because why let her take a cut in pay just because she's married to me.  That, that didn't seem right either, so I figured that his rule and my rule, either one are right they'd, they'd balance out (laughter), and she'd get the pay.  So, and then we got that apartment and people were begin- early were beginning to know a little something fishy.  We were together, you know they'd see me with the kids and her, she'd be with the kids.
Speaker 2: I have a question, though.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Now in those days, even now, people, there are people who in practice, if not in theory, suggest that women should not be paid as much as men.  They still, this is still going on.
Speaker 1: That's right, oh yeah.
Speaker 2: And, and so in those days did you feel that women deserved the same pay?
Speaker 1: I did, if they, if they were capable and really could do the job.  You know, some women would have, will have degrees and can't do the job.  I mean if the job is being tough with males or have to be tough sometimes with males, the competition is out there, you're gonna have to fight prejudice, you know, from inside and outside, and if the person can do that they should get more.  And I felt that, and, and I truthfully and I felt that way.  And I did, I always treated when, when I was working as the president [at Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia] I always treated them fair.  Even if they came in married, I treated them based on their qualities.  And you know people began to believe in me.  My wife was telling you how tough it was when we got up here.  Well, she didn't but it was tough and of course they, they didn't know me.
Story_ID: 623053
Speaker 1: You know some (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, let's go back to Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State University; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Oh all right you have to ask me some questions then.
Speaker 2: When we get you here, yeah when we get to Norfolk [Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia] I want you to tell that story.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But we're getting there.  So, how did things go at Tennessee State as assistant to the pre, to President Davis [Walter S. Davis]?
Speaker 1: Well, it went very well.  As a matter of fact, he had me to, they had a program with industry and it was a new program, but Brud Holland [Jerome H. Holland] had told me about it.  Now Brud Holland has his office in New York [New York] in one of the top office buildings with gold on his door, outside metal on the doors and all that stuff and he was a wheel in, in, in, industry especially because he went to school with a lot of those guys at Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York] and a lot of them knew him and they were in power because of their age and, and he was just a hero. That was before so many of the athletes were minorities.  When you found one that was good academically and as well as a tremendous athlete you know they, they appreciated that.  And so Brud Holland was, got to a personal friend of mine.  And, and so his, his, his whole attitude about, about people getting the same salaries or people working together and all that.  But anyway the president gave me this job, told me what he wanted me to do.  He wanted me to build a--develop a film for his university.  'The Role and Scope of Tennessee State University and Higher Education at Tennessee' [ph.], and I produced that film with the help of industry that, that I was just starting the program with.  It, it, it developed into a public relation film where, where faculty and department heads could use it for recruiting students or could use it for chamber of commerce if they were gonna make a speech there.  Because he was smart enough to know that with this, with this college really developing this University of Tennessee at Nashville [Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee], he knew that his place, better hurry up and develop the role and scope.  What would our responsibility be, not, not when the state asks us, to have it defined and have it out there in black and white and, and let it be there for a number of years before any problem come.  He could anticipate that school downtown developing into a huge school.  It was not reason why it wouldn't, but I didn't feel we were in competition with them because actually we were a historically black university [HBCU].  We had white students there, but we, we weren't counting on them to come.  If they wanted to, they were welcome, and that's just the way it was at, at Tennessee, but in the future he wanted to protect it.  So, that's one of the things he wanted me to do and a professional film.  I, I got some of the people in this cluster company where the companies made film and all.  I got them to help me with the film, and we went through the city [Nashville, Tennessee] to talk to the city leaders on the importance of Tennessee State and how they saw our role and scope, how are our students, what do they mean.  I could quote some of them.  So--
Speaker 2: Well one thing about Tennessee State, I think that the whole nation knew about was the Tigerbelles women's track team.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that Coach Temple [Ed Temple] put together (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's right, oh yeah.  And he was, he was in college when I was and so we knew each other and they all loved Dr. Davis.  He looked, he, he was president then, but he looked out for the athlete, athletes.  They had the best food.  They had good food before you had table tables.  It was unbelievable the food that they had, and the other schools didn't have.  So, he was just ahead of his time, that's the truth.  And in addition to that role and scope, I brought in this industry program that, that Bud Holland told me about.  And many of our schools hadn't gotten into that.  They called it the cluster, C-L-U-S-T-E-R, the cluster program where we clustered with industry men represent, the representatives of industry at a high level.  We knew you're not gonna get the president or vice president, but below that you're gonna get some top notch people who will tell you about your students, who will tell them I mean, will tell, we'll tell them about our student's quality.  We had an engineering school, one of the first historically black schools with a top notch ranked engineering school.  I don't know what it's like now.  I haven't I haven't even been around it or anything.  But, at that time, they were wheeling and dealing and, and boy those kids were, were doing a heck of a job becoming engineers.  And so anyway those were the things he wanted me to do.  That's, he, he pushed me into that and so I started right way.  I just took off.  I didn't teach any courses.
Story_ID: 623054
Speaker 1: But then as he [Walter S. Davis] got sick, he, he en- he enlarged my, what he wanted me to do [at Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State University; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee].  I took over meetings for him at, at downtown club, at the banks where he was on the board.  I got a lot of visibility.  I made--on TV one of the times I was being interviewed and I bragged about the country music people, and I bragged about what was the guy's name, Lucy [Wilson's second wife, HistoryMaker Lucy R. Wilson]?  Oh golly the country music singer that was so great.  I can't think of his name right now.  Oh god, what was his name?  I'll think of it, but I, I bragged about him, and he was a great country, he, he'd been in prison years earlier.
Speaker 2: Johnny Cash.
Speaker 1: Johnny Cash.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Johnny Cash.  And he had been in prison; a lot of people didn't know that, but he admitted and you know he was from Mississippi.  And when he found out I worked in Mississippi [at Jackson State College; Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi], I, I would get so I'd act like I lived, that, that Mississippi was my own and boy we developed a relationship that couldn't be beat.  And he introduced me to his wife [June Carter Cash] and all the other people who were in power in, in the country music business.
Speaker 2: In Nashville [Tennessee].
Speaker 1: In Na- I'm talking about just in Nashville.  I'll tell you doc, and, and, and at the same time I made friends with, with our champ, the boxer, Oh god.
Speaker 2: Muhammad Ali.
Speaker 1: Muhammad Ali.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: See his uncle and I went to school together in Kentucky.  I went to Kentucky--
Speaker 2: Kentucky State [Kentucky State College for Negroes; Kentucky State University, Frankfort, Kentucky].
Speaker 1: --State, and he's from Louisville [Kentucky] see and his uncle has the same last name and I asked him--
Speaker 2: Clay [Nathaniel Clay], yeah.
Speaker 1: --him was that his nephew, he said yeah, and I wanted to get to know him.  So, that was before he got to be as big as he was and I invited him down to Tennessee State to give a speech to the kids.  Everybody, all the kids loved him.  They followed him around like he was pied piper when he'd come to Nashville.  When he, when he was in Nashville, the kids from Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] would go wherever he was.  The kids from Tennessee would go wherever Muhammad Ali was.  So, I decided that I was gonna raise some money, and I had the governor, the president, the man that was governor during that time, Johnny Cash and his wife.  Oh I had three or four others, and I had brought back some of the elderly ladies who were in the Grand Ole Opry [Nashville, Tennessee] who, not in the Grand who were in the, the singers that they have on their campus.  The singers that, that were relatives that went to Europe that sang to the, to the, to the heads of some of the governments that were some of, what do you call them presidents or what, but they were kings.  Some of them were kings.  Some of them were chancellors and what not.  They went to England.  They went to Ireland.  They went to France.
Speaker 2: You talking about the Jubilee Singers [Fisk Jubilee Singers]?
Speaker 1: Jubilee Singers.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, we'd go the Grand-- the new Grand Ole Opry and I have Muhammad Ali.  I have Johnny Cash and his wife.  I had some people that had never been together.  Anyone could have drawn the crowd.  And the Jubilee, old Jubilee Singers were gonna sing with the young Jubilee Singers.  And this was at the New Grand Ole Opry out, out in the suburbs of Nashville.  And that was a night, I told Muhammad and Muhammad could say some of the wrong things if you weren't, if you didn't tutor him.  If you tutored him, he was right on target and I told Muhammad I said, "Now listen this is the governor don't, don't crack any bad jokes, brag on him for me, 'cause I wanna get some money from him for our school."  You know that, if you gave him the script he would, he'd come down on that script he talked about and everybody loved him.  I mean he had a personality that they just, just fell in love with him and he talked to Johnny Cash and he talked to the governor that was there.  I was so glad he put his arm around the governor and the governor got up and spoke.  So, this is at the Grand Ole Opry and the performance and we raised so much money that it wasn't even funny.  And of course the company scam, the companies that we had, no that, oh God I messed up.  This was Fisk that did that.  But, I did have Johnny Cash and the others come to Tennessee State and the leaders, I'll, I'll get back on that and make it quick.
Speaker 2: I was wondering about the Jubilee Singers helping Tennessee State, but that was for their--
Speaker 1: Yeah, that was for them.  That was, that was for Fisk.  That was later.
Speaker 2: That's all right. We, we understand that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 623055
Speaker 1: The whole--the bottom line was that, that at Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State University; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee] we, we finished our plan, no, no pressure.  Nobody was asking us what our role and scope was.  We just came out with it.  And we were the only school in Tenne- in Nashville [Tennessee] to come out with the role and scope of your university.  And after that several colleges came out, you know because you got five or six colleges in, in Nashville and how, how do you fit?  What area should you command?  You know, we're not talking about that yet, but we figured that might be in the future; Dr. Davis [Walter S. Davis] did.
Speaker 2: Well you got Vanderbilt [Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee], Belmont [Belmont University, Nashville, Tennessee], I don't know what else there is.
Speaker 1: Yeah, oh yeah and the other school that our kids went to in high school, in junior high.  What was the name of that school?
Speaker 2: (HISTORYMAKER LUCY R. WILSON):  Peabody.
Speaker 1: Peabody College [Peabody College of Education and Human Development, Nashville, Tennessee]--
Speaker 2: Right, Peabody.
Speaker 1: --one of the best teaching colleges in the country.  So, but anyway this was Nashville and I stayed there for four years.  I was gonna stay five.  And, and I brought in money.  I had more money in my budget than the president in his budget.  I mean his spending budget, what he could spend for himself or travel and that kind of thing, and because these guys would put a certain amount of what they gave to the school, earmark it for my budget so I could visit their companies, so I could tell their bosses what a good job they were doing and how representative they are and this--man that word got around and I did this before the other schools started it, because it hadn't come out yet to the state school, but it was on its way because my, my man in New York, the football player that went to, that, that played at Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York] told me it was gonna come.  He, he saw it, and he talked to some of the leaders in the area.  So, with everything that I was able to do in those years and get around to, to all the industries and I had a big banquet one night where, where we sponsored it.  We didn't ask them to give us anything for the banquet.  We sponsored the banquet.  They would invite me to their business if I hadn't been to meet their bosses and their bosses' boss.  It got so I even met the president of GM Corporation [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company] and Ford [Ford Motor Company], you know.  And it just hit right on, just at the perfect time.  And of course that can give you more publicity than regular classes or doing something in the university that only the university knows, but it began to spread out and people were wondering and some of the, some of the colleges began to do it, but I got the head start on them by getting these companies committed.  And even to the extent that I, I wanted a car.  And my car was getting old.  I had a station wagon then with all the boys and girls I had, and so I decided I wanted a station wagon, one of them Country Squires from Ford [Ford Country Squire].  And the man that was representing the Ford told me I could get it at cost up there, something like three thousand something dollars, thirty-eight hundred dollars and some cents.  That was what he'd buy it for working for Ford, and so they sold it to me for that.  I paid him, I was able to pay him cash for it.  I had this fine Ford.  And then later on, two years later, I got the people from General Motors.  I always wanted, I didn't--I wanted a Cadillac.  I just wanted it.  I was just like my cousin [John Merritt], he had a Cadillac and I wanted one, but I couldn't afford one.  I told a representative from Cadillac that I wanted one.  I'd be the best representative that you have, and I don't mind paying, I wanna pay for it what you pay for it if you bought one.  And I even got better, I got it, I got it just about as cheap as I got that Ford.  So, after I got that Ford from one company the year before, two years later I had a Cadillac and so we had a new Cadillac and a new Ford and a new house.
Story_ID: 623056
Speaker 1: Believe it or not we were gonna have a new baby [April Wilson Woodard] (laughter).  I had four boys and, and one daughter [Jennifer Wilson], and I didn't tell Lucy [Wilson's second wife, HistoryMaker Lucy R. Wilson], but I said doggone it, first I fussed, "I don't, you didn't know anything.  I thought you knew something."  'Cause I told her I didn't want any more kids (laughter), children.  But boy once, once it happened Lucy will tell you I'm telling you I was, I didn't let her go anywhere unless I was with her, helping her up the stairs.  If snow on the ground, I'd drive her to her door on campus [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State University; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee], now, and let her, and help her up the stairs until she got in the building and all that kind of stuff.  And things with us were going just as well as things on my job were going.  She came right, right in and, and when we first got there we lived in a dormitory, furnished dormitory room, but it, it was in a dormitory.  You know the noise other students make on the other floors, and then our kids, there was another lady that worked for the president [Walter S. Davis] for years and she didn't have any family, so he let her have an apartment in this dormitory.  She was on the first floor.  So, but anybody on the second, third, and fourth, and we're on the sixth, even the sixth floor would upset her.  So, we went through those first years in that situation.  And of course it wasn't long be, after about three years I guess, no, yeah we were getting ready to have a baby so that must have been three years, wasn't it that--
Speaker 2: (LUCY R. WILSON):  Two.
Speaker 1: Huh?  Lord, I didn't know it was that soon.  I was good, wasn't I?  So two years and in, on those two years I told Lucy I wanted us to be in a house.  I wanted us to move out of that dormitory and I didn't care how long I was there we were gonna get us a house.  But she like a good person, I'm not gonna tell a story, I usually tell a story right here, but I'm not gonna tell because Lucy found out about a house that was out just past the Grand Ole Opry [Nashville, Tennessee].  I must have been living right or doing something right, but when we went out--it was advertised in the paper and when we went out to see it.  It was in an area that I told Lucy, "They're not gonna sell us that house."  "You reckon?"  I said, "No."  I drove up about a block, country block, 'cause it was in the country, and I said, "Well he can't beat me up I'm gonna go there."  It had for rent, for sale on it out front and I pulled up that long driveway, it had a split rail fence around it, up around that driveway and it had three, three carports and he had a swimming pool in the back and he had five acres right behind it and all and I told Lucy, "Don't get out of the car I might have to fight this guy."  She was expecting, see and I didn't want her to get in any kind of trouble, and I was joking about fighting him I wasn't gonna fight him, even if he refused to sell it to me I was gonna (unclear).  In my introductory statement, that's what I said.  I told Lucy to stay in the car, I'm gonna ring the bell and talk to the guy.  If he doesn't want to sell me the house there will be no argument or nothing.  I, I couldn't stand as much bad publicity as he could.  I couldn't stand it, and I--so anyway when I told him who I was, where I worked, and that we were interested in this house and I wanted to come out and talk to him and that my wife is out in the car and I left her out in the car because I didn't know whether you and I were gonna fight.  And he was a little guy and he laughed, you know.  He said, "Come on in, get your wife and come on in."  And he had just made millions of dollars on an investment that he made, millions of dollars.  That house was too small for him.  He was a real estate man.  His name was Hooper [ph.], well known in Tennessee, well known at the Grand Ole Opry.  And what he was buying he bought an Antebellum home and redid, re- refurbished the whole Antebellum home with modern lighting, modern electricity, modern floors.  Everything was, was like it was built yesterday, but it looked like it was built in, in 1800 and something or 1780, and that's what he was moving to.
Story_ID: 623057
Speaker 1: So, he [Hooper (ph.)] had so much, he had so much money and, and he was a Christian, the white gentleman.  And I told him I said, "You know I don't wanna make a mess or anything, but my wife and I, you can see my wife is expecting a little girl [April Wilson Woodard]."  That's what I told her we're gonna have; you couldn't tell in those days.  And that I don't wanna have any trouble, but I wanna buy your house I see the for sale sign.  He said, "If you got the money you can buy it," just like that (laughter).  Oh boy I think of that.  So now, now I'm in negotiations.  See my whole attitude and demeanor has changed and I ask him what did he want for it?  And I told my wife out in the car before we got there, before I knew the situation I said now I'll be the good guy and you be the bad guy, you know you, you don't like this, you don't like that when we start talking about the money.  And he, they, his wife offered us coffee, and we had coffee to drink and she brought some hors d'oeuvres out there and all.  Just a stranger gonna buy, wanting to buy the house if I can afford it, that's what he said.  So, I saying god, god I wonder what he wants for it, it just might be my luck.  So, what he wanted for the house I was ready to buy it right then.  He had so much money he wasn't worrying about how much.  He, he was thinking about what he put in it himself.  He had contractors that built it and this and that (unclear), including the land.  And Lucy [HistoryMaker Lucy R. Wilson] went into her act, "I don't know, that's a little bit more money."  I said, "No Lucy, it's great let's, let's buy this house."  She was going by what I told her before we went in the house, and I'm changing the whole rule because it's right where I want it (laughter), good gracious.  I didn't even want him to come down any.  I didn't want to make him angry, that's how great it was.  I wish we had some pictures to show him of it.  It was, it was just what we needed for our family, a new daughter coming in the family and she was born, we're at, we had moved to the house and everything.
Speaker 2: So, what year is this that your daughter was born?
Speaker 1: What year was that 19--?
Speaker 2: (LUCY R. WILSON):  (Unclear).
Speaker 1: Huh.
Speaker 2: Sixty-nine [1969].
Speaker 1: (LUCY R. WILSON):  Sixty-nine [1969].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That was 1969 and, and the people began to talk about us living in a dorm with all those children and this and that and all that stuff, but shoot we bought that doggone house and we didn't have to do anything to it did we honey?  Not anything.  The rubs were immaculate, nothing with expenses, equipment.  And what I loved were the li- outdoor pool and I, I had built a barn out there, and used some of my graduate students to help me build a barn and, my students at Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State University; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee] and we--
Speaker 2: Now, so this is about the time that things are kind of changing in the South, I mean the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, things were changing--
Speaker 2: --attitudes were changing a little bit.
Speaker 1: This guy was an unusual man.
Speaker 2: It's a year after Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated in Memphis.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: A year after Dr. King was assassinated in Memphis, Tennessee, one year later 1969.
Speaker 1: No he wasn't, he wasn't murdered.
Speaker 2: He was murdered in '68 [1968], you know,
Speaker 1: Yes he was, yes he was, yes, yes--
Speaker 2: --so it's a year after Dr. King died.
Speaker 1: --'cause I used to go to that hotel [Lorraine Motel, Memphis, Tennessee].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: He was murdered in Memphis.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Let's see was he, was he, he wasn't murdered yet was he honey?
Speaker 2: (LUCY R. WILSON):  Yes he was.
Speaker 1: Was he?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (LUCY R. WILSON):  Yes.
Speaker 2: He'd been murdered a year when this happened.
Speaker 1: (LUCY R. WILSON):  You were in the dorm when he was murdered.
Speaker 2: Right.  He was killed in '68 [1968] yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, well I, I lo--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, but anyway yeah but this, this man was--he showed his religion by the way he talked to us.  He didn't have any reason to talk about how he tried to treat people right, how he tried to be fair with people.  And then, he wasn't looking for an award.  But with all the people that criticized him, here he was the one that, that hit this big money.  He invested his money in it and boy went off the, went off the scale.
Story_ID: 623058
Speaker 1: By 1969, you're pretty settled down in Nashville [Tennessee] right and you, and you've got, got a house, a new daughter [April Wilson Woodard], and so is there any--is there another story about Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State University; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee] or should we move on or?
Speaker 2: Yeah I moved, I hadn't been to Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] yet.
Speaker 1: Yeah right, right.
Speaker 2: See and Dr. Davis [Walter S. Davis] got sick--I want take as long--Dr. Davis got sick and he, he subsequently had to leave and it was just all kinds of guys fighting over the presidency--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and they knew I was in a good slot.  They were trying to cut my throat, and once he was gone all my power was gone, see 'cause my power was through him, what he delegated to me see.  And so I told my wife [Wilson's second wife, HistoryMaker Lucy R. Wilson], I said, "You know I think I'm gonna go back into coaching."  And she told me, "No don't go back into coaching."  See I, I didn't have confidence how things would work out from there.  I thought that because my main stay was, was sick and left that I was shot to pieces and it, it, it was hurtful because everybody was trying to, everybody that been with him all those years was trying to get the job or had somebody they wanted to give the job to and so it was so, it was so tough and so bad that before I could do anything the president of Fisk called me, called me and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now who was the president then?
Speaker 2: Jim Lawson [James Lawson].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Jim Lawson had been the president for at that time about fifteen, sixteen, seventeen years or maybe long, maybe twenty and, but he was, he wasn't well either but he had found out what I did for Tennessee State and it was a state school.  You see people, industry don't give as much to state school, not to African American state schools as they would give to a private school, and that's the way it was then anyway and so places that I would go and, and they would tell me that, that would just leave me out in the cold.  So anyway, the president asked me to come down to see him after work and I went down to his house.  Now, mind you, when summer rolled around it was summertime then I was coaching my boys in Little League.  Here I'd been a college coach and I had my sons and all these other kids in that area, in town, kids out of, out of the ghetto and I'm coaching them and developing a baseball team, a Little League baseball team and my wife would come and bring lemonade and sandwiches.  We'd buy the boys pizza and, after the games, and, and of course they had some coaches that were coaching didn't, didn't, couldn't do all of that.  But, my wife would handle all the food part and we bought a motor home, since I didn't have to pay for a car, we bought a motor home with all the kids and, and we began to enjoy life.  Because when I went to see the president, he was so nice.  He didn't hem, hem around the bend.  He wanted to know if I'd come to work for him and do the same things I was doing at Nashville, I mean I was doing at Tennessee State.
Speaker 1: Tennessee State.
Speaker 2: This is in Na- and well I, I knew it was a private school and I didn't know if they could pay me what I was making, 'cause pay was critical to me then.  It was, although, although I, I figured, I figured some ways I could make some more money that I didn't figure at Tennessee State that if it wasn't right I could, I could make it right to myself.  But when he gave me this letter of, for--of employment and showed the figure on there I still, it still didn't look like it was right until I took it home and showed it to Lucy.  She says, "You accepted, didn't you?"  I said, "No, I didn't accept, I had to talk to you first.  I didn't know if you wanted to go to Fisk or what."  You know she's, well she's got an independent job.  Right now at the same time Lucy is director of the health programs like dentistry for the State of Tennessee.  She, she have to later give you the exact title of her job.  Well, she was working at the University of Tennessee [University of Tennessee at Nashville; Nashville State University, Nashville, Tennessee] first, then you know publicity got around on who I was and who she was, and now she's at the University of Tennessee, she's leaving, she's gonna leave Tennessee State when I leave.  I'm a little ahead of my story in sequence, but anyways she said, "You signed the contract didn't you?"  (Laughter) I said, "No, I was waiting."  She said, "Well you sign that doggone contract and take it to him tomorrow."  'Cause my contract would be up in, in, at the end of that summer, and my man was gone.  I didn't know--I could have kept my job as a teacher, but I didn't want to go back in a classroom and I'd be getting behind from reaching my goal.
Story_ID: 623059
Speaker 1: Now what year is this when you go to Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee]?  What year is it?
Speaker 2: Was it '69 [1969], honey?
Speaker 1: (LUCY R. WILSON):  Seventy [1970].
Speaker 2: When I went to Fisk?
Speaker 1: (LUCY R. WILSON):  Seventy [1970].
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy [1970], okay.
Speaker 1: So, so what it was like four or five years at Fisk, at Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State University; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee]?  I think it was four, five, four or five I don't know.  Anyway, that next morning I, I dropped my wife [Wilson's second wife, HistoryMaker Lucy R. Wilson] off to work and dropped the kids off at their schools they were going to, and I went right back to the president's [James Lawson] office and sat there until he came to work with my contract signed (laughter).  And--
Speaker 2: Okay, were there any unique chall- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you give me--
Speaker 2: I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Did you give me the signal this time?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah we're, we're started already.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: I just, I just--what were some of the challenges at Fisk?  What kind of things did you have to deal with at Fisk, the same--?
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: I know you were doing the same job, but were the challenges different?
Speaker 1: It was broadened.  I was running the university.  He'd come to work around one o'clock and leave around three; I'd been there since nine.  So, I, I was doing everything.  What I'd learned at this point at Tennessee was helpful, don't get I, I handled committee meetings and stuff and did, and did the main cluster job because I think that's what gave me the, the exposure and that's why he wanted me to come to Fisk because of the private school and that reputation.  It was no way I couldn't succeed, and with him making me almost a president and everybody knew, you know he let everybody know what I was there for and we, I, my job just took off.  I'd gotten my practice at Tennessee State, but now I'm in a situation where everybody is with me.  Their money is going to be dependent on how well I do with the, with the Quakers, because one of the things he wanted me to do was to renew our relationship with them.  We had a rich history with the Quakers and the way they, they did, what they did for the school in terms of money and energy and taught school and everything at Fisk.  A lot of people didn't know what history.  He wanted me to do that.  He wanted me to visit all the churches where they had big time alumni and get--recruit students speaking at the churches in Cleveland [Ohio] and Chicago [Illinois] and Detroit [Michigan].  I'd go in and get my wife, she'd pick me up at the airport, and I would, I would give her my bag of dirty clothes and she'd give me a clean bag and I'd catch another plane going to Chicago or wherever.  And I loved it at first, but then I started getting so tired.  I didn't know where I was, but I loved it.  I loved it because it was a challenge of getting people to do something you want them to do, to sell something to them, a university, a school for your children, for your, for your kids that are finishing high school to go.  They had lost that zest and all.  And with the Quakers, I made a speech, I, I don't, I can't remember what they called it, but they, they didn't have an assembly or anything.  It was a different name they had, but they had all, all the leadership of the Quaker, of the Quakers in Pennsylvania, all over the whole state came to a meeting and they invited me to speak to them about Fisk, about their ancestors because some of them didn't know what their ancestors had done.  We had the history.  We had names at Fisk.  I got all of that.  See Tennessee State didn't have that.  It was a private school that had that.  So between going to the Quakers churches or whatever they call them, I forget now, they weren't churches I don't think.
Speaker 2: Meeting houses, I think, yeah.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Meeting house, I think.
Speaker 1: Meeting house, it was meeting house.  Between going there and then going to the alumni and going to the big churches of the, of, of, the big churches in the cities of Chicago, Cleveland, and Washington [D.C.] and places like that where we had Fisk students.  We had the list of students where they were coming from and who their parents were.  They were doctors and they were lawyers and they were this, and that was a heck of a crew to get, get you lined up.
Story_ID: 623060
Speaker 1: And I was learning really how to do it through my cluster program.  I developed one on campus at Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee].  Well what I did, I took my people that I had at Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State University; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee], I didn't take them away from Tennessee State, but when they came to Tennessee now they'd go to Tennessee State and they'd come to Fisk.  And then the program dwindled so at Tennessee State that they start just coming to my program, and they would come out, swim.  These are representatives of the industry.  A lot of them were African Americans, some of them were not.  And Lucy [Wilson's second wife, HistoryMaker Lucy R. Wilson] got to meet a lot of them because I'd bring them out to the house and have a little repast after we left the campus and after we left the work and all.  Those guys like to have a sip now and then, and they could do that in my home.  And it was just getting to be more powerful that, that now that I'm at Fisk.  They lost the benefit of, of engineers, but they were still getting people in business and top notch students in business, and so that was the other thing that they would get.  They'd get the business and the public relations.  And I had it wrong and this is where we had this big blowout for Fisk, for the, for the pioneer choral pe- group [Fisk Jubilee Singers] that went, well some of them were related to those who went to Europe and sang for, in Scotland and sang in England to the heads of state.  And then I got into the whole system it was a different atmosphere.  These were private school kids.  Some of the things I didn't like.  They were, they were, they had more, more finances, and they were more--parents were professionals and in order for them to be able to even go to Fisk they had to come from parents that were making darn good money.  So, along with that and, and that Fisk even had a good name and see University of Tennessee at, at Nashville [Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee] wasn't afraid of Fisk.  They're a state school; we're a private school.  So, that eased the tension there, and my wife was working there, although she left and went to the state job where she travelled all over Tennessee, which was, was scaring me because they were beginning to like her better than they liked me.  And, and I had to say, "Lucy don't you know I'm the one that supposed to be a president now?"  And I'm joking.  She, she never, she never even acted like she even wanted one, although she could have been a tremendous president, really, now that they have women presidents.  So, that was where I produced this show at the Grand Ole Opry [Nashville, Tennessee] where I had the governor and all these dignitaries.
Speaker 2: Muhammad Ali.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah and Muhammad bragged on the governor, put his arm around the governor.  And he'd just been elected governor, and it was in a tight race and he knew how to jive him.  He knew how to tell him things that he could make up and it sound so true, you know, and, and the people loved him and this was after he went through the problem with the courts, because they, in their hearts they agreed with his stance.  Most of them agreed with his stance of what--how he felt about what they wanted to do to him, take his, take his money and his profession.   And the [U.S.] Supreme Court didn't have an official ruling, but they gave a group what their ruling could be if, if, if it continued where you couldn't do certain kinds of things because if it ever came to them they would declare that you're wrong in what you're trying to do and that was a whole question of, of what, what women could become, what men, African American men could become.  And mind you, I had two or three judges who knew judges in, in Nashville [Tennessee], knew judges at Supreme Justice, and they were able to get information for me about how, as professionals, and that it would be out anywhere.  This was just information for them.  It's surprising what, what they give out to their old buddies that they've known in college and all that, and of course they're sworn to a whole lot of things.  And the way things turn out in our, in our situation here in America is they almost have to know what's gonna happen before it happens because the moves they make and, and what they decide to do suddenly, which wasn't legal, but it's, it's gonna be legal.  So, anyway they--I was there, and I gained more experience.
Story_ID: 623061
Speaker 1: Lucy [Wilson's second wife, HistoryMaker Lucy R. Wilson] helped me with my speeches.  Matter of fact she wrote my speeches for me and, and when, when, when I got to be president of the univer- here [Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia] she wrote all my speeches.  Of course, I paid her, I paid her.  I, I got somebody to mop the floors and did all that and so she didn't have to do that, that was my way of paying her and I'm joking for the sake of the record (laughter).  She would kill me if I left here, but I wouldn't.  No she's, she's steady the, the woman behind me.  I, and I would tell people.  I'd give a speech and tell them about her and how she came to my aid.  A lot of people thought all the children were hers.  They thought we'd been married all those years, and I, I didn't, I didn't feel right not letting them know what, what I did or what we did, and they shocked.  Every Sunday we were at our church that we went to, we took a whole pew.  And when this little baby girl [April Wilson Woodard] came, I had those four boys and one bigger girl that was three years old [Jennifer Wilson], but I had that little baby girl I had to carry it in, in the church, not to the church, in the church and I'd hold her for a few minutes, and when she'd started crying I'd give her to her mother.  But anyway it was, it was, if I'd ever had any bad luck or any, any, anybody had ever done anything that was distasteful or hateful to me growing up or any, anywhere in my life, I felt like my, the Lord, and I, and I believe in God, pointed out who I should marry.  I didn't know--you know, you never know for sure, but I'm telling you she--and I embarrass her a little bit saying this--but she was, she was just something special.  She, the only way I could say it as if she was 6'9" and you were counting on her to make the NBA [National Basketball Association] and in her first year she made the All-Stars and, and took you to the national championship or, or the pro championship, well that was Lucy.
Speaker 2: She's the Magic Johnson of marriage (laughter).
Speaker 1: She, she was Magic Johnson of my life.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And because--
Speaker 2: Now, now, now let's see, let me--
Speaker 1: All right go ahead.
Speaker 2: --let me get you to--
Speaker 1: And I'm gonna try to talk a little, little less and answer quickly and stop.
Story_ID: 623062
Speaker 1: How did you come to leave Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] and go to Norfolk, come to Norfolk State [Norfolk State University, Norfolk Virginia]?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, I still wanted to be a president, and my boss at Fisk I would never had taken his job, because a couple of my enemies tried to tell him that I was there to take his job.  And before, he never said anything to me, but when I found out, it was tough.  That was back home growing up in Amsterdam [New York] and these were Italians, not blacks.  That's the way I dealt with sometime, sometime I didn't.  But I went to him and I told him it was one guy in particular who the president and he were close; he was a scientist.  When I came on the scene, naturally, I won't say naturally, but the president shifted to me, and Lucy [Wilson's second wife, HistoryMaker Lucy R. Wilson] and, and, and he and his wife we'd go out together and where as he used to be in it, into the number, and he didn't like that.  So, he told a rumor that I was there to take his job, and I found out about it.  I did everything short of punching him in the mouth.  I couldn't afford to do that; I'd never get to be a president.  I did everything but that and told him to stay out of my way, don't come anywhere, we're at Fisk together don't come anywhere I'm around.  You see me, get out of the way.  I was, I was, I was hurt and angry, and that was the first time anything that deceitful was done to me by an African American, and, and so the president I didn't tell him.  He, he asked me, says, "They tell me you were getting ready to whoop up my top scientist."  I said, "Oh you know that, I didn't intend to tell you doctor, but yeah."  He was, he was telling me that I was here to take your job.  That's your friend telling me, telling people that I was here, not to cooperate with me 'cause I was trying to undermine Dr. Lawson [James Lawson].  Lawson was like my father.  He could have been my father.  I look just like him or he looked like me.  So anyway I, I told him that and he said, "Well okay."  He didn't say anything.  He didn't say yah or nay, but when I, when I told him, when I told Dr. Lawson that, "You're, you're just like my father now, you're taking his place and do you think I'd do that to my father?"  He said, "No I never thought you'd do that."  He said, "I heard it."  I said, "But I just heard it recently."  Some of my friends on campus told me, and it was good I didn't whoop him because that was, I was, I'd went back to my old days, hadn't done much of that and I didn't want to do it then.  'Cause how am I gonna be a university president fighting?
Story_ID: 623063
Speaker 1: So what had happened that you got the job at Norfolk State [Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia]?  What (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Opened up.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Did they call you, I mean did they, did they do a search or did you apply?
Speaker 2: No, I applied, I applied there after scouting it out.  I sent a good friend of mine that I was gonna take with them, and I had him go down there as commencement and check it out to see what it was like.  It tells you a lot when you see a university's commencement.  And, and so when he gave me, he gave me the report, I applied for Kentucky State [Kentucky State University, Frankfort, Kentucky] and for, and for Norfolk State.  And actually, they both came through about the same time.  One of them, Norfolk State sent me a letter, not a contract, a letter saying they wanted to interview me, and the chairman of the search committee at my alma mater, Kentucky State, told me they were having a meeting and they were gonna elect me president of my alma mater.  And of course that's where I always wanted to go back to, but like Lucy [Wilson's second wife, HistoryMaker Lucy R. Wilson] tell--told me and tells me the Lord knew best because I didn't know I had some enemies there that I had from the time I was a student and played ball.  And they were in power in the administration and in the, and in the faculty.  But anyway, she gave me a very, very objective way to figure it out.  They were talking about Monday and, and the offer was if everything is acceptable, at least acceptable we want you to make a trip here, or we wanna make a trip there and, and if, if, if at least your candidate then we wanna send, we wanna, we, we'll send you a letter to the effect that, because I told them I couldn't, I couldn't stop trying to get another job if I didn't have--you, you got the job.  So, the chairman of the search committee, I guess through people that worked at Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] in the old days had heard what I was doing there and they were grooming me to be president at Fisk and the kind of job I, I had done at Tennessee [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State University; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee].  You know that kind of word gets around, and a, a team came to visit, to visit us and I guess about five men and what two or three women were there.  And they saw where we were living.  Everything was--everything I put to religion and to the way I'd been living and the way I was trying to do the right thing about people.  I, I felt these good things were happening to me because of that.  And when those guys came, the word at, at Han- at Norfolk State was that we were living in an old piece of house and run down and that we owed everybody in town and this, that, and the other. So they didn't want me to be president, some, some group.  I didn't know that was going on, and that's the way they, that's the way politics operate, at least, I don't know, I, I won't say on our camp- but that's the way they operated in that situation at, at--(unclear).  Even though the chairman told me he was, that I would get it.  Well, they came and saw our house (laughter), one of them said, "You gonna leave this?"  I said, "Yeah I'm leaving for the job, not a house."  They didn't even have a house for the president.  The old man [Lyman Beecher Brooks] lived across the street and built his own--well he had the veterans to build his house.  I knew how he did it for a little of nothing.  You know how the veterans were in school at that time.  He let them in without tuition and this and that and talked them into--you know they, they had a tremendous program for, for that kind of area, that area of expertise.
Story_ID: 623064
Speaker 1: The old man [Lyman Beecher Brooks] that was there had his group that wanted a certain guy and that's the way it is at a lot of these places.  And, and there was a group there that wanted me.  So, if it was on who had done the most to be ready for it, it was clearly me.  The other guy was a scientist.  He was working, he was working for the government in one of their plants or one of their, not campuses, but one of their educational facilities.  He was a smart guy, but he had no experience at being a university president at all.  He didn't have--I didn't have a case on it until I went to Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State University; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee], what was behind it and how you had to work with the politicians and this--well all that I loved, so that was up my alley.  So, anyway they had, this team came, they came to our church and talked.  They came to our church, and we were in church when they showed up.  I didn't know they were coming, and, and they, you know how you do in church they, they give their names and where they're from for all visitors and these six, five guys and one woman or four guys and two women were all from Norfolk State University [Norfolk, Virginia], board of visitors, at the, at the church.  You know how this is going over with anything else that's happening in, in my educational job.  So then I had to tell, I had to tell Pres [James Lawson] then that I was being considered seriously for the job in two places.
Speaker 2: How did he feel about you leaving?  Was he--
Speaker 1: Well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) upset about it or what is--
Speaker 1: No, because he knew I came there to learn to be a president.  I, I, I didn't approach him, but I approached my, my president at Tennessee [Walter S. Davis] who wanted me to come.  He always asking me every time he'd see me when you gonna come, I wanna make you a president.  I almost waited too long, 'cause you don't get the opportunities often to get paid and then do a, do his job.  His failing health, and then I had to buck people that were older than I was sometime and been there longer and here I am, you know, learning to be a pre- they knew what I was doing.  I was his assistant.
Story_ID: 623065
Speaker 1: What do you think finally sold you to the Norfolk State [Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia] group?
Speaker 2: Well, I wouldn't have that problem, but at the same time I knew I was gonna have a problem with the president [Lyman Beecher Brooks] that just was retired.  He didn't want to retire, but he was making a lot of mistakes in all from what I understand, and the people loved him.  He was, he was a good old country boy one of those kind of guy.  School wasn't going anywhere at that point.  Whatever the state would give him, he'd take.  He wasn't hustling for what he should get or how he should do it or anything.  All, all he did he was running it like he would run a high school or like he'd been running it during other times.  These were new days.  The political scene was changing.  We didn't have a black president, but at the same time we had men in key slots in industry and key slots with various organizations that were powerful in this country, and some of them were graduates of these schools.  So, when we, we made two trips here.  We made that initial trip and then when we were in the finalist group they had us go to Washington, D.C. and that's where, that's where the, the people who were up to being considered for the presidency had to go to be interviewed and to interview and so forth.  Well, the fact that I had after this president in two places and knew what the job was all about, knew, knew everything from the dining facilities and contracting and political as well as private, because maybe a Hampton [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] might have developed or something like that.  Well, Hampton had developed with a guy that's over at Hampton now.  He, he was at Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] in the same job I had.  I didn't, I meant to tell you that.  Well, he left and went to Tuskegee [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], and, and that, when Pres [James Lawson] got me from Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State University; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee] to come take his place.  But he didn't do but certain little old things.  I was doing everything.  I was older than he was, more mature, and I knew I had only a certain amount of time.  And so anyway when I, we went to interview in Washington--should I tell them what I said to the rector at breakfast that morning?
Speaker 1: (LUCY R. WILSON):  Yeah, great.
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: (LUCY R. WILSON):  (Unclear).
Speaker 2: You know that coaching never got out of my system, talking to officials, being political behind the scene, knowing how to vote and all that stuff.  I went down to breakfast.  I, I, I, I didn't know I was gonna see him.  I didn't know where he was staying or nothing.  But he was a guy if he wanted you, you had the job.  He ran, he ran the board, and I picked up on that.  And it was torn between me and this fellow that was in Cleveland [Ohio] working for this, this national organization, which, which was a good job, but it wasn't a university.  It wasn't dealing with kids, and it was, and he wasn't very mature and there's a whole lot of things that he would have had to take five or seven or eight years to learn on the job.  So, I told--I knew what this guy was worrying about.  He was worrying about me being strong or whether or not I'd let him remain in power.  I told my wife [Wilson's second wife, HistoryMaker Lucy R. Wilson] that.  I told her what I, what I, what I could see, and I went downstairs hoping I'd get to talk to him one on one, and I was at breakfast by myself and he sat down with me.  And I'm not, I'm, I hope that you don't ever put this in what I'm saying now, but I wanted you to see how things went in any writing or anything.  I wouldn't want this part in there.  But I want you to understand what you have to go through in these competitive situations.
Story_ID: 623066
Speaker 1: I said to him [Lyman Beecher Brooks] that you know you and I are going to be running this school.  I'm gonna have to count on you.  I didn't go very far on it, but I did say that.  I saw his eyes change.  And with your experience in dealing with the general, I'm talking to him with the general assembly and all, he hadn't done that much when I studied him a little bit and I knew what he has, what he had done.  But that's what he was worrying about.  He wanted the pleasure of firing people.  He wanted the pleasure of if you didn't use him as a lawyer he'd find a way to make it miserable for you.  He was that kind of guy.  And it didn't take me long to find that out.  How could I succeed with a guy like that if I went along with what he wanted to do?  Well, anyway soon after that meeting I was, I got the letter that I was--had been, I'd been nominated as president at Norfolk State [Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia].  So, now I might have gotten without that, but I doubt it.  That wasn't, that wasn't that wasn't a good move, it was a smart, smart move, slick move, but it wasn't a good honest move.  And, and of course it, I forgot who said this, but I, I, I don't know, I, I, I don't know exact, the exact quotation, but sooner or later your something will come back to haunt you or somebody will come back to haunt you and the very ones that come back to haunt you are the ones that you maybe promised them something that didn't go through with it, and I couldn't allow him to, to run the school.  He was chairman of the board, but how could he, how could he run the school and make right choices.  Right off he wanted me to fire certain people, and these were people I'd scouted.  With some of my boys I found out they were some of the top people, but he couldn't handle them.  He wanted me to fire them.  And some other things he wanted me to do, and I didn't do it.
Story_ID: 623067
Speaker 1: Well, anyway they named me president and, and Lucy [Wilson's second wife, HistoryMaker Lucy R. Wilson] and I came into the university [Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia].  They didn't have a president's home.  He didn't mention anything about building a president's home.  I had four chil- five children, six by then, two girls and four boys, and I, I couldn't live in Virginia Beach [Virginia] fighting that traffic every night and not being able to get back, not being able to get a hot meal.  I tried it for a semester living at Virginia Beach, and that was before they put--well they put those, those tour, those toll gates in and you know how in the busy periods how they--
Speaker 2: Back up.
Speaker 1: And oh man, I was miserable.  Every meal I had was cold.  Plus he wanted me to fire one of the persons that I taught at Jackson State [Jackson State College; Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi], top notch professor.  And her husband, I coached him.  He was a quarterback on our football team, and he was just like a son to me and I'm gonna double cross and fire her?  No I couldn't.  I couldn't do that.  I couldn't do it because she, she was anything--she could be antagonistic, but you don't fire people over that.  If they do their job and do a good job, then, and then I felt like I could handle, I've known them since they were college students and if anybody could handle anybody that was at Norfolk State or Jackson State at that time I would.  So, I didn't, wouldn't fire anybody that shouldn't be fired.  And boy he [Lyman Beecher Brooks] was angry with me.  And I stonewalled until he went off the board, and he put his wife [Evelyn Brooks] on the board.  It's political, see.  I'm, I'm learning the politics of how you do that.  But once I did that, once I found out the politics, I went right to the governor [Mills Godwin].  You can, in Virginia you could go to the governor especially if he met you and liked you, and so I went to the governor about, about my board members.  I wanted board members who were going do their job, not try to undermine people.  He said, "Well, I'll tell you what you do when it comes time for appointing board members, you give me your board members and those will be the ones you'll have."  I told Harvey [HistoryMaker William Harvey] that.  Harvey was having trouble with his board.  That's the guy over here at Hampton [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia]; done a great job.  I'm a little jealous of him having a president there before me, but it's one of those things.  I would have, I would have started working on him when he was running for office, especially as soon as he won I'd been in Memphis [Tennessee] 'cause I know my way around Memphis.  I'd been at that park talking to him.  But anyway, the governor gave me that authority.  So this guy who was local political, he would send in his list of who he wanted, and that's who the governor would, would give him.  He could still send them in.  I didn't say anything to him about that.  He didn't know I was, I had my list going to the governor, and the governor was gonna take my list.
Story_ID: 623068
Speaker 1: The governor liked the way I talked.  I talked to him about my, my years in Mississippi [at Jackson State College; Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi], about my years with, with, with the authorities in Mississippi, department of education [Mississippi Department of Education].  And I told him some things that a mature person understands, and he told me some things that a mature person understands 'cause he was a governor that closed the doors.  What did he do to the black schools, yeah they closed the doors 'cause they wanted to integrate.  He was the governor then.
Speaker 2: The same guy.
Speaker 1: The same.
Speaker 2: (LUCY R. WILSON):  Mills Godwin.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: (LUCY R. WILSON):  Mills Godwin.
Speaker 1: Mills Godwin was his name.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: See you could run, you can only run four year terms, but after a year, after a term you could rerun again if you wanted to.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I think the Almond [J. Lindsay Almond] was the original guy that closed the schools in Virginia.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And then this guy came behind--Almond, something.
Speaker 1: (LUCY R. WILSON):  He supported it.
Speaker 2: Yeah okay, all right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but see he was the man with the, with the political clout.  Well, he became like a father to me believe it or not.  I talked to him about my father [Harrison Wilson, Sr.].  He was a speaker for my inauguration or so to speak.  They had like an inauguration for the president of the university [Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia] and had all the dignitaries to come from other schools and all.  I had my speech that Lucy [Wilson's second wife, HistoryMaker Lucy R. Wilson] had written for me.  She can write speeches.  And boy I'll tell you this, this speech was, was like, like I'd give to a bunch of football players, only it was education, you know, just intellectual, oh god.  And the governor brought, this governor brought his wife [Katherine Godwin] and, and Lucy sat with his wife and I was next to the governor.  I told him about my father, in a short time about my father living in Kentucky and what happened to his father and how, how he, how this guy--my, my [paternal] grandfather [John L. Wilson] was born in Virginia.  I told him, I told him the story as I told you.  We're on the stage, but I gotta get in good with this guy, and he just shook his head.  He said--I told him my father was the only one living, the only one of the sons living.  Of course, my grandfather [John L. Wilson] and his wife [Martha Wilson] were deceased.  So, "Is he here?"  I said, "Yeah."  "I wanna meet him."  So, after the whole program the governor sat there and waited for my father to come down from the upstairs of it where we were having it and downstairs and, and he sat there and my wife spent that time with his wife sitting together, keeping her company talking about us.  And we talked, I talked to the governor and my father talked to him.  And I told you about my father, my father was the strangest man.  He learned fast.  When I say fast, he learned, he lived to be ninety-something, ninety-five.  When he died, he was, he was with us when he died, and, but anyway he asked my father some questions.
Story_ID: 623069
Speaker 1: I'll give you an example of, of the top man in the legal profession, the supreme court judge of the State of New York at that time.  When a new lawyer is coming into the state, they have to examine their credentials and swear them in.  They're, they're officer of the court and in New York they do it big time in Albany [New York].  So, my father [Harrison Wilson, Sr.] went with my brother who was a lawyer, young lawyer to be sworn in.  I wanna, I wanna retrogress just a second to tell you this about my father.  And when my, my, my brother got up to tell who he was, here this guy 6'4", 6'5" got up to tell them who he was from Amsterdam, New York, Harrison Wilson [Harrison Wilson, Sr.], his father, he, the chief justice said, "Wait a minute Harrison Wilson from Amsterdam?"  My brother had told my father not to say anything 'cause he always, he felt my father always say the wrong thing.  I never did think that.  But the supreme court chief justice was from Amsterdam, New York, and would park his cars on my father's parking lot for years when he was a lawyer at all and my father took care of him just as he took care of everybody that way, kind and helped them and he made a heck of a living off of that parking lot for thirty years, thirty-five years; it was his lot.  But anyway, he recognized my father and my brother was angry 'cause he supposed to be the star.  He's the baby of the family.  Anyhow he's mad 'cause he's not getting one in and the man spent all this time talking to my father, but he found out who had the power.  My father had the power, because he had known my father for years and years and years.  And when, when this judge told me he'd come back to Amsterdam, had relatives there, he was an Italian, and, and of course started out in that neighborhood I started out in.  And of course they knew my dad from, from then.  I, I don't know his relationship with them.  I, I wouldn't know what, but I do know my father worked, had this parking lot downtown and had it for oh forty years I guess.
Speaker 2: So how did your dad get along with the governor of Virginia [Mills Godwin]?
Speaker 1: Wonderful, wonderful.  He asked my father questions about his father [John L. Wilson], and my father could, was very lucid and could talk.  My, my, my wife [Wilson's second wife, HistoryMaker Lucy R. Wilson] tells me I talk like my father and he talked too much; I know I do.  But anyway, he sat there that short time and I think he interviewed my father, asked him about his father, how he got from place to place, why he got there, what kind of farm did he have?    My father, he had a ranch.  He had a bunk house.  We all stayed in the bunk house, all the boys, and people that he adopted to, to come and work and they could, they could stay there and, and he'd pay them and they'd have a family.  If they wanted to use his last name, they could if you wanted to.  That's who my grandfather would do, but anyway my father and the governor I didn't hear it all, but when he got through the governor was like my father.  The same governor was like my father.  Here I am--
Speaker 2: So, oh I'm sorry what--
Speaker 1: In Virginia.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  So you're building relationships with, with the key people here as you're coming in the office that's what's going on.
Speaker 1: That's right and, and I wanted to, I was showing you how my father was without the education was able to manipulate and talk and, and show his intelligence and what, what he did and what his father did and how he did it without, without being a braggart.  He's just an humble guy, hardworking man, raised all of us.
Story_ID: 623070
Speaker 1: But one thing I know from the material we have is that Lyman Beecher Brooks, the fir- the first president of, of the college, he was somewhat of--I mean it was somebody you had a little conflict with in the very beginning, right?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: And tell us about that, what was that (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well, the conflict was he didn't want anybody to succeed him.  He had messed up a couple of times, had gotten old and everybody gets old, I'm old now, and they wanted a new president to move the university.  He did well when he was there, and I didn't have anything to do with any of that.  I just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So he didn't step aside voluntarily basically.
Speaker 2: He was stepping aside voluntarily--
Speaker 1: But he was under a kind of pressure.
Speaker 2: --but he wanted to be able to put his man into, into that, into that position, and he wasn't able to because the chairman got me.  So, he was--there was always a conflict between the chairman and, and Dr. Brooks and of course I was the natural person, and I'm the one that came and took his place.  So, it was always tough.  It was always tough, and they put things in my past that would be mistakes, but I learned well.  The things that I learned at Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] and at Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State University; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee] carried me at Norfolk State [Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia].  I couldn't have done what I did at Norfolk.  I wouldn't have stayed there three years.  But not only did I know how to run a university, I knew the political way to handle the people who are in charge to get done what you want done.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Plus, I knew how to handle governors.  I did that at Fisk.  I wasn't afraid of governors, to talk to them or have them come in or any of that.  I got to meet with them, meeting with lawyer, everything.
Speaker 1: So you, you were president for twenty-two years of Norfolk State.  Now, tell us about--just kind of give us a rundown of what some of your major accomplishments were?
Speaker 2: Well, from, we grew I don't know how many students in.  I had almost 10,000 when I left.  I came there they had about 3,500.  It was more like a high school curriculum, what they were doing more like a high school.  They had a few buildings that they couldn't get support and cooperation of the state because it's, it's political and, and nobody could get into that political thing.  They had that tight, tight reign where African Americans were concerned.  But my father [Harrison Wilson, Sr.] meeting the governor [Mills Godwin] and talking to the governor about his father [John L. Wilson], his real, I mean not his father, yeah his father who was his owner's father and how he, how he was with him all those years serving really as going with him, his protector, bodyguard.  And everybody, everybody knew that was his son and it was acceptable in that society, you know.  I mean when I say acceptable, the man with the money that's--you know, who's gonna mess with him?  And that's just the way it was.  But when, when my father talked to the governor, the governor was a different guy.  Now much of the time I wasn't there, just the two of them were talking.  I had to do some other things and I'd come back and listen awhile, but I could see the governor was--
Speaker 1: Yeah, now--
Speaker 2: --you know, the governor could have stopped the conversation anytime he got ready.
Story_ID: 623071
Speaker 1: So what were you able to do as a result of that relationship?
Speaker 2: Well, I went to see the governor [Mills Godwin] about wanting a house on campus, and I told him I was gonna build it.  And I, I went there with the facts you know.  I learned you don't go to see a governor and don't have anything in your hand.  I had done the study.  I knew how, how big the house was gonna--I even had the drawings. I said, "Every university, but Norfolk, that wasn't exactly true, as far as I know any--every university except Norfolk State [Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia] had a president's home.  I have children, governor.  How can I go back and forth to Virginia Beach [Virginia] every night and things happening on campus?  I couldn't last any time.  Now governor I'm not asking you or the state to give me all the money.  If you give me whatever you can give me, I'll build a home and here's a copy of that.  I'll get the funds, the donations to build this house."
Speaker 1: So you had a plan already.  You, you had a blue print already for him (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah. Yeah, well not the blue prints--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --a drawing, a rendering.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I knew all how to do this.  I knew, I knew what you could, what you could say to a governor and it wouldn't make him angry.  He's a political being.  He talked to my dad [Harrison Wilson, Sr.] and really liked my father, and I guess he figured I was gonna be okay.  This is, this is, we lived without a home the first year going back to how much three year, three years, going back and forth.  Then we moved closer to, to Norfolk [Virginia] where we bought, we bought another home.  I'm buying a house.  All the other presidents got homes on campus.
Speaker 1: So, so from I understand, you were able to utilize some of the resources of the university they were already in place to help build a home and use the money for the materials, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, use, well use the money for materials and use the money for their, for their expertise on building.  You see we had faculty members teaching bricklaying and all that stuff, and they had all these students and I had gone to the students and, and the faculty and asked them would they do it?  And the students were glad to do it.  I said you'll be in the history book as building a president's home on this campus, something that hasn't been done in Virginia, and I said, "It's gonna be something that you'll be proud of.  You can bring your family back and I'm gonna have the names of you guys that build this, I'm gonna have that on my door."  I had a gold plate they took off.  I made them put it back on.  I think it's off now, but you know that's the way a new person comes in they don't wanna see that, but that's the history of that building.  But, but the governor was sold, coach, and I had the plans, I said I'm not gonna as you all for any money.  Now if you see fit to give me some, a donation, or $100,000 this house will be at least worth 400,000.
Speaker 1: How much did it cost to, to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh I don't know all together--
Speaker 1: How much did he give?
Speaker 2: All together I think we built it for less than 200,000.  That included paying people that worked.  We, we didn't have a man that could do plumbing, so we had to hire plumbers to do, put the plumbing in and we couldn't put, we didn't have anybody on campus that knew roofing, so we hired, we, we paid 10,000 dollars to put the roof on that house.  I, I don't mean the whole roof, I'm talking about just the, the final two layers.  We, we built, we built the house and, and the roof and everything, but you had to finish it off with tile and stuff and that's what I had to pay ten thousand dollars for.
Story_ID: 623072
Speaker 1: Now what I, there's a note I have here and tell me if this is correct that during your term the annual budget at Norfolk State [Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia] grew from 14 million to $86 million.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Is this true?  Okay.
Speaker 2: That's true.  When I left, that's what it was, and you see you got, you got money based upon enrollment.  So, not only did I have the black students that I was hustling, but since they had passed a ruling that they would give tuition to any student that went to--any black student that went to a white school.  So, I went to the governor, this is another governor [George Baliles] now.  I went to this particular governor who liked me and had, had me to, had me to, to roast him and my wife [Wilson's second wife, HistoryMaker Lucy R. Wilson] wrote my script, and it was the best one of all the roasters, a governor.  And he was governor and I went to him and told him I had to have, I had to have some money for white students.  I wanted to, I wanted to bring whites, and I was sincere.  We had a few here and there.  I wanted to bring, I wanted to at least get five hundred, at least, 'cause I knew what, what, how much money you'd get with five hundred students from the state, how much, how much you'd get out of the pot, how much they give any state that has that many students.  And so, I was able to convince him or whatever to give--and I told him I said, "Governor, they're giving money to these football players and basketball players for scholarships.  Why shouldn't I have some money for people that are gonna help us build something?  Help us, help me get money because I'm bringing them, I can do a better job and I want to educate them."  And this particular governor went to a military school.  He was from, he was from Virginia, but he went to a military school, which let me know his family was pretty well off, and he heard me talk about my father and plus the president of the school up in, what was the name of that school, honey, that Carrier [Ron Carrier] was president of?
Speaker 1: (LUCY R. WILSON):  James Madison [James Madison University, Harrisonburg, Virginia].
Speaker 2: James Madison.  The president of James Madison and I were close.  He was from Tennessee, and he was a poor boy growing up and I told him I was a poor boy growing up.  He was, he was probably the best president that Virginia has ever had in terms of politics, in terms of being able to get what he wanted to build James Madison from a girl school to a twenty-eight thousand or whatever he had up there at James Madison.  You can, you can check the history on what this guy did, and he was from Tennessee.  And the two of us became friends and so he would, he would work with me on, on giving me the inside scoop.  He was from Tennessee, give me the inside scoop on what UVA [University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia] was doing.  See they kept UVA and Tech [Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, Virginia] and let's see Tech and William and Mary [College of William and Mary, Williamsburg, Virginia] and the school in what was the, what was the school fifty miles up the road, honey.  Was that, that wasn't William and Mary was it?  William and Mary okay.  These were the, the schools in, in, in Virginia, Virginia Tech, University of Virginia, VMI [Virginia Military Institute, Lexington, Virginia], William and Mary.
Speaker 1: What about Virginia Commonwealth [Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia] and--
Speaker 2: Virginia Commonwealth.
Speaker 1: --Old Dominion [Old Dominion University, Norfolk, Virginia] yeah?
Speaker 2: And who else?
Speaker 1: Old Dominion.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Virginia Commonwealth.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, old Dominion hadn't worked into that.  They hadn't gotten the political clout up there to sway any of the, any of the presidents.  And they had, what politicians we had, they had them in their pocket.
Story_ID: 623073
Speaker 1: We had four or five from Norfolk [Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia] and I hate to say this and don't ever quote me please, don't ever quote me, they weren't getting me anything.  So, I didn't ask them to give.  I made friends and I'd act like they were doing something for me in meetings with the people.  They never, they never got me anything.  They came up to get free football tickets or something.  And I'm serious.  Even the governor that was black, when he finally got to be governor and I helped him all the way through, he was younger than I was, a little bit younger than I was.
Speaker 2: Doug Wilder [HistoryMaker L. Douglas Wilder].
Speaker 1: Doug Wilder, I was his friend, talked to him, told him about something he was doing that wasn't right and that he'd better change he'll never get to be anybody in Virginia and he did.  He was exposing himself.  When he probably should have been doing it behind closed door--he was single, but he, he shouldn't been walking down the street hand in hand, two on, one on each arm flaunt, flaunting, flaunting his popularity.  And I went and told him.  And the people said, "If you tell him that, he's gonna fight you."  I said, "He's too small, he ain't gonna fight me."  And I was friends with him, and I told him.  I told him, "Governor you haven't given me anything.  I'm the one, I went to Africa with you."  The, the other presidents boycotted him, the white schools boycotted him because he was cutting the school budget so bad, the university budget so bad.  So none of them would go.  So here again my wife [Wilson's second wife, HistoryMaker Lucy R. Wilson] saved me, 'cause I wasn't gonna go.  Who wanted to go to Africa, all that heat and everything?  And my wife said, "Look you're not William and Mary, you're not UVA, you're not any of those schools.  You better go," and I went with them, got sick as a dog, I thought I was gonna die in Africa.  I told them to take my body back home, make sure my wife gets my body.  I don't know what she was gonna do with it but throw it in the ground.  But anyway I'm over there in Africa with him and he's, he's ignoring me.  I can't get close to him.  We're, we're riding on plane from the Belgian Congo [Democratic Republic of the Congo] to one of the other countries, and from that country on a plane to that president's plane to the next country and that president.  Had these 707s [Boeing 707], talk about Africans being poor.  They are, but the leaders are not.  They send their kids to France and England for education.  They go there on weekend trips in this plane from Africa flying to England for week, long weekend to see their son, he's in prep school there.  That's what I found out on that trip, and I just, I, it's distasteful to me.  And then I almost died with that darn, eating something I shouldn't have eaten, but my point is I called the governor from over in Africa--no, no I didn't that's a lie.  I was getting ready to lie to you.  The, the governor is ignoring me, so I can't even get close enough to talk to him about what I need.  He's been in office now almost two years.  If you don't do it early, you, you aren't gonna get it done.  You only get one term, then you have to stay out and then you can run again, but you can't, no consecutive two terms, more than one term.  So anyway--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: I told the governor that I had--he, see he called on me to come and stay where he was gonna stay on, on the next trip to the African country, whichever it was, and I had an apartment as big as this first floor and I'm there by myself and he's in one this big and he's there by himself (laughter).  That was scary honey.  All those African guards with, yeah, but anyway.
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (LUCY R. WILSON):  (Simultaneous) Wilder building [L. Douglas Wilder Performing Arts Center, Norfolk, Virginia].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: So.
Speaker 1: (LUCY R. WILSON):  Wilder building.
Speaker 2: Wilder.
Speaker 1: (LUCY R. WILSON):  Building.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 623074
Speaker 1: So the point was I told him.  When he asked me, "So what, what do you want?"  I'm still on the trip.  "What do you want?"  Well I, I don't know what in the heck I want, although we had--well anyway it's good when you learn to tell just little fibs, and I told him that I wanted a performing arts center.  I'm talking to him now, we're in Africa.
Speaker 2: That's not a fib is it?
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: That's not a fib, is it?
Speaker 1: No, but he, well you gotta let me finish the fib.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: "I want a performing art--we want a performing arts center and we're gonna ship--marble is cheaper in Africa.  I found that out already, governor, and due to you we'll be able to get it cheaper.  We want marble, marble floors when you walk into the Wilder Center [L. Douglas Wilder Performing Arts Center, Norfolk, Virginia].  Before you get very far, there's a picture and that's the first African American governor in the Commonwealth of Virginia, Doug Wilder [HistoryMaker L. Douglas Wilder]."  I'm telling him this, just this way.  And I said, "Governor don't you want to be remembered?"  I said, "UVA [University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia] isn't gonna remember you, and you, you went to Virginia Union [Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia], but that's a private school.  No state school--," and Virginia States is up in the woods.  I said, "I'm the school to save you.  Kids are gonna come through year after year, 'That's, that was the governor' and read on there, 'Governor Commonwealth of Virginia.'"  But anyway, to make a long story short, how much is it gonna cost?  Well I don't even have a cost for it.  We had talked about it, but we didn't start any planning.  You gotta pay the architects if, if you gonna have a building, you gotta have it approved.  So, I'm figuring in my head right quick that's why I don't want you to repeat this and I told him $13 million.  He said, "What? Oh Jesus can't you come a little cheaper than $13 million?"  "Well," I said, "listen, governor, you can't build a building with your name on it that's gonna be--," well I used a term that I don't always use out in public, out of, out of my crowd, but you don't want an 'Amos 'n' Andy' building.  You've got to have a building that's representative of the first African American governor of the common- of any state in the United States, but the Commonwealth of Virginia.  Yes.
Story_ID: 623075
Speaker 1: How much did you get from Governor Wilder [HistoryMaker L. Douglas Wilder] to build the Wilder Center for the Performing Arts [L. Douglas Wilder Performing Arts Center, Norfolk, Virginia]?
Speaker 2: Ten million dollars.
Speaker 1: Ten million, okay.  I thought it was eleven million, but.
Speaker 2: Well, that's what I asked for, eleven.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you got ten?
Speaker 2: Well, I may have gotten almost, almost eleven.  I, I just wanted to even out.  I didn't wanna--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --tell a tale.  I wanted to be sure I was in the number.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, here's some other things I want you to, to comment on.  Enrollment was increased during your tenure from 6,700 to--
Speaker 2: How many?
Speaker 1: From 6,700 students to 8,100 is that right?
Speaker 2: It was less students than that, to be honest with you.  Did you get that as partial figures (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When it started?
Speaker 2: --or somebody just give it to you?
Speaker 1: Somebody gave it to me.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well it was less than that.  It was about 4,000 something, 4,800.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you doubled it?
Speaker 2: Oh tripled it really 'cause--
Speaker 1: Tripled it okay.
Speaker 2: --'cause when I, when I ended up I had seventeen buildings, well seventeen construction, equivalent to buildings, with a football stadium [William "Dick" Price Stadium, Norfolk, Virginia], the largest one with the exception of UVA [University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia] and Virginia Tech [Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, Virginia].
Speaker 1: Okay, so the football stadium had 31,000 seats?
Speaker 2: Thirty-one thousand five hundred.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We're not filling it anymore, see 'cause we haven't had good teams lately.  I haven't, I haven't been affiliated with them at all until recently where the new, the new chairman of the board [Ed L. Hamm, Jr.] want, want, wanted me to help him selected the president.  I'm in the business of doing that.  They--
Speaker 1: But now, you started the first doctoral program on social work right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, oh yeah.  Social work, then we got some in other fields, psychology.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you expanded a number of bachelor degree programs.  You were able to increase the graduation rate, right?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah we, we tripled the graduation rate.  I mean I was, I was building for, let's see was it a one thousand--I was building, I wanted to build for 19,000 students.  That was the figure I wanted, and, and mind you, I was getting the students, because all the kids wanted to come to the school that had--they had always had a band, but I had a better one.  I had a better dress band.  The students were treated better.  You didn't send a kid home--let's say you're teaching mechanics or you're teaching history and you call the dean and send so and so home.  No, no, no, the dean can't send anybody home unless it comes through me.  I wanted to do that because you get athletes where people are prejudice against athletes and the first little thing they do wrong they wanna send them home.  You can't get people who wanna sing in the choir because they can't even get tuition.  You gonna, I don't care how poor you are, tuition doesn't cost you anything really because that goes into your teacher's salaries and if you got the teacher's salaries you can handle the tuition.  But, that's the way they were doing business doc.  Not only that I started getting white students.  I made a speech one, one day about I didn't want to ever find that an African American, this is to my faculty, ever mistreated a Jew or anybody that wasn't an African.  But, I specified a Jew, I wanted that to get around town.  I specified that and Lu, Lucy [Wilson's second wife, HistoryMaker Lucy R. Wilson] will tell you that I did, and, and the people were just so cooperative.  Lucy and I belonged to the B'nai B'rith [B'nai B'rith International], I think you told him didn't you honey?
Speaker 1: (LUCY R. WILSON):  I didn't tell him, but that's true.
Speaker 2: Okay, we were the first couple to be taken in at the same time into the B'Nai B'rith society.
Speaker 1: (LUCY R. WILSON):  Right, right.
Speaker 2: The two of us, and you know I made history, two African Americans being taken in at the same time.  I want that to be known.  And if you had my Jewish brothers with me, there aren't many people can be against you.
Story_ID: 623076
Speaker 1: Now tell us about the Dozoretz National--
Speaker 2: Dozoretz.
Speaker 1: --Institute for Minorities in Applied Sciences [Dozoretz National Institute for Minorities and Applied Sciences].
Speaker 2: Yeah.  A friend of mine told me in Washington [D.C.]--I used to go up there at the request of the secretary of the [U.S.] Army and [U.S.] Navy.  I used to go up there with the secretary of state for Virginia.  I used to go up there for several of the secretaries that were my personal friends that would want me to do things like visit all the Army bases in the United States along with other veterans of World War II [WWII], and give them a report of weaknesses that we saw.  I was the only African American in that crowd.  They had lawyers, doctors, everybody.  I had these, I had, I had the doggone admiral saluting me.  I didn't have a suit on, but that, that was their way of showing me they knew who I was.  Anyway, all right honey, but--
Speaker 1: (LUCY R. WILSON):  Dozoretz.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How do you spell that just so--
Speaker 2: Spell it for me honey.
Speaker 1: I, I've got it here, just for the record it's D-O-Z-O-R-E-T-Z National Institute for Minorities in Applied Sciences, right, Dozoretz all right.
Speaker 2: That's right, and I brought kids in from all over.  First I, I got the kids from, from--well I went to the governor [George Baliles], this, this fellow that was, that was the guy who his, his training was through military schools when he went to school, and he, he just really liked me and Lucy [Wilson's second wife, HistoryMaker Lucy R. Wilson] and he had me to be one of his roasters and Lucy wrote my script.  But he's the governor now see, and I went to see him and I told him about what I had in mind, what I was building here [Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia].  We had more cadets for the Navy and Army than any other college in Virginia except UVA [University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia] and Virginia Tech [Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, Virginia] when I was there.  We built it to I don't know how many thousands.  I had white kids coming 'cause they wanted to be an officer in the Navy.  They didn't want to go in the Army, they wanted to be an officer in--this is before we fought a war you know.  I think we may have had that thing over there that I was asking you.
Speaker 1: Before the Gulf War.
Speaker 2: Well, we, we were, no, no we had the Gulf War and we won.  But anyway let me tell you about the Gulf War and the war, the one I call the desert war where they, that was the Gulf War where they went over to in the desert--
Speaker 1: Desert Storm [Operation Desert Storm] yeah.
Speaker 2: Desert Storm.
Speaker 1: Yeah right.
Speaker 2: Well, to just tell you about that, I'm talking to the governor and I'm telling him governor we need facilities for my, for my campus.  Earlier I told the governor that didn't like us, I said, "We don't have place, our, our ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] program is getting so big we don't have any place to store ammunition or our rifles."  Well that was a lie.  We, we had a place to store our rifles.  There was no ammunition connected to that at all.  They didn't give you ammunition.  The officers kept that at home or at the armory or some place.  We had our gu- we had our, we had our, not guns, but we had our, our rifles.  You had to drill with something, they had rifles.  And they may have been antiquated rifles even at that.  But my point is when I went to see the governor, this, this is another governor, this was earlier than Doug Wilder [HistoryMaker L. Douglas Wilder], and it was earlier than the Dozoretz situation.  I told the governor that we needed to have a place, "We have the largest ROTC in the Army now."  I didn't have a Navy one at that time, and we don't have any place to store our ammunition, and here we are with, with the largest outfit and these young black kids wanna go in the Army.  They wanna be officers; they're not letting them in just because they wanna be in, they have to be, they have to come up, they have to be able to cut it, but you know you have to be physical when you're in the Army.  You know everybody is not a storekeeper.  In the Army, you, you're trained to do something that most people don't want to do.  My boys could do it.  They just have to remember the history that they've been taught and how people have mistreated their people and how they're mistreating other people and if you get away with treating people away that'll come back to you and they'll mistreat us again.  I mean that's, there's no question about that.  They have to learn to respect everybody, respect.
Story_ID: 623077
Speaker 1: And the governor [George Baliles] said, "Wait a minute, wait a minute. Let me tell some--."  He, he called his, his, the secretary of education who was an old guy, one of his buddies.  "Did you hear what Dr. Wilson [HistoryMaker Harrison B. Wilson] said?  He said they don't have any place to store their ammunition and their rifles and stuff [at Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia]."  Well, we didn't have a good place to store our rifles.  It was damp.  We had to keep them oiled all the time, and of course we didn't have any ammunition, but he didn't know.  And he told his secretary of education, he said, "Could we build this, he wants to build a physical facility that he could have physical activities in it, gym, play some basketball."  He didn't know it, but with eighteen, seventeen thousand seats in it and so they can play basketball, but it's gonna be ROTC building, but it's gonna be physical ed [physical education] building too.  I didn't say athletic.  I didn't say ROTC.  And we, we had to put ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] on it because we've gotta store the rifles.  And we have a building, I think I'm on the campus, this is where I used to live in conjunction with the rest of the campus.  I was getting ready to point where it is.  But, it on, it's up the campus when you get in the gate from the main entrance If you go straight up you'll see it, R, big ROT, it's a big basketball coliseum.  We, we seat as many as twenty thousand, twenty-two thousand at the, at the very big games while I was here, and all big activities were there, graduation, eating, and we had all that catered and we ate there and all.  That was our central--
Speaker 2: And so--
Speaker 1: --and our ROTC is named, ROTC, an athletic complex.
Speaker 2: And what size facility did they have before that building was built?
Speaker 1: It's an old gym, it's still in existence.  Is as you get up to the football field it's a building on the left.  It's been renovated three or four times.  I renovated, renovated it twice.  That's where you had all the gym classes and they played basketball.  You couldn't get, you couldn't get ten thousand people in the gym.  You had to come, kids would come early and take their dinner there and eat to get them a seat.
Speaker 2: So, it was really needed.  This was something that was really needed.
Speaker 1: Oh it was, oh it wasn't no, we needed it.  We had to have it if I'm gonna grow like I'm gonna grow, I gotta have a good athletic.  I haven't talked about athletics 'cause that wasn't the thing to do.  A coach doesn't, makes a mistake if he comes in talking about he wants to build a big athletic program.  Nobody is gonna support him.  You gotta build an educational system first.  So, that's what I did and--
Story_ID: 623078
Speaker 1: Tell me this, we always ask this question.
Speaker 2: It's all right, ask it.
Speaker 1: When, when you look back on everything that you done up to this point, particularly at Norfolk State [Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia] is there anything major that you would do differently if you could?
Speaker 2: I wouldn't tell some of the lies I told.  I told the lies 'cause I felt they were necessary for me to be able to complete--it wasn't for me, per se.  When I told a tale, it was to get something from the state who owed us something, 'cause we had been fighting in the wars.  They had never given us much in Virginia I'm talking about, and my [paternal] grandparents [Martha Wilson and John L. Wilson] were here, my father [Harrison Wilson, Sr.] was raised here, partly here in Kentucky and you know I just felt like that, that wasn't bad.  And not only that, this is what the big white schools were doing.  See that's how they started getting everything and building up and they got so powerful, politicians wanted to do it to have their name on something.  So, I was, I built eighteen buildings on Norfolk State's campus, plus the football stadium.
Speaker 1: Right.  And that's, that's--
Speaker 2: They can't fill it now.  They filled it when I was there.
Story_ID: 623079
Speaker 1: The next question that we always is when you look back on everything you've done, again, what today would you consider to be your legacy and you, you started to talk about the football stadium [William "Dick" Price Stadium, Norfolk, Virginia].
Speaker 2: Well I would think before I even talked about facilities, my legacy would be those students that I put out during my tenure--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --because they did a heck of a job.  I'm not exaggerating at all.  One kid from Trenton, New Jersey, came to the school.  He was here one week, and wanted to see the president.  I heard him talking loud out in (laughter)--I went out there, said, "Come on in son."  I was used to handling guys like that and you know it was one problem.  I said, "What's the problem?"  I start talking soft.  He said, "I wanted to, I wanted, you all aren't doing nothing here.  Hey, I've been here a week and I haven't finished my registration, and I don't know this, I don't know that."  I said, "Well, how long you been here, a week?"  I said, "I'll tell you what to do, you tell me how much money it cost you to get here and I'll give you a ticket so you can go back home.  How about that?"  He didn't wanna--what the heck is he gonna be doing in Trenton, New Jersey, a semi-poor kid who wants an education, who sees the value in an education?  That's the kind of kid I want, and so I said, "Look let me tell you something what, what are the problems? Okay give that list to your secretary out there the first lady you come to.  She'll type it up for me and give me two days and come back, come back I'll have it straight for you.  But look, let me, the first lesson don't talk about a place you wanna stay at, 'cause I was ready to send you home.  You don't like it here, then go home.  But son I knew you didn't wanna go home, you ain't got nothing at home to go home to."  And I wasn't putting him down I know how a poor kid--I was a poor boy.  I was, how glad I was able to fight a war [World War II, WWII] (laughter), 'cause I was getting to the age where if I didn't get a scholarship to Syracuse [Syracuse University, Syracuse, New York] or one of them schools, I didn't know much about down south, I don't know if I, I don't know what I'd a done.  But the war came, that was my savior.  I grew up in the war, knew my way around in the war, knew how to handle people in the war.  I was handling guys twice as old as I was when I was through ca- camp, boot camp and all.  I was number, they call it number one in, in regular schools that, that have cadets, I mean sch- military schools, the number one, the number one soldier, the number one cadet.  Well, I was the number one of my company at Great Lakes [Naval Station Great Lakes, Lake County, Illinois].  I couldn't have been number one at the Great Lakes.  Man, if the war hadn't come I wouldn't gone to no service, I'd been going to Syracuse ill prepared, not knowing what to expect, thinking the teachers are gonna help me.  They didn't care nothing about me playing football, basketball that's all they wanted me to do.  I learned that in the [U.S.] Navy.  I heard the old guys talking about it. I hung around with the old guys.  I'd sit there and listen to them.  Some of them were principals of schools and jobs like that, and I'd ask them questions about insurance for instance.  I got insurance policies from the time I finished college.  Well, I got one in college (laughter) ten dollars a month, five thousand dollars policy, then dollars a month.  It's been paid I don't know twenty or thirty years.  And, I still paid up insurance.  But my point is, I learned that by sitting down talking to a black guy who sold insurance when he was in civilian life, a little older than the rest of us, and he told me how it worked.  I didn't know how insurance worked.  My mother [Marguerite Ayers Wilson] had a fifty cent policy, fifteen cent a week policy.  That would, that would bury you five hundred dollars, bury you after you had it twenty years, you know.  But no I didn't know anything about it.  I, I, didn't want to know.  At sixteen, seventeen you don't wanna know about any, you not gonna die.  You don't believe you gonna die, so but in the Navy it's different.  You know you could die and they tell you that, and they get you ready.  They tell you everything but that, but you know all the stuff they're saying le- leads to right there.  And so I talked to guys when I went to the Navy about insurance and how important it was.  And these were guys from New Orleans [Louisiana], Birmingham [Alabama], places where they worked with black insurance companies, and they were talking about the policies and what they had and what, what you should be getting and what we had in the Navy was gonna help them get better policies when the war is over, that's what this black guy was telling me who was in the Navy, thirty years old (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So--
Story_ID: 623080
Speaker 1: You're saying really though that your, your development of students is the, is the most important legacy that you've left?
Speaker 2: Yeah, because that's, that's for posterity.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: These kids now doc they got a different attitude.  My, my boys were in ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps], went to Desert Storm [Operation Desert Storm] I, I got the kids to send them boxes of can goods, and the general from this area got to be a friend of mine and you know what when he got out of the Desert Storm and was getting ready to retire I hired him as my assistant for military affairs, brand new job, white fella.  Why, he could get in doors I couldn't get in even then, even then.  He knew guys that were generals and military school that he went to.  He went to the one in Virginia, Virginia Military Academy [Lexington, Virginia].
Speaker 1: VMI.
Speaker 2: VMI, it's still there, but their, their cadets in the field aren't as good as my boys were.  You have to be physical to be good in today's war, and my boys that went to camp were in shape, and they'd get in trouble, a group of us get in trouble and you need a leader, there's no lieutenant, he's dead.  Next officer is dead here, scientist has gotta get us out.  If you're not intelligent, you can't figure a way to get out.  And a smart guy that has good planning and good sense will show you how to get out.  Kids that were gonna, were gonna sue the government.  You heard about the explosion out in, out in California during the war?  A ship blew up and all these black soldiers were, black sailors were killed.
Speaker 1: Yeah, during World War II [WWII] you mean.
Speaker 2: World War II that's what I'm talking.
Speaker 1: Port Chicago.
Speaker 2: Port Chicago, but that's out in California.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right, right.
Speaker 2: And it's right near San- right near San Francisco [California] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) San Francisco right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause when I got out there it happen, it had just happened and I had, being a pharmacist I had go there and pick the bodies out of the water.  You pick up a guy whose head is showing or floating, you know they don't come right up they go down and then after there in a while they come up, and it was deep water 'cause it was where the ships were.  And they'd been telling--I knew the story, the real story.  They, they, they had been telling the officers over and over it's dangerous.  A couple of friends had been killed, blown up, only two of them or three of them.  And they, and they wanted them to fix it.  Well, the leaders were dumb guys that didn't go to high school.  They may be the sergeants, but you don't, you, you do not refuse to do something because it's, it's a military order.  What you try to do is get somebody who will go to someone higher up to get you out of it, to get you, you know to explain the whole situation, but you report, and they wouldn't report.  And if I, I was over in San Francisco, it was just twenty or thirty miles away and I was on the other side of the bay and, and I could, well I, I wouldn't have been doing that work because in the rating I had they couldn't make me do any kind of work other than medical work.  We were shown that in the Articles of War and all that stuff where if they asked you to scrub a floor somewhere you don't have to do that unless it's in a medical facility, then you gotta do it.
Story_ID: 623081
Speaker 1: Here's another question we always ask and, what are some of your hopes and concerns today for the African American community?
Speaker 2: Well, I would hope that going to college would be like going to high school for African Americans.  And I'm not so selfish I wanna just limit to African Americans.  I think a smart country is a country that will stay strong, and we were losing that.  We had a lot of guys that on the street gambling and whatever they were doing were telling, giving the wrong story to the kids.  You got, you gotta protect where you live.  You're mama's there, your dad's there, your brothers and sisters are there; this your country man.  I never had to worry about that.  I knew about it before I even went in the [U.S. military] service.  I wanted to go to war.  I wanted to kill some Germans so bad I could taste it.  This is the kind of thing I began to have my guys teach these kids as they come in.  I don't care what they had in the curriculum.  I want you to teach loyalty, and these sociology club, teach loyalty what it means.  Teach honesty.  Here I am a lie in a minute to get something for the school, but I'm teaching honesty.  I'll, I'll admit it after it's over, but anyway those are the things that a leader has to have if he's gonna be a good leader.  Otherwise, you're gonna lead them down the path.  You can't lead them to do wrong.  If you gonna lead anybody, lead them to do right.  And we were woefully in trouble in the war [World War II, WWII] in the [U.S.] Navy when, when I, when I was in there.  At least half of the guys didn't have a high school education, blacks, half.  Half that I met at Great Lakes [Naval Station Great Lakes, Lake County, Illinois], and I was around there awhile 'cause I played basketball with the Great Lakes sailors, whatever the name was and in all, but my, my point, Doc, is that we have to continue to educate all our citizens.  But right now, white kids got enough people cheering for them.  As, as African Americans if we don't, if we, we're derelict of our duty, if we don't see a black kid and, and talk to him about straightening himself up--you don't even know him.  I'll stop a black kid on the street and say, "Hey son what are you doing?  You got a job?"  "Well, sir no I don't."  I said, "Well how old are you?"  "I'm fifteen."  I said, "That's not too young to get a job."  I said, "How many brothers and sisters you have?"  "Eight."  Well, there he is on the street, he's ready to be, to do something wrong.  Don't have a penny in his pocket and no way to get any, but he can't see the idea get you a nickel job.  That will get you hamburgers.  You can go to the movies.  You save it, you--I saved twenty-five dollars to get a balloon tire bike, shining shoes, and I, I didn't, I had it in the bank and I didn't think I could spend it.  When I was twelve, my mother [Marguerite Ayers Wilson] said, "Why don't you buy that bicycle?"  I said, "Can I, mom?" She said, "Sure, it's your money."  Now that don't count the money I bought groceries for her, during the Depression [Great Depression] brought home, twelve, thirteen year old.
Story_ID: 623082
Speaker 1: We have one last question to ask and it's very similar to legacy, but it's a little different.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry I couldn't hear you.
Speaker 1: Our last question is very similar to legacy, but it's a little different.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Sir, can you, oh okay, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh boy you know that's, that's really a hard--I, I've been asked that before and two or three times I didn't have time to answer it.  I had to think about it really, and I thought about it.  I, I'd like to be remembered as a family man who loved his family, who educated all of them to their maximum so they could earn a good living and hope that I pass that on to them.  I wanna be remembered as a man who loved this country, not talking it, but joined when I was seventeen and fought and was out there where it was dangerous and, and I didn't cry.  I cried once in a while, but nobody saw me cry, just a kid scared.  But, but I wanna reme- be remembered as someone who was willing to work to make things better, for not just African Americans, but for our country.  I see it going down the drain with people that are selling it down the drain with drugs and with other kinds of things, that they're talking to Communists.  And people, I mean who supposed to be honest peoples stealing from the banks and stealing from their church and stealing, you know.  If a guy is a crook and been a crook all his life, you could, you could halfway under, you don't agree with it, but you could halfway understand that, but a guy who has had everything, gone to the best schools, and he's president of a bank and he's stealing $40 million from a bank.  That's what hurting our country right today because we don't have the leadership we used to have; we really do not.  Now, we're getting some in the minority community.  That's a place where it hadn't been touched.  Now, I could think of five others in this country that could do a hell of a job if they could get in the right--and wanted to do it.  It's a sacrifice, but they, they're gonna have to more and more use the best person and not, for this country to survive, the best person who can get us out of trouble who can keep us high, keep us moving, not what am I gonna get, what am I gonna do for you.  And that's the one fear I have about our country and the direction it's moving in and some of the people that are in these offices, high offices, robbing, robbing people, robbing the, robbing their clientele, robbing, taking money out of the church or taking, you know it's just that bad.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We have leaders doing that.
Speaker 1: But you would like to be remembered as some- somebody different.
Speaker 2: I would like be remembered as a man who, who thought that was the worst thing a person could be, that I not only fought for my country, but I tried to do things that would enrich our country.
Story_ID: 623083
Speaker 1: I loved education, but I stayed in it mainly 'cause I could see I was doing something worthwhile.  I was changing kids from street kids to college kids (laughter).  I changed kids who didn't know anything about military and why they should fight.  They didn't think that was their co-, "That's not my job to fight."  They didn't know.  Nobody had told them.  They didn't, I don't know what they're doing in high schools, but they're missing the boat.  You gotta educate each generation on what their responsibilities are.  Don't expect them to just automatically take the same ones that you had or I had or your grandfather had; it's not that way.  Each group has to relearn what we're all about in America, and I'm saying I hope, I'd like to be remembered as a man who, who loved their country, but, but, but did what he could in his time for it.  One way was by training, training people--like I said we had the, except for except for Virginia Tech [Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, Virginia] and UVA [University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia], we had the largest ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] program when I was in Norfolk State [Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia] than, than any other school in this area and the best according to my general who made sure that we got recognition for that.  And, but I'm saying that should be passed on.  If, if, if you gotta mother and a father and you love them and a wife and kids, you ought to be willing to fight for them.  If you don't have that feeling, then you, you, you're not a good citizen.  You know, if it's all for me and the hell with you, that's not the way to go you know.  So step up citizens.  Step up to this boy that, he, the kid I stopped, telling the story about, heck he calls me.  He's--his sister was elected to a big office in New Jersey, and he's working with a big company in New Jersey and doing well and people come here and tell me about him.  He tells the story how I told him to go home then man, you're, you're in the wrong place you don't need an education.  And he stayed and boy he, my student government president and he led, he led the other kids to do right and the kid that has had it hard knows what it is to have it hard.  He don't want that anymore.  If you can show him how to make it better and show him he can make it, you gotta a hell of a recruit and that's the way it is.  You can't do it just in churches.  You gotta do in churches; you gotta do in schools.  Schools first, home first, churches, schools, home, all working together, so that the kid has an idea by the time people can begin to change him so that they can't.  America is in danger, coach, because our system isn't working that well.  Our white kids are getting weaker.  I can prove it.  Look at the professional teams that have combat.  Look at them, where they are, right now they're minorities or, or guys from another country that's had it tough.  We got Jewish kids from Israel playing basketball are just as tough as the black guys (laughter).  We got kids from some of those other countries, Africa, some of those countries that are just as tough as the American.  The American Negro is beginning to weaken.  He's beginning to change.  And in ten years, twenty years he's not gonna be so strong if he keeps living the life he's living.  We gotta preach it, Doc.  We gotta talk about it in church.  We gotta talk about it in schools.  We gotta cooperate with these guys that are doing a lousy job.  Get them out if you can.  And this is why I would tell my citizens if I was a governor or mayor or what have you.  I would go right to the grassroots and say we're, we're losing it.  How can you have officers from West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York] that you've proven are guilt of spying or are guilty of undermining the military?  West Point, the cream of the world, and they're gonna ruin our country.  Well, people don't just grow up and sprout good.  It has to be taught.  It has to be nurtured and all.
Story_ID: 623084
Speaker 1: Now those aren't just words with me.  As long as I was young, I backed them up.  I, I'd fight a dude in a minute.  I'd put gloves on with them.  They didn't know I used to be a boxer (laughter).  So, I, I knew how to box.  I'm through, but I wanna tell you one last story about my coach in Chicago [Illinois]; he was in Chicago.  He was from Chicago and went to Kentucky [Kentucky State College for Negroes; Kentucky State University, Frankfort, Kentucky] and played football, was a great All-American and he was married, older guy, now--I was a young guy had a new car.  He didn't know how hard I worked to get it, waiting tables.  Many a meal I served to get that Buick and all these other G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944], all those other.  So, he, he wanted me to get hurt in this course in boxing and wrestling.  And the rule he put up looking right at me he said, "Each of you have to fight three rounds and no playing.  If you don't do that, you're gonna fail this course."  He was looking right at me.  He didn't know I used to box.  I didn't tell those guys that.  I didn't tell anybody I like to fight.  I still like to fight.  I, I love to fight.  I can't get anybody to fight me, I'm too old they don't want to hurt me, but I, I didn't tell you this and please don't put this in writing, but I told a guy that kept agitating me--he was on the team of the other, other president [Lyman Beecher Brooks]--and he was in a, he was in a meeting.  Every so often he'd say something under his breath.  I said, "Wait, when I first got here," I said, "Wait a minute, what is your name?"  Pointed right at him.  He looked, and I said, "You, you, you're looking around, you."  He told me, I said, "Look I notice what you're doing, I know you're trying to distract me and you did, but I'm gonna offer a deal right now.  If I've done something you don't like, tell me now, tell the whole crowd here, tell us all, this whole group that's here right now, tell us what I've done to you personally."  And one thing he told me was that I moved his wife out of the president's office when I became president.  "Well, sure," I told him, "that's right."  I said, "I'm not gonna tell you the real reason I moved her out, that's 'cause she was going with the president," I said, "but I tell you what, here's some of your co-teachers here ask them would they tell you.  I'm not gonna tell you.  I don't think it's my right to tell you."  I didn't tell him that, but I'm, I'm saying I told him to ask the teachers why, why I did that.  She wasn't on my team; I told him that.  She was loyal to the other president.  I didn't tell her, I didn't tell it all.  She walked through my office one day without knocking on the door going into another office.  Can you imagine?  I'm on the phone.  This was after the old man left, and I'm president.  I didn't appreciate that.  My wife [Wilson's second wife, HistoryMaker Lucy R. Wilson] would kill me, and not only that I didn't want, I wasn't interested.  But my point is, Doc, so often we get on top and I know how it is and I, I've looked sometime at myself but I look but I don't touch because I know what I got.  I know what helped me when the chips were down I didn't have anybody.  Even my brothers and sisters didn't come and stay with me.  They didn't say, "I'll take two of the kids and keep them during the summer to you get yourself together."  They didn't do that.  My big sister that I love like a mother she said, "Well, you're gonna get married again."  That was her contribution.  That's pretty good 'cause I was thinking that was awful to think about getting married so soon my wife died to help raise these kids; that's what she said.  But, what I was trying to tell him is that we have you all right here in this class, Doctor.  You, you're mad at me, you don't even know me, but I'm gonna make you an offer right in the presence of this whole group of your peers.  I said, "If you got something you don't like about me and you think fighting me will help meet me behind this building."  (Gasps) That's what the teacher said, (gasps), some of them went, "You hear what Dr. Wilson [HistoryMaker Harrison B. Wilson] said?"
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: I said, "Yeah I'll repeat it again.  If, if he's got something against me and he doesn't like me and he's gonna, thinks he gonna talk and disrupt meetings," see I was telling that for the whole gang, see not just him, "I want him to meet me out back of this building and we'll get it on."  That's what I told him.  He dropped his head.
Speaker 2: Well you're certainly a fighter and I think that you're, and you will be remembered as one.
Speaker 1: And you have to be sometimes.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You have to be sometime especially when you're younger and, and, and your whole life is ahead of you and they're taking bread out of your family's mouth that you worked hard to get.  I worked like a dog to get to be president at Norfolk State [Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia].  I, that's what, that was my, that's what I wanted to do, and I don't think, I don't think you, well I think you do have to work harder to become president of the United States, I, I do think that.  But, I worked like a damn dog, taking the right courses at grad school [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana] and so anyway.  I'm thankful that, that you allowed me to do this and I hope it will help somewhere and anything you wanna audit out, edit out, edit out, anything.
Story_ID: 623085
Speaker 1: That was, that was at a football game, and Norfolk State [Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia] used to have thirty-five, forty thousand at our football games and I was given them a talk on alumni while we had all those fans there, twenty-five thousand, thirty thousand.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's some time ago.
Speaker 1: Oh, that was when I was president.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah that was--you see my sport coat, don't you.
Speaker 2: Well, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's the one Lucy kept me in.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You see that hair don't you (laughter)?  If it wasn't a long time--I didn't grow, I didn't gray all of a sudden.
Speaker 2: It grayed in the back first.
Speaker 1: Well, I had a spot.  That's where--the presidents and everybody knew me that, where I played basketball because they remember me with the boy with the spot in his hair.  I had a gray spot, gray hair.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's what I was--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay next.
Speaker 2: And I had it all while I was in the [U.S.] Navy and everything and it was just a birthmark, was nothing I could do about it.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, could you tell us about this one please?
Speaker 2: Yeah, tell us about this photo.
Speaker 1: Oh I'm sorry.  Those are recent graduates of Norfolk State and they're back giving a, a business kind of show where the various businesses come back and all, and let the students know what jobs there are available for them when they graduate.
Speaker 2: Yeah, job expo.
Speaker 1: That's what that is there, and I took a picture with them.
Speaker 2: This is Governor Baliles on the left.  He's my favorite governor.  He was the one that had me to, to roast him, and my wife wrote my script for me, and it went over great.
Speaker 1: And then the mayor of--
Speaker 2: And this is the mayor or Virginia Beach.
Speaker 1: Virginia, which one?
Speaker 2: The student at Norfolk State.
Speaker 1: Okay, who is this?
Speaker 2: Mayor of Virginia Beach.
Speaker 1: Okay, what's her name?  Do you know her name?
Speaker 2: Oh geez I know it--
Speaker 1: That's okay. Let's go, and who are the rest of these people?
Speaker 2: Students.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: These are students.  This kid here his mother went to Norfolk State before I got there.  The boy in the yel- the green jacket, and his father was so proud of him because when he came to school he was afraid to talk and say anything to anybody, and I took particular time to work with him.
Speaker 1: This is a picture with me after I retired and my wife.  Is that my wife?  I better not say it.  Yeah, that's, that's Lucy with two gr- on the right--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: And going from left to right is one of our alumni members that works hard, volunteers to help the university in business shows and like that, and my wife, Lucy Wilson [Wilson's second wife, HistoryMaker Lucy R. Wilson]  and myself.  This was after she and I retired and I was back for some activity, and they wanted to take my picture.  And this was this lady's friend who works at Norfolk State now as a clerk.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Oh you wanna--did, did you decide to take this one?  'Cause this is the one I said that the lady was deceased.
Speaker 2: It doesn't matter--
Speaker 1: Doesn't matter.
Speaker 2: --if she's deceased, it's history you know.
Speaker 1: Oh it's real history.
Speaker 2: Everybody's (unclear)--
Speaker 1: No, no I, I'm agreeing with you.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: It's not that I, I just didn't, you know I, I just didn't know.
Speaker 2: But who are they?
Speaker 1: This is, was, when I came to Norfolk he was the vice, one of the vice presidents, and he retired soon after I got here.  And this young lady was from, from, from--what's the name of that damn town?
Speaker 2: That's all right.
Speaker 1: Anyway, her father, her father was one of the leaders of this, that particular community, and she went to a lot of private schools.  She was, she was one of the African Americans that was well--that whose folks were well-heeled and she got a chance to get the best, and she was willing to give it to our students, so she taught them everything that she could to help them graduate and all.
Speaker 2: Now this is Governor Baliles?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Governor Gerald Baliles who was, who-
Speaker 2: Spell his last name for us so, for, for--
Speaker 1: Oh I hate, my wife's the speller, doc.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: If we, and she'll see you before you go.  She'll spell it for you.  I don't trust myself.
Speaker 2: Yeah, any researcher should be able to--
Speaker 1: But, Gerald Baliles is his name and he was, he was in the [U.S.] Navy.  I don't know where he was during the war [World War II, WWII]--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --but he went to a, a naval school.
Speaker 2: Your son.
Speaker 1: This is my son who graduated magna cum laude from Dartmouth College [Hanover, New Hampshire] and went on and went to Harvard Law School [Boston, Massachusetts] where he graduated with honors in Harvard Law School.  And he's with, he's presently a partner with one of the, one of the top law firms in, in Washington, D.C. [Beveridge and Diamond PC], name is, his name is Benjamin Wilson [Benjamin F. Wilson], the president.
Speaker 2: Okay, now who's this?
Speaker 1: This is myself, in younger days, and this is my youngest daughter [April Wilson Woodard].  I was president of Norfolk State then.  This is my youngest daughter who was two years old or three years old when she came to Norfolk State with us, and here she is she finished, she was into dancing and she finished Miss, Miss Virginia, Miss Black Virginia [Miss Black Virginia USA] and then she went on to win Miss National Black Virgin- Miss National Black America [sic. Miss Black America].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And she was also in, in, in the contest for Miss America, and she won in Virginia and she lost out in the second round at the national thing.
Speaker 2: And that's my wife, Lucy Wilson, who is Dr. Lucy Wilson who taught statistics and she was in, in, in, in development of young people in terms of her, her degree.  She was the first African American at the school in New Jersey [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey] she told you about it. I can't think of the name of it, but I will, and she taught, she worked there.
Speaker 1: And let's see that upside, let's see it the right.  That's her again I believe, yeah.
Speaker 2: Administrator at Old Dominion [Old Dominion University, Norfolk, Virginia] right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: She was vice president at Old Dominion.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I don't know if she was the first black vice president, but I didn't see any when I came here.
Speaker 2: She was, she, that's what she said she was the first one.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I, I don't, I wanna be sure when I say that to you doc.  I don't want you to say something.  It would be my luck in the audience it will be somebody (laughter) wait a minute now I don't know where you got that.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) background you didn't give this to me, but this seemed like it would be a good picture, you know, for illustration.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  I assume this is your wedding?
Speaker 1: This is, no not my wedding, this is, this is one Mother's Day--no, my daughter's wedding, my youngest daughter, who is in the picture out in the hall.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  So, and that's a picture of you and your and what?
Speaker 1: That's a picture of my wife and I going to the wedding of my daughter, my youngest daughter.
Speaker 2: Okay, your daughter.
Speaker 1: And Dr. Lucy and Dr. Harrison Wilson [HistoryMaker Harrison B. Wilson].
Speaker 2: That was one of the, I was gonna say last, but no that's '97 [1997] yeah, yeah.  Okay, that was one of the last little, little, not a catalog, but a little document about the university at Norfolk State.  And that's out on the veranda of the building that was named for me, and it's the administration building [Harrison B. Wilson Hall] at Norfolk State University.  The first governor, second governor gave, gave me that building.  I went and told him that we didn't have a place for our computer.  You guys complain about us not getting our material.
