Story_ID: 116828
Speaker 1: My name is Jacques Lesure and I'm the interviewer today.  The videographer is Neculai Burghelea, is the videographer.  Sir, could you please state and spell your whole name for us?
Speaker 2: Frank Washington, F-R-A-N-K, do I really have to spell my last name?  It's evidenced on a dollar bill if you need to check it, spell check it.
Speaker 1: For historical sake.
Speaker 2: W-A-S-H-I-N-G-T-O-N.
Speaker 1: And your birth date and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Twelve, twenty-seven, '47 [December 27, 1947], Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: And where are we currently?
Speaker 2: Sacramento, California.
Speaker 1: And what day is today, today's date?
Speaker 2: Good question.  I believe it's the, oh, it's April Fool's Day, 19-2008 [April 1, 2008].
Speaker 1: And today, and this location, where we are actually right now, where are we right now, actually?
Speaker 2: Oh, this is a real test.  300 South Grand Avenue, Los Angeles, California.
Speaker 1: Very good.  And your current occupation?
Speaker 2: Entrepreneur.
Story_ID: 116829
Speaker 1: We have a couple other questions we'd like to ask, we call them People magazine-type questions and they let us know who you are a little bit, if more in depth.  Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: And your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I don't go on vacations (laughter).  That's the answer.
Speaker 1: Your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Um, my favorite food.  I don't know that I have a favorite food.
Speaker 1: Do you have a saying or phrase that you like to use quite a bit?
Speaker 2: Um, you know, I like to be as original as I can so I try to, you know, shy away from the hackneyed.
Story_ID: 116830
Speaker 1: So, you were born in, born in Washington, D.C.  Now, what we like to do is start with your mother and talk about her a bit, your early years.  And we like to go through the parents to get to that, to get to that point.  Your mother's name?
Speaker 2: Ida Mayo Washington.
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.  And when and where was she born?
Speaker 2: Um, I think she, I recall, I think she was born in 19--I want to say '27 [1927], in a place called Rockland County, New York.
Speaker 1: Okay, and does she share any stories about her childhood, growing up that you could recall?
Speaker 2: She was a very blessed, you know, for somebody black growing up in the Depression.  I actually did a little research on this.  Her father worked for this guy called Oom The Omnipotent [Pierre Arnold Bernard].  He was some sort of Swami-type guy that went around and got rich people to give him a lot of money as some sort of guru, or something.  And my, my mother's father was his chauffeur and that was, you know, a top of the hierarchy for black people at, certainly during any period leading up to recent times and during the Depression.  I mean, it was a huge advantage for their family.
Story_ID: 116831
Speaker 1: How do you describe your mother as a person?
Speaker 2: Um, somewhat imperial, you know, had the carriage of a queen, would often be mistaken for white, you know, she [Ida Mayo Washington], the hospital I was born in was the Columbia Hospital for Women in [Washington] D.C. and she was getting ready to go into the bathroom and, of course, they had, you know, segregated bathrooms and a white woman started going in the black bathroom and said, you're going in the wrong bathroom, which she found less than amusing.  She was somebody who could do the New York Times crossword puzzle on Sunday to completion, you know, on the same day.  So a fairly smart lady but one who, you know, she had aspirations of being a nurse but she never did it.  You know, she wound up being a secretary.  And, you know, for all of her royal bearing and all that, never really, in my opinion, went as far as she could have gone.
Story_ID: 116832
Speaker 1: How about your father?  What was his name?
Speaker 2: Frank Washington [Sr.], and he was an interesting character.
Speaker 1: When and where was he born?
Speaker 2: 1917, on Halloween.  That's right.  That'll make it easy.  Whatever day of the week, whatever day of the month that is.  He--
Speaker 1: Was he born in Rockland also?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, he was born in Washington, D.C. and totally different upbringing, I mean, hard scrabble, you know, I think his father probably abandoned the family when he was a young kid.  Allegedly, he, I mean, he told me stories about how his father had worked for Legs Diamond [Jack "Legs" Diamond], the gangster.  I have no way of verifying that, and he did, to his credit, he graduated from one of the two black high schools in Washington, D.C., Armstrong [Samuel Chapman Armstrong Technical High School], which was the vocational school, the other one, I forget the name, but was the Memorial, elite school.  And he used to tell me stories about how, he was fairly dark-skinned, and poor and how he was ridiculed by the other kids in his class which was an interesting point of demarcation for me when I went back to Washington, D.C. as, you know, among other things, working for a law firm of the order of Skadden [Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom LLP], working in the White House and saw some of that black bourgeoisie that clearly had, you know, denigrated him.  It was really very ironic.
Speaker 1: It was still a, still apparent.
Speaker 2: It was apparent but, of course, I'm there under totally different auspices, you know, with a totally different--they were going to view me totally different from the way they would have viewed my father.  So it was, it was a most ironic connection that way.
Story_ID: 116833
Speaker 1: But what kind of man was your father?
Speaker 2: Well, he [Frank Washington Sr.] was, a very much the artist.  He was a graphic, I mean, he, you know, he was a very good--
Speaker 1: A visual artist.
Speaker 2: --visual artist.  He, you know, he drew pictures and made things.  You know, boats and stuff like that out of craft wood, but like most people, most black males of his generation, I mean, there was only so much he was going to be able to do and part of that was part of it, part of it was himself that held himself back and as a result, I mean, he basically wound up working as a blue collar guy.  He also, part of him being held back, was his own, you know, challenges, I'll put it politely, with alcohol which clearly, I mean, had economic and emotional impact, you know.  So, he could be a pretty tough guy.  I mean, I will tell you honestly, I hated the guy, you know.  I mean, you know, when he died, he died when I was about 12.  I had wished him dead because of the way he acted and my parents said, well they were estranged at that point for about a year and a half, and he basically drank himself to death.  I mean, he was dead by the time he was 45.
Speaker 1: Was there violence in the home when he was drinking and things of that nature?
Speaker 2: Oh there could be, yeah.  Most of it was, was meted out on the, you know, the three siblings.  I was the oldest.  The thing that, that resulted in the fam--, you know, the break-up ultimately was he burned my mother [Ida Mayo Washington] with a, with an iron and she called the cops and had him carted off.
Speaker 1: And that was it?
Speaker 2: And that was it.
Story_ID: 116834
Speaker 1: Now your grandparents.  I heard you mention one that was the chauffeur, your mother's father, for The Great Oom [Pierre Arnold Bernard] as you said?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now tell me about your grandparents.  What, well let's just start with him.  What was his name?
Speaker 2: You mean on my mother's [Ida Mayo Washington] side?
Speaker 1: Correct, her father.
Speaker 2: You know, I can't tell you I know his name.  I met him once in my whole life.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean, you know, he, I was maybe five or six years old and, you know, I remember he gave me a pair of scissors that didn't work.  That was the only time I ever met him, so--
Speaker 1: How about her mother?
Speaker 2: I never met her.  She was dead long before I was born.
Story_ID: 116835
Speaker 1: And on your father's side, grand--his parents?
Speaker 2: Well, of course, I never met my grandfather 'cause he ended up, you know, exited many years before.  My grandmother was a very important person.  I mean, she was the one person who my father [Frank Washington Sr.] might listen to.
Speaker 1: And what was her name?
Speaker 2: Goodness, you're asking me these questions and it's been so long--  Oh, God, I want to say Anna, you know, I called her "Grandma".  I, you know--
Speaker 1: Well, we'll use that, "grandmother".
Speaker 2: Okay, right.  But anyway, she was a very tough lady because I mean here she was during the Depression with three kids and had to support them and, you know, I think they all managed, wound up going to high school, which, you know, you know, black depression.  I mean, that was of small minority of the total population.  So somebody must have been doing something right there.  And, you know, she was the kind of person, she would work, you know, department store, and she would, she'd have my mother [Ida Mayo Washington] trace the outline of our feet and then send the shoes.  And I remember she used to call, she used to send me letters or cards and she'd put "Master", very proper, Frank Washington, on there.  So, she was a pretty special lady.
Speaker 1: And did you ever spend any like real quality time with her?  Did you get a chance to do that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think, as I recall, I think I had a couple of vacations.  You know, my father took us, maybe on one occasion, took me alone, down there, and I had a chance to spend a couple of weeks with her.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: But she lived in [Washington] D.C. the whole time.
Story_ID: 116836
Speaker 1: Now how about siblings on either side, you know, your mom's side or your father's side?
Speaker 2: Right--
Speaker 1: Do you recall the siblings names?
Speaker 2: Well, let's see.  My father [Frank Washington, Sr.] had a sister and a brother.  The brother was a musician, interestingly enough.  And he was--
Speaker 1: Do you recall their names?
Speaker 2: Nope, like I said, I had been, you know, I think the last time that, once my, my grandmother died, I lost touch with that whole side of the family.
Speaker 1: How about your mother's siblings?  Did she--
Speaker 2: She [Ida Mayo Washington] had, she had a brother--an older brother, an older sister and a younger sister.
Speaker 1: And do you recall their names at all?
Speaker 2: I think the brother's name was Presley.  He was a nutcase.  The older--her, Margaret, was her older sister who just died not that long ago, fairly stable person, and then her younger sister was another nutcase.  Insanity seemed to, you know, ricochet around in the family quite a bit--
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: --as far as I can tell, which is part of the reason why I haven't done a whole lot of work to turn over any rocks for fear of what would jump out from underneath.
Story_ID: 116837
Speaker 1: So, so you were born in, so you were born in '47 [1947]?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: And you said, now you didn't, where, where did you actually grow up?
Speaker 2: Well Rockland County, New York--
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: --just outside of New York City.
Speaker 1: --Rockland County, okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, would you have any idea what time you left [Washington] D.C.?  I mean--
Speaker 2: I was a baby.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I don't know if it was within months of being born, I think.
Speaker 1: Do you know why they went to Rockland?
Speaker 2: Well that's where my mother [Ida Mayo Washington] had grown up so I assumed it had something to do with that, but I'm not totally sure.
Story_ID: 116838
Speaker 1: Do you have any stories of how your parents met?
Speaker 2: Um, you know, my father [Frank Washington, Sr.], camp, the place, this place called Camp Shanks [Rockland County, New York] where we lived for quite a while after, when I was growing up, and it was during the War, it was an embarkation point and, disembarkation point, and I know my mother [Ida Mayo Washington] was in the USO [United Service Organizations] and I, I'm guessing they met through the, you know, somehow or another, around that Camp Shanks business.
Story_ID: 116839
Speaker 1: Okay, well let's talk about your earliest childhood memory in Rockland [New York].  Could you share, in the Rockland County, could you share that with us, the earliest thing that you can recall?
Speaker 2: The earliest thing that I can recall?  My memory is not very good.  You need to have my brother or somebody here 'cause their memories are much better for that kind of detail.  Well, I can just tell you generally, I mean, Camp, this, this Camp--
Speaker 1: Camp Shank.
Speaker 2: Camp Shanks [former United States Army embarkation camp]--
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: --was an interesting place.  I actually did some research on it a few years back.  It was farmland that the Army requisitioned, took over, and made into this camp and subsequent to the War, they, they took the barracks and turned them into apartments and most of the apartments went to guys who were using the Veterans education process.  A lot of them were going to Columbia.  The surrounding area was all farmland and farmers, which was very conservative, I mean, here in the middle of it, they had this place that was, you know, probably exceedingly liberal and certainly very different from the surrounding area.  The fact that there were blacks and whites allowed to live in the same place together at a fairly cost-effective, you know, place, was pretty, I think, unusual anywhere.  And to the point where, from the research I did, that the, the people in the surrounding area were very concerned that these, they were going to get outvoted and they tried, literally, tried to figure out how they could disenfranchise the people living in Camp Shanks.  Anyway, this area, a lot of it had been, it was all farmland.  I mean, the, the peach trees and the apples trees and the strawberry patches, they were all still there.  I mean, they had gone somewhat feral and as time went on and other people with, all the other people with options, moved out, it became more and more overgrown and more and more pastoral and returned to its original state.  And, I mean, towards the end, when they were tearing down these barracks and replacing them with tract homes, I mean, you could, there were acres upon acres where there was nobody living there and so you could just wander around as a kid.  I mean, it was a wonderful experience.  I mean, for me, it was as close to nature as I probably will, will ever get and, you know, I could, I got enough of a, an experience there that I can smile at people who had spent their whole lives in the city and never knew, you know, what it was like to actually live, you know.  We used to call it "the woods", but, you know, it was, it literally was kind of like the woods even though now, if you went there, it would just like look like part of the, the ex-urban sprawl of the metropolitan New York area.
Story_ID: 116840
Speaker 1: What were some of the other sights and sounds and smells growing up around that area?  You said it was farmland and with strawberries and things?  Was there, what were some of the other sights and sounds that you could recall in your neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, most of it was just, there was a lot of, there was a fair amount of wildlife around and, you know, parents back then could feel comfortable just letting kids go out and run around and do whatever, you know, climb up in trees or do whatever they were gonna to do but sights and sounds, you know, nothing, I don't experience history that way.  It's hard for me to give you a good answer on that.
Speaker 1: Do you recall any of your neighbors, in particular?  Anybody that, I'll say, we'll say neighbors or playmates at the time when you were growing up, do you recall in Camp Shanks?
Speaker 2: Sure, there was a guy that lived right across from us, a very, very nice family.  And you recall this, the father was kind of like an absent-minded professor type.  You know, very, my father [Frank Washington, Sr.] always used to snicker at him behind his back because he, you know, he played classical music and he was very intellectual but he would always, he'd always be forgetting something or, you know, screwing, absent-minded kind of, things up.  So, and they had a couple, several kids that we were, you know, playmates with.  Towards the end, what happened was, they started to put welfare people into these barracks and so you started to get a little bit rougher crowd coming in there.  There's this one kid I remember.  His name I remember, Gary Daniels.  If he's still alive, he's probably in a penitentiary somewhere, but I meant, you know, what a, and an interesting bit of work he was and, you know, he was kind of like a gun that you always want to keep pointed away from you 'cause he could be lethal.
Story_ID: 116841
Speaker 1: So, you mention that this was an integrated area--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --so there were whites and blacks living together.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And this we would say, this is like in the mid '50s [1950s], correct?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Now a lot of things are going on, there's, across the country, there's a lot of, a lot of volatile things that are happening across the country.  How are you dealing race relations as a young man, in your particular neighborhood?  How are those around you reacting?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, obviously--
Speaker 1: Were you insulated away from what was really going on?
Speaker 2: No, because I mean, you still, as a kid going to school, you still, I was subjected the, you know, name calling and, clearly things--I remember I had this one coach and the whole, everybody'd be acting up in the class and I'd be standing there minding my own business and he would come along and grab me out of everybody, that kind of stuff, and I, I remember him one time telling a kid to throw me the ball.  We were playing baseball because I wasn't going to be able to do anything with it.  You know, that was one of the prouder moments 'cause I turned that ball into a pinprick on the horizon.  I mean, I love when somebody does something like that.  So, you know, there was that, that kind of element.  And then I remember when there, it got to the point where, you know, they were tearing down all these barracks and so we had to move somewhere.  Well, my parents could not find any decent rental properties 'cause the only places that would rent to blacks were dives.  I mean, just total heaps and while these barracks weren't exactly, you know, the Ritz, you know, at least it was a halfway decent and safe, you know, environment.  And I can remember the challenges that they went through.  They finally wound up buying a house in an area that, where they allowed blacks to buy houses.  It was this segregated little several blocks of this adjoining township.  So, and it had a decent school that we were able to go to as well.
Story_ID: 116842
Speaker 1: Now, you mentioned your siblings earlier.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: How many do you have?
Speaker 2: A brother and a sister, both younger.
Speaker 1: Could you give us, give us their names and the birth order, you being the oldest?
Speaker 2: Right, Michael [Washington] is about a year and a fraction younger than me and then my sister's about six years younger, Julie.
Speaker 1: Julie Washington or is she--
Speaker 2: Well, she's just got a married name now, Binilith (unclear).
Speaker 1: Okay, so what was life like with the three of you all growing up in that, in your family home?  You know, you, now of course you mentioned some, some rather violent acts on your father's part because of alcoholism but what was life, basic life like?  Was it church going?  What was life like?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, my mother [Ida Mayo Washington], yeah, we would go to church most of the time.  You know, I, at the time it all seemed fine.  I mean, it seemed even though, you know, it was terror around my father [Frank Washington, Sr.] at various times and you never knew when it was going to be terror, but, you know, at the time, it seemed just fine, you know.  And, you know, we pretty much, you know, we had chores to do and stuff like that but, you know, it seemed like a, at the time a normal childhood.
Story_ID: 116843
Speaker 1: Now you're in elementary school.  Do you recall, do you recall the name of your school?  Your first elementary school?
Speaker 2: I think it was Orangeburg Elementary School [Rockland County, New York].
Speaker 1: And are there any teachers or classmates that, that stand out in your mind at the elementary school?
Speaker 2: You know, I think I remember a high-- it was a kindergarten teacher or something that, you know, everybody used to like her a lot but I can't remember her name.
Speaker 1: Okay, so your next school after that, after, now, do you have any like, aspirations when you were in elementary school?  Anything important that you wanted to be possibly?
Speaker 2: I just knew I wanted out of where I was.  I didn't know necessarily what I wanted to be.  At some, at some point in middle school, I did start thinking about becoming a veterinarian.  Somebody had raised that idea.
Speaker 1: Middle school is like close to junior high?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So what--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What was the name of that school?  Do you recall the name of that?
Speaker 2: Well, at that point, I was going to this Nyack High School [Upper Nyack, New York] that my mother [Ida Mayo Washington] had gone to and it was a school that was right at the racial tipping point.  So the whites were just starting to move out and it was, you know, probably within three or four years after I left there, it totally went into the ground.  I was one of two black kids in the accelerated classes and I had--
Speaker 1: Now, now this is junior high?
Speaker 2: This is junior, this is--
Speaker 1: The middle school?
Speaker 2: --this is, this is seventh through ninth, part of--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: -Yeah, ninth grade, right.
Speaker 1: So now you're, you're one of two blacks in the accelerated school?
Speaker 2: Uh-hum, classes.
Speaker 1: Classes, and what, how did that occur?  Did someone recognize that you should be in there?
Speaker 2: Well I had been, the school I was in, what happened was my parents got, broke up, and so my mother had to find a cheap apartment.  The only place she could find one was at the Central Nyack, which was part of this Nyack school district, which was outside of Clarkstown [New York] which was a much better school system that I had been going to previously.  That Clarkstown was where I got, they decided, that I was, they put me in accelerated classes and so I made a point of making sure that that continued once I went to Nyack.
Speaker 1: So now this is all New York still, pretty much?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so you're in this Nyack accelerated program.  What kind of classes did you take there?  What were you doing there?
Speaker 2: Well I was taking, you know, Algebra--I was taking college-type courses--
Speaker 1: In--
Speaker 2: --precollege type courses.
Speaker 1: In, almost, we'll say pre-middle school in that, during that range, you were already doing that, those kind of courses?  Seventh to ninth grade?
Speaker 2: Right, exactly.
Speaker 1: Which is quite an accomplishment because you hadn't really get into the high school thing yet?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that was normal for the accelerated classes then, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean, it was just, if you were gonna be there, that's what you were going to take.
Story_ID: 116844
Speaker 1: And you mentioned that there, you mentioned, you thought about being a veterinarian?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What brought that on?
Speaker 2: Like I said, I think my, that was my mother's [Ida Mayo Washington] idea and I just kind of, 'cause she thought I liked animals, which I do, and that was how I kind of picked up on that.
Speaker 1: Did you have pets at the time?
Speaker 2: Yeah, don't ask me.  I can't, I don't, I may have had a dog, I never actually, I had a dog later but I didn't have one then.
Speaker 1: What other interests did you have when you were in middle school, like then?
Speaker 2: I just read, that's all I did.  I'd read every book in the library.
Speaker 1: Fiction, nonfiction?
Speaker 2: Everything.
Speaker 1: Everything.
Speaker 2: I tried to read every book on the shelf.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, at this time, I would imagine that your momma's raising the three of you by herself now at this point?
Speaker 2: At this point, right.
Story_ID: 116845
Speaker 1: So high school's on the brink, tenth grade is coming up.  What high school did you go to?
Speaker 2: Well, fortunately, because I'll tell you, I was having to fight guys or be threatened with being beaten virtually every day.  I got, she was able to buy a house back in the Clarkstown [New York] area and so I went to this Clarkstown High School, which exactly wasn't a bed of roses either.  This, this is right around the time that my father [Frank Washington, Sr.] died and I kind of went into this, what do you call it, almost autistic shell, you know.  I just, I wouldn't talk to people.
Speaker 1: So this would have been in what, about 1960, somewhere around there or?
Speaker 2: '61 [1961], '62 [1962], something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But anyway, I mean, I never dated during high school.  I just, basic, I, I did, I mean, I was involved in a few clubs and stuff like that but I pretty much stayed to myself in part because, once again, I mean, I'm one of only two black kids in the, you know, 300 class, you know, high school class and, you know, I just didn't, I wasn't trying to break any boundaries.  I was just trying to mind my own business and I was-- I tend to be, what's the word, introverted anyway, and, you know, focused on learning as much as I could.  It was almost like I knew that for me to do what I wanted to do to get out of there, I could not be distracted by anything and I just focused on what I thought was, and it was hard enough getting through that, you know, doing it the way I did it, much less if I think I had been some, trying to act like some social animal, I mean, I'm, that doesn't come to me naturally.  It would have been too much of a distraction.
Speaker 1: So you weren't involved in a lot of extracurricular activities or things like that?
Speaker 2: Well I played some sports and stuff like that but, you know, it wasn't like I was going to, I never, like I said, I never dated, never went to a dance.  My mother [Ida Mayo Washington], I think, was concerned there for awhile.
Story_ID: 116846
Speaker 1: So, you're going through high school and your single-minded because you want to leave, you kind of repressed a lot of stuff and you're just being quiet to yourself and you're going through.  Now, college is in the horizon.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Or was college in the horizon?
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.  I mean, I was, you know, trying to figure out, I knew I had to get into college.  I absolutely knew that.  You know, I didn't know where the money was going to come from but I just, oh actually I did start, I started saving from paper routes and assorted other places, I mean, I'd been saving for probably, you know, ever since I was, you know, in junior high school.  So, by the time I got ready to graduate, I had about $2,000 in the bank which back then, that was a lot of money.
Speaker 1: So, did you have any idea where you wanted to go to school?
Speaker 2: Well I wanted to go to Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York] because that was, that had the premier vet school.
Speaker 1: So you had, so you had decided at this point I'm going to be a veterinarian?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So you decided to go to Cornell?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And what does your mom say about this?
Speaker 2: Well she's, tried to help, she facilitated it as, however she could.  You know, boy I'll tell you, talk about, you know, ignorance on steroids.  I mean, I only applied to two schools.  I applied to Cornell and Albany State Teachers College and they put me on the waiting list at Albany State Teachers College.  I mean, I don't know what I would have done if Cornell had turned me down.  I, you know, I mean, you know, I had so little understanding of the--
Speaker 1: Process.
Speaker 2: --you think about today and all the stuff that parents do.  I had none of that.  And the guidance, I mean, I did, there was some, I think there was a guidance teacher but, I mean, and I had fairly good, you know, SAT and PSAT scores and stuff like that but I mean (laughs), that is not, that is not the way you would wanna to play that, you know, to put yourself in that narrow of a position, but I couldn't afford the, you know, the application, well I guess I could have, but in any event, that's what I did and I was, God must have been smiling on me because (laughs) I, like I said, I don't know what I would have done if I hadn't been accepted at Cornell.
Story_ID: 115686
Speaker 1: You're asking about my mother [Ida Mayo Washington].  I mean, another thing about my mother is that she had grown up in a multi-cultural community, once again, very uncharacteristic for the time.  And so she had a, an outlook that was, while she was most aware of color, at the same time, I mean, for the most part, it was one based around acceptance, you know, based on color, 'cause that's how she'd grown up.  And I think that was one of the things that, when I later went to college, and was around a lot of kids that had come from ghettos and had been segregated their whole lives, I had much more of an ease, excuse me, in dealing with the larger society than they did.  I was much more well-equipped to deal with that than they were.  And when we get to that I can, I was involved in the takeover of the student commons area at Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York], the armed takeover.  I, may have been before your time, made the front pages of all the newspapers and everything else and the, you know, the kind of, what would I call it, well, I mean, fundamentally, it was fear that prompted that, came out of just not having been given the tools to, to exist in, you know, a non-segregated, isolated type, you know, whiter-type environment, whereas I had that and so that was a big advantage to me.
Speaker 2: So you saw yourself able to fit in either way to be able to--
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Speaker 2: --to be able to understand the plight of those that were, may have seemed less, less franchised than you saw, disenfranchised but you could also, also relate to, to the majority of society also.
Speaker 1: Absolutely, and, I mean, what's interesting is, I mean you talk to some of the discourse around [HM President Barack] Obama, okay.  I mean, I'm not half white, half black in the, you know, to me that doesn't mean anything.  I mean, you know, that's, that doesn't mean anything.  What I mean, what I was though was half black and half white by dint of experience and, you know, sometimes that could backfire.  I mean you could wind up gettin' shelled from both sides, you know, just and, as opposed, people think about that, you know, just because you've got a white mother and a, and a black father or vice versa, that to me doesn't mean anything.  It's what, you know, how you have experienced the world and when you've had that half and half experience, you know, it can be--
Speaker 2: Of experience.
Speaker 1: --it can be a strength on both sides or it can be a vulnerability if you get your wires crossed.
Story_ID: 115687
Speaker 1: So let's juxtapose that with you being not necessarily rich during this time period when you're learning to be accepted in and inclusive of people and learning to be but your own personal family lifestyle was that one of, would you call it poverty to a certain point?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, poverty to me is as much a state of mind as anything and while there was no question, I mean, there were times when we literally had, whether it was going to be enough food to eat, was a question and certainly didn't, as I mentioned to you, I had shoes that, you know, I had to wear with safety pins to keep from tripping over my own, you know, my own shoes, but I don't think, because of my mother [Ida Mayo Washington], both my parents, the fact that they had graduated from high school, they both had a, a sense of thinking, somewhere I got the idea, it was probably from my mother who said, you know, you can do, be anything you want.  And so it was that expansive manifest destiny kind of thinking that, you know, I, to me, you know, poverty, you know, it's the opposite of poverty.  You don't, you can't think outside of the hole, to the point where, you know, I have a lot of relatives, and particularly back then, a lot of them were dead or in jail or whatever but, I had relatives that I knew were smarter than I was.  I mean, I played tournament chess and some of these, my cousins, could beat me.  They hadn't, you know, I'm up there memorizing the opening games and stuff like that and they could beat me at chess.  They were clearly as smart or smarter than I was but when I tried to convince them to go to college, they couldn't do it.  They said, that's your thing.  I mean, they clearly were in--they had that impoverished mind thing that held them back.  They, it was out of their comfort zone.  It was out of their frame of reference.  They just couldn't do it and nothing I was going to say to them was going to change their minds.
Story_ID: 115688
Speaker 1: So I heard you mention that you had gone through school and you had been the consummate geek you said--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --through coll-, through high school, doing your work, getting good grades and so now Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York], you said, you got into Cornell?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Tell us about your first year there.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: And that experience.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, you know, I remember the day my mother [Ida Mayo Washington] and my godmother dropped me off there and I always visualize it--
Speaker 1: What was her name, the godmother?
Speaker 2: Beatrice Fountain.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Anyway, I always visualize it as one of these panning shots, you know, where the shots starts right next to you on the ground and then it pans, it goes way back and it's just me standing among all these people, you know, who obviously knew what the hell they were doing.  I'm just standing, you know, in the middle of this parking lot without a frickin' clue of where to go, you know, who to talk to or anything.  So I kind of stumbled around like that for a while until I met a couple of guys on my floor that, you know, I think they had, this was the COSEP [Committee on Special Educational Projects] program at Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York] where they brought in, for the first time, a large number of blacks, a lot of them from inner-cities and other places.
Speaker 1: Now what year would this have been?
Speaker 2: This was 1966.
Speaker 1: Okay, now there's a lot going on now as far as race is concerned in America at this point.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay and you're now at this, not only white school--
Speaker 2: Right, and it was interesting because initially there was kind of like this exploration period where the, most of these white people had never been around blacks and vice versa and it looked, you know, like kind of a positive reaction initially but it very quickly turned sour.
Speaker 1: How many blacks were there, pardon me, at this time?
Speaker 2: You know there may have been, I don't know, there may have been, I don't know.  There could have been three or four hundred and out of a class of, I don't know, you know, several thousand or more, these are just undergraduates, not the graduate schools which were, you know, there were many more graduate students, I think, than undergraduates 'cause Cornell is basically a graduate school which is part of its strength but it's also part of the vulnerability or challenge for somebody going there because you have to be a strong, self-reliant person or you will, you'll have a hard time there because--
Speaker 1: Caught in the undertow.
Speaker 2: Nobody's going to tell you what to do.  I mean, you have to kind of sort things out.  But for me, Cornell was wonderful, I mean, because it was out in the middle of nowhere so it wasn't overshadowed by some, you know, larger metropolitan, you know, influence and yet you had this multiplicity of intellectual and cultural and other diversity among all these people there and I mean, the graduate schools were a large part of it, you know, because you had a lot of people there from engineering schools and all sorts of places and it was just a, I just found it to be a cornucopia, you know, of learning experiences.
Story_ID: 115689
Speaker 1: So while you're there with your, now you're, now your first year, had you declared a major or you were still looking for a veterinarian?
Speaker 2: I was undergraduate pre-veterinarian medicine which was a brutal exercise (laughs).  I mean I, things like organic chemistry, you know, integral and differential calculus.  I was taking the six-hour German course that was taught by the ex-girlfriend of Hitler.  I mean, you know, I really loaded myself up and I, to be honest with you, I did not do, I did not do very well in my first year.
Speaker 1: As many people do their first year.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I, I was very disappointed and, you know, not very happy with the, with how that went.  But I finally figured out that, you know what, this is not for me.  I mean, I'm not, I'm not going, first of all, the veterinary school back then had a quota.  They'd only allow in two women and I think the same number of blacks 'cause of the dean was, you know, a real piece of work.  And so I knew for me to get in there I was going to have to have top scores in all these areas and I could very quickly see that was not gonna to happen.  So after my, I think it was about halfway through my second year, I made a decision to, to see if I could get into another school 'cause I didn't want, the school I was in was the Ag School at Cornell [Cornell University College of Agriculture and Life Sciences] and I didn't, I didn't want to be any frickin' farmer.  So I applied to the [Cornell University] School of Industrial and Labor Relations and the Dean there said, we'll let you in if you can do well in the hardest course in the school, which was this labor law course.  Well, I managed to get a B in it and that was good enough for them to allow me to switch and then I became pre-law.  The problem was, the Vietnam War was also going on at the same time.  I lost a whole year's worth of credits 'cause I had to make that up in order to graduate from this other school and when the draft board figured that out, they immediately tried to draft me so that I would go right in the Army after my fourth year thereby not graduating.  Well, of course, and I should point out, my father had been a big military guy.  In fact, I tried to get into ROTC [The Reserve Officers' Training Corps] when I first went to Cornell but because I had asthma, they, they refused me.
Story_ID: 115690
Speaker 1: Now explain, explain ROTC [The Reserve Officers' Training Corps].  What ROTC is?  ROTC?
Speaker 2: ROTC, right.  I don't need to explain that, right?
Speaker 1: Right, and that's okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, anyway, so I actually, when I first got this notice, I immediately asked for a, a hearing with the draft board.  Well, that was a big mistake.  I went down and there were a couple, there were about four or five old guys sitting on this Board.  The only black guy was a town drunk and, you know, I mean that just, I remember walking out of there and slamming the whole, the door so hard I think the American flag might have falling over.  But that's when I figured out, you know, what, I'm not going, you know, I'm gonna finish my degree.  I am not going in any stupid Army before I get this degree finished.  And I'd heard about this Surgeon General's list of all the physical things that would get you out of the Army and anyway I went out, I got a copy of that and I figured, you know, between the asthma and the, a very bad case of flat feet, and I was able to have an asthma attack like, you know, it was a real asthma attack while I was at school so I had it documented.  Anyway, to make a long story short, I was able to get a 4-F designation and not wind up, and I would have probably gone in the Army if they had done it in a way that I thought was fair like let me, after I spent all this time and effort, you're going to have me go in the Military before I get my final year?  But that made me mad and that's one of my characteristics, by the way.  I, as long as, I think, even when they don't work to my favor, if I think a rule is fair, great, I'll go along with it.  When I think it's stupid, and I don't mean just for me, I mean in the greater good sense, I'll do everything I can to get around it.
Speaker 1: So, is it, is that the kind of child you were growing up in general too?
Speaker 2: I don't remember.  All I know as a child, you know, I'd get my head handed to me so I was, so I tended to follow the rules even when they weren't stupid.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Or even when they were stupid.
Story_ID: 115691
Speaker 1: So, so you're at Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York] and what other highlights?  You mentioned one earlier about the takeover of the common area but, but tell us about some of those, your highlights at Cornell that you were involved with?
Speaker 2: That I was involved with?
Speaker 1: Explain that one to us in more detail if you'd like.
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: What happened?
Speaker 2: --yeah, as I mentioned, there was a large group of blacks who became increasingly frustrated with how they were being treated and, you know, there were a variety of things, some legitimate, some imagined, you know, some, you know, exaggerated, but anyway, it culminated in a group of people, some of whom, it was very interesting, it taught me a real lesson.  The guys that I mentioned that I had, had been on my floor as a freshman, they were from Bed--one of them was from Bedford-Stuyvesant [New York City, New York], which you have some sense of, you know, they had both gone to Stuyvesant High School, okay, so they knew what it was like, you know, to be poor and everything else.  The main instigators behind the takeover were, were middle class black kids who had all sorts of privileges that we never had and, you know, as my friend said to me, I know what it's like for somebody to get killed and I'm not raising my hand to go get killed over something bullshit, you know, was how he reacted and, but these other guys, I mean, this, this occurred on Parents Weekend, on a spring, spring, sometime in the spring semester, and--
Speaker 1: Approximately what year would this have been?
Speaker 2: This was about '68 [1968].
Speaker 1: Okay, and then Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] had been killed already?
Speaker 2: Um, you know I don't think so.  I think this predated that.
Speaker 1: So it was prior to April?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think it, I think it predated that.  Anyway, they, something had happened.  Somebody did something or other, in any event what happened was, oh, a large number of blacks got together, a few of them had guns and they took over the Student Commons area which included a radio station and they took over the radio station until they found out it was a federal offense to take over a radio station.  But anyway, they were all up there and I, you know, I was with my mother on Parents Weekend, you know.  I had no intention of go, in going and getting involved in something like that nor did my, you know, the guys that I had been the closest to that, you know, I'd known since being a freshman.  But--
Speaker 1: And their names, are you at liberty to share some of the names of your classmates and those guys in particular?
Speaker 2: Oh, those two guys?  Theo Jacobs and Paul Johnson.  I just was able to have a little mini reunion with them several years ago in New York City.  But anyway, that, you know, that kind of set off, obviously, a huge, I mean, it was a miracle that nobody got killed over that.  I mean, that they were finally able to work that out but it threw the university into an uproar, I mean, a very esteemed presidential scholar professor wound up committing suicide over that because he, and you know, there's been books written about it, he was viewed as having cotton (unclear)--there were two groups of, Cornell had this huge governmental, government school or sub you know, area of discipline, a number of the most esteemed government professors in the country were in this department.  Anyway, he was criticized by a lot of the more conservative of the folks in there for having been too accommodating and having, you know, compromised himself.  He wound up killing himself over that.  I mean, it got really nasty and that carried on, I think, through the entire, I mean, twice while I was there, finals were suspended between the Vietnam War and, you know, Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] getting shot and they closed the university down.  I was getting pissed off because I'm putting, I'm, you know, unlike some of these other people, I'm there to get an education to get out of there.  I spent all this time, you know, preparing and then it, and then it all gets cancelled.  Now I'm not saying I was totally unsympathetic because I actually did participate in a lot of the stuff but once again, going back to what I said about the, you know, the half and half, I didn't feel I needed to ostracize or reject my white friends just because of all of this and yet I took a lot of shit, you know, because I didn't.  You know, I remember, I was arts review editor for the 'Cornell Daily Sun'.  You know, I wrote movie reviews and play reviews and stuff like that, and one night I'm in there trying to get this frickin' movie review done, you know, on the deadline, and some guy comes running in and says, they're turning over cars on Eddy Street, you know, and burning them and I'm sitting there going, what in the heck am I doing (laughter)?  So I mean it was really kind of 'Alice in Wonderland,' it really was.  It was a time where there was an enormous amount of distraction and, I mean, more than, you know, college is always a place where you're trying to find yourself, well, you know, people are trying to find themselves by, you know, playing Kamikaze, you know.
Story_ID: 115692
Speaker 1: So, so are you opened now in your personality?  You said you were somewhat introverted.  Are you more involved in activities and, obviously?
Speaker 2: Well, as I mentioned, I was, I did, I did the, you know, I did the work for the, for the newspaper.  I was an editor for the newspaper.  I did play lacrosse in college.  I started going out, you know, with girls, women, whatever.  My two friends from Bedford-Stuyvesant [New York] taught me how to dance so they kind of loosened, loosened me up, beat me up, got me to, you know, be a little bit more sociable. (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Sociable.
Story_ID: 115693
Speaker 1: So now did you go back home for the summers?  Did you go back home for your summertime?
Speaker 2: And I worked.  A factory that my father [Frank Washington, Sr.] had worked in, this was a, boy I'll tell you, Darwinian is one step away from Dickson's, Dickens boot black place.  It, this was a factory that produced paper and in many cases the laminated paper or paper that was covered with foil.  And it was right on the Hudson River and it, it had been there for, I don't know, at that time, I don't know, fifty, sixty years, and it had been owned by a succession of companies and it was, during the summer, I mean, these huge presses that took heat and compressed the rags and, you know, paper and stuff to make it in the new cardboard paper and they'd come off these things.  It'd be 120 degrees in there and it would cut, you know, it had machines that cut the paper.  Well, guys were always getting their hands cut off, their feet cut off or they'd go down in between the, you know, these rollers that squeezed the water out of the paper and so lose their legs.  And what I did was I worked, I worked shifts of people who were on vacation.  So a lot of time I'd be working, you know, I'd work from seven till three and then the next week on Sunday, I'd go from three to six, excuse me, from three to eleven, you know, or the graveyard shift.  And so it was always, I'd always be changing shifts which you can imagine, and a lot of times I'd work eighteen hours 'cause that was another way of getting, you know, I'd get time and a half for eighteen hours.
Speaker 1: You worked a whole eighteen hour day?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  No actually, no two eight-hour shifts, sixteen hour days.  I'd work a sixteen hour day, right.  So, and I, most of the time I was there I worked on a machine that produced aluminum, it, the liquor bottle boxes, you know, that had the aluminum foil cover.  This cut the box material that was used for those and my job was to stand on the back of this machine and make sure no imperfect pieces came through.  And, once again, I mean this place, a cast of characters out of Dickens.  So there was a guy there who had been a prize fighter called Tommy Dell.  He was about five foot three and he was notorious because he had been, he fought to the point where he was semi-blind but he would get, he'd pick a fight with a bigger guy and let the bigger guy punch on him till he'd wear himself out and then he'd kill them.  I mean, he would just destroy them.  And this little, he was like an imp, you know, and one time I was standing up on this ladder, and this is over a course of three or four summers, and I'm watching this paper come off of there and something went wrong and, you know, by this time I was kind of a pro at this and I saw his hand on the, you know, 'cause he'd be yelling at me.  You know, and I saw his hand on the, on the ladder to, he was going to start coming up there with me and I stepped on his hand.  So, about two weeks later, you know, we had, they let this guy drive the crane even though he was halfway blind and there were holes, it was a huge cavernous hall that all these great big rolls of paper, I mean, you know, they weighed two thousand pounds a piece that went on the machine and he had to use this crane to pick them up.  Well, there were holes in the wall all around where he had ja-, he had run this two ton crane into the wall, you know, because he couldn't see what he was doing.  And on this one occasion, I was standing on top of a table and the crane had a great big metal, it was like a rectangular bar that must have weighed, you know, 150 pounds and it had on either end, it had chains with hooks on them that you would hook onto the paper rolls and lift the rolls up.  Well he got, this happened all the time, he got the chain caught somewhere in the wall and instead of letting me get down off the table and go over and unhook it, he just pulls the crane.  Well, what happened?  The, that pole shot, when it finally came loose, shot out of the wall right at me and, I mean, I dove, you know, into the floor which was covered probably in about six or seven inches of all this paper dust.  So I mean it was a big mess.  And I happened to look up and he was up there just smiling, laughing away.  He just thought that was the greatest fun.  But, I mean, guys, I remember this place had five or six different sellers and I remember, you know, on a overnight shift, graveyard shift, wandering around, 'cause these guys had figured out, this is how I figured out labor unions, okay.  They would run the machine fast during the night and then go to sleep.  So they'd make their quota and they'd jimmy the, they had these gages that were supposed to show how the thing was running.  They'd jimmy the gage, you know, and then go to sleep.  Anyway, while they were sleeping, I went wandering around one night and I remember coming to a steel door and it was, some poet had written on this door this story of some guy that had gone down there and they, I mean, they have all these flammable liquids everywhere because they use that for the different colors on the, you know, to coat the boxes and other stuff.  And apparently this idiot walked into this room full of flammable liquids and lit a cigarette and the way the story was written, of course nobody ever saw this guy again.  So, and my, and my father had worked there, my uncle worked, actually both my uncles worked, I mean, it was, you know because it was a union job, you could make more money with the least amount of skills, you know, in this place but if one ever got an education, and why you wanted to get a college education, this was the place to get it because these were lost souls.  I mean, they were just, you know--
Speaker 1: They were stuck.
Speaker 2: --they were playing out their time.
Speaker 1: Stuck so to speak.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, exactly.
Story_ID: 115694
Speaker 1: So you're going through, and you're doing this in the summers?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You're at Cornell [University in Ithaca, New York], you've changed your major to pre-law?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Are you having any legal aspirations?  Are you seeing anything now?  Are you becoming more interested in politics?  Policy?  What's going on with you now as--
Speaker 2: I really didn't focus--
Speaker 1: Just going to school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I didn't really focus that way.  In fact, I, I knew I wanted to try to apply to law school but I also knew, at the same time, I was, I finally learned my lesson from, you know, the almost disastrous college application process that you better make sure you have a number of alternatives.  And I, they, I went through the job process and I think it was at the point where I hadn't decided whether I, or where I was going to go to law school or if I was going to go to law school.  But anyway, just for the heck of it, I went through the job process, through this labor relations school, and the job that these guys came up with was down on the Gulf of Mexico, there was a huge plant, Goodyear, Firestone, one of those tire companies, and this place had been segregated forever and they wanted, the job they had was for somebody to go down there and be the HR person, I won't even say presiding over, let's just say, you know, present at, the desegregation of this place that had been seg-, I took one look at that and I said, not in this lifetime (laughter).  I knew I was going to law school then.
Speaker 1: So you graduated from Cornell in about '71 [1971]?
Speaker 2: That's correct.  It took me an extra year.
Speaker 1: And your degree was in what now?
Speaker 2: Industrial Labor Relations.
Speaker 1: Industrial Labor Relations, okay.  Now you learned from, from before to have a few options when it came to law school, you decided to go to law school.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: How many did you apply to?
Speaker 2: Oh, about, I think about six or seven.
Speaker 1: This time you took a few more under your belt?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, I sure did.
Speaker 1: And what were those schools?  Do you recall?
Speaker 2: I think, let's see, Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California], Chicago [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], I want to say there were some other Ivy League schools in there that I also applied to but I can't remember off the top of my head.  In any event, I got into all the schools that I applied to but Yale was the one I was most interested in.  I mean, it was clearly ranked, you know, as the top school and what was interesting about it was it had this pass, fail system.  So it was kind of like, you know, once you get in, you're in.  You know, nobody's gonna kill themselves once you're in there and it turned out to be the right choice.
Story_ID: 115695
Speaker 1: Were there any notables there with you while you were there at that school [Yale Law School, New Haven, Connecticut]?
Speaker 2: Well the Clintons were a year ahead of me.
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: And the guy that was in my class that I very quickly became, and continue to be good friends with, is Clarence Thomas.
Speaker 1: Now tell us about your interaction with the Clintons or Clarence Thomas.
Speaker 2: I had virtually none with the Clintons.  I think I met Bill [President Bill Clinton].  Bill was never at school.
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: Bill was out running other people's political campaigns and son of a bitch got all honors.  I mean, he was never in school but he was so bright he was able to pull that off.
Speaker 1: He was a strategist for other people's campaign?
Speaker 2: He worked on their campaigns.  I don't know what exactly he did but, I mean, you almost never saw him.
Speaker 1: Now how about Hillary [Clinton]?
Speaker 2: I saw her more often but I never had any, you know, interaction with her.
Speaker 1: Interaction, but Clarence Thomas was a classmate or a--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, and a close friend.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean, you know, there were three of us.  Him, a guy named Harry Singleton and myself that hung very close together because we all were, you know, there by dint of luck and bootstraps, you know.  Most of the other people, the [HM] Lani Guiniers and I forget this other guys father, black kid, whose father had been the Secretary of Transportation under Ford or somebody, I mean, you know, they had generations of, of, Lani's father, I think, was a judge, I mean, you know, they clearly had lived in that environment whereas we came out of nowhere.
Speaker 1: And you were the first generation of your family to come through and--
Speaker 2: First generation of my family to go to college, period.
Speaker 1: Period.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 115696
Speaker 1: Now the Yale Law School [New Haven, Connecticut] has a, a, just a host of notables but one of the most is our, is one of our current Supreme Court Justices who happened to be a friend and classmate of yours, Clarence Thomas.  Now there's, there's quite a bit been said on both sides of this, of the coin about Clarence Thomas and things of that nature.  Could you give us your opinion, growing, well we'll say growing up because college is still a growing up experience.  You're in law school, you all are going into careers that are-that can have major consequences.  Did you ever hear him say, I want to be a Supreme Court Justice?
Speaker 2: Nope.
Speaker 1: Okay, and did you ever have, it was a trio you said, yourself--
Speaker 2: And Harry Singleton.
Speaker 1: --Harry Singleton and Clarence Thomas.  Just give us a, a basic rundown.  You're all at Yale, Yale Law School, there had been people there before, it's prestigious but three, three young black men at Yale at the same time.  Talk to us about that.
Speaker 2: Well, just to put it into context, I mean the class, my class had ten black people.  That was half between females and males.  The class before us had considerably more and the, the rumor was that they purposely reduced the number of black people in the class because of some of the problems that they'd had in the previous class.
Speaker 1: What problems would that have been, do you recall?
Speaker 2: You know, I think it was somehow, 'cause I wasn't there, it was tied into some of the overall disturbances in that period but some of the people didn't, just didn't, didn't do as well.  You know, I don't know.  That was just a rumor because our class was like a third the size of, a third or quarter the size of some of the more recent previous preceding classes.
Speaker 1: So possibly the class before had forty or fifty people--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --in it?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And keep in mind, Yale is the small, I mean at that time our class size was about 170.  Harvard [Law School], by frame of reference, is like over 400.  So it was a fairly small school.
Speaker 1: So you're, you're somewhat just under ten percent?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Under ten percent actually.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Of the whole overall student body.
Story_ID: 115697
Speaker 1: So now you're there with, with Justice [Clarence] Thomas.  Tell us about him back in those days and your--
Speaker 2: Ah, just a wonderful guy.  I mean, great sense of humor, incredible athlete.  I mean, he could stuff, you know, he's only, he's my height.  He could stuff a basketball and I've seen him throw a football running in the opposite direction about forty or fifty yards.  I mean, he was a serious athlete, and just a great guy to be around.  I spent, you know, enormous amount of time with him.  I don't know if you've read his book which, about his grandfather, you know, it's called, my grandfa-, I forget exactly what the name of it is, 'My Grandfather's Grandson', or something like that.  In any event, you know, he used to talk about, you know, his grandfather and his experience growing up and, you know, I thought I had it bad, you know, he had a few steps on me.
Speaker 1: Because he had been from the South also, right?
Speaker 2: That's right, and Pin Point, Georgia and, you know, just really oppressive circumstances both, you know, within his family and without.
Speaker 1: How are you all, as far as students at this point?  Did you, are you able to help each other?  Was it a struggle for all of you, [Harry] Singleton and yourself included?
Speaker 2: Well I think we all, I think we held our own.  You know, we, to some extent, on occasion would come, you know, compare notes and stuff like that but by that time we pretty much determined, you know, we pretty much perfected our academic styles.  They used to kid me, Clarence in particular, 'cause I had learned shorthand and all my notes, he used to say, you know, "man, you're no good, your notes are all in shorthand, I can't read them", you know, so, stuff like that but, you know, I think we were all, in our own way, we had gotten to the point where we were good enough scholars that we were able to, you know, to do what we needed to do.
Story_ID: 115698
Speaker 1: So your first year of law school, if I'm correct, it deals with tort and property and those kind of things where you're coming in for your first group of classes, is that correct?  Is that some of the things you deal with?
Speaker 2: The first year of law school is like boot camp--
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: --in the Marines.  It's designed to break down your way of thinking and make you ultimately think like a lawyer and it is very disorienting.  I mean, that's when most people, you know, if they're gonna not do well, that's, that's when it comes out because this is--
Speaker 1: What are some of the class, class loads like?  What are some of the classes?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, things like, we had contract law.  I remember we had this woman who ultimately became the Chief Justice of the Connecticut State Supreme Court.  I mean, I couldn't understand what the hell this woman was talking about half the time.  You know, I mean she made contracts, you know, a conundrum.  We had a guy named Joe Willy Moore.  There's something called Moore's treatise on bankruptcy, Moore's treatise on procedure, I mean, you go in a law library, you see that.
Speaker 1: Is that--
Speaker 2: This is the guy that--
Speaker 1: Is that M-O-H-R or--
Speaker 2: M-O-O-R-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is the guy that created all those procedural volumes.  I mean, we had, you know, there were some real, and these were kind of like lions of the legal profession who, you know, are having their last roar, their last hurrah.  He was, he was certainly one of the more notable of them but there were a number of them that were there in teaching and he, they were just coming off a period of time and the so-called Socratic method where they would, you know, humiliate people to, you know, to make a point.  And he was a master of it but he had, there were more women in the class and I think, I don't know what had happened but he had tempered his approach.  I mean, he was a, you know, you looked at this guy who's this little, he looked like he could have been a stand-in without the beard for Santa Claus, I mean, this roly-poly belly.  This guy had been, he had been a cowboy or something in his, you know, earlier life and, I mean, looked like this little dwarf redneck, you know, but I mean he was an extraordinary guy and a very thoughtful one and one you could, you know, learn a lot from--
Story_ID: 115699
Speaker 1: Were they very open in teaching you, you all being black?  Was there any, did you ever get a feeling of possibly they're trying to break me down because, because of my race or they want to see how far, or they're trying to help push me forward to give a little extra push I might need.  Did you ever feel any of that kind of?
Speaker 2: I don't know that, you know, others may have, but I, you know, I didn't, I didn't sense that.  I mean, it was, you know, it's a free fire zone.  I mean, whatever you wanted to go after, you went after it and these, I mean these guys were grandees, dons, whatever.  I mean, they were so, most of them, intellectually focused.  They were just above all of that.
Speaker 1: The average thought process, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right.  I mean, they were just focused on, for the most part, you know, what was between your ears.  And, I mean, probably the most challenging, I mean other than the first year of law school, the most challenging part of the experience for me was I decided I was going to write a note for the law journal [The Yale Law Journal] and detail is not my thing, which is one of the reasons why, ultimately was, you know, decided to get out of the practice of law or that there were other things that, you know, suited me better.  And this is back in the era before the computer and my little note, which was published in the law journal had about, I don't know, 120 footnotes.  Well every time, and I rewrote this thing three times over the course of a year--a year and a half, every time I changed that thing, I mean and it moved the footnotes around, I had to, it literally, you had to cut pieces of paper out and move stuff around.  I mean it was, and it got rejected the first time for probably good reason.  I submitted it, but, of course, being the bullheaded person I am, I was determined to get this thing, you know--
Speaker 1: Published.
Speaker 2: --accepted and published.  And it literally gave me a case of irritable bowel syndrome trying to get that thing done but I ultimately was able to do it.  That was the most intensive part of the experience.  There were--the thing that I enjoyed the most was practical applications.  So I had, actually the idea for the law note came out of work I did for the Urban League in, in Connecticut.  There was a three-city combined Urban League Governmental Affairs Council that one of the projects we got involved in was cable television franchises that politicians had gotten awarded themselves and then sat on, didn't build them, until they figured they can sell them for a lot of money.  I mean, it was craven.
Story_ID: 115700
Speaker 1: So now you were still in, in--
Speaker 2: Law school [Yale Law School in New Haven, Connecticut].
Speaker 1: --law school at this point?
Speaker 2: And I was doing work for the Urban League and one of the projects involved this cable television area--
Speaker 1: Because typically law students were flying some kind of project or some kind of job to get involved with while they're there.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Is it part of your course work or is it--
Speaker 2: It was--I don't, you know, I don't, I was actually doing it for the experience and to earn money--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --'cause I got--they paid you a small stipend.
Speaker 1: Because in the summers, don't you either clerk in the summers or find something to do in the--
Speaker 2: Well, let's see, I'm trying to remember, the first summer, it wasn't until, it's the second summer where most guys, I mean, most, the first summer I didn't, I did work for the Urban League--
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: --but the second summer I clerked for a law firm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's usually the second summers when you're clerking for, you know, a judge or law firm or something like that.  But anyway, the, that practical experience of working for the Urban League was wonderful.  I mean, 'cause I got directly involved in both public policy as well as semi-political, you know, type issues.
Speaker 1: So did you kind of know now, okay, because of that work, that you can have more of a focus on which direction of law you wanted to go into?
Speaker 2: Well, I got really interested in communications.
Story_ID: 115701
Speaker 1: Okay, how about Clarence Thomas at this point?  What was he doing?
Speaker 2: He actually worked for a, some sort of poverty law project his first year, as I recall.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you know, as we go through this and talk about him and, you know, there's been so many things about, you know, the name calling of, you know, "uncle" and all those things but, you know, without, without jeopardizing any friendships, tell us about what you think his true position has been since he's had this position and where you think it came from.  Do you think it came from his poverty level that he's tried to show that, that you don't have to be one-sided in order to, well what do you think?
Speaker 2: Um--
Speaker 1: People say he's forgotten or he didn't--
Speaker 2: Right, Clarence has the best intentions as far as the, as far as black people but he has, as I have learned, that the problem ain't out there, the problem is, you know, the challenge is in here--
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: --and, yeah, he's conservative as hell but I mean if you really understand and read what he's talking about, it's really driven by that kind of a self-sufficient up by the boot straps, you know, kind of notion of the world that all of the coddling and the welfare and that kind of stuff has ultimately resulted more in dysfunction than anything.
Speaker 1: Do you think that we, as African Americans, when we talk about this kind of thing, African Americans really don't, really can't consider ourselves those that necessarily don't go with the common flow, can really be called conservatives or are they people that feel like they're more self-sufficient?  Do you think sometimes that it's self, self-sufficiency gets mixed up with conservative thinking?  Do you think they, the wrong title is placed upon them?
Speaker 2: Possibly, I mean, you know, I'm not, I know in my case, that probably is true, you know, but, you know, there's certainly areas where I would differ with Clarence, you know, in terms of how I would, you know, deal with a particular situation, not on the fundamental philosophy but just, you know, I wouldn't write a particular decision the way he had written it on some, on some issues.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But I think there is a lot of misinterpretation because of the history of race in this country.  I mean, it's certainly natural that people tend to be very sensitive and come to the discussion with prejudices of, from both sides.
Story_ID: 115702
Speaker 1: And were you involved with him, or there as a good friend when he was going through, his little battle to be (unclear) Anita [Anita Hill]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --or were you there by his side?
Speaker 2: Well, you should, you should know, I introduced him to Senator Danforth.  That was how he initially met [John] Danforth and, you know, he and I, after we graduated from school [Yale Law School in New Haven, Connecticut], I mean, he wound up taking a job with Danforth in, not St. Louis but I forget, Jefferson, Jefferson City [Missouri], and I would see him on occasion and we stayed in touch that way and when Danforth came to [Washington] D.C. as Senator, I helped move Clarence.  It was him and I moving him into his house and I told him at that time that was the last time I was moving anybody 'cause it liked to kill me.  And then, you know, he and I would stay in touch, especially after I left, you know, I left D.C., mostly by phone.
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: If I was back in D.C., I'd come by and I'd see him or whatever.  So when he, 'cause he was kind of keeping me apprised of what was going on, you know, as he first got the, the Court of Appeals appointment and then when he called, you know, he told me that he thought he was going to get nominated to the Supreme Court.  Anyway, I, he reached out and asked me if I would help him because he had people handling various parts of his background as part of the whole nomination process and he asked me if I would help him with the law school part, which I did--
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: --to the point of, you know, writing editorials and doing whatever I could to assist with the press which was as time went on got to be a pretty sensitive kind of task.
Speaker 1: It had nothing to do with law school after a while.  You got in other areas that you, probably out of your control after a while?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure I'm following that question.
Speaker 1: What I'm saying is as far as, as far as the issues of his background and things of that nature became other areas later on--
Speaker 2: Oh, right, right, and he actually called me and told me that somebody--I didn't even know her.  He called me and told me that somebody he had been very close to was making allegations that weren't public at that point, that he just, he felt, you know, like somebody had taken a knife and stabbed him to the soul with it.  He couldn't, he just couldn't understand why, you know, why would she do something like that.  And then, of course, it was, it was within a week after that conversation, I mean, he was mighty affected already, that this whole thing, you know, became public and blew up and it was agonizing for me to watch.  I mean, you know, vicariously I think, you know, I can't imagine what it was like for him but it sure as hell wasn't a lot of fun for me.
Speaker 1: And you also, you know, knowing his character, who he really was, you knew that this was maybe an aberration of the--
Speaker 2: Well, I knew that they, they, the liberals that had gotten Bork were out to get him any way that they could.  They, I mean, they had, they had tried, they had thrown stuff against the wall.  I mean, he used to tell me some of the stuff that they have alleged that didn't go anywhere and this was finally the, you know, the one card that they felt they could pull that might, you know, that might work.
Story_ID: 115703
Speaker 1: So, you graduated from law school in '74 [1974] from Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut]?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: What was your first job at that point?
Speaker 2: Well, I had a number of interviews with law firms and I must have had, I probably set a school record for interviews and with the least amount of results that I could point to.  I not only, I not only interviewed for law firms, I also interviewed for a couple of clerkship positions and, I mean it just seemed like it was, it was going nowhere and then--
Speaker 1: Why do you think that was?
Speaker 2: Well, maybe they just didn't think, you know, I had what it took.  I mean, I had, you know, I had, I think I had two honors, and all the rest were, you know, pass grades.  I was on the, you know, I was on, I was an editor on the law journal [The Yale Law Journal], I was going to publish notes, I mean I have to scratch my head over why that was the case.  Anyway, the way it turned out was that a law firm, Arnold and Porter, which was a, then a fairly large, for that time, it was only about 70 or 80 lawyers, Washington, D.C. firm.  Back then, you know, the firms in Washington tended to be very boutique.  They were focused on the, mostly some sort of federal regulatory-type practice or appellate, you know, Supreme Court stuff, and, but, you know, they tended to be just based there.  Now, you know, these, those firms are all bought up or merged with larger firms so, you know, Arnold and Porter's no, no different.  It's probably, I don't know, five or six hundred lawyers by now but then it was about 70 or 80.  Cliff Alexander was, I believe, the first black partner they ever had.  He was there.  He had been the secretary of, well, he subsequently became the Secretary of the Army.  And there was one other guy, Abramson, God, I can't remember his first name, they named a scholarship after him for the D.C. bar has, just an absolutely wonderful, wonderful guy.  Anyway, they, they were both there when I went to this law firm and the way I got in was, there was a senior associate who had done communications work who decided to leave to go run or be a general counsel for a newspaper in his native Iowa.  He left in the middle of the year and what happened was, because of my, you know, focus on communications and because it was kind of out of the hiring season, it was late, it was late in the year, I went, I found out about this and I went down there and interviewed and, you know, they made me an offer.
Story_ID: 115704
Speaker 1: So prior to this, you, as you said earlier, you had been dealing with the Urban League and the cable commission so you had a lot of background in communications?
Speaker 2: I had, I had some background that way and I also had done some work for a guy who had been a president of CBS television network and he had, I worked on a project for him.  I also did another project involving the Ford Foundation which was reviewing a grant it had made to a law firm that was doing communications-related public law, public policy law, where it would practice before the communications raising--the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] raising issues about the FCC's practices as they related to citizens.  The FCC, up until that time, and to a large extent, currently is pretty much focused on the industries that it regulates or people that argue regulate it.  They didn't care that much about the listener or, you know, anyway, this, this Ford Foundation grant was focused on basically elevating the rights of the, the listener and other disenfranchised stakeholders.
Speaker 1: So over the last three years of that prior to you going to Arnold and Porter [LLP] you had, you hadn't got your feet quite wet--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --in the communications?
Speaker 2: Right, and, right.
Speaker 1: So that kind of fit as a shoe-in for you to be the person for this job?
Speaker 2: Well I don't know if it was a shoe-in but at least, you know, I'm sure it helped get me in.
Story_ID: 115705
Speaker 1: So you get there, you're out of law school, you do have some, and you're not just a student that dabbled in just your classes, you have some other information that, that's in your head now so you're going into Arnold and Porter, tell us about your tenure there.
Speaker 2: Well, like most law firms, I mean, they are, they're partnerships and they're not the most well-managed organizations.  They don't generally look very kindly on, I mean, they're mills, you know, where the partners need about three associates to generate enough revenue from their work to support the partnership share.  So generally what happens is you have this constant turnover among the associates and only a small group of people actually become partners.  And as usual, I mean, I came in there [Arnold and Porter LLP] thinking, all right, you know, I'm gonna see what I can do to become a partner, you know.
Speaker 1: You go over the top?
Speaker 2: Oh, of course, I mean I'm never going to, you know, short-change myself.  Well, I mean, it was, it was a wonderful experience from the standpoint that the practice of law that they engaged in is in its highest form and I learned that and that's a reference point that was subsequently valuable to me when I was, you know, in the government where they weren't as rigorous in how they did things.  So that part of it was wonderful but this was at a time when, as I said, a seventy-person firm, Cliff[ord] Alexander was there as the first partner but he left, I think, within a year.  The other guy, Abramson was there for a while. He left, so I mean, I was the only, you know, for a, I don't know, a year or so, I was the only black in the whole place.  And there was an article in the Washington Post about blacks in law and one of the sections of this was on blacks at these prestigious law firms and how few of them there were and, by the way, continue to be.  And, anyway, I hadn't really, shall we say, become very sophisticated as to how to deal with the press regarding me personally.  I mean, I dealt with the press in a context of some of the Urban League stuff I was doing but that was always based on, you know, some public policy issue, not necessarily me.  So, in the course of an interview with the Washington Post, the journalist, I made the mistake of not only talking about the fact that they had mistaken me for a black summer intern, you know, they, we all look alike kind of thing but I also made the mistake of not telling the guy to, or telling the guy not to attribute that comment to me.  So it winds up, and I'll never forget, I went to this, I went to this, it was called a, it was, I can't remember the name of it, it's a black law association and I remember going to one of these meetings.  There was this guy named Vinny Cohen who was a law[yer], who was a partner at one of the other top law firms and just a very gregarious, outgoing guy, and I'll never forget, a great big guy too, comes up to me and he gives me one of those looks like, you, who are about to die, we salute you.  You know, it's like, in one sense he was awed that I would make that comment but in another sense, I mean, he was telling me, the lights went on in my head and I suddenly realized, oh, I guess I made a mistake doing that.  Well, the people at this law firm, Arnold and Porter, never said a word.  The only time I ever heard a word said about it was when I was basically leaving the firm and the guy who was supposed to be my mentor, you know, told me how much they disliked that I had made that reference.  So, I mean, I probably tied a pretty big anchor to my tail, you know, as a result of that, that little, that little comment there.
Speaker 1: Now how so because, with the comment may have had some validity to it--
Speaker 2: Well, what do you, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you know, so--
Speaker 2: But it made 'em look like a bunch of, you know, racists.
Speaker 1: But then at that point, weren't you, wouldn't that, wouldn't that ensure you to be there and to, and to take care of your situation?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't, you know, there were too many ways they could get me.  You know, too many ways they could get me and, you know, the thing was, the whole time I was there, I mean, you know, I have the ability to be so focused in what I'm doing that I can push pain, I can push, you know, what's the word, discomfort, I don't even think about it, I just fly above it.  And the whole time I'm there, I mean, you know, the level of detail that was required and the type of work, it just wasn't my thing and it was grinding away on me but I didn't even, you know, I just pushed it to the side.
Story_ID: 115706
Speaker 1: So something else inside of you was pulling, pulling harder that you really, and possibly you didn't know what it was but you wanted to do something else?
Speaker 2: Well, it was, let's put it this way.  When I realized that I could not see a clear path to a partnership, it didn't take too much to, you know, when that reality fully set in, I could see the practical.  I mean, while I am very focused and I can be very assiduous in pursuing something, I'm also not a big fan of, you know, worthless exercise.
Speaker 1: Now some attorneys will jump from firm to firm hoping they can get a partnership.  You weren't getting ready to do all of that?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, I thought about it.  I actually talked to some other law firms which was helpful because by that time I was feeling so beset, or I should point out, I'd been married in the, I'd been married in, I guess, my third year at Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and at this, the whole time this falling out at the law firm is going on, I'm also going through a divorce.  So all this stuff is hitting the fan at the same time.  So I mean I was having one of those, you know--
Speaker 1: Good years.
Speaker 2: --moments of self-questioning, to say the least, and I was a--you know I went, I talked to a number of people and this was right at the point where [President Jimmy] Carter had been elected and was going into the White House and one of the things that he had done was, he had made a commitment to the black media that in return for their support of him that he would do something to try to increase the amount of, of minority ownership of broadcasting and cable outlets.  And, you know, I had continued to work with some of the people I met when I was doing that Ford Foundation regarding the, you know, public access, you know public communications related issues and stuff like that.  And one of the guys that I had met, who actually was the guy that ran this center that the grant for the Ford Foundation was for, was tied into the Carter campaign and he got a position, there was what was called the Office of Telecommunications Policy which was notorious under [President Richard] Nixon because they're the ones that tried to yank the Washington Post two television licenses because they didn't like, you know, what they were writing about the president.  And, anyway, this, it was an executive office, a White House, it was literally in the White House, and he got hired to over--to run this place to go in and clean it up or whatever and he asked me if I would come in and focus on this whole thing of minority ownership, and what could be done to increase--now the prior administration under Ford, the, the FCC [Federal Communications Council] chairman there had done some things but they were superficial, okay.  And so, I mean, I was really bent on trying to find something that would really make a difference and this had very high level attention and there was a woman in the West, the West Wing named Bunny Mitchell, there was another gentleman named Gene Jackson, Bu- Bunny Mitchell was in the White House.  Gene Jackson was a black entrepreneur who owned radio stations and, you know, very sharp from a business standpoint as well as from a political standpoint.  Percy Sutton, if you know who he is, was another person who, you know, was kind of involved in that, but Gene and Bunny were the two key people and when they figured out that, you know, I was kind of a gun, a tool or whatever that could be used because I understood from the legal side and had the experience, you know, they did everything they could to facilitate and support me.  A couple of things came out--
Story_ID: 116053
Speaker 1: --So you've, you're at a law firm and you're in a transition point where you're going to think about what else is going on.  Carter's [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter] campaign is going on and you know some people in there that are involved in communications and they're starting to view you as someone that could be very, very, very instrumental in what they're trying to get accomplished at this point?
Speaker 2: Right, so they ask me to come in to join this Office of Telecommunications Policy in the White House to focus on coming up with ways to facilitate minority ownership, among other things, and there were several things that stood out there for me, one is that, as I got into what was required for this job, which a lot of it was, you know, thinking and dabbling in public policy, talking to a lot of people, trying to get an understanding, you know, of what the frame of the, framework of the problem was and then, you know, trying to see, okay, what alternatives the people have to deal with that, that's when it first dawned on me how much I hated being a lawyer--
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: --'cause I realized how much I enjoyed doing what I was doing.  I mean, it was being much more creative and it just felt, I mean it felt like a, you know, a huge burden had been lifted from my shoulders.  So if I needed any more validation of why I probably shouldn't continue as a lawyer, that was it right there.  The other thing was, this whole power thing, okay, two aspects of that, one, I was absolutely flabbergasted by how little power the president had.  I mean, ultimately, his ability to make something happen was no better than the people he had that were in sympathy or in support of what he was trying to do and their ability to convince the people in these various executive agencies to do it because they, obviously, well not obviously, but they had, they simply had other motivations and they were going to do whatever they were going to do and they didn't give a damn what the President thought.  So that was a real stark thing.  The other thing was the realization from my standpoint, you know, somebody had told me about this idea of Potomac fever--how people would go to D.C. and get so hung up on the power, they'd disappear into it.  They'd never come out again.  And I was absolutely convinced that I was not going to let that happen to myself.  I felt, all along, that this was somebody else, this is the people's power, not mine.  It was something I could use and I needed to use it judiciously and, you know, just like a tool, when you're done with it, you put it away.  It's not, it doesn't belong to you.  So those were a couple of things and, you know, there were some interesting manifestations of that.  I remember we put on a series of, of discussions that were held in the Roosevelt Room of the White House and the idea was we would get some of the key players in this whole minority ownership arena, have them come in and talk, you know, and then use that as a way of getting ideas, etc., etc.  I could not believe the political sensitivity around that.  I mean, people who didn't get invited, you know, who thought they should have been invited or the people trying to get invited, regardless , I mean it, you know, it really my, opened my very naive eyes.  I mean, I'm coming from nowhere.  You know, the people I grew up with had no power to do anything. ...
Story_ID: 116054
Speaker 1: And your agenda was different anyway.  You were just trying to get the information--
Speaker 2: I was focused on really making something happen, okay, and as I said, I'd seen, you know, the FCC [Federal Communications Commission], previous FCC chairman who did, you know, I mean it was worse than diddly because he knew he was doing window dressing crap, you know.  So I was determined to come up with a way to solve this.  Well, something in the back of my mind said, tax certificate.  I had been exposed to, I heard about this tax certificate idea.  Now the, the nub of the problem was that one of the most effective ways that I concluded to foster minority ownership was for there to be some sort of tax incentive for people to sell to minorities, yet [President James Earl "Jimmy"] Carter had come in saying he was not going to create any more loopholes in the Tax code and, furthermore, it was very apparent to me that it could take forever to get, you know, some sort of law through Congress and that's when I suddenly remembered this tax certificate idea.  So I went back and did some research.
Speaker 1: Where'd it come from--now in school--when you were in law school?
Speaker 2: No it came from when I was in the law firm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's how I, I heard about this tax certificate.  Well, what I found out was that the tax certificates were based on a special section of the tax code that had been put there during the '50s [1950s] when guys, when companies were being forced to divest stations as a result of the FCC becoming more conservative in its, in its policy towards group ownership.  And the idea behind the tax certificate was it basically said, when it's in the public interest, the commission can reward a tax certificate.  A tax certificate basically was a deferral of being taxed on the sale of that station.  In the case of the, its original use, it was because they were being forced to divest the station--
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: --but my, you know, once in a lifetime brilliant idea was, hey wait a minute, it says in the public--what the FCC deems in the public interest, that means that the FCC says it's in the public interest that sales be made to minorities that they can award a tax certificate.  The law, the way it's written, it leaves it open for that.  So I was working with some pretty sharp political guys and I bounced this idea off of them and one of them said, you know, he said, the National Association of Broadcasters [NAB] which was this, still is, very conservative organization, they're trying to figure out how they can play in this game in a way that doesn't wind up hurting them.  He said, this idea is something that it actually will help their membership because it gives the existing broadcasters a tax write-off for selling to a minority.  So, I went over and talked to the top guys at the NAB and said, would you be willing to support this?  I said, I want some attribution as a guy that came up with the idea but would you be willing to make this petition to the FCC?  Well, you have the largest, most powerful broadcasting organization saying, we want to see this in place, petitioning it to the FCC, that's a pretty powerful piece of work and within months of my coming up with this idea and setting that in motion, I got hired by the chairman of the FCC to be his legal assistant.  So, in effect, it put me in a position to catch my own pass because what happened once I got over there, within a year of being over there, I wrote, along with a commissioner, the second after Ben Hooks, the second black commissioner, Tyrone Brown, I wrote this policy statement that basically, you know, made this law, created the policy overnight and over the course of it being in place, it, you know, tripled the number of properties, both TV and radio that were owned by minorities.
Story_ID: 116055
Speaker 1: So you, and so in essence you were able to implement your own idea on the other side?
Speaker 2: Yup.
Speaker 1: So you stayed with the, with the--
Speaker 2: I stayed with the Office of Telecommunications Policy--
Speaker 1: Yeah, Office of Tele--
Speaker 2: --for about nine months, towards the end of 1977, and then I was hired by the chairman of the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] to be his legal assistant--
Speaker 1: So that's--
Speaker 2: --and that's--
Speaker 1: So now, so now you are in what we will call an official branch of governmental agency?
Speaker 2: Well, the White House is pretty official, but, yeah, I was in a, I was at a regulatory agency that, you know, probably was, is, maybe the most powerful agency in the world because once I got to the chairman's office and saw, you know, the reach--every place, everything in the world.  I mean, anything to do with communications policy, this office had some impact on it one way or the other and back then, unlike now, it was a very de-politicized organization.  So they really were trying to focus on the, what's in, you know, what's in the best interest, at least most of the time.
Story_ID: 116056
Speaker 1: So you said the station numbers grew.  How many stations would there have been prior to, to your tax certificate?
Speaker 2: You know, I couldn't give you exact numbers but I mean instead of talking tens, you know, and twenties and thirties, we went up in the hundreds--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --you know, so maybe it was more than three times.  It was probably a lot more than that.
Speaker 1: So, so cable was not in its advent, also, right now?  A lot of the--
Speaker 2: Excuse me?
Speaker 1: Cable at this point, cable at this point was, was in its advent coming into--
Speaker 2: Cable was just starting and I tried to convince the cable guys to do, you know, something similar to what I'd done with the broadcasters.  They, I never could get them to understand that.  However, the way we wrote the policy statement when we, when I, when we ultimately published it, it applied to both cable and to radio.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 116057
Speaker 1: One, one point here on this power thing, I'll never forget the day that I was announced as being the chairman's legal assistant.  I mean, up to this time, I was, you know, just another scrub associate at a law firm.  I mean, people would just ignore you, you know, I mean they wouldn't pay--and I'll never forget walking down the street in Washington, D.C. and people that had never given me the time of day before are all of a sudden walking up to me, you know, and congratulating me and it's not just an idle congratulation, I mean, this is like, I'll be in to see you kind of, you know, acknowledgment, and that confirmed, you know, my initial, the part I told you about the Potomac fever and the fact that this is, you know, I won't say a game but this is something that is to be taken seriously because it's like a drug, you know, and to recognize that the power doesn't belong to you, it's something that you can use while you're in that position but, you know, you're supposed to use it properly and when you're done, you let go of it.
Speaker 2: So you were saying basically that you would use the position and the tool towards the main purpose which is the people but you weren't going to become the thing yourself?
Speaker 1: Well, that's right because there were clearly a lot of people who had, you know, that's--
Speaker 2: Become.
Speaker 1: --become that.  So anyway, that was kind of the alpha of the, of the tax certificate and--
Story_ID: 116058
Speaker 1: How long did you stay with, stay as deputy, as the legal assistant?
Speaker 2: Well, I was legal assistant for about a year, maybe a year and a half and then the chairman asked me to become the Deputy Chief of the Broadcast Bureau--
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: --which oversaw cable as well as all broadcasting.  And that was actually a very interesting experience because it expanded beyond just the public policy, slash legal stuff, it got me involved in real management opportunity and I started to realize, you now, I'm really good at this.  And, furthermore, I had always been, as a lawyer, looking over the shoulder of my clients at what they were doing from a business standpoint and the thing I started to realize even more in the role at the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] was how much I liked the business part and, furthermore, even though we were making a lot of changes, I mean, we were, we deregulated cable, we deregulated radio, we introduced cellular radio, we introduced direct broadcast satellite, massive--
Speaker 1: In the '70s [1970s]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, massive changes.  It seemed to me that all we were doing was opening doors.  The people that are going to walk through those doors were going to be business people and entrepreneurs that really made things happen.  And there's this picture called 'Mr. Roberts' that I kind of use as a metaphor because in this picture, he's--during World War Two, and he's stuck on this supply ship where he's, you know, in the back waters, he wants to get to where the real war is.  One night he's, you know, out having a smoke and he sees these ships of the line, you know, battleships and carriers, obviously headed to a big battle.  I mean, it was probably Okinawa and, you know, but the captain on his ship won't let him off because, you know, he needs him to do this stuff.  Well, I mean, not total analogy but the point was, I'm thinking to myself, you know what, I'm out of here.  You know, I'm going to figure out a way to make a transition in the business, out of law, out of government, by God, out of D.C., and I really started to focus on that when I realized Carter had lost and, you know, the administrations were gonna to change and it was time to leave and I was blessed in that I got an opportunity to join a company called Times Mirror--
Story_ID: 116059
Speaker 1: --so is it safe to say that a lot of the things that we're experiencing now as far as cellular is concerned, the satellite broadcasting, things that you were there to set policy that sort of phenomena?
Speaker 2: I don't want to sound like Al Gore, you know--
Speaker 1: I understand.
Speaker 2: --I invented the Internet but I definitely was, I mean, there were a lot, there were a lot of people that were a lot smarter on this stuff than I was--
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: --but I was, I definitely had my little, you know, areas of influence and at the very least, watched, you know, this history, I guess, being made.
Speaker 1: Because at that time, people weren't really, I mean, the airwaves had been there, the airwaves but no one probably foresaw the cellular movement at that point?  How big--
Speaker 2: No they didn't understand it.  What was even more impressive or more profound to me was the notion of convergence, okay.  Convergence is a cliche.  Now, as I told you, I don't like cliches, but for lack of a better word, in 1978 and '79 [1979], it wasn't a cliche and there was something going on then called the computer inquiry, okay, a rather, you know, anonymous or anomalous or whatever name but basically what it involved was IBM [International Business Machines Corporation], AT&T [American Telephone and Telegraph] battling it out because the, the telephone system was becoming increasingly computer-driven as opposed to mechanical driven and AT&T was a creature of the regulations whereas IBM was not.
Speaker 1: Private sector.
Speaker 2: And they had the computers and so there was a battle through this computer inquiry over where the regulation was going to fall.  Was it going to fall and include the computers or was it, was it going to be where the computer part of it be outside where IBM would have more of an advantage?  And that's when it dawned on me where all these lines were starting to cross and that was, frankly, part, that was kind of like a, a, what do you call it, Eldorado, for me, you know, a pot of gold or something--
Speaker 1: The epiphany.
Speaker 2: --to pursue, because I was fascinated by the idea of taking disparate, previously unrelated areas and combining them, okay.  And if you think about it, that's how I came up with the idea for the tax certificate.  I mean, I just plucked something, another tool on the wall that nobody had thought about. In fact, when I first told these lawyers at the NAB [National Association of Broadcasters] what I had done, they looked at me and said, why couldn't, why didn't I think of that, you know, and it wasn't just 'cause they were looking at, you know, a young black lawyer, it was because it, the elegance of it was so simple and that's something that I think has been a major part of how I do things, you know, as I, I look at all the various facets and I actually look for things that don't look like they have any relationship yet, you know, from a utility standpoint, serve exactly the purpose you're looking to accomplish.
Speaker 1: So take the disparate entities and put them together?
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 116060
Speaker 1: Okay, so now you, you stay there, you're starting to see that [President James Earl "Jimmy"] Carter's thing is going in another direction and stuff so you decide for yourself to go join, to go into the department sector, in business now?
Speaker 2: Right, because I'm interested--
Speaker 1: You've been a lawyer, you've been in government--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --so now this is--
Speaker 2: Well because I feel like, you know, Mr. Roberts, I want to be where the real battle is.  I want to make things happen.  I want to be involved in creating new industries, you know.
Speaker 1: So now, did you go to Times Mirror or they came, they came to you?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, they, I think through an intermediary, they approached me and they were interested in me because of my regulatory background but the idea that, you know, they were totally receptive to the idea of me making a transition to business.  So they basically created this VP [Vice President] position for me at their cable company which they had just bought.  I mean, they're primarily at that point, I mean they owned everything.  They owned newspapers and TV, magazines and they had just bought this cable company and they were using it as a testing place for what has actually already happened.  They were concerned back then that something like the internet was going to come along and wipe out newspapers and while I was, I was heavily involved in the operational side, this is like 19--you know--81 [1981], of the cable company initially, I immediately gravitated towards something which was a precursor to internet called Videotext.  There was no computer, personal computer back then, so we had to use keyboards with a television set.  But we actually put together this test in southern California testing out a lot of the stuff that's on the internet today and it was through that project that I, which I headed up, it was actually a partnership with some Canadian newspapers as well, I got a chance to go around and sign up a lot of newspapers who were going to become partners with us.  We were going to roll this surface out in various markets.  That was how I met the McClatchy [Newspapers] people who three years later, in '84 [1984], approached me and hired me to go up to McClatchy and run--they had cable, radio and some information, computer-driven information companies.
Speaker 1: Now prior to you working for them, weren't you on their Board beforehand?
Speaker 2: No, I, when I was hired, they asked--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --the part of the deal was I was going to go on their Board.
Speaker 1: Okay, so now you've been dealing with, you have a very good background at this point, a legal background, you know about the government, and we'll call it even the Potomac fever situation--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --and how to deal with Washington and you're aware of that.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: So now you're in the private sector and you're dealing with some burgeoning technology that they basically were right to be afraid of to a certain point because, because it was, it was on the way.
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, except it was twenty years too, you know--
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: --twenty or fifteen or twenty years too early and at the time, the Times Mirror guys, you know, could see that this wasn't going anywhere.  What they didn't, obviously the piece that was missing was the PC and the software that supported the PC.  That was the part that wasn't there yet and wasn't going to be there for quite--
Speaker 1: And they didn't quite see, they didn't quite see what the piece was missing?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: They knew that something was there--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --but they didn't know what it was.
Speaker 2: Right, right, and so they declared victory when they saw, you know, it wasn't going anywhere at the time and forgot about it.  So, I mean, that was a very, you know, that was very interesting.  I mean, at the time we all, the people that were involved in this because there were a number of major companies that were doing this, everybody from Time Warner to Knight Ridder and there were a number of major companies that were making--Sony, significant amounts of investment in trying to see if they could make this go.  And so when it finally just kind of cratered, you know, there were, there was a group of, there was a lost generation of people who had been involved in that that kind of, you know, went, dispersed into other start-up type stuff but in many respects, it was the origins of the internet as we know it today.
Story_ID: 116061
Speaker 1: So you stayed there for a while with Times Mirror and then, as you said, you went to McClatchy [Newspapers]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: McClatchy Newspaper.
Speaker 2: And now they, the magnet for me at McClatchy was that they had, remember I talked about convergence?
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: They had all these different areas of business, areas of media, that I was going to be able to oversee and I'm going, this is my chance, you know, if there's ever, you know, an opportunity to come up with some sort of grand convergent scheme, this is going to be it.
Speaker 1: Airwaves, print media, the whole thing--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --was right here.
Speaker 2: Right, so what happens?  I get there and the area the company that I, the areas of the company I had were about 20-- worth--they constituted about 20 percent of the company's revenue 'cause the rest was all newspaper.  And I'm on the board and I very quickly realized that these companies had been terribly undermanaged.  They were all turnaround candidates and that's basically what I spent most of the three years I was doing was turning them around, the cable, the radio, upgrading the level of operations and, you know, improving their bottom line.  It very quickly became apparent to me that the, the McClatchy people did not have the stomach for doing what I felt was going to be necessary in order to really maximize these particular assets.  And so in an act of--you know, it's counterintuitive to most people but I said, why don't you sell it even though I knew I was doing myself out of a job.  And it was almost, I won't say self-destructive but, I think by that time, I had something intuitively figured out that it was good to have the learning experience of working in the corporate world because you're using other people's money but I had learned about as much as I could and I had this lawyer of mine who ultimately wound up at Skadden [Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom LLP] who kept whispering in my ear about the idea of being an entrepreneur. And McClatchy sold, they sold the cable first, they sold the radio, the last day that I was there, we sold the cellular radio.
Speaker 1: Who did they sell it to?  Do you remember who?
Speaker 2: Well the cable was sold to a company called Continental which was bought by, who bought Continental?  In any event, they're owned by Comcast now.
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: The radio was bought by Group W and I, probably Clear Channel, Clear Channel owns them now.  The cellular, I forget, I don't know who wound up with the cellular, but in any event, I very quickly realized that I had created an enormous amount of value.  I mean this stuff, this is '70 [1970], this is '86 [1986]--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --Eighty-seven [1987] and that stuff was sold for a total of about 200 million and I estimate that about a third of that $200 million price tag was value that I added.
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: Yet, my deal, my severance deal, was a year's severance pay.
Story_ID: 116062
Speaker 1: That's all?
Speaker 2: Uh-hum, and you know, I could justify that because, I mean, don't misunderstand the McClatchy [Newspapers] people are wonderful, still are wonderful people, they're in a lot of trouble, but they were certainly wonderful people then and they let me do stuff sometimes because I was just faster getting it done than they could figure out what I was doing.
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: But I never would have had a chance to do it anywhere.  So, the experience was worth it but I'm saying to myself, you know what, I know I can do this again, and guess what?  I would be an idiot to do it again under these terms, I wanna own a piece of whatever I'm involved in.  So, once again, I'm going through divorce number two at this point and I decided that I was going to liquidate everything I had and whatever portion of it I could hold on after the divorce would then be my, would be my ante for trying to live off of that while I was trying to put together deals.  And I, it basically took me two years which was about the full extent of my, you know, my, my savings and before I got my first deal.  The first deal was, and I was looking at areas where I had hands-on experience, cable, broadcasting, information service.  The first deal I was able to strike was with a guy named Leo Hendery who, when I first met him, worked for the 'San Francisco Chronicle', he was the CFO [chief financial officer].  And out of all of these hotshot cable guys, I talked to them all, John Malone, all of them.  I couldn't get--
Speaker 1: Herb Wilkins, is that, was Herb?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, well but see Herb was a, I mean Herb is an entrepreneur--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --it was a private equity fund but I wasn't, I'm talking about guys who own big companies.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.  What I was trying to do was use the tax certificate to do cable deals on a large scale basis and almost by definition, cable was, because of all the capital, they're so much more expensive than, you know, a standalone broadcast station, you had to be looking at much larger dollars.  Leo was the only one that understood the value of the tax certificate.  So he leaves the San Francisco Chronicle and goes out and raises the fund and then I partnered with him and we started using the tax certificate to buy up cable systems.  Jack Kent Cooke was the, one of the first deals we did.  It was a huge deal.  I don't know if you remember Cooke, he owned the [Washington] Redskins--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --kind of an entrepreneur character of his own but over the course of about five or six years I rolled up about a half a million subs in--
Speaker 1: All across the country?
Speaker 2: All across the country, you know.
Speaker 1: And what were some of those markets?
Speaker 2: Tucson, Arizona, a lot of stuff around the City of Nashville [Tennessee], some stuff outside of Atlanta [Georgia].  Anyway, 1994, '95 [1995], we get a chance, after years of pursuing it, we convinced the Viacom people to sell their $2.3 billion cable asset to us.  It would have been the largest deal ever done by a black person at that time.  And we, we got a lot of attention, okay, it got a lot of attention, you know, Wall Street Journal, all kinds of stuff.  Unfortunately, this, '95 [1995] was when the Newt Gingrich conservative resurgence occurred so as we're coming to the end of '95 [1995], they're taking over Congress.  The next thing I know, somebody calls me or somebody, however, notifies me that there's this, this bill pending in Congress to retroactively repeal the section of the Tax code that enabled the tax certificate.
Speaker 1: So someone really looked at it and saw what you were doing?
Speaker 2: They saw a black person with a deal like this and they said, "Oh, this is just what we're looking for. This is a case of a black person getting some sort of preferential treatment."  Now, you know--
Speaker 1: It had nothing to do with being black, it had to do with your savvy and knowing the Tax code?
Speaker 2: Of course, but that's not how it was, it was being portrayed.  And to make it even worse, I had a local congressman from, who was a liberal, from Sacramento [California], where I'm living at the time, who was on the bill.  To this day, I have never figured out why this guy Matsui [Robert Matsui] did that.  I never figured it out.  I don't know what his problem was but, you know, never figured it out.  I could understand what, you know, there was a kind, it was kind of, it was a perfect storm for me in unfortunate circumstances.  One, I had these racist, you know, congressmen, two, I had a guy who was the chief aide or chief non-elected person on the committee for the ways and means [United States House Committee on Ways and Means] who resented the fact that the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] had that kind of power.  So he, for that reason, wanted to get rid of it.
Speaker 1: So that was his whole thing?
Speaker 2: That was thing.
Speaker 1: Thorn in his side.
Speaker 2: That was what was going on there.  So I had, you know, all of these kind of things going on at the same time, plus, I mean, it, it was at a point where, you know, there was a whole lot of public focus on, you know, minorities and affirmative action and all of that.
Speaker 1: So he has fires all over the place.
Speaker 2: All of this was going on and, in fact, I was described in some of the articles as the poster boy, you know, for affirmative actions being, affirmative action being rolled back.  And what was so, I'll say, I'll use the word crippling about this to me, at least, was I couldn't say anything.  I mean, publicly, virtually anything that I would say would make me, could be used against me.  You know, trying to explain to people why, how this had all happened and everything else, it's a business deal, you know.  So one of the things that was being used against me for the fact, for example, was the fact that I hadn't put that much money into the deal, and I was going to put a couple million dollars into the deal.  I mean, any businessman knows, I mean, probably why they're in a lot of trouble now, but the private equity guys, that's what they do, is they leverage a deal against enormous amount of debt.  The more leverage you use, the better return you're going to get.  But I got criticized for that because they argued it made me look like I didn't, you know, I was just being used somehow as opposed to--
Story_ID: 116560
Speaker 1: So the 1996, the Telecommunications Act of 1996 was being drafted while you're in the middle of this deal and--
Speaker 2: It was actually a separate bill.  It came out of Ways and Means [United States House Committee on Ways and Means].  It wasn't even communications related, it was tax-related 'cause remember that, there was a foundation of the tax certificate.  And, anyway, I spent basically, mostly, three months, the full part of, the first quarter of '96 [1996] in Washington [D.C.] lobbying at various places to try to get this thing killed.  It did not go without my notice that, of course, here I had been the alpha and yet there were black people looking at me saying, you son of a bitch, you're, you're, what you did is so outrageous, it's going to kill something that we've all been able to use up to this point because, you know, we didn't do anything as flamboyant as what you did.  So, you know, it's one of those classic cases of, you know, damned if you do and damned if you don't.  Anyway, we came within a couple of votes of getting this thing killed in the Senate until Dole [Robert Joseph Dole] was running for president at the time and he wanted to make a statement.  He had been hurt, he had a Republican vote go against him two weeks prior and he wanted this, to get to the right of another senator who's running against him for president and so he forced a party-line vote in the Senate Finance Committee and once that happened, the only person that could have stopped this was one William [President Bill] Jefferson Clinton and because, these guys had been very smart the way they did this.  They tied the repeal a tax certificate to a tax-related medical insurance--
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: ---piece of legislation and remember, the whole thing with Hilary and that whole blow up.  There was no way that Clinton was going to repeal that, and he didn't, and I think it was sometime in April of, of '96 [1996] when I suddenly realized, you know, there was nothing, it was gone.  And I had made one hail mary move, a friend of mine, named Rufus Cormier, who's very good friends with Clinton, from law school, I had gotten him, I wrote a letter, you know, and asked him if he would sign it and I had it personally delivered to the president in, in Arkansas 'cause I had a contact that knew how to get that to him.  I mean, of course, he wasn't going to repeal it, he wasn't going to veto it.  So, I mean, at that point I just had to suck it up, you know, and I had a lesson, you know, and one of the lessons my father taught me was he had burned himself out, you know, in terms of feeling that he had been disadvantaged, badly treated and I'm sure that was a major contributing, contributor to his, you know, dying from drink at an early age.  And I saw that and I said, that ain't never going to happen to me and this was the circumstance, you know, where I could have had very, I could have burned up a lot of energy, you know, looking for revenge or just bemoaning whatever happened, and I, you know--
Speaker 1: And being bitter?
Speaker 2: Exactly-- ...
Story_ID: 116561
Speaker 1: --and I made a conscious decision.  You know, they got me on this part but they're only, they're only going to get one bite (laughter), you know.  I'm not gonna let that happen and, you know, I just, at that point decided I realized I could not grow, you know, couldn't continue to do what I needed to do on the cable without the certificate so I, I basically liquidated all the holdings, sold them back to my partners and got out of the cable industry at that point.  I'd already started looking at some other, you know, some other opportunities, one of 'em was a systems integrator deal which actually had started looking at when I was, when I was doing cable.  And once again, I mean, it was a convergence-type play because what I realized, some of the cable systems that we were, that we owned, we were just beginning to turn them, this is like ninety, you know '94 [1994], '95 [1995], we're turning them into two-way systems so you could send stuff back and forth.  And I realized this is a highway, you know, you need cars to run on it and you need somebody to govern how the cars go.  Well, my idea was to take a company system integrators, which was basically a company that made and managed publishing systems for major newspapers around the world.  We had probably a third of the major newspapers in the world, every, every place from the Financial Times to the Singapore Straits Times, The Washington Post, The Chicago Tribune, I mean--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --we had major newspapers.  The, the guts of that system was focused on managing the text.  My idea was to see if I couldn't get control of that company and use that core competence to manage multi-media, audio, video, etc. and, in fact, I mean, it took me, you know, it turned out that it was another--I always get into these situations where I find a company, the only ones I can find generally are ones that are in bad shape and this was no, you know, this was no different and just like at McClatchy [The McClatchy Company], I got in there and I realized, boy, I'm going to spend most of my time getting this company turned around and that's what happened.  We did come up with a system that did what I was talking about but we were just beginning to--we were putting, we had a prototype that we were starting to put in some small newspapers--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --when I sold the company in 2000 and I might add, you know, it was sold just before the dot com downturn and, you know, you would not want to own a company that was a vendor to newspapers today.  So I mean, you know, I definitely, God was on my side to sell it, sell it when we did.  Now while I was doing this, I had all along been interested in radio and I got my first opportunity to buy some radio stations on the East Coast.  So while I'm CEO of this company that's a turnaround, I'm also having four radio stations--
Speaker 2: You're always ahead of the game a little bit.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so I had, there was a guy that I had met back, you know, a few years before and he and I were going to try to use tax certificates to buy radio stations, it never worked out.  Anyway, he was selling his company, his radio company at the same time I was buying these.  So I approached him about forming a partnership where he could run the stations on a day-to-day basis and then we'd use that as a platform for buying more stations.  Well, that's exactly what happened.  We sold that company in, let's see, 2002 for about $300 million and we subsequently started another radio company.  I had gotten involved in several TV stations along the way, usually in partnership with other people.  That's really become my modus operandi.  I mean, generally, at any given time I'm probably involved in a half dozen different deals, you know, and I couldn't do that unless I was working with people that I'd bring in or I partnered with who compliment what I'm doing and usually the way they complement it is by having them run the stuff on a day-to-day basis.  I'm capable of, you know I'm right now, I'm CEO of one company but it takes so much time that it undercuts my ability to do other stuff and my joy comes from having a number of spinning plates, you know, and figuring out, you know, how I can stack 'em while they're spinning, you know.  So to do that, generally that means I, I, my role is as an investor, a strategic player and a board member although, you know, I tend to get on a required basis more involved as needed so if there's something that has to be done, you know, a deal needs to be negotiated or whatever, I'll step in to do that if I feel like I can really add some value.
Story_ID: 116562
Speaker 1: So what is your hope for the future for, for African Americans in broadcasting?
Speaker 2: Well I think the system, you know, the old elites are, as we can see, everything is up for grabs today and I'm working with some young black folks who have a firm grasp of this whole internet thing and my sense of it is that, you know, all the rules that, you know, kept people in, in chains or, you know, within certain boundaries, they're all gone.  And the mental attitude of people, they don't, you know, they're not limited the way, you know, people who had been subjected to the full force of segregation for so many years.  They're bold, they'll do anything.  I mean, if they, you know, if they see an idea, they'll go after it, generally.  I'm not saying everybody's like that, but I do think there's a cohort of black entrepreneurs, both female and male, who are capable of anything, of building anything, and in the environment that we're in, I mean, all, you know, all rules are, you know, up for grab so I think there is a likelihood that, you know, that given all these things going on that, you know, African Americans are gonna have their full place for the first time, particularly in the communications area because, you know, one of the things about the tax certificate, I think, that went beyond this, the number of stations, was it attracted attention.  It got a lot of people's interest and I think that, I think that momentum has continued.  I think it's a, for a variety of reasons, I mean I'm not trying to take credit for the fact, I think, you know, like you're a musician, I think black people tend to, I think they tend to be particularly focused on places where there's a lot of outreach potential, you know.
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: There's a lot of ways to express yourself.
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: And I think the tax certificate was kind of a, a magnet, kind of a, a tipping point factor that really got peoples imagination and I think that continues to today.
Story_ID: 116563
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't, I guess if I wanted a legacy, I'll write a book.
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: You know, maybe nobody'll read it, but as far as, you know, things are just too changeable.  People forget, you know, from one year to a next, it's like what have you done, you know, what have you done lately?  So I don't know that, to me that's too grandiose to think about, you know, legacies, you know.  You do what you do and you hope it has some impact and, yeah, it'd be nice if somebody remembered, you know, that, you know, maybe you made a difference but there's so many people, you know, that have an influence on something, the course of events, that no one person can take, you know, it's very, I mean the tax certificate was a, it was a special moment but it's an exception.  I mean, it just doesn't happen very often and even that, you know, Jackie Robinson is my, is my idol and, you know, Jackie Robinson would probably be the first person to tell you that, yeah he broke the color line but man, he was walking on the backs of a whole lot of other guys ahead of him that never got the chance but that set it up for him to be there and I, I'm a firm believer in that.
Story_ID: 116564
Speaker 1: Do you have any advice for the young Frank Washington's who are out there who have the same dream 'cause you hear a lot about people, I want to have my station, I wanna do this, I wanna do that, do you have any practical advice that you could probably give in a sentence or maybe just a couple ideas that you could give those people?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, notwithstanding all the advances that have been made, I still feel that what--an axiom that my parents, you know, impressed upon me, still holds the case and that is, if you want to get somewhere, you better make sure you're better.  You better make sure you're working harder and you better make sure, you know, that you're willing to go, you know, a mile further.  I still think that holds, you know, for black people and they get, you know, they get, what's the word, lulled into a sense that, you know, it's all equal.  Well, it ain't, you know, it ain't.  I don't know if it ever will be but it still isn't, I mean, and if you want to go somewhere, you better make sure you have your stuff together.  It's hard enough to do when you have it together.  The guys that think they can just coast, you know, they're kidding themselves and, I mean, in a way that's a regimen that you'd want to have for people regardless of what the outside circumstances are, you know, and that's kind of the way I think about it but I'm kind of like Jackie Robinson, you know, I feel like, okay, I'm not, I'm not gonna get back at people, you know, I'm just gonna beat 'em.  I'm gonna outcompete 'em.  I'm gonna use that pent up frustration that had my father drink himself to death to make me, you know, make hopefully, you know, worthwhile contributions that maybe, you know, wouldn't have happened otherwise.
Speaker 1: Mr. Washington, we want to thank you for this interview.  It's been very enlightening.  You've really helped us see how, even what we're doing here now, has come into play and come into focus and to look forward to the years of coming.  We want to thank you for this interview.
Speaker 2: You're most welcome, sir.
Speaker 1: Thank you very much.
