Story_ID: 641246
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am can you please give us your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Elynor Alberta Williams [HistoryMaker Elynor Williams].  It's Elynor with a Y, so that's E-L-Y-N-O-R; Alberta after my father, Albert [Albert Williams]; and Williams, W-I-L-L-I-A-M-S, and Alberta is A-L-B-E-R-T-A.  I never use my middle name.  I don't know why.  I find it a little distracting, but that's my full name.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, is there a story behind the Y in Elynor?
Speaker 2: My mother [Naomi Douglass Williams] was creative and she wanted us--me to be different and she got her wish.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born October 27, 1946, makes me a Scorpio.  It also makes me sixty-five years old, and I was born in Baton Rouge, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My mother was living in Mississippi with my father and he didn't want me to be born in Mississippi, so he shipped my mother off to Louisiana, that's where I was born.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now that sounds like a story.  Your father didn't want you to be born in Mississippi?
Speaker 2: No.  He thought it might be difficult for me growing up with that kind of a background and I don't think he really had a lot of faith in the health services for black women.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now was he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Because people always ask me who do I know in Baton Rouge.  I know no one.  I was just born there and went back home with my mom.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, was he down on the Gulf [Gulf of Mexico], in Biloxi [Mississippi] or something?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't exactly remember where he was but they were living in Mississippi at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And ma'am, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Well right now, I'm passionately seeking bliss and happiness, so I am fully I'm retired.
Speaker 1: And when you were working, you were--
Speaker 2: I retired as the first female black vice, corporate vice president for Sara Lee Corporation.  I was vice president of public responsibility and I retired at fifty-two.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what is today's date?
Speaker 2: It is, let's see, we're in April and it's the 19th, 2011 [sic. April 19, 2012].
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at The HistoryMakers [Chicago, Illinois], a wonderful organization.
Story_ID: 641247
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth there are five lightweight questions we ask as a warm up, and they only require a short answer.  The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes, I do.
Speaker 1: And what is it?
Speaker 2: I like shrimp and crab cakes and anything that has to do with the sea, bottom feeders only.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Lobster, crab, type of thing.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I would say black.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Probably spring, probably spring.  Not too hot, not too cold.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Oh, there's so many to choose from.  Not really, not really.  I could say Australia, I could say Las Vegas [Nevada], I could say a number of places, but my most favorite one, that would be hard for me to say.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, the last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: This too shall pass.
Story_ID: 641248
Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask about your family history, I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but we'll ask about them separately and then put 'em together so we don't get them mixed up.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Naomi Theresa Douglass [Naomi Douglass Williams].  That's N-A-O-M-I, T-H-E-R-E-S-A, D-O-U-G-L-A-S-S, Williams.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born in Memphis, Tennessee, I don't exactly know when, but I do remember she was thirty-one when I was born, which made her a late mother, mother who had late in life, and got married late in life, back then to get married at thirty, you didn't have hope, but she did.
Speaker 1: Yeah that's about 1915, I guess would be, thinking--
Speaker 2: Somewhere along in there, because I think my father [Albert Williams] was 1913.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what do you know about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them and what were they doing in history as far as you know?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess I could go as far as my grandfather [Thomas Douglass].  He was a minister in the A.M.E. church [African Methodist Episcopal].  My grandmother died at an early age.  She was half Cherokee Indian [Native American] and my mother became the mother of a family of five and she had one sister and three brothers and she raised them all.  My grandfather got married again [to Blanche Martin Douglass] and my mother got married and left the family and went off with her husband, who was, see my mother was a teacher and he actually taught her at Lane College [Jackson, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, because he had gone to college at an early age.  They were about the same age.
Speaker 1: Okay, so Lane's in Nashville [Tennessee], isn't it?
Speaker 2: I think so, yeah.
Speaker 1: Nashville, Tennessee [sic.].  So was your grandfather associated with Lane as an A.M.E. minister?
Speaker 2: I don't know a lot about him.  That's about all I know.  I didn't meet him.  He died before, right after I was born.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I just wondered if he was associated with the college since he's A.M.E.
Speaker 2: He could have been, but I don't know.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, Lane is C.M.E. [Christian Methodist Episcopal] isn't it?  Lane's a C.M.E. school.
Speaker 2: Beats me.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it is. So, yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: It was Methodist, so.
Speaker 1: Now, are there any stories on your mother's side of the family about what the family was doing during slavery, any stories about an ancestor in slavery or Reconstruction?
Speaker 2: No, not on my mother's side.  It's fascinating that we never sat down and got the family history.  We talked about it but we never did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now her family roots basically were in Tennessee?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, yes.  My uncle had the family home.  He just recently died and my cousin called me and I hadn't seen him since we were children.  He has two sons, and I saw those sons for the first time at a medical dinner.  My cousin is a heart specialist and for me to walk in and see those two boys all grown up that I had never met was just awesome, so we're back in touch because he wanted to sell the family home.  I said, "You guys take it."  I hadn't seen it in such a long time.
Speaker 1: Now where's the family home?
Speaker 2: It was in Nashville.
Speaker 1: In Nashville, okay.  Now, did, was your mother raised in Nashville?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Tennessee was home base.  Aunt Audrey [ph.], also was my aunt, was a teacher as well and she was the repository of all the information and the families, whenever you moved, you had to go tell Aunt Audrey where you were because she wanted to have addresses and telephone numbers, so that if anybody in the family would call then she would could tell them where you were.  And one of the funniest stories, I got promoted and moved to Chicago [Illinois] as a director of public affairs [for the Sara Lee Corporation] and I called Aunt Audrey and told her I was moving to Chicago and why and she said, "Oh, my god.  I'm going to have to let you talk to your uncle."  She said, "You're just like your nephew.  Neither one of you can keep a job."  She had no understanding about the mobility of people moving for promotions and changes and that type of thing, and I thought that was hilarious, because she grew up and married, went to Clarksdale, Mississippi and stayed there until just before she died and her sons moved her to Springfield [Illinois], which she wasn't happy about, but, but you know, her idea of life was to marry somebody and stay still.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A whole different mindset.
Story_ID: 641249
Speaker 1: So, did your mother [Naomi Douglass Williams] have any stories about growing up that she shared with you?  I mean, about what she was like and what she liked to do?
Speaker 2: Not really.  She was very pretty.  She had a lot of suitors.  She fell in love with a guy who left her, and funny thing the first guy I was engaged to looked just like the guy that she was engaged, she was in love with, and he left me too (laughter).  So, that was really funny.  In fact, when she first saw him she went, "Hah."  She gasped.  She was a teacher and when my father [Albert Williams] was courting her, he was very poor and so she said she looked out the window and saw him pulling roses off the bush and with a ribbon, tied them up as a gift to her but it was their bush in the front yard and she never let him know she knew it, yeah.
Speaker 1: That was nice of her, yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh, today, can you imagine someone doing that today?  It wouldn't go over very well (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They lived in a very lovely house, my mother, and they were middle class, you know, in that era.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So your grandfather [Thomas Douglass] as an A.M.E. minister did well, I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did he have a big church in Nashville [Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: My sister [Gwendolyn Williams Demps] says it was fairly, fairly large.  He put up a swing in the church for her and she hated it because the church was so big and she was scared so she very rarely used it, so I imagine it was a pretty good size with the exception that as a young child, this room would be huge, (laughter) you know, so it's kind of hard to say.
Speaker 1: Now what was the name of this church, do you remember?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.
Story_ID: 641250
Speaker 1: Now, going to your father's side then, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Albert Berry, B-E-R-R-Y, Williams [Albert Williams].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: He was born in Mobile, Alabama, and I think I might have found a date of birth for both my mother [Naomi Douglass Williams] and father and sent it to (unclear).  I'm not really that great on dates.
Speaker 1: So he was, you said he was three years younger than your--
Speaker 2: More or less, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, about 1912, I guess.
Speaker 2: Nineteen thirteen [1913].
Speaker 1: Nineteen thirteen [1913]?
Speaker 2: I don't know why I remember that.
Speaker 1: Thirteen. Okay, now. Once again, like what do you know about your father's side of the family?
Speaker 2: I know my grandmother.  My grandmother was called Aunt Sara [Sara Williams], and she was very bright.  She worked for this white family and they thought she was very bright so they sent her to college.  She went to Tuskegee college [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] and got her degree signed by Booker T. Washington in (unclear) and I actually have that certificate.  Back in the day they really did write them on sheepskin so I really need to get it restored, but it was signed 1897.  I just looked at it today.  I started to bring it and I thought I don't want to put it into the lights.  My mother--my grandmother left my grandfather [Albert Williams] because he couldn't make a living in the city, couldn't find work.  He wanted to go back to the farm, to the land where he could grow things and feed the family and she wanted to stay in the city, so he left her and she kept working with this white family and she had four kids that she was raising by herself.  My father was the youngest.  They had very old fashioned names, there was Aunt Flossie [Flossie Williams] and Aunt Leona [Leona Williams], and my father was Albert, after I think, his dad.  He met his dad once.  He had an old gun, which I have no idea where it is now.  He gave it to a neighbor.  That's a long story, but anyway, she swears she didn't get it, but anyway that's another story, so, when he went to visit his father on the farm, he was surprised because they had lots of food and they were growing things in the backyard and they had lots of things to drink and they were kind of scraping by in the city with their mother, and so my grandfather gave him this gun and that was the only thing he had from him and the last time he saw him.  My father was very bright, so he went to college at fifteen and with a gold coin out of the tenth grade that paid for his tuition and everything when he went to school.  My aunts were both teachers and so was my father.  Do you want me to stop there, because then I'll have to get into his full story, which I didn't get into my mom's full story so--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  Well.  Was this about time when they meet, or--
Speaker 2: It was--
Speaker 1: Because they met at Lane [Lane College, Jackson, Tennessee], right?
Speaker 2: They met at Lane, yeah, but he had graduated.  She was just coming in.  He was teaching her at Lane.  My father was in math and science.  My mother was in English and French.
Speaker 1: So you wanna go back to your mother's story?
Speaker 2: Well, they married and--
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how they met, I mean, where--
Speaker 2: He taught her.  That's all I know.  She was in his class.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  So he doesn't talk about how, you know, he became attracted to her or anything.
Speaker 2: Not really, except he said she was just as pretty as a peach and there she was sitting in his class; and how he made that transition to dating her, I don't--I'm not sure.
Story_ID: 641251
Speaker 1: Now, what did he [Williams' father, Albert Williams] teach, what was he teaching?
Speaker 2: Math and science--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --so I imagine it was one or the other (simultaneous).  And just on the educational side he went on to the University of Cincinnati [Cincinnati, Ohio] and got his master's [degree] and then started at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] towards his Ph.D.  At the same time, my mother [Naomi Douglass Williams] was working on her master's at Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts], which she got, and my father dropped out so she could finish, so he didn't finish at MIT, but he went to a couple of courses at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and that type of thing.  He started the junior college in Palatka, Florida [Collier-Blocker Junior College].  He had been the dean of men for the University of Miami [Coral Gables, Florida].  He had been principal at several places in Mobile, Alabama.  We moved a lot.  My sister [Gwendolyn Williams Demps], for instance, went to four high schools.  I went to three in three different cities and she was in four different, no three different cities as well but we were, I started out when my mother was teaching with my father at Mobile County Training School [Mobile, Alabama].  I had a babysitter and she came home.  This is her story, and I was totally full of mud so she decided to take me back to school with her and it was because of that, that I was able to get my, finish public school and then they threw me out and I went to private school for a year and then I went back because--they threw me out because I was too young.  My sister used to come home and teach me my ABCs and whatever she learned in first grade and that, so I knew most of the stuff.  My mother was an AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority], very proud of it.  I grew up in a pink and green room because of it.  My father was a Sigma [Phi Beta Sigma Fraternity] and a third degree Mason.  He was very proud of both of those, and the junior college that he founded in Florida was at a time when desegregation was happening and they didn't want the black kids going to the white schools so they had all of these, several, the twelve magnificent.  There's a book about the whole story of how he founded this--these colleges ['The Magnificent Twelve: Florida's Black Junior Colleges,' Walter L. Smith], and so there were twelve men that they picked around Florida to start these junior colleges, and the governor [Charlie Crist] just, several years ago, ordered him, and I didn't even know about it, it was in the paper.  They were searching for one of us and they found me.  My sister was overseas at the time, and it was very, very thrilling.  We were, he was given, he was written up in the equivalent of the Congressional Record for the state; and they had a reception for him and they called our names out in--on the floor of the House [Florida House of Representatives], and it was really very, very nice.  He would have loved that.
Story_ID: 641252
Speaker 1: Now did he, when did he [Williams' father, Albert Williams] develop this school in Fl- Florida?  This is Central Academy High [Palatka, Florida]?
Speaker 2: Central Academy is a high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Collier-Blocker [Collier-Blocker Junior College, Palatka, Florida] was the name of the junior, junior college.
Speaker 1: Collier--
Speaker 2: Collier-Blocker.  It was named after two noted black men [sic. Nathan W. Collier and Sara Blocker] in that area of the state.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It no longer exists because when they finally had to integrate, of course, the black schools went away and they merged them with the white junior colleges.
Speaker 1: Okay.  About what year was, were they established?
Speaker 2: Sixty-three [1963], something like that.
Speaker 1: Sixty-three [1963]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Because I was, no maybe 1960, somewhere along there.  It was in the '60s [1960s], early '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: I'm thinking, I'm wondering if they were established to meet requirements of Brown versus the Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954].
Speaker 2: Probably, yeah.
Speaker 1: To have separate but equal--
Speaker 2: Separate but equal.  And, I know it was because they didn't want the black kids to go to the white schools, but my father put his heart and soul into it, like he did everything, which is what he taught us to do; you know, you work and whatever you do, you do it well and that was true with everything.  It was, he was rather a remarkable man.  He, we grew up with a lot of homilies, like some of them, my sister [Gwendolyn Williams Demps], when I start with one she would help me finish it, like, "Every flower is born a blush unseen and wastes its sweetness on the desert air."  And, that was his way of saying, "Do you want to waste your talents or do you want to use them for good?"  We had all these homilies that he would use to teach us lessons.
Speaker 1: Were these things you suspected he learned at Lane [Lane College, Jackson, Tennessee]?  Or, now where did he go to college?
Speaker 2: He went to Lane.
Speaker 1: So he went to Lane and then he taught at Lane.
Speaker 2: Uh-hm.  Then University of Cincinnati [Cincinnati, Ohio] and then--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I was thinking about his early education, where he went to school, and so Lane, he went to college at Lane and then taught at Lane.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Then moved on to these other places, okay.
Speaker 2: It's interesting, my mother [Naomi Douglass Williams] wanted me to be in AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] and my father wanted me to get a Ph.D., so I became an AKA and my sister got the Ph.D., so we sort of resolved that.  My love of learning and reading came from both parents.  Because I moved so much, I learned to, my mother used to tell me, she said, "Don't worry about friends.  Learn to entertain yourself."  So, I learned to, I was very proficient on the piano because I could get away.  Same thing with books.  I could just go away.  And that's still true for me.  It was a very loving family.  We, my father thought there was nothing that either one of us could do wrong.  If I stood on my head in a parking lot, he'd bring all the neighbors and say, "Look what my daughter has done.  Isn't she fabulous?"  Mother was the disciplinarian.  She's the one that made us toe--toe the road.  She was, it's interesting as it was sort of a dichotomy and looking back, it was probably because she didn't really have a mother, so she knew the motherly things to do, like clean the house, keep yourself clean, you know, like, "God knows if you have holes in your underwear and you fall dead in the street, I will not own you." Which most black parents said to their children, especially girls, and we had to make good grades; you know, if you made a B, why couldn't you make an A, if you made an A minus, why couldn't you make an A plus?  There was always this drive to succeed, which was I think was normal from children in my age bracket.  I mean, that's what we thought in the black community at that time, that you've gotta get an education because that was your ticket to having a good life.  I mean, there was never a question that either one of us would be going on to college.  I mean, there was not even anything--you know, you weren't going to do anything but go to college.  What else would you gonna do?  So, that was understood from birth.
Story_ID: 641253
Speaker 1: We always ask this question: when you consider your parents' personalities and their talents and their looks even, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I look like my mother [Naomi Douglass Williams].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My sister [Gwendolyn Williams Demps] looks like my father [Albert Williams] (cough). Excuse me.  In fact, because I looked like her, she zeroed in on me to try to fix all the things she saw wrong in herself, which I think is probably normal.  So, I was her favorite.  She thought my sister wouldn't make it, but I was not a favorite in the sense that I was nearer to her heart; I was the project that she had to fix, so it was always an issue between us, I think.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it's just you and your sister?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Two of you, and how far are you apart?
Speaker 2: Two, two years.
Speaker 1: Two years, and she's the oldest, or?
Speaker 2: She's the oldest.
Story_ID: 641254
Speaker 1: Now, so when you were growing up, the household consisting of your mother [Naomi Douglass Williams] and your father [Albert Williams] and you and your sister [Gwendolyn Williams Demps]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did any of your grandparents ever live with you or--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --uncles or aunts--
Speaker 2: They were all dead.  So, as I said, my mother--my grandmother died when my mother was young and my grandmother [Sara Williams] on my father's side was born--was dead before I was born, so I never knew either one of them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: A few.  Let me give you something that a friend of mine told me once, at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia].  They said, "Your memory is just like Ronald Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan].  You know, your memory works just like Ronald Regan, just a bunch of blank pages."  And I think it's because I learned to focus on the now and not to be so bewildered by the things that happened in the past.  Well, I remember, I'm trying to think what the, when I was about four years old, five years old, and my mother had dressed me up in all yellow. I had yellow socks with lace on them, and black patent leather shoes and pretty little fluffy yellow dress and yellow bows in my hair, and it was my birthday and I went to, they were having a birthday party so I came downstairs and I remember this little boy staring at me and then running over and biting me, and he bit me hard and--
Speaker 1: Where did he bite you?
Speaker 2: He bit me on my arm and he bit me hard, and I just yelled and my mother said, "Oh honey, he just thought you were something good to eat."  (Laughter) He couldn't figure it out, I guess.  I don't know.  But that's my earliest memory.  I remember, we went up to a lot of plays and things, musicals and performances and black kids in the South at that time.  We were pretty much isolated and protected.  I lived in a, we lived in an interesting neighborhood because I spent about the bulk of my childhood in Mobile, Alabama, in my mother's--my grandmother's house that had been torn down and rebuilt by my parents, but it was the land that my grandmother had and it was on a block.  The whole block was black but everything around us was white and Jewish and we used to play with the kids in the middle of the street because that was safe ground.  I don't know how we knew that, but we never went to each other's homes, but we played ball in the middle of the street.  There was a Jewish store on the corner.  Everybody went to that store.  We used to call him One Penny John [ph.], because he would always add a penny.  If you bought a piece of candy for five cents it was always a penny tax.  And, I remember one day one of the white boys called me the N word and so Bernadette had a group of friends, Bernadette, Lolita [Lolita Humphrey (ph.)], and a couple of others with names that I don't remember, so I went to Bernadette's house and I had a water pistol that looked like a gun and all you had to do was put your finger on the top of it.  I'm not sure I should be saying this, but, so I went out and we went to the store on the corner and we saw the little boy.  I called him over and I put the gun to his head and I said, "I will blow your head off if you ever call me that again."  And, he was begging and so we ran home and were laughing and then the police came and Bernadette and I got under the bed--it was at Bernadette's house--and the police said, "Do you know someone named Bernadette Jones [ph.]?"  And, Bernadette's mother said, "No." And we were shocked because we were taught never, ever, ever to lie.  And yet, in some way, we kind of understood why she said that.  Probably saved our lives, I don't know, but it was just shocking to us that she would lie, and we never spoke of it again, and then we started playing with the kids again.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, we were young (laughter).  What did we know?
Story_ID: 641255
Speaker 1: All right, so Mobile [Alabama], this is in the--?
Speaker 2: In the '50s [1950s].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, I also remember going to school because I had to go--Council School, W.H. Council Elementary School [W.H. Council Traditional School, Mobile, Alabama] was right on the corner, my mother was a teacher there and it was about two blocks from my house, so I would walk to school and one day one of the white kids that was not in our, he was not from our neighborhood, chased me home and I dropped my sweater, my favorite sweater, and I never told my parents [Naomi Douglass Williams and Albert Williams] and my mother says, "Where's that sweater?"  And I said, "Oh, I don't know.  Maybe I left it at school."  I never told her because I didn't want to put her in a position of having to do something about it.
Speaker 1: So, this was a little white kid that didn't belong in the neighborhood?  Was he in the neighborhood or--
Speaker 2: He chased me home.  Don't know where he came from 'cause you have to understand there was just this one black block.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: It was a weird way to grow up.  It was just funny.  And, we had these rules when I was growing up that you had to be home by night, before the sun went down, and we had these great bicycles we used to ride all over town, and one day I was racing to get home and I ran in front of this car and this white woman got out and she yelled at me and she says, "Who are your parents?"  And I told her and she goes, "You should not do this.  You shouldn't be out here like this."  But I felt the warmth from her.  That was the first time I really felt a caring warmth from someone white.  And she said, "Now, I want you to go home."  My neighborhood was the sort of thing, too, because of that block every parent on that block looked out for the kids on that block.  So, you couldn't get away with anything.  They would say, "Aren't you Naomi Williams' daughter?  What are you doing down here?  What are you doing?" You know, and before you'd get home, your mother knew about it (laughter).  You know, somebody picked up the phone.  It was like the village was there to raise us all.
Story_ID: 641256
Speaker 1: We always ask this question in this way (unclear): what are some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, the smell of food.  My mother [Naomi Douglass Williams] cooking pork chops and greens and corn bread. Vicks VapoRub.  My mother was not a huggy, kissy kind of person, but when you got sick she rubbed you down with Vicks VapoRub.  So, I always equate that with love.  Oh, gardenias.  We had gardenia bushes in our backyard and at night they were just a fabulous smell, the crickets, even though we were in the city, we had crickets and butterflies and there was another flowering plant.  My mother had all kinds of flowering plants, you know.  She loved to plant things so she had gardens and things like that.  We had two big pecan trees in the backyard and so that was horrible because they would just fall and fall and fall, and our job was to pick up those pecans so we could go sell them and they kept falling.  Even though we were getting money for it, it was just tedious work, all those pecans.  Lolita, who lived next door to me, Lolita Humphrey [ph.], was a mulatto.  She was my best friend.  We got into so much trouble together.
Speaker 1: Now when you say. Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When she was grounded I used to crawl across the fence to visit her anyway, or she'd come across the fence to visit me.
Speaker 1: When you say a mulatto it means, it means one of her parents was actually white when they married?
Speaker 2: No, somewhere in her family.  Her parents are very, very light.  They're mixed.  It was the Gulf of Mexico.  I mean, Mardi Gras was actually born in Mobile, Alabama if you didn't know that.  It started there.  Two people from Mobile went to New Orleans [Louisiana] and that's how it got to be such a big deal down there but anyway, so, we used to ride the bus and go downtown to shop or whatever, and one day, and I would just always sit next to her because people probably thought I was a little, the maid's daughter, because Lolita had straight brown hair and hazel eyes.  She looked very white.  We were never bothered. And I always would sit in the front of the bus, and one day somebody questioned why I was up there and Lolita let this whole barrage of curse words.  She was the only person in my life I'd let curse at that time, because cursing was a no-no, and the woman backed off and we kept riding in front of the bus, never rode in the back of the bus because of Lolita.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, Mobile is the kind of places where the rules weren't as hard and hardly drawn as in some places--
Speaker 2: Oh, no.  Mobile was a horrible place.  Well, not the Mobile I grew up in.  Do you understand?  We were so isolated as children.  We were protected in this little cocoon, and I mean, those are probably the ones I just cited are probably the most racially horrible experiences I ever had in my childhood because we were not exposed to that.  You know, we were, we were kept, we were in our little cocoon, and we went to church, and we went to other's h- you know, to birthday parties and this and that, but we were always with a group of adults who kept us safe.
Story_ID: 641257
Speaker 1: Now, did you go to an A.M.E. church [African Methodist Episcopal]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Oh yeah, oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what was the name, name of your church in Mobile [Alabama]?
Speaker 2: I could see it, it's a big white church.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In fact, it was Reverend Smith's [ph.] church.  He ended up being a bishop in the church, and it was A.M.E., and he was the one who baptized me, and I ran into him when he got to be a bishop and it was really, really exciting to see he was still alive and he had done well.  He's passed away since but, yeah--I remember my father [Albert Williams] was a stickler for time and my mother [Naomi Douglass Williams] was not.  I am my mother's child.  He would get so, so upset.  One day we went to church and they were having benediction and my mother said, "I will be in the--," my father said, "I will be in the car." 'Cause she just couldn't get herself and the two of us [Williams and her sister, Gwendolyn Williams Demps] ready to go at the same time and, and be on time.  So, we were late to church a lot.  But that's where I learned to do oral speaking because we always had a part in the Christmas play and the Easter play and it was a vat of love.  I mean, I think as an aside, I think segregation, desegregation has done fabulous things for a lot of people, but I think segregation, there was so much protection there and so much love and so much, it was not just my parents saying, "If you make a B, why can't you make an A?"  It was all the parents were saying that.  And all the parents were instilling in all the children at that time that you can do better.  You can achieve.  You can be better than what I've done, and the teacher said that too, and they instilled us with such hope and such a feeling of possibility, yeah. That, yeah, and it was interesting that most of the people in my neighborhood on my block were Catholic, so I used to, my mother would let me go to the Catholic church with them until she said, "Do they ever come to church with you?"  And that's when I stopped going because they couldn't at that time.  The Catholics couldn't go to any other church, and so I stopped going with them.  I used to process things in my little head and try to figure it out and my parents taught me that, "Think it through. Where are you on this? Does that make sense?"  As I said, my mother was the disciplinarian.  My father, though, if she said wait 'til my father comes home, that was horrible because then I had to wait because he was in administration.  He was the principal or whatever of schools and so he wouldn't get home until five or six [o'clock].  I had to wait for hours.  And, I didn't know what he was going to do, whether he was going to, but it was always a lecture first, how disappointed he was in me.  I was a better person than that.  Why couldn't I have listened?  "Didn't we teach you better than that?" So we had to go through all that, and I'm sweating bullets, right?  And he was either going to give me a hug or a swat.  I didn't even know.  But it just, so you sort of didn't do a lot of wrong things because I couldn't stand it if she ever said--I adored my father--if she ever said, "Wait 'til your dad gets home."  That would be a terrible thing.  Because, as I said he loved us so much, it was kind of ridiculous.  And yet, my mother was, as I said, this standoffish kind of person and it was a dichotomy there and a dichotomy in my neighborhood, with a multiracial environment.  But I mean the school was cool.
Story_ID: 641258
Speaker 1: Now, did you have a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: English.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because I was a budding writer.
Speaker 1: And, what about teacher?  Did you have, do you have some favorite teachers or was there a special teacher that was a mentor to you in grade school (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A lot of 'em.  In grade school?  Not so--well, yeah, there was one.  I discovered boys in the sixth grade [at W.H. Council Elementary School; W.H. Council Traditional School, Mobile, Alabama] and they used to all want to come and sit, we had double chair--seat tables and they'd come and try to squeeze in there with me and it was kind of fun.  There was never anything awful going on.  It was just kind of fun, but I didn't know my time tables and so I made myself sick so I didn't go to school and wouldn't have to flunk the course and to this day I don't like math and numbers because it's, I don't know, it's just a bad experience.  Now, my father [Albert Williams], when I started taking chemistry, he would help with me with homework and then he decided he couldn't do it anymore because he would come to the right answer, but then I'd take it to school and the teacher would say, "Well, how'd you get this answer."  I had to finally say, "My dad did it." (Laughter) And she would say, "Well, it's the right answer but it's not the way we wanted you to get to it."  So--
Speaker 1: So, his method didn't match the educational process (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.  So, I stopped asking him and tried to muddle through by myself.  But I loved English; yeah, I did.
Story_ID: 641259
Speaker 1: Now how would people describe you as a little kid? What were--as a little girl--what were, what were you interested in and how did you--?
Speaker 2: I liked Katy Keene magazines, comic books, because I was going to be a fashion designer, you see, and she had all the nice clothes and things like that.  I liked all the, all the books, you see back then they taught us about our black pioneers, like Booker T. Washington and Harriet Tubman, and--
Speaker 1: So they do this in school?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Oh, yeah.  It was a big deal.  I mean, you had to know who your ancestors were.  You had to know what they achieved, so that you would know how you could be better than what you are.  Because they were in worse times than you're experiencing.  And, when we went to Mobile County Training School [Mobile, Alabama], there was a teacher there, because my hair, I was in seventh grade.  My hair was very wispy.  My mother [Naomi Douglass Williams] would plait it up as tight as it could be, but by noon it was all over my head and so she called me bird nest, and she was the nurse at the school, and she'd bring me in and braid my hair and I had a good friend and we would fight all the time, and so she gave us these little statuettes where the two people would hug each other and said, "That's what good friends are for."  So, she was sort of a nurse there who was sort of a mentor.  I've been blessed and had a lot of those growing up and I had a lot of them to make an entire career.  There was a, so I was sort of like a very bright personable person, but I was kind of shy also and I excelled, but I had social skills that were, for instance when I went to high school, I could not, I got stockings for Easter after I begged and begged and begged and begged and begged, and I wore the stockings 'til they just were threads because when I went to, to church, my mother made me put on socks.  Well, nobody age--nobody in my class wears socks.  I was just so young, so when kids were dating in the ninth and tenth I was like, how old was I, twelve, thirteen, so I couldn't date and the kids would tease me, you know, because my dad [Albert Williams] took me everywhere, they'd say, "Elynor [HistoryMaker Elynor Williams] and Pop." When they'd dedicate songs on the radio, so I learned to entertain myself and I had some friends, but high school was kind of tough for me, you know.  I did, my mother, my father let me date a guy, well date, he could come by the house.  You have to understand.  My parents were older, number one, and number two, you know, I was younger so there was this whole dichotomy there, trying to figure out what to do with this, this girl, so he would come by my house and then my father would play this song by Dakota Staton--"Ain't no use in hanging around," ['Ain't No Use']--and if that guy was still in there by the end of the song, it was gonna be a terrible scene for me.  So, I would just make sure he was out of there before the end of that song.
Speaker 1: Now, did you have to imagine that terrible scene, or did he ever act it out?
Speaker 2: Oh, he would come to the door and say, "Son, don't you have a home, don't you--?" Oh no, you know, he would, he would go through the whole thing.  "I believe you need to, it's about time you left here to go home."  So, I mean the guy could stay for a while, but once that song started playing he had to go or my father was gonna make a scene.  My mother took me to the prom with a guy that was stamped with the Good Housekeeping seal of approval.
Speaker 1: So, how old were you at the prom?  I guess--
Speaker 2: Fourteen.
Speaker 1: Fourteen?  So you're younger than--
Speaker 2: Yeah I was. I was (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) the age you're supposed to be for these things.
Speaker 2: So that meant socialization was an issue.  I didn't really have--
Speaker 1: So, so you started school younger (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I started college [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] at fifteen, just like my father.  When I found out that--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I said, "Dad, how could you do that to me?"
Speaker 1: So that means you started high school at about eleven.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 641260
Speaker 1: And the funny thing about it, twice they tried to skip--have me skip grades and I loved my parents [Naomi Douglass Williams and Albert Williams] for that, they wouldn't allow it to happen, because I love to read and I love to write and I was proficient on the piano because that was my escape route.  When it was time to do dishes or whatever, I'd go practice the piano and that meant my sister [Gwendolyn Williams Demps] had to do it, which was cruel for her but that was how I got to be very good on the piano, because it was my way of getting out of housework, and we had dogs all during my childhood, collies mostly.  When we moved to St. Augustine [Florida], there was this whole wide woods in the back of our house, so I used to hiking through there and my dad would call out, "You got the dog?"  (Laughter) So I'd go out in the woods by myself with the dog and I started taking the kids in the neighborhood.  I was like the Pied Piper and one time--because the people let their dogs out and they would get bitten by snakes and stuff--one time I had about four of them and I had to pick them up because there were some mad dogs out and I figured that if they bite me then the kids could run, and we were protected because they didn't come near us, and one time I had one of the little kids out here in some cowboy boots, these were like four year olds, five year olds, and it was amazing their parents let me take these kids.  I didn't know what I was doing.  But it was a rattlesnake and he was bending down to pick that snake up and I said, "Oh, let's play a game." I don't know where that came from. I said, "Let me see how slowly you can walk away, back up."  And I never told his mother, of course, but I used to spend a lot of time (unclear)--time in the woods with the dog, snakes and stuff.
Story_ID: 641261
Speaker 1: Now, now, St. Augustine's, that's like what, what--how old are you at that point?
Speaker 2: I was in ninth grade, so--
Speaker 1: Okay. So, you were about eleven, I guess.
Speaker 2: Uh-hm. See, I didn't have friends.  I had one or two friends, but, because what happened in Mobile [Alabama], we were going to school [at Mobile County Training School] and my mother [Naomi Douglass Williams] used to tell me always come home.  I wasn't coming home after school.  I was going with my friends.  We'd go get root beer floats and stuff like that, and she would punish me and I'd do it again, because I didn't see anything wrong with it.  I wasn't being insubordinate.  I just didn't see, if I didn't logically what was wrong with it, then I didn't do it. And so my mother called and my father [Albert Williams] and said we were going to Florida because she couldn't handle her girls, mainly me.  So that's how we ended up in St. Augustine with my dad, because she didn't want to leave Mobile.  She loved it there.  She was in all the social clubs and all that type of thing, AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority], doing her bit, and this and that, and so we ended up in this, and we lived in this house, big rambling house, had a sun porch and I slept on the sun porch.  It was screened in and everything and my father, at that time St. Augustine was a hotbed of racial tension and my father was dean of boys, dean of men, and he used to ride with the men at night.
Speaker 1: Dean of men now, now where?
Speaker 2: This was St. Augustine.
Speaker 1: St. Augustine's College?
Speaker 2: No.  St. Augustine, Florida, but it was--
Speaker 1: St. Augustine, Florida. What is the school?
Speaker 2: Miami, University of Florida--something like that, wasn't University of--that's white. It's now in Miami [Florida].  They moved to Miami. I can't remember the name.  They changed the name.
Speaker 1: Not George Waters--
Speaker 2: No, you're talking about Edward Waters [Edward Waters College] now.
Speaker 1: Edward Waters. Edward Waters. That's right.
Speaker 2: That was in Jacksonville [Florida].  Now, this was in Palatka [Florida].
Speaker 1: Not Central [Central Academy, Palatka, Florida], that's the one, not the one you founded, right?
Speaker 2: No, no.  This was a university.  My mother was teaching French at the school and my father was dean of men and it was in St. Augustine, and it was at the end of the, it was out from the city.  And, that was at the time (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Not Bethune Cook- not Bethune Cookman [Bethune Cookman College; Bethune Cookman University].
Speaker 2: No.  That's in, that's in, that was in Daytona Beach [Florida].  Anyway, they poured acid in the swimming pool downtown, so my father would get out with the men and they would ride the campus because the whites would come in cars and shoot up the campus, and so I would get under the bed with my dog every time my dad went out and my mother would fix sandwiches and coffee and he would ride with them all night long to police the campus and I'd be under the bed with the dog, because I lived on the sun porch, you see, so if they shot they could shoot right through the window and I might get hit, so I would sleep under there with the dog, whenever my dad went out.  And there was a mentor there, I got to, I got to be--who was my home economics teacher, and I got the national sewing award that year, because I didn't realize all the things she had me do made my little dress just so special.  I just liked doing it because she was, that's how I got into home economics when I was in college [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], because she was sort of like, and my French teacher--I mean my Spanish teacher.  She was three hundred pounds of fun and she made it fun to speak Spanish.  We had Spanish meals and we had, and she was always laughing and we had Spanish music and it was really cool.  I'm trying to remember my high school days.  There was a lot of pain there because of the isolation.  Kids, I remember I used to, my mother made me wear these pleated skirts and socks with my shoes, so by the time I got to school, I had packed a whole new outfit that I had made and it was like a slim skirt with stockings, and I used to go to the bathroom and pad myself with slips so I had hips, you know, and I did that a lot and I don't know, she must have known.  Somebody probably told her.  She just ignored me.  She let me do it.  Because there's a certain thing you do with children.  You let them express themselves, so I guess she just let me do it as my way of rebelling, but I leave there looking like her little girl and go there and put myself together in all matter of evil. (Laughter) But my grades were good.  I was a good girl.  I didn't do anything.  I didn't date anybody during that year.  I remember one year when I was at Central Academy, where I would graduate, that was St. Augustine.  There was a boy I had a crush on.  He kind of had a crush on me and his girlfriend and other friends used to follow me home and called me names all the way home, and so I told my dad, who was my confessor, and he says, "This is what I want you to do.  I want you to turn around and tell them, and dare them." And I did that and they stopped doing it.  I got into one scrape in my entire education--
Speaker 1: Turn around and tell them you're, you're dead?
Speaker 2: No. To dare them.
Speaker 1: Oh, to dare them.
Speaker 2: Not exactly what I said, but I said, "You need to stop this because I'm getting ready to go and beat you up." Or something like that I said, because as long as you're a victim--I learned that, it took me another time in my career to really learn that.
Story_ID: 641262
Speaker 1: As long as you allow yourself to be a victim, you will be.  That happened in gra- in grammar school too [at W.H. Council Elementary School; W.H. Council Traditional School, Mobile, Alabama].  There was a big burly girl, dark skin, really she was ugly.  She wasn't plain.  She was a bully and my dad [Albert Williams] told me the same thing.  He said "I want you to make to--you can hit her, but make sure it's the last thing.  Hit her as hard as you can."  I'll push her--anyway so she said, she used to always tell me she was gonna beat me up and so I said, "Okay, let's go."  She said, "I'll meet you after school."  I said, "Okay, fine."  I had all confidence.  I didn't care if I got beat up, because my dad said it was okay, because fighting was not allowed but this wasn't a fight.  I was just gonna hit her as hard as I could and run.  So, she, we met and I just pushed as hard as I could and she fell over in the garbage can, and she never bothered me anymore, so, I learned something about being the victim.  You don't have to be.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But, I wouldn't say it to kids now, because bullying is so insidious now with the social network and all that, but I think the principle is the same.  You know, if you have confidence in yourself and some self-concept, you can ward them off.  I saw a little snippet on the movie, the 'Bully.'  Bullying, the film that they have for kids now, and the little boy was taking it, and it was the same thing.  I don't know if he stood up for himself whether it would have helped or not, but maybe it would have.
Story_ID: 641263
Speaker 1: So, you're in high school. You're, you're younger than most high schoolers by about two or three years and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I was teaching piano lessons and I was also--
Speaker 1: You were taking--?
Speaker 2: I was teaching.
Speaker 1: Teaching, okay, teaching (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, and I was the, I had the young adults choir that I was in charge of and I played the organ.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now this is in a school in St. Augustine [Florida]. This is in--
Speaker 2: No, this is now Palatka [Florida], Central high school [Central Academy] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Palatka. Okay.  So, how long were you staying in St. Augustine's?  Just a year or so?
Speaker 2: Let's see, my sister [Gwendolyn Williams Demps] went to Dunbar [ph.]. I have to do it that way. I was in. Yeah, maybe a year. Maybe a year, because my father [Albert Williams] got the job as junior college president.  That was when he started the junior college [Collier-Blocker Junior College] in Palatka, Florida and we moved there and we were all in the papers and stuff like that and, because I had two years in Central Academy high school, so it must have been about one year in St. Augustine.  My father had been there two years, but my mother [Naomi Douglass Williams] didn't go the first year.  She came the second year.  That's how my sister ended up, yeah, because I had two years at Central Academy in school, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, Central Academy is a high school that was founded, I guess, by the state and your father was hired to be the--
Speaker 2: No. Central Academy high school was the high school.  Collier-Blocker was the junior college that he found--that he started.
Speaker 1: Okay. How do you spell that again, it's Collier--
Speaker 2: C-O-L-L-I-E-R, I think, dash Blocker, B-L-O-C-K-E-R.  It doesn't exist anymore.
Speaker 1: Collier-Blocker.
Speaker 2: I have a whole book ['The Magnificent Twelve: Florida's Black Junior Colleges,' Walter L. Smith] that I could pull out his section of it if you'd like.  And, a couple of people, when we were--
Speaker 1: We, we should get it for the archives, but I'm just trying to establish where you were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Actually, I have--thank you. Maybe I'm getting ready to leave this earth, because all of a sudden I can give my art away, and I have this extra book and I've one to each of my nephews, one to my sister, and I still have one, and I have an extra one and I don't know what to do with it, so I'll give it to you.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  The HistoryMakers archives, yes that's right.
Speaker 2: All right.  You can have it, 'cause I'm thinking what am I going to do with this extra book?
Speaker 1: So Collier-Blocker is the high school.
Speaker 2: No. Central Academy is the high school (Simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Central Academy is the high school, and Collier-Blocker was the junior college.  Okay, all right.  Now, I can figure this out.  All right.
Speaker 2: And, I should have been valedictorian, but they had a rule that you had to have been in the high school for four years to be valedictorian, so I wasn't valedictorian.
Speaker 1: But you had the best grades (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah--I made good grades.  And I played the flute in the band.  I was in a lot of stuff, because, and I used to learn a word and I used to use these big words in all my papers, because if I learned a new word, I had to use it. 'Cause I had, you know it was so pompous, but all my papers were just amazing, and, because I would learn these words and then I'd have to write 'em down and use them in some way in my papers.  This was just something I did on my own, and I was in a lot of clubs, and there was a lot of this, and I was in this and that.  And, I think that's healthy.  I think that's what people do now.  Keep your kids busy so they don't get in trouble.  Now one of my best friends was sort of a hothouse flower like me and she got pregnant and I thought how?  That was impossible.  You know, we were at school and then we were home.  I mean, you know, don't let any strangers in your house, keep the door locked, you know, and all the rules that you have as you're growing up in a black family.  I couldn't figure it out.  How in the world did she get pregnant?  (Laughter) I mean, I knew how you get pregnant but I didn't know how she did it.  I mean, that was certainly not anywhere in my mind.  I think I had kissed a boy once in my, by my senior year, oh, yeah, with Cookie [ph.]--that's the guy who used to come and visit.  Yeah, I kissed him a lot.
Story_ID: 641264
Speaker 1: Now, you're in high school [Central Academy, Palatka, Florida] and you said you have a scholarship to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I'm kissing Cookie [ph.] (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, you're kissing Cookie-
Speaker 2: Kissing Cookie.
Speaker 1: And you have a scholarship offer from FAMU [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida] in music but--
Speaker 2: Yes, I had a scholarship from FAMU in music and I had UNCF [United Negro College Fund] scholarship to Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia].  So, I took the UNCF to Spelman.
Speaker 1: But did you know much about Spelman then?
Speaker 2: Actually, I wanted to go to this college in Connecticut because they had horses.  You have to understand where I was in my mentality.  I was still fairly young and they had this great riding for horses and all these things at Stevens College [ph.] and my father [Albert Williams] said, "I'll tell you what.  You're gonna go to Spelman and if you still want to go to Stevens we can figure something out."  So, I went to Spelman and the interesting thing about my sister [Gwendolyn Williams Demps], we had these separate lives.  I very seldom saw her at Spelman.  She had her own group of friends, I had my group of friends.  When my father would call on Sundays or my parents, she would say, "Dad's calling.  You better come over and--."  I always had to go to her place and get the call, of course.
Speaker 1: She's older than you, so--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, she was already at Spelman?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right, so--
Speaker 2: And then my father drove me to Spelman, and when I got into the dorm he announced to everybody--they were having a dorm meeting, "This is my daughter and she's fifteen, and I want you to be sure that you all take care of her." And I thought I was going to die.  I wanted to fall into a hole in the floor, because I just wanted to be like everybody else, and so, I was pretty lonely at first and then I met these three other women.  We used to call ourselves the four Vs, four virgins.  But, before then I was caught by security walking the fence because I used to go and sit behind the magnolia trees because they smelled so nice, and then I walked the fence. The fence was brick.  On one side it was only like two feet.  The other side was an eight foot drop, so the security said, "Who goes there?"  And I told them, "It's just me."  I ended up having to go to the counselor.  They thought I was, they thought something was wrong with me, and there was nothing wrong with me.  I was just lonely.  But anyway, I used to go because she had beautiful gray hair and she'd wear it in a bun and she looked like Santa Claus, Mrs. Santa Claus.  She had blue eyes and rosy cheeks and she always served tea and crumpets, and that's all I remember about her.  She served tea and crumpets and I'd always show up for my appointment because I wanted to get some tea and crumpets, but--
Speaker 1: Who is president of Spelman, when you were there?
Speaker 2: Manley.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now what's his, what's his full name?
Speaker 2: Albert. I think it was, Albert Manley.
Speaker 1: Alb- yeah, Albert Manley. Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: And so I tried to be a music and home economics major and it was just impossible, because there were music labs, you had to be in the glee club and the chorus.  There were physics labs and biology labs and I just couldn't hack it so I dropped the music and kept the home economics because I was going to be a fashion designer you see and--
Speaker 1: So that's the route you were taking to be a designer, home economics?
Speaker 2: Uh-hm. It was as close as I could get at Spelman, by the way, that degree doesn't exist anymore.
Speaker 1: Right. Now, I've interviewed some people that have got that degree (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, my sister was in the same. Anyway, so, one of the professors--
Speaker 1: Why do you--just a word, just to dwell on that for a second, why do you think it is that there's no place for that anymore and why there was a place for it then?
Speaker 2: Well, I think there was still this residual feeling that women should know how to manage a home, and deal with children so much as managing homes, budgets, and things like that, physics, biology, courses that help them to understand the dynamics of home management and the things that could go wrong.  We weren't taught to sweep and dust and stuff like that.  It was mostly a lot of sciences and I think that there was an underlying belief which still is on a residual now but not as much as it was then, that you would meet a Morehouse man [from Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] and then you'd get married and you'd have your own home.  So there was still some of that there, even in the '60s [1960s], because that was when this was happening, and that's what I wanted to do with it, but it was really home economics education; so you ended up with a degree that allowed you to teach.
Story_ID: 641265
Speaker 1: Now who was on campus with you?  Who were some of the other students that you remember?
Speaker 2: Beverly Shef- Beverly Sheftall, who is now an historian at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right. [HistoryMaker] Beverly Guy-Sheftall.
Speaker 2: Right. She was--yeah.  What was her name?  Walker.  Alice Walker.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Who else was there that you might know?
Speaker 1: Was Bernice Reagon [HistoryMaker Bernice Johnson Reagon] there?
Speaker 2: Uh-hm, yeah.  I mean, I could call a bunch of names but you might not know them, Phoebe Bailey was there, Deborah Crockett [Deborah Peek Crockett], Helen Carithers, Jackie Chatmon [Jacqueline Burgess Chatmon], oh, just a whole bunch of us.  All of us were very unique and strange.  I remember my freshman year and we were all talking about being virgins because that was really the thing back then, and this girl says, "I swear on a stack of Bibles," and this is my freshman year, she stood up to put her hand on the Bible and all this blood rushed out.  She had just had a, she had just had an abortion.  It scared me to death, because I didn't know which side was up, and Spelman was sort of another little cocoon that I went into.  You know, it was very protective and it was local parenting, was that correct, in lieu of your parents we're here for you.
Speaker 1: Those were the days when the black colleges [HBCUs] and I don't know, there might be still some like it, but those are the days when black colleges were very, very strict, very old school, very (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, very old school.
Speaker 1: Compared, especially compared to the white colleges nowadays, where they were more and more liberal (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.  We had to wear gloves and we all had to go to chapel in the morning, and dress up and go; in fact, when I went back to Spelman to speak, I was stunned. Here these kids coming in jeans and sweat suits and backpacks, and I couldn't believe it.  We had to have these gloves and heels and stockings and blah, blah, blah.  But anyway, I grew up there.  That's where I grew up.  I fell in love a few times, ended up my junior year, the guy that I was madly in love with went to the Peace Corps because that was the days of the Vietnam War.  He said, "I'll wait for you."  I said, "No, go to the Peace Corps." Because if he had gone to Vietnam and died, I would have that, and plus, I was so young, I wanted to have, I wanted to experience life.  I wanted to do something with my life.  I wanted to, didn't want to just go from my mother's house to Spelman to some man's home.  I didn't want that for myself.
Speaker 1: I neglected to get the year you graduated from high school [Central Academy, Palatka, Florida].  What year was that?
Speaker 2: Oh, 1962.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're coming out in 1962.
Speaker 2: And his name, well, I shouldn't do that, but anyway he was the big man on campus and everybody was surprised that he was dating me.  I was kind of surprised, because who was I?  I mean, I was just, but he was very active in the movement, the Civil Rights Movement at the time, and I remember he told me I had to go with him to see Dr. Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] speak and I was not impressed.  And I looked back and then I said how could I not have been impressed?  Because, that's not where my head was at that time.  That was where his head was at that time.  He was an activist.
Speaker 1: Now was he a Morehouse man [from Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh yeah, oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.  Morehouse, sorry.  Because I know he could be on Morris Brown [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia] or Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] or--
Speaker 2: Oh no, not for a Spelman girl.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) That's the way Spelman (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I mean, there are some who did, but that was sort of like, oh, you're dating somebody from Morris Brown?  I mean, that's not true now but that's what the mentality was.  Spelman girls dated Morehouse men.  Isn't it funny?  Girl, men.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah that's interesting.
Speaker 2: And that's what they were.  They were Morehouse men and then, it's sort of--Johnnetta Cole [Johnnetta B. Cole] said years ago, Spelman took out, years later, Spelman took away sexism and racism and created a pure learning environment, and that's what Spelman was like, and that's what I imagine it still is, because you didn't have to be shy to be smart because of the guys in the room. You didn't have to deal with the whole racial thing because there was all black, it was all female. And all you had to do was learn and become, and they taught us to be rather, felt we were really kind of unique and special.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was back on campus, oh my god, unique and special, those women are awesome; they're awesome now.  (Laughter) I mean, you know, we thought we were hot stuff, but they're awesome now, awesome. And so--
Speaker 1: So, so here, you're going with an activist.  Now was he involved in the SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference], or SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] or which one (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, all I remember is he was, he was involved in a lot of stuff.
Story_ID: 641266
Speaker 1: I was in the theatre group.  He made me get out of it, and I did.  I mean I'd never do that any time since, but I did because I loved it (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now what kind of theatre group was it?
Speaker 1: It was a theatre group on campus.  But it was a lot of handsome guys, but most of them were gay, and I don't know why I didn't think, I don't know but he told me I needed to get out of that, so I did.  I did stuff in the swims- I made costumes (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What plays did they do?  I'm just asking.
Speaker 1: 'Othello' [William Shakespeare], I mean you name it, we did a whole lot of it.  The guy who was head of the theatre group at that time was awesome and he brought really wonderful plays that we did, I did mostly costumes, and I that for the swimming club as well, and there was a lot of stuff at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] too.  But, I remember I went marching a few times and he would make me go home because he didn't want me to get hurt.
Speaker 2: So, it was all right for him to do it, but not for you.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, but not for me.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He was pretty old school, a gentleman to his core, very popular, very smart, in fact he was in--what is he doing now he was a, dentist, I think, medical doctor or something.  So, and, whatever he told me to do, I'd do it.  And my father [Albert Williams] wrote me this long note and said, "I love you dearly, I believe in what you're doing," he said, "but if you get put in jail, I'm not coming to get you."
Speaker 2: How, how did your (simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So that was a veiled threat.  It was like you go to jail, we disavow you.  So, I was always on the edges.  I just know it was really--and there were friends of mine who got their heads whacked, and from Spelman. Blood gushing down their--it was just a time to grow up in that environment because that's what I was really doing, growing up.  But, yeah, I was right there in Atlanta [Georgia] during all that time, going on.
Speaker 2: Okay. So your parents they, I think they weren't so, they were for civil rights but they didn't want you to--
Speaker 1: They didn't want me to get hurt.
Speaker 2: Get hurt, okay.
Speaker 1: That's the parental thing, I think.
Speaker 2: Um-hm. All right.
Speaker 1: And, to my dismay I should have saved all those letters from my father.  Some of them are very telling, and he was a very good writer.  And they got lost; I don't know where they are.
Story_ID: 641267
Speaker 1: Now who were some of the professors that influenced you on campus?  Now you took classes over at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] and at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Or, 'cause you had some classes over at--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Bob Cham- Bob Chambers [ph.] was a, he had a class at eight o'clock in the morning on a Saturday.  I never made that class.  It was probably the only class I almost flunked, because I went in there and at that time Spelman sent all the grades to your home.  My father [Albert Williams] called me up and he said, "I just got your grades."  I said, "Oh, you did?"  He said, "Yeah.  What is this?"  I had an F.  I never had an F in my life.  I went over there, Bob Chambers said--oh, he wasn't a mentor, I'm just scared to tell you this story--he said, "Who are you?" (Laughter) He didn't even know who I was. Because by the time you finished partying on Friday, you had an eight o'clock class on Saturday, and they had told me all I had to do was show up, so when I did get there, I'd have my pajamas rolled up, which a lot of kids did, with a trench coat over them and I'd sit in the back of the room and go back to sleep, so I wasn't doing anything bad.  I was told I didn't have to really do anything but answer a few questions and pass the test.  Well, that was not exactly true.  Anyway, I got out of there with a D.
Speaker 1: What, what class was it?
Speaker 2: Philosophy.
Speaker 1: Philosophy, oh?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Eight o'clock on a Saturday morning.  And that was the only time they were, so I ended up having to go summer school because I got that D, but anyway--
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite class or teacher at Spelman?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my organ teacher and I can't remember her name.  I think she's back there.  I cried my freshman year.  I probably would have stuck with the music had she stayed there.  She played the organ for chapel and she came back.  She went to Oberlin [Oberlin College, Oberlin, Ohio] to get her Ph.D., and I said, "You can't go."  I couldn't believe she was gonna leave me, and she did.  I probably would have stopped, because she made music, I always loved music, but she made it sing.  She made it awesome for me, she was, I was, she was a role model.
Story_ID: 641268
Speaker 1: When you were on the verge of graduation, now what were your prospects?  Now, you majored in home economics; even in those days though, what does somebody do with that in 19--?
Speaker 2: Teach.  I had a teaching degree.
Speaker 1: So, this you'd be coming out in 1966, right.
Speaker 2: Uh-hm. Yep, I had a teaching degree.  So, I went home.  I had actually done student teaching in this wonderful small town and every night they'd play on the juke box 'It's a Man's World' ['It's a Man's Man's Man's World'].  I used to hate that song.  Anyway, we were on the top of the hill and it would come all the way up from the juke box, 'It's a Man's World.'  I used to say, "It is not."  I remember that.
Speaker 1: James Brown. Now, but he said, you didn't appreciate his line, "It wouldn't be nothing without (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, but the rest of it, "If not for a women." Right but, I got in a lot of trouble in my, in my senior year.
Speaker 1: Now, was there any, were there any teachers at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] that were really presaged, like a more independent, thought from women--
Speaker 2: It was in the air.  I was talking to a woman from Spelman as I told you about the art, who, she says still there's a culture.  She came from the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], and she said when they first started singing a Spelman hymn, she didn't join, and they came to her.  She said, "Look, as long as you're in this campus you're a part of this culture."  I mean, it was just known that you were special and unique.  They taught you critical thinking, you were taught how to perform at your best, because all of us were valedictorian and salutatorians and that's still true.  They only took the best of the best, and it was just, and even to this day I still have very close friends from Spelman and Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], because that class, we considered it one class, Spelman and Morehouse.  Spel-house is what they called it, and my boyfriend used to have these parties his campus so I used to go over there and we'd party and come sneak back on campus before the gate was locked.
Speaker 1: Was there a curfew?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, yeah.  In fact, when I started my student teaching my senior year I walked off campus at midnight and the whole dorm was locked down because of me.  You see, I was living, doing my student teaching, so I didn't think anything of it.  They never told it was me, and I found that out years later.  They just all stayed in the lockdown, but everybody knew it was me. And they never told.  But I wasn't doing anything wrong.  I was living on campus; but anyway, what would I do with that?  So.  Good question.  I applied at this department store to be a buyer.  I'll never forget that.  Nobody wanted to hire me but this guy--
Speaker 1: Now were, I'm sorry, were you teaching at this time, when you, or before (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.  I was doing nothing because I couldn't get a job.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is like between graduation and--
Speaker 2: Back up. I decided to stay in Atlanta [Georgia].  So, my father [Albert Williams] said fine.  So--he said, "You could stay there until the money runs out.  I'm sending you a bus ticket home.  You can either just cash that in, stay there and I won't send you another one, or you can use it to come home."  As always, we always had these choices.  So I kept the thing and I had a little money, and I was staying with a girlfriend's aunt, all right.  The only person who knew I was there was my mom [Naomi Douglass Williams].  I had applied to the Peace Corps, and then they were going to send me to Venezuela.  My boyfriend was in Africa.  I didn't want to go to Venezuela.  They just wanted to send me there because I spoke a little Spanish, a little French, so I just didn't respond, and the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] came looking for me.  I'll never forget that.  I don't know how they found me, and they said, "We're looking for [HistoryMaker] Elynor Williams." And I said, I was at my aunt's, my girlfriend's aunt's house and it scared me so much, and they said, "Well, you were supposed to report in Washington [D.C.] to get the training for the Peace Corps." And I'm going, "Uh-huh." And they said, "Are you coming? What are you going to do?"  I said, "I don't want to do that."  And, they said, "Fine."  I went home and took that bus ticket and went home and I called my mom and I said, "Did you tell them where I was?"  She said, "No."  I don't know if it was the FBI, but it had to be.  I mean, how in the heck did they find me?  It's just weird.  So, I went home and because I was so young, I couldn't get a job teaching 'til I turned eighteen, nineteen (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, so you were like back in Florida?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: To my great dismay.
Story_ID: 641269
Speaker 1: So, I'm sure my father [Albert Williams] pulled some strings but anyway, I finally got a job when I turned nine- eighteen or nineteen.  Anyway, I was teaching at Eugene J. Butler High School, Junior Senior High School [Eugene J. Butler Junior Senior High School, Jacksonville, Florida].  It was an inner city school, brand new, and I was a part of this cluster of home economics teachers.  There were three of us, and one of them, I can see her face, I'm terrible with names and numbers, but she took me under her wing and I was just dedicated, I was such a dedicated teacher.  There was one girl in particular.  It took me a long time to figure out she couldn't read.  She would copy stuff off the board and it would be right, but then if we had an essay or something, these letters were beautifully written but they made no sense.  So, I remember going to try to get her in a reading program, to try to help her out and she had like one point more than the cutoff for her to take the reading course and she, I could never get her out of my class, because I was the only one who probably took any time with her.  I bought her some Jane books [Dick and Jane].  You know, I didn't have any authority about teaching anybody to read but, anyway, so, and I had a drug addict in my homeroom class, junior high school homeroom, and I touched the guy and told him it was time to go to lunch and he attacked me and all my big boys came and got him.  I'll never forget that.  I didn't think they cared.  So, I decided I was never gonna have him back in my class, so I stood up for that.  The dean of boys brought him back and I said, "He's not coming in here, I'm sorry." And locked my door.  I've always been feisty.  I don't know how I got where I was, I--eventually the successes I have because I always spoke my mind and I always stood my ground, and so he never got back in there.  And then we went on strike.  We went on strike for better equipment for the schools and my parents and I fought because they kept working and I didn't.  In the story, they busted all of us teachers down, they couldn't bust me any further because I was already (unclear) teacher and one of the women in the cluster of home economics, we had three rooms and we were all together and she came in and she had this thing for a job fair and I didn't have anything to do.  I was on strike and it was in New Orleans [Louisiana] during Mardi Gras, so I went, and I got there and I didn't have a room, because they didn't hold my reservation.  So, I ended up, I met this girl in the bathroom and she said she had a room, and I said, "Fine." So, you know the vagaries of life as a young person, so I stayed with her until she started bringing guys in, so I told the guy who was in charge of the job fair, Charles Fields [ph.], that I was having problems with my housing situation.  He said, "Come and stay with me in the suite."  So he gave me a bedroom, and that was, I was, I said, "Fine."  There was, nothing ever happened.  He never came to do anything, but I just stayed there.  I just always took risks, you know.  I think that's probably, I took, I always took risks and I was lucky that nothing really terrible ever happened to me.
Speaker 2: So this is what, 1966?
Speaker 1: This is '69 [1969].
Speaker 2: Sixty-nine [1969]?
Speaker 1: Sixty-eight [1968], '69 [1969].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (Counts) '68 [1968] yeah, somewhere along in there.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sixty-eight [1968] (unclear).
Speaker 1: 'Cause I stayed, I taught for two years.
Story_ID: 641270
Speaker 1: So, I went into this job fair and I ended up, I had two job offers, one was with Pfizer [Pfizer Inc.] and one was with General Foods [General Foods Corporation] in New York, so I took the one at General Foods in New York and my mother [Naomi Douglass Williams] cried and my father [Albert Williams] gave me a gun, and then my mother found out my father gave me a gun and she cried some more. (Laughter) I was going, it was just too far away. I just had to get out of there.  I was being suffocated, because my home life was still like I was twelve.  You know, I had a curfew, and she was right.  She says, "As long as you're single, you can't get a place of your own, and as long as you're living in my house, you had to do by my rules." So it was just like I was in a no win situation.  Also, to my great astonishment, I had to pay rent.  I couldn't believe it.  What a perfect thing.  Of course I had to pay rent.  I mean, now, I understand it but then I said, this is my house.  She said, "This is my house and these are the bills and I want you to understand this is your portion you're going to pay."  So, I went to New York and lived in the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association], and I was a food editor, yeah, a food editor.
Speaker 2: For General Foods, now.  This is--
Speaker 1: In White Plains, New York.
Speaker 2: In White Plains, okay.  So you're in White Plains, New York.  Now where is White Plains in relationship to New York City [New York, New York]?
Speaker 1: About an hour away, forty-five minutes.
Speaker 2: Upstate?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's upstate.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And, the training was horrendous.  I went to, they had these food testing panels, well nobody told me, so I was on this panel for, for industrial foods, you know, for cafeterias and hotels and restaurants, et cetera.  No one told me I didn't have to eat everything, so they'd have these displays of food, so by the time I got to the second pie, third pie, fourth pie, fifth, I was sick as a dog, and plus I was low man on the totem pole, so I had to do the dietetic stuff, which was really horrible because it had that aftertaste, and then somebody pulled me aside, she says, "Honey, you don't eat it all.  You take a bite.  That's why they call it a taste."
Story_ID: 641271
Speaker 1: Now let me, let me go back for a little, little--
Speaker 2: I was twenty-one (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So this is, you're twenty-one years old.  It was nineteen sixty-what?
Speaker 2: I was twenty-one, from '46 [1946] to--
Speaker 1: So '67 [1967].
Speaker 2: Sixty-seven [1967], '68 [1968], yeah.
Speaker 1: This is prior to Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] assassination, or.
Speaker 2: No, I was in college [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] when King was assassinated.  I remember because--
Speaker 1: He was assassinated in '68 [1968].
Speaker 2: No, no.  It was '65 [1965], '66 [1966], because I was in college.  I remember walking across campus in total disbelief.  I was like in shock.  I was like, it was like, Oh, that was Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy], I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Kennedy was killed in '63 [1963] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was Kennedy. I'm sorry, sorry, sorry.  That was Kennedy.  I remember that too, because it was like I had been killed.  I mean, it was just amazingly painful.
Speaker 1: Dr. King was killed in '68 [1968], now.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was '68 [1968], right.
Speaker 1: Was that after you got to White Plains [New York] or before, you think?
Speaker 2: I think that was before.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because that sent me into shock, too; another shock, and I was thinking I'm gonna be numb because right before that was Bobby Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy], and.
Speaker 1: No, he was after.
Speaker 2: Oh he was after Dr. King, yeah, right, right, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) About a month and a half later. It was early June, I think.
Speaker 2: It was it was. Yeah, it was a bad time.
Speaker 1: It was rough time period.
Speaker 2: There was so much hope.  We felt we could change the world and in a lot of ways we did.  That was just, and this is an aside.  I truly believe that we were the last of the well educated kids and I say that to say this.  There is a dumbing down of America.  I mean, people don't like to say that but it's true.  And, because we were educated and we challenged the status quo, I think that there has been a watering down so that we don't have as many people challenging.  What I see now is wonderful.  I see that this is coming back.  You know, there's a 99 percent thing, but I was behind some kids the other day, they couldn't make a straight sentence without curse word and these are young black men who are now in high school.  I'm going, what happened here?  That's another side thing.  It just breaks my heart because basically I'm still an educator in my heart.  It's in my DNA.  When I went to, so, I went to West- Western Electric [Western Electric Company] which was--(shakes head) wasn't Western Electric, General Foods [General Foods Corporation], and I had a mentor there, her name was Dr. Lenora Moragne.
Story_ID: 641272
Speaker 1: Now, were you the first black person they had hired in (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Unh-uh, actually my roommate at the time, the two of us were hired at the same time.
Speaker 1: Okay, so two of you all came in at--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Were you the first two (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We probably were. We probably were.  I didn't even think, put any thought in it; Lenora Moragne came after us.  She was in the kitchen.  She went to Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] and I was put on the editing staff and that was, it was interesting.  It was interesting.  I did some TV work.  I got, the first time my dad [Albert Williams] wrote in and got put in Ebony, my little picture, and the funny thing about this is how, oh, with the young, it's silly.  I had them take the picture at another place instead of my, where I worked, and the vice president of GF [General Foods Corporation] kitchens came and she says, "You're in Ebony."  I said, "Yeah."  They said, "Why didn't you let us know?"  I mean, that was a big deal for them (laughter).  You know, and I'm thinking, you know, this really doesn't have anything to do them.  Oh, this is crazy.
Story_ID: 641273
Speaker 1: I just wanted to emphasize again that I just wanted to check that date because of the fact that so many opportunities opened up after Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated, after the riots (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There is no question about that.
Speaker 1: So.
Speaker 2: There's no question about that.  There's another marker I want to tell you that happened late- that happened later on in that career and it was because, again, of Reverend Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] and the need to have more blacks in positions of power, but I'm trying to think.  It was because of the movement.  Let me say that.  I knew that.  I knew that's why I was hired.  But see, the thing that I told people when I used to go out and speak, yes, we were hired, maybe because of the movement, but we were kept there because we were good.  I said, so don't, so you go in there and you tested and those of us who were good stayed, and those who weren't were let go, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--
Speaker 2: But that's why I was hired.  There's no question about that.
Speaker 1: But you were qualified.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, okay.
Speaker 2: And, this and television. That, but I'll never forget.  She came, she couldn't believe it.  She says, what--I said I went to a studio and had pictures taken.  She says, "Why didn't you have them come here?" You know I, I just didn't get it.
Speaker 1: Because I guess one of their goals was--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  They wanted the publicity.
Speaker 1: They wanted to publicize the fact that they had black people hired at this point.
Speaker 2: And Dr. Moragne [Lenora Moragne] came and--she was a Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York] graduate, Ph.D.  And so, she, we used to go hang out in Harlem [New York, New York] because there was this all-white area that we worked in and kind of lived in and we used to go see off-Broadway shows and we'd eat Fig Newtons and popcorn and ribs, and one time this guy said to us, "Whatcha eating baby?"  It just warmed our heart because I had spent my entire life in the South among black people.  My first white friend was at the Y [Young Women's Christian Association].  She was a witch, by the way.  That's another story; not in a bad way, she was truly a witch. (Laughter) She was actually a witch.
Speaker 1: She actually was a witch.
Speaker 2: And she was my first white friend.  And then one of my white friends at the Y was dating a black guy and I had to get over that because he actually treated her pretty badly and I told her she should leave him.  But, you know, so, the whole idea of acceptance in a society that, "Don't look at the color of my skin but the color of my character."  I think I learned a lot of that during that one year I stayed at the Y in White Plains [New York].  But anyway, Dr. Moragne was my mentor for (unclear).  In high school, not only was this woman on my home economics team, but there was a man who was going to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] for his Ph.D., and we were like, we used to do a lot of stuff together. Like we had the academic team together, we had the kids who went on TV for competition, we were the counselors for that, and before you left, there was a curriculum piece, we had to teach the kids how to shine shoes and he came in and he saw me shining shoes.  He pulled me out.  He says, "I'm going to Harvard."  He said, "If I come back here and see you shining shoes, I am going to personally kick your butt."  He made me so mad, and that's when I decided to take that job fair thing and that's when I decided to really get out, and he said, "And plus you need to get away from your mother [Naomi Douglass Williams]."  I mean, he just (laughter) and I really liked him.  He was a good friend of mine.  How could he talk to me that way, and he was right.  I mean, it was time for me to do something different, try my wings.  So, back to Dr. Moragne.
Speaker 1: Now, Dr. Moragne was at--
Speaker 2: At General Foods [General Foods Corporation].
Speaker 1: General Foods.  Okay, now.  How do you spell his name?
Speaker 2: Her name.
Speaker 1: Her name.
Speaker 2: It was L-E-N-O-R-A.  She ended up being assistant to Senator Dole [Bob Dole].
Speaker 1: L, what was it?
Speaker 2: L-E-N-O-R-A, Moragne, M-O-R-A-G-N-E.  Her, she had twin brothers [Adolph Moragne and Rudolph Moragne].  Both of them were physicians in Chicago [Illinois], and she later on became an assistant for Senator Dole.  But anyway, she says, "Listen, honey."  She says, "You need to get out of here and get an education." She said, "Because you're going nowhere fast."  She says, "The only way you're going to move to a different segment is to go and get your master's degree at Cornell." You know she was a Cornell graduate.  I said, "Okay."  So I applied to Cornell and took the graduate, the GMAT [Graduate Management Admission Test], and I got accepted and I didn't have any money because by that time, see, when you come out of college, now here they still do that, they give you all these applications for credit cards.  I must have had thirteen credit cards, all of them active, all of them had something on it, so I didn't have any money.  I was barely keeping up with the credit card payments and so I wrote them and said I'd love to come, but I had no money, so they sent me a stipend.  See, it was still the '60s [1960s], and they were still looking for black people.  So they gave me a full scholarship and a stipend and I headed off to Cornell.
Story_ID: 641274
Speaker 1: Once again, you had the qualifications, I guess, to get a scholarship, and you didn't even know you could get one (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, but you know, as someone told me and I think this is true, I wear a lot of my life and career as a light shawl.  My mother [Naomi Douglass Williams] always told me years ago to never believe your press releases.  Know who you are, but remain, and my father's [Albert Williams] favorite, you know, is to be able to speak with kings and still keep the common touch, by Kipling ['If,' Rudyard Kipling].  So, that was also instilled in my life, you know, I think I was very lucky and I think I took opportunities, even though they were risky when they came about; I mean, sort of like I was always sure.  So, when I got the scholarship, I said, "Okay, I'm out of here."  Now, this is interesting again.  Being young, General Foods [General Foods Corporation] wanted to pay for my education and they wanted me to come back, but see I didn't want to be beholden to them, so I turned it down and so while I was there, they used to send me these press packets, you know, where they would have rice and frying pan and, you know, (unclear) food and stuff, and they would send me those occasionally, and then the summer came and the stipend quit and I didn't have anywhere to live, so my father told me you can come home, because he said he was giving me five years to get out of Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] and that was it, so I didn't look for him to help pay for anything.  My sister [Gwendolyn Williams Demps] was in Japan at the time, and she just started sending me thirty dollars a month, and it was like manna from heaven, and I started eating berries on the side of the--on these bushes next to the African American center, and I ate berries a lot of the summer and I had a boyfriend at the time and I used to fix berries for him with sugar.
Speaker 1: What kind of berries are these?
Speaker 2: Blackberries, strawberries, and one day I went in there and there were snakes.  There was a snake.  I dropped my bucket and ran and I thought, uh-uh.  You've got to eat.  So, I picked up my bucket and he was still there.  I said, "Look.  You take the berries over there, and I'll take the berries over here, and we'll be--," and his mother, my boyfriend's mother, used to send us a care package every now and then there would be fried chicken and biscuits and stuff and I would take mayonnaise and with boiled egg, I could make four sandwiches out of that, and I knew I was as poor as anybody could be before I finally got a job on campus.  But, I understood what poverty was because, but the difference between me and anybody else who was super poor was the fact that I knew I was coming out of that.  I knew this was a temporary situation for me.  But I can appreciate what poverty really is, like when you know you're very stuck there.  It's like I was terrified of snakes but I was, I was going to get those berries.  You know, it's just like what do you do when you are, when you don't have any food.  And the job, thank God, got me a cafeteria card.  So, I used to go in there and get food, and then I'd go and give my boyfriend the card and he'd go get food. 'Cause he was--what was he, he was in communication arts too. I was studying communication arts at Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York].
Story_ID: 641275
Speaker 1: Another incident with racism, my professor was Dr. Sengure [ph.] my coun- my counselor, whatever you call it, advisor for my master's [degree] and I was getting a master's in communication arts with a major, with a minor in nutrition, so I had the whole sciences and stuff all over again.  I was doing this course with this guy who was from Scandinavia and I remember the course was extremely hard.  It was really hard and he had the accent, so half the time I didn't know what the heck he was saying.  It was one of the auditorium kinds of rooms, so I called my dad [Albert Williams] and he said, "Well, raise your hand.  Ask him questions."  And, he would never call on me.  Dad said, "Start taping the lectures."  So I taped the lectures and played it over and over until I could understand what he was saying.  Then my dad said, "Stay after class and talk to him after class."  I'd be standing there and he would ask for everybody else's question and then when he got to me, he never had time.  He said, "Get an appointment in his office."  So, I wrote this, it was a three page paper, single spaced, and what, I had five pages of references.  I worked really hard on it.  He called me in.  He said, "I want to talk to you about your paper."  I said, "Fine."  He asked me who wrote it.  He asked me if Dr. Sengure wrote it for me.  I said, "No, I wrote it."  I mean, I didn't understand what he was getting at, and then he said, "Well, who gave you the references?"  I said, "I read, I did the references myself." And then he said, "Well, who typed it for you?"  I said, "I typed it."  He said, "Well, I guess I guess I'll have to give you an A minus."  He couldn't give me an A.  So, I was fuming.  I went to my, Dr. Sengure and I told her, I said, "I'm going to take this up with the dean.  He's a racist.  I've put up with the whole, you wouldn't believe what I've put up with," and she said, "Sit down."  She says, "Do you want to get your degree?"  I said, "Of course."  She says, "Then suck it up and keep going."  And that's what I did.  And the next year, a black female took him and charged him and they fired him.  I was talking to somebody else the other day, my nephew.  My nephew is in a situation with the government right now.  He could be a whistle blower.  The New York Times is calling him for statements, and I told him he's got two kids.  I said, "Darling, if you lived in a shoebox with a puppy, I'd say go for it, but you've got a family."  I'm not sure what the right decision was, decision.  Obviously wasn't it right for me.  I really bled over the fact that I didn't stand up, because he had one more year to really abuse black kids.  If I, if no one ever stood up, I couldn't have had the opportunities that I have had at Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York] or General Foods [General Foods Corporation] or at Sara Lee [Sara Lee Corporation], or you know.  I couldn't be living downtown.  I mean you know, somebody has to stand up.  Somebody has to say something.  I mean even when, during the Civil Rights Movement, I mean, I was the one sent home before it got bad.  You know, it's almost like what have I done, and then I realized there are some things that I had done, and I was always there, I did it a different way.  I think I made a difference, but I wasn't on the front line and I acknowledged that and I'm happy someone was.  I think that was important for all of us, actually, and I think it's sad that our children are not growing up knowing this and appreciating--I mean, they know who Dr. Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] is, but do they know Harriet Tubman, or Paul Laurence Dunbar, or any of the other people whose shoulders we stand on, you know?  Then the question is, do they need to know?  I have friends--I'm digressing so just allow me, just one moment of pontificating--I have a friend whose daughter, she went to the Latin school.  They sent her off to one of these white colleges and prep schools, and so forth and she came home with a guy and she has no connection in the black community at all.  At least she does know.  I have another friend whose son doesn't even date black women.  He has no interest in that.  She tried to put him in, they live in Winnetka [Illinois].  They took him to Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.].  He wanted no part of that.  He is, for all references, a white boy and I know her well enough to know that she did her best, but somewhere somebody is dropping the ball.  I mean, he has no interest in anything black.  He's light in color, but he's definitely a black child.  You can see that, and he has no roots.  He has no foundation, and I find that very sad, very sad.  So--
Speaker 2: Despite the fact that his parents tried to instill him some sort of--
Speaker 1: He was a late baby so maybe they didn't have the time.  She was off working and he was off working, but I think they did put some effort into getting him connected, but it didn't take.  And maybe it wasn't enough of it.  Maybe they didn't go to any black churches.  Maybe they didn't get him into a bible school or, I don't know.  And he's so smart and he's so lost, and I feel very sad about that, and I'm sure he's one of millions like that.  Anyway, so, where were we?
Story_ID: 641276
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're in graduate school at Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York], and--
Speaker 2: Eating berries.  No.
Speaker 1: Yeah, no (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We got past that (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, what was your thesis for your master's [degree]?
Speaker 2: Yeah it was, it was on pregnant teenagers and nutrition. My advisor tried to get me to do it on birth control and I refused.  I said, "I'm not doing birth control on black kids."  I said, "I'll deal with pregnancy and good nutrition in black kids."  The first time I saw, actually a twelve year old pregnant by her father, it just about blew me away.  I did a dichotomy study between rural Upstate New York and Jacksonville, Florida, because I could get in the school system because my mother [Naomi Douglass Williams] was there.  And there was no difference between what they probably still teach to this day and I finally gave the module to USDA [U.S. Department of Agriculture]--no. Some other outfit that could use it with the kids, which is what it ended up being, because I was a media major.  It had to be, it was a slide show with a tape, and then the nutrition part of it had to deal with some type of nutritional thing.  But it was interesting.  They all eat hot dogs and pop and potato chips, and have no idea what to eat.  And I got a couple of prizes because I put a lot of work in it.  And, unfortunately, the people in Upstate New York, my advisor got me into that, I thought that they wanted the finished product, but what they wanted was the raw data for their school, so when I put together my thesis, you know, it was mixed up so, I mean you know, they wanted to sort out their kids, but the point was there was no difference between a rural community and the urban communities what kids ate.  So anyway--that was my thesis.  And, I had an advisor, I had three people.  One, I absolutely loved, which was Dr. Sengure [ph.].  Then there was Dr. Crawford [Robert H. Crawford].  Dr. Crawford was chair of the department and he was such a lost leader.  Nobody ever chose him, so I chose him just because I felt sorry for him.  Well, he almost, I almost didn't get my degree because of him, because I was going to the other two people, you know, getting advice and what should I do about--I never went to his office to talk to him about anything.  So, when I got ready to defend the thesis, he says you know, "I haven't seen you at all."  He almost buried me.  The funny thing when I had to defend it, oh my god, I was standing there and the first question Dr. Sengure, my favorite of the advisors, she goes, "What did you do this study on?"  I went blank.  I couldn't remember anything.  I couldn't remember what I studied, what the name of the project was, nothing.  And then she threw me a bone.  She says, "Wasn't it about pregnant teenagers?"  And then I was off and running.  But, I mean it was like this long--I went completely blank.  I loved Ithaca [New York].  I used to walk the woods all the time by myself.  I lost a lot of boyfriends because I was a good hiker, and I'd go out there by myself with a stick.  It was beautiful, beautiful up there.  A lot of kids committed suicide because of the gorges and stuff.  I used to walk around the gorges and go up the, as I said, I just, I don't know.  It was just sort of, I liked doing that.
Speaker 1: Ithaca was voted one year, the most lovable city in America.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  It's beautiful.  Rod Serling went to Ithaca College [Ithaca, New York].  The communication department [Department of Communication Arts; Department of Communication] at that time was in this old half Tudor building and graduate school students were on the top floor and there were bats in there, so I'd be studying with a blanket over my head with the lamp on, trying to read, hoping that the bats wouldn't land on my head.  It was interesting.  I met some interesting people there.  I studied all the time, because I was trying to get the, because I didn't have a degree in communications or journalism.  I had to take some undergraduate courses to get caught up so I could get my master's, and then I had all this stuff, biology and--stuff on the nutrition end of it, so I spent a little of my time studying, but it was a good experience.  I met some neat people there.
Story_ID: 641277
Speaker 1: Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York] in the early '70s [1970s], were there any interesting people there that you met that you wouldn't have met if you hadn't been at Cornell?
Speaker 2: I'll tell you why I went to Cornell, and not only because of Dr. Lenora Moragne, but I remember it pictured in Time magazine when the guy was with the gun and they, took over the--
Speaker 1: Took over the campus.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And I thought that's cool.  That's where, that'd, he had a nice place to go to school.  And I remember I had my little heels from working in General Foods [General Foods Corporation] and the student union building was at the top of the hill, and I had my little heels and I'm trying to get to the communication department [Department of Communication Arts; Department of Communication], at the bottom of the hill.  I slid all the way down the hill on my butt, and then my friends at Cornell at the school said, "You need to go in here and get yourself, go to the Salvation Army and get yourself some boots," (laughter).  "All that New York stuff, you aren't going to be able to make it here."  And I lived over a garage, they got a place there, and part of my, I was supposed to shovel the driveway and cut the grass in the summer.  Well, I wasn't about to cut grass, but I shoveled the driveway mainly because I had to get out and go to class, so, but did I meet some people there that I wouldn't have met otherwise?  I'm not sure how you mean that.  I met Bill Jeter [William Jeter], who is now professor at the University of Florida [Gainesville, Florida].  You mean celebrities and stuff?  I mean--
Speaker 1: I don't know, one thing that attracted you was students protesting before the black studies department.  I don't know, did you go to--
Speaker 2: They were gone by the time I did that.  I loved it, I loved that picture.
Speaker 1: Okay. Well, I just wondered because it's a place where high professors come in and they bring in speakers from, you know, that you wouldn't necessarily see someplace else, I just wondered, you know.
Speaker 2: As I said, I studied most of the time.  I didn't really indulge in a lot of the extracurricular activities.
Speaker 1: Okay, so.
Speaker 2: I mean, I had a couple boyfriends hung around, but we didn't do much and none of us had any money.
Story_ID: 641278
Speaker 1: Okay, so you went to North Carolina after you graduated, right, is that true?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  I told General Foods [General Foods Corporation] I was coming back.  And then, I got this call from this guy from General Foods, from North Carolina Agriculture Extension Service [North Carolina Cooperative Extension Service], and he said, "I want you to come down here for an interview."  He was a graduate from Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York].  He got his Ph.D. there.  And I said okay, because I had never been to Greensboro [North Carolina] before, so I went down there and came back, because I was going to go work for J. Walter Thompson and, who was the other one, Ebony.  J. Walter Thompson wouldn't spend the money to take me down, bring me down to New York if I didn't have any way to get there, so I'd even go for the interview for that.  Another one I went to, ad agency and they wanted me to write a couple of stories, which I refused to do, and Ebony, they just didn't like me because I didn't have experience, and so that left General Foods, which I didn't really want to go back to, and so when I went to the interview at North Carolina Agriculture Extension Service, when I landed the airport was in the middle of this field and there were cows over there. I thought, oh god, I can't come and live here.  So, I went back to Ithaca [New York] and didn't think anything of it, and then this guy called me.  I can't remember his name, but he was cool.  He called me and he said, "Are you going to take this job or what?"  I said, "Excuse me?"  He said, "Are you coming down here to work for us or what?"  I said, "Oh."  He sounded like my dad [Albert Williams], so I said, "Yeah, yeah, I'm coming."  (Laughter) He gave me the riot act, so I ended up working there.  I started the department of communication arts at the agri school at A and T [North Carolina Agricultural Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina].
Speaker 1: So, was that the, don't mumble that through because this is important.
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sorry.  You know, we were having a conversation.  I forgot he was taping. I am so sorry.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now don't mumble that through.  This is something, you started the department.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but it was just for the ag school.
Speaker 1: And the idea was that he was coming and you were brought there to start this department thing, is that true?
Speaker 2: It was just me and a secretary.  I mean, we did the publicity for Ag Extension and the black school [HBCU] which is the 1890 university schools, you know.  They had the separate pieces and, so I didn't really start, I started department--we're talking about two people--I was the first one that they hired to do the job, and I started and I started doing publicity for them and there was a photographer who I hired a lot, and he was cool, and he said to me, "You should join the chamber of commerce [Greensboro Chamber of Commerce]."  I said, "Okay."  So I did.  I got in the eight o'clock club and got really active with them and I had a mentee.  This is interesting.  I was dating this guy because, see, I went to North Carolina on a mission.  I was going to save people's lives.  I was going to teach them how to cook and how to clean, how to sew and how to make their lives better.  That was my mission, and I was going to have a boyfriend just to be on the side, just so I could, whatever.  Anyway, he had a roommate that he said was a Vietnam [Vietnam War] vet.  This guy was a runaround.  I mean, I knew that.  I didn't give a, I didn't care.  I mean, he was a womanizer.  I didn't care.  The guy, his roommate, had me go with him for lunch and he said, "Did you know that this--," and I said, "Yeah, I know that.  I don't care."  He said, "But you're so much better than that."  I said, "I know that."  I said, "He's not important to me."  We got to be best of friends.  We're still friends.  He was right, he was not a Vietnam vet.  He was a student at UNCG, University of North Carolina at Greensboro [Greensboro, North Carolina].  The guy didn't want me to know he was rooming with a guy that was that young and, anyway, I got him to take a job.  I said you're too smart to stay here.  We got to be friends, too, because he, anytime I sent him an article or something, I used to call him up, I said, "Maurice, you know you ought to print this for me."  I said, "We got a lot of stuff in the paper because of that."  And, so I got him out of there and I got him to move to New York, and he just is retiring now as vice president of PepsiCo.  One of my success stories. I had a lot of those.
Speaker 1: This is Maurice-
Speaker 2: Maurice Cox.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: From PepsiCo. Yeah. And he, to this day, he said, "If it hadn't been for you."  'Cause I used to rag at him all the time.  I said, "What are you gonna do?  What are you gonna do with your life?  You gonna work at this paper forever?"  Anyway, that was my first real mentee.  I had some other people, but I was, I stuck with him.
Story_ID: 641279
Speaker 1: So you were at North Carolina A and T University [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So I'm at North Carolina A and T State University.
Speaker 1: So, how long were you there?  Now this is in Greensboro [North Carolina], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so--
Speaker 1: And you did some work in Raleigh [North Carolina] too, right, from--
Speaker 2: Yeah, see Raleigh, North Carolina Agriculture Extension Service [North Carolina Cooperative Extension Service] was really headquartered in Raleigh with the white people.  So, we used to go up there for conventions and workshops and stuff like that.  But, I started, I had a radio station, a radio program because I knew a bunch of the radio people and they said, "Come on, do this." So I did the 'Open Door with Elynor Williams' [ph.] and it was all about agriculture and extension and how you can make your life better. And we'd have people on there to talk about Christmas and how to make your own Christmas ornaments and crap like that, and so the eight o'clock club, so they liked me at the Chamber of Commerce [Greensboro Chamber of Commerce], and so they offered me a scholarship to be a part of the Leadership Greensboro.  I said okay.  So, I went to the Leadership Greensboro, they paid for it, and at the graduation dinner, the guy sitting next me worked for Western Electric [Western Electric Company], which was a part of AT&T [AT&T Inc.], and he said, "Do you like your job?"  And, at that time it had gotten so easy that I was ashamed to take my pay check, so I was looking for something different, and he said, I said, "So whatcha got?"  He said, "Well, we'll see."  So, I ended up with working for Western Electric, and the guy who had brought me to Ag Extension couldn't believe I was leaving and it got to be really--oh, back to General Foods [General Foods Corporation].  They read in some journal that I was going to A&T.  That was terrible.  I should never have burned that bridge.  I just didn't think it mattered, but that they really did want me back.  I was part of their statistics, I guess, because they probably kept me online, you know, as part of their employees while I was on salary.  They probably did; just because I didn't take any money didn't mean they didn't keep me on the roles because I did say I was coming back.  I just wanted to get out of there.  So--
Speaker 1: So, Western Electric is now AT&T, right?
Speaker 2: It was always AT&T.  It was a part of AT&T.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right.
Speaker 2: I got there at the time they were breaking up the Bell system.  It was very exciting.  I got a Ph.D. in corporate politics working for that company.  That was a whole other thing.  I thought I could just do my job and not be noticed and go on about my business.  Well, the whole thing about corporate politics is that if you don't play the game, you become a victim, and I never did like being a victim.  I'll give you a couple of examples.  One is when I got there, the guy who had my job before had been promoted, and then he went on vacation for two weeks.  I had no idea what to do.  His files were a mess.  My boss did not want me there because his boss was the one that hired me.  So, he didn't bear, he said, "I can't help you.  I don't know. Just look in the files to see what's up."  I, so I did and I spent hours just trying to make sense, I just decided okay.  If I don't know what it is I'll put it in this box.  If I can kind of figure it out, I'll put it in, you know.  So, I finally got somewhere in the files.  I kind of figured out what I was supposed to be doing.  The guy came back and he said, "Well, I don't know.  I don't know.  Make it whatever you want it to be."  So, okay, I'm plodding along and I had a couple of friends there and one of the women who worked in the department said, "Let me see what I can do to help you."  And, she gave me a couple of good tips, about one or two.  I was pretty much on my own.  And then, I had my review and my boss said, "Well, you can't write.  You can't speak."  So, I went out and I got the editor to the company paper and I said, "Let me do some stories for you."  I was so good, he started giving me bylines.  Never heard of a byline in a company paper.  So my next reviewer says, "You know, you still have problems with your writing."  So, I said, "Look. You think So and So, you think he's good?" "He's an excellent writer."  I said, "You know, I'm getting bylines in the paper.  You know, he thinks I'm an excellent writer too."  The guy turned beet red.  I mean, he was, and then speaking.  I started doing speaking things.  I started doing just volunteer.  I'd speak anywhere.  And I showed him some clippings from my speaking.  And then I left his office and the EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission] office was right across the hall.  I went across the hall and I went in there and I said, "Do you wanna go to lunch?"  I never filed anything, but it was, at the time AT&T was having that big lawsuit against them, so the next thing I knew I was being promoted.
Story_ID: 641280
Speaker 1: So you had two good stories to tell us (laughter) that were generated over the break, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I learned that you could either be a victim or you could play the game, you know, and that there were only, in Corporate America there was only two options you had, regardless of how small you are on the scale.  And so, I decided that I would not be a victim, and I got promoted and this guy was supposedly, dotted line, reporting to me, so he told everybody I was reporting to him.  He went to Duke [Duke University, Durham, North Carolina].  Well, I went to Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York], okay?  So, he had made all these jokes, so I got him in the TV studio and I slammed him against the wall and I said, "Look, kid." You know, and I'm black.  I was 115 pounds soaking wet, so I was no (unclear).  I said, "Stop with the jokes." And I said to him, "Stop with all the negative stuff."  "Oh, I'm just joking."  I said, "Man, I grew up in the South."  I said, "That's how white people made fun of black people all my life."  I said, "It's not a joke to me."  I scared him to death.  He got off my back too and he stopped making racial jokes, borderline racial jokes, and there was sexual harassment from my boss's boss.  They would have brought me in.  I didn't even know what it was, but he used to make passes at me.  He used to call me and the other woman, who was white, his chocolate and vanilla team and he used to take us out to lunch all the time, tried I guess, and I didn't know what it was because I was so naive, I just, and I decided I gotta get out of here.  You know, I just had to get out of here, and they were stunned when I left.  I didn't think people would miss me that much, but--oh, before I left, I was working with politicians.  I was public affairs and I got to be manager of public affairs, so I was doing all kinds of stuff with politicians.  The bail system was being broken up so I was doing lobbying without a license.  I was up in [U.S.] Congress.  I was talking to a lot of people and, so one of the senators from North Carolina, we were at some function and he said, "Why aren't you running for office?"  I said, "Who, me?"  So I went back and told my boss.  He thought it was a cool idea because, I mean, can you imagine with AT&T [AT&T Inc.] having a person who's senator who used to work with them?  What a cool--so he said, "Do it, do it."  So, I did.  I said, "Okay."  So, three people gathered with my name and I'd be there.  I worked my butt off and my coworkers started to resent me, which I understood because I was gone a lot and they had to pick up the slack.  So, I wasn't mad at 'em and I understood where they were coming from because they were some of the same people that tried to put knives in my back.  I had so many, as I told before, I thought I was a porcupine because I had so many knives in my back, but anyway, so I ran and I knew a lot of people so on my stationery I had all of these power brokers as part of my advisory crew, the whole side of the thing, and I did something, that this was instinctive, I didn't know and no one told me to do it, but I went to everybody I thought would be a problem and asked them did they have a problem with me running for office, and looking back what I did was diffuse them from coming out publicly against me because they had agreed and there was only one person who said they would and so I ran and that was an interesting time.  Well, I lost by twenty votes.  I did.  And part of it was a naivete.  I went to the board of elections [Guilford County Board of Elections] that night and watched myself go down the tubes.  It was like this up down up down.  I didn't know I wasn't supposed to go down there.  I didn't know that, I met the guy who beat me out by twenty votes, I met him at one of our stations.  We passed out literature.  He says, "Give me some of yours and take some of mine.  I'll pass out yours and then you can pass out mine."  Well, he probably dumped mine.  I'm still passing out his.  I mean, there's some, there's a lot of, I always said things work out for a reason, happen for a reason.  I was devastated.  I was devastated.  And Howard Coble, who is in Congress now as a Republican, he got on TV and he said, because they all liked me, I mean, Republicans, Democrats.  It didn't matter.  I was working.  I was working for 'em, you know.  I had, I was throwing parties, you know, I was in public affairs.  So, I remember one time one of the most powerful men in North Carolina came to one of my events.  Now, this is really bad.  I always had a pile of shrimp.  My boss's boss was allergic to shrimp and I'd have it at every party, not to be mean to him.  I just happened to like shrimp and I'd forget and every time he would say, "You know, I'm allergic to shrimp."  He should have fired me.  I mean, I couldn't keep that in my brain, but anyway, he said, "I want you to get me a drink."  I said, "Okay, come on with me."  I said, "You can get your own drink."  He looked at me like I'd fallen off a tree.  Today I'd get him a drink.  It doesn't matter, you know, but I was a feisty feminist at that time.  So, anyway, so I lost.  I was devastated.  So Coble said, "I wouldn't vote for a yellow dog," because in that time there was a saying, "I'd rather vote for a yellow dog than vote for a Democrat."  And he said, "But I'd vote for [HistoryMaker] Elynor Williams."  And, he was on TV saying it.  He was a Republican.  I said wow, because I had worked with Howard.  We were on some tour, and the head of the superintendent of schools passed like my flyers on the bus, which was totally illegal.
Story_ID: 641281
Speaker 1: Now you're running for--?
Speaker 2: It was House of Representatives, um-hm.
Speaker 1: From the State of North Carolina?
Speaker 2: Yes, just the state, North Carolina House of Representatives (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Just for the state, statehouse, okay.
Speaker 2: And, then my nemesis from television station, he was, he used to follow me and just dog me all the time, just dog me.  He was on TV that night when I was losing and I thought he was going to be in tears.  He said, "We always thought she would win.  She had so much--," and he gave me some, I said this is a guy who used to dog me up and he, I couldn't believe it, and he was almost in tears.  It was kind of amazing and then I was kind of like what do I do now?  So, I got to be president of North Carolina women's political caucus [National Women's Political Caucus of North Carolina] and got to be really rigid feminist, getting women to run for office and I was on every board you could imagine and my boss called me and he says, "Your job is not to be on all these boards.  Your job is to get all of us, the executives, on these boards."  See, the problem was I was black and acceptable and all of them wanted a black acceptable person on their board, the symphony board, I joined (unclear), which is the all-white women's group.  I was the only black woman there.  I mean it was a whole lot of the stuff that I was involved in and I was always the only black there.
Speaker 1: Since they traditionally had mostly white men--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --I guess they didn't need any more since, since.
Speaker 2: So, I was it and I got chastised for it and I learned something.  There's this one thing I did learn.  My boss said, I took him an idea.  It was a fabulous idea.  He said, "Go with it."  But, he didn't tell me how to go with it.  So, in a vacuum I put, I researched it, I studied it and I came up with this fabulous proposal, and he said, "Okay, let's take it to the executive committee."  I was shot down.  I was annihilated and it was because I didn't check with all those people.  The HR [human resources] guy said, "I've never seen anything like this, I've never seen this, what is this?"  So, it wasn't his idea.  He wasn't part of it, so he shot it down.  That was, I mean to the person.  I got a Ph.D. in corporate politics from Western Electric [Western Electric Company] for sexual harassment.  I think, did I mention that?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I didn't know whether I did mention that on tape or not.  So, because I ran for public office my name was out there.  I got a call from this guy and he said, "Would you be interested in interviewing for this job with Hanes Group [Hanesbrands Inc.]?"  I said, "Ah, I don't think so" because right then it was in the middle of everybody, it was exciting, you know this time with the AT&T [AT&T Inc.] and whether or we're gonna win or not, for rallying employees or writing letters.  I mean, it was just a really exciting time and so, he said, "Well he'll buy you dinner."  I said, "Okay."  See that's why I said if you invited me for lunch or dinner, I'm there, so--
Speaker 1: This is 1983?
Speaker 2: Yeah, about 1983.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I went over there and the guy just kept buying champagne.  He wasn't giving me anything to eat.  And I said, I was hedging his questions and I finally said, "I thought you were buying me dinner."  And he said, "Oh yeah, yeah, yeah.  We'll buy you dinner."  So, it kind of snowballed from there and his boss came in town and I was late because I was still working with the people in Washington [D.C.] for AT&T, and so they hired me, bottom line, but they hired me for the Hanes Group.  At that time, Hanes was going through a crisis, because--
Speaker 1: This is--
Speaker 2: --of carpal tunnel syndrome. It was all over the world.  I mean, Sara Lee Corporation was trying to isolate the problem at Hanes.
Story_ID: 641282
Speaker 1: Now Hanes is--
Speaker 2: Hanes Group [Hanesbrands Inc.].
Speaker 1: --makes underwear.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well it was L'eggs (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Sock- socks-
Speaker 2: --it was socks, it was stockings, it was but it was all their apparel.  I think it was called the Hanes Group, but it was part of Sara Lee [Sara Lee Corporation].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And there was a meat group, the Hanes Group, the food group, you know, so it was, anyway, so I took it on and I remember the interview with the president of Hanes Group, and I said, "You know, I'm a feminist." And he said, "What's that?"  And I said, "That's the person who believes that women should have a fair shake, that there should be equality in the work force for women and we should be paid the same as men." And he dropped his eyeglasses and he said, "That's what we believe in."  I said, "Are you sure?"  He said, "Yes it is."  I said, "Then I have to have free rein to do what I believe in if I take this job."  And he said, "Absolutely."  So, I got the job.  And, it was a whirlwind.
Speaker 1: So, did they pay you like they--
Speaker 2: He gave me a nice, nice raise.
Speaker 1: Your compensation was--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --comparable to--
Speaker 2: No.  I found that out later.
Speaker 1: Oh.  But they said it was.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It was more than I was making, for sure.  I think it was almost twice what I was making.  So, when I got there, the second week I came to Chicago [Illinois] to learn about the company because it was huge.  We had 140 countries at that time.  It was $20 billion in sales and I knew a little bit about a little bit, but I knew a lot about nothing, so I was supposed to get acclimated and I was up here for orientation into the corporation and all these phone calls were coming through, from AP [Associated Press], ABC, NBC, and this guy said from corporate, he said, "You're on."  I said, "What you mean I'm on?"  He said, "These calls are for you."  Talk about being dumped in fire, (cough) I didn't even know, hardly knew what the issue was.  (Unclear) I'd never forget.  They had not even approved the Q and A book, but he slapped it on the table and he said, "Use this."  I'll love him to this day for that because I was flipping pages trying to answer all these freaking questions. And the rest of it was amazing (cough), excuse me. I never worked so hard and had so much fun in my life.
Speaker 1: Okay now, you, you started off (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Because they started doing the right thing.
Speaker 1: You, you started in Winston-Salem [North Carolina]?  Is that where?  Okay.  All right.  I just wanted to make that clear.
Speaker 2: And at that time, the Hanes Group was made up of different cultures.  L'eggs was all high tech and all that.  Hanes was walnut woods and old school and it was funny, if I got bored, I could go from one manufacturing unit to the other, did a lot of travelling, did a lot of media and then I think it was Peter Jennings, I forgot which he was, ABC, NBC, somewhere.  He wanted to come down and do a story, so we started doing media training and going to and Gordon Wanger [ph.] was like my, my guy.  He was just there for me, and he was based in Chicago, so he would be down whenever we wanted him to be down, but we put together a taskforce, and then, and they started including some people in the medical department, who started studying ergonomics and how to make those chairs right, and how to make sure these, they were, because they were cripple and maiming people, repetitive motion, and the only way I took that on is because they were going to do something about it, and because I have to believe in stuff.  I mean, I can't just, just, for me to do well I have to believe in it, and so I knew they were trying to do the right thing, (cough) and I picked up a stalker during that time too.
Story_ID: 641283
Speaker 1: Okay, Hanes Group [Hanesbrands Inc.] in the 1980s.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and so they formed this taskforce.  There was general legal counsel, we had medical people from Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York], we had an ep- epidemiologist, if I'm pronouncing that correctly.  It was an exciting time.  It was probably the best working experience I have ever had before (unclear) but I was a part of the executive decision making.  I started the department, that's--I did start the department there at Hanes Group.  They didn't have a department of communication, and so I started as director of public affairs.  And, I did media training.  We did a whole lot of stuff and we talked to a lot of people.  I also told them I needed some money and talked them into the fact, which they hadn't thought of before and this is something people should think about when they are trying to move up in any organization, what is it that's going to push that button.  The button I pushed was the fact that Hanes Group marketed all of its products to women and they were doing nothing in support of women.  Men's underwear, statistics showed at that time men's underwear was being bought by women so what were they doing?  I said, "I need some money because we need to do some financial support for them. I need to get some of you guys out there to talk to some of these women's groups and you need to be sincere about this because this is your number one customer." And that's so.  And, so it was hard giving away money.  I mean, I had to research all these organizations and find out who and what, and that's how I met [HistoryMaker] Alexis Herman, which I told you about earlier, and I got to know a lot of women, a lot of wonderful people and, was just working all the time.  And I picked up a stalker at that time, and I'll never forget.  It was a woman who used to send me these many aqua letters (gesture) and I took it to our legal counselor and I said, "What do I do with this?" And he should have said go to the police, which is what I should have done, and somehow, that's how I know God has always watched over me forever.  I just stopped taking the phone calls, stopped doing anything, you know, answering letters, whatever.  It got really, really rough for a while and she was actually in Raleigh [North Carolina] and had a position at the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association] in Raleigh that was fairly significant.  She was in the papers and everything and I was always picking up people that I could help.  I'll never forget.  I was in the process of doing our budget and my secretary said, "Well, I've got this young woman on the line.  She wants to talk to you."  I said, "I do not have time to talk to you."  She says, "Should I make an appointment for you?" I said, "Well, absolutely not."  She said, "I'll do that." And I called her in and said, "What's wrong with you?"  She said, "Because any time anybody wants to talk to you who is in a growth period, child, student, whatever, you always say yes, so why should I go through that?  You'd ask me later, 'Why didn't you tell him to come on in?'"  So, I did a lot of that.  I did a lot of speaking.
Speaker 1: So this stalker, what did the stalker want?
Speaker 2: I don't really know.  She was very, very enamored with my success and what I was doing and wanted to follow me around and it got to be a nuisance after a while and when I stopped answering her phone calls because she was getting very, very erratic and things like, "I know where you live, and I've been by your house." I mean, she was in Raleigh and it was just like, and then these letters written in red ink, just scribbled over pages and pages.  It was just horrendous and I kept that stuff for a while.
Speaker 1: So this is the--
Speaker 2: It was just really bad, it was really bad and nobody, I didn't know whether I should have gone to the police.
Speaker 1: So this is the nightmare side of being a role model in a--
Speaker 2: Yes.  That is a nightmare.
Speaker 1: This is the nature of this problem, so you're a success, you're black and you're working for this company that didn't have a lot of black people before, high profile and this is the nature of the stalker, right. That wanted to be like you?
Speaker 2: And, it was a woman.  This is what I find unusual, who had a position who was obviously psychotic and, you know, and a couple of times invited to things that we were doing and stuff like that and she just, after I stopped, because she just started just calling me all the time, and I'm going, "Whoa."  You know, back up.  And then she just became very psychotic and that went on for a while.  I would like look out when I got to my townhouse, I'd just look behind the bushes to be sure that I could get to my door, you know, 'cause it was really frightening and I should have called the police but I didn't even think of that.  I really didn't.
Story_ID: 641284
Speaker 1: It seemed kind of incongruous anyway, right? Sort of, I guess.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah, it was just really, really strange.  But, when I left--let me back up--when I left Chicago [Illinois] after fending off all of these phone calls from the media I wrote down one thousand questions, what felt like one thousand, and so we were having an executive meeting the next morning with the team and so I'm sitting there and they're talking about golf.  Now, you have to understand I was the new person on the board, on board, and so I just blew up.  I said, "You all are sitting here talking about golf and I have like, I have all these questions.  I've been spending media, I've been working for this company for two weeks."  I remember, I just went, oh, I said, "I need some answers." And the president looked at me and he said, "I think this is a good time to get coffee."  So, they broke up the meeting and Bob Brown [Robert J. Brown] came in, because I was there steaming.  I was furious.  He said, "Sit down." Because if anybody talked to me like my dad [Albert Williams], I just--response it's automatic.  I said, "Huh?"  He said, "Sit down."  He said, "Do you know we've been dealing with this for months?  You've come in and you blah, blah, blah."  He said, "You need to calm down." And he became my friend and my mentor.  Any time there was an issue, you know, I would call.  Do you know Bob Brown?  He was in the Nixon administration [President Richard Milhous Nixon] and, actually, the way I met him he was actually how I got in to the Hanes Group [Hanesbrands Inc.].  He saw me on TV one time and I was promoting AG Extension [North Carolina Agriculture Extension Service; North Carolina Cooperative Extension Service] and he knew the guy who ran the program and he says, "I'd like to meet her." And he offered me, the first job he offered me was with TWA [Trans World Airlines] as director of, of public relations, but I had sense enough to know I was not ready for that job.  I had no experience.  I had gone from teaching to Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York] and I was where I should be, and he was impressed with that and he sort of watched my career, and then he was the, he was behind the guy who called me.  I didn't know that 'til later on, so he was there as my counselor and my mentor.  I have been just really, really lucky with the people that have been in my life, who cared enough about me to help me along, and that's why I've tried very hard to give that back, because I think that is so, so important.  If I don't help, who will?  Maybe I won't be on the front line, you know, marching and stuff like that, but there are things that I can do and I think all of us have a role.  We all should be paying it forward; somehow, paying it forward because none of us got where we are without somebody pushing us forward.  And, and that's why my secretaries, I said, would always, whoever wanted to come in and talk to me about the job or whatever, I would invite them to come in.
Story_ID: 641285
Speaker 1: No, I just wanted to know when you, when you started at Hanes [Hanes Group; Hanesbrands Inc.] what was the diversity like at Hanes (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) None.  I mean, there was hardly any.  There was one guy, a black guy who was there before me and I, bless his heart, he died of AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome], bless his heart, but he called me out for dinner.  He said, "Will you have dinner with me?"  I said, "Absolutely."  (Laughter) You know, offer me a meal, I'm there.  And, he wrote, he told me the wherewithal, all the people, all the executives, their shortcomings, whether they're racist, who were they supporting, who didn't support them.  It was, I was writing so fast, I couldn't believe it.  He gave me a road map and I will always remember him for that.  Errington, bless his heart.  Al Errington [ph.].  But he said, "I want you to know who you're dealing with."  He was there before me so, and so I was the first female executive that they had at the Hanes Group.
Speaker 1: First female, period? Executive. All right.
Speaker 2: I was actually a director.  He was a manager.  The highest ranking person he had there was a manager at the time and they brought me in as a director and I worked my butt off but it was a lot of fun, because it was so stressful.  We were in crisis, and the people I met and the people I talked to, I mean, I met people like Coretta Scott King, and [HistoryMaker] Dorothy Height and I made sure that it was not just, it was black women.  Black women were an important piece of this for me.  We did some things with white women's groups as well, but black women were important and I brought in a piece, I brought in organizations like the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], the Urban [National Urban League], they had never given money to any of these organizations, and I met the leaders and I came in with what I wanted to do and how we wanted to do this and I made sure our chairman, I said, "No, it's no.  I'm a flack."  I said, "I'm a PR flack [public relations flack]."  I said, "They want to see you."  I said, "You've got to be there at some of these events.  It just can't be me."  I said, "I'm black, I'm female, I work for the company."  I said, "You are the CEO of this company and you've got to be there." And we were able to settle it because, and at the same time I was dating a union organizer who was trying to organize our plants.  It was kind of fun.  He was fun and funny.
Speaker 1: Now did that make ma- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was a conflict of interest.
Speaker 1: How did management--
Speaker 2: They didn't know.
Speaker 1: They didn't know?
Speaker 2: Oh, of course not.  You keep it private.  That was the other thing.  You keep your private stuff private.  You don't go and bleed all over, because somebody in that company is going to use whatever you say against you.  Keep your stuff private.  I've seen people really go down the tubes with stuff like that.  You know, they go and they tell everything about their private life and people use that against them.  "Oh, she's weak.  You know, her husband beats her at night." Or whatever.  So, I started a department there, started their giving program, and travelling all the time, was travelling all the time.
Speaker 1: So you--
Speaker 2: One day, I figured out I had gone to three cities in one day.  Three cities in three different states in one day.
Story_ID: 641286
Speaker 1: And, my boss got promoted. He got promoted to a corporate office here in Chicago [Illinois], Paul Fulton.  He became president of Sara Lee Corporation, and he wanted me to come.  I was thinking, Unh-uh.  I'm not going to Chicago.  What would I?  I liked coming to Chicago because it was a fun city.  Great shopping.  Loved shopping here but the cold was, was daunting and I remember we came, I came up for a meeting with the corporate affairs people here in Chicago in the corporate office and we went in to the restaurant and it was, the sun was shining.  We came out and there was this white stuff falling out of the sky and the sun was shining and I'm saying, I thought some building was burning.  It was snow.  I had never seen snow in May with the sun shining.  It was really bizarre.  So, I started looking for another job and there was a guy, R.J. Reynolds [R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company] that was leaving, he was VP. And I had an interview with him but I couldn't bring myself to work for a tobacco company.  I couldn't do it.  I couldn't go out and promote that people smoke tobacco.  My principles wouldn't allow me to do that and I stand on those.  Like I tell young women, I said, "You don't have to sleep your way to the top.  You have to stand on, always stand on your principles."  I used to tell people, "Hey, look, I can go out and sell pencils on the street before I'll do anything against my principles." And I meant it at the time.  I always thought I could go home and sit on my mother's [Naomi Douglass Williams] porch until she died, and that was, that was really scary because I didn't have a porch to go sit on (laughter).  But, I, so I couldn't, I couldn't quite get there and then the VP of Hanes Group who was coming to Chicago to be VP, which is huge, because that's, and he walked in my office, and says, "You know your social life would be better in Chicago.  You should come with us to Chicago."  He said, "Paul Fulton thinks your social life would be better in Chicago."  And I went, dang, if they care that much about my social life, then maybe I ought to go to Chicago.  So, that's what I did.  I came on up here (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 641287
Speaker 1: So this is 1986?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, you're good.
Speaker 1: So, Chicago [Illinois] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I--see, I remember those dates.
Speaker 1: Right. So Chicago in '86 [1986], Harold Washington is the mayor.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: He's at the height of his-
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) powers as mayor, as his run was, as he died in 1987.
Speaker 2: Yes, I know.
Speaker 1: He was at his height of popularity and power in 1986.
Speaker 2: And I waltz into the town.
Speaker 1: Michael Jordan from North Carolina, who wears Hanes underwear, is our basketball star here in Chicago.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, had that relationship been made with Hanes [Hanes Group; Hanesbrands Inc.] and Michael Jordan at this point?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah; in fact, Paul Fulton, who is now president of Sara Lee Corporation, had gone to North Carolina [University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina] where Michael Jordan was a basketball player.  He was also a basketball fan, Paul Fulton, so it was a marriage made in heaven.  He was president of Hanes Group and, of course, he was going to Michael Jordan to, and he got to be actually a part of the Hanes Group family, because Paul was all excited about, he bought seats, his own box seats for games and stuff like that.  That was fun to go to, too.  A lot of perks when you get up there.  A lot of hard work, a lot of knocks too.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I always thought when I got to be VP that that would, my life would be easier.  Oh, my, god.  I had no idea.  I had no idea.  It was three times harder.  So anyway, I'm at Hanes Group, so I decide to come to Chicago with Paul, and Paul did two things.  First of all, I was from North Carolina, I was from Hanes, and it looked like to the Chicago people that we were trying to take over the company, because all of a sudden the president was from Hanes, the VP of HR [human resources] was from Hanes, and I was brought up at a time when they were downsizing.  They had two very popular employees go, and so I come in and nobody likes me (laughter); not even because I'm black.  See, that's the other thing.  Corporate politics doesn't always have to be about color.  It's just about whose side you're on, what color is your parachute, not the parachute, but what color is your beret or whatever.  They didn't like me because I was coming from Hanes and I was, I was taking a job that could have been for one of the two people they had already let go, so nobody is talking to me.
Story_ID: 641288
Speaker 1: One of the things that happened--I'm gonna backtrack a little bit about sexual harassment.  I went, when I was a part of the team that was going about trying to save and isolate the corporate office from the Hanes Group [Hanesbrands Inc.] and its troubles, I used to come up to Chicago [Illinois] often to meet with them and give them an update of what was happening at Hanes, and so forth, and so one night, one day I was supposed to be in New York [New York].  I think we were doing some television work or whatever, but anyway, we were going to stay in the corporate apartment.  I'm thinking I was the only woman and these three men, and I'm trying to figure out, okay, how is this going to work?  So, the president made sure he gave me the master suite, basically, with the separate toilet, bathrooms and all that, but it also had a huge fireplace in the living room, so I was talking to the senior VP over at corporate affairs, human relations, human resources at the time, and he started rubbing my arm, the fireplace is going, we're drinking schnapps or whatever, Courvoisier brandy or whatever.  This was after dinner and after, you know, and he said, "I want to talk to you." And it was very obvious what he was doing, and see by this time I could spell ha- sexual harassment and I knew what it looked like.  I knew what it looked like, I knew what it felt like.  Before I didn't know what it looked like and what it felt like.  I knew I didn't want any part of it, and he said, "Is this bothering you?"  I said, "No, if it's not bothering you; but I wish you'd stop."  And so I got up and I went to my room and I closed the door and I thought, okay, there you go.  You're down the tubes.  So, the next morning he would not even, he never spoke to me again after that, and he was the senior VP of human resources, and I don't know whether he thought I was going to file a claim, I don't know whether he thought I was going to file a claim.  I don't know whether he thought how dare I rebuff him?  I mean, we had been very cordial before that, but he iced me out and actually I was glad.  The other thing, I think, in terms of being in Corporate America, this is a sidebar, pick your friends because that's going to be important later on in the story.  Know who's going to back you up and know, stick with the winners, you know what I mean, and then become one of them.  Paul Fulton became a mentor of mine at a distance.  He admired what I did.  He was the president of Hanes Group and ended up being president of Sara Lee Corporation.  When I moved up here he had the back office.  I was an employee and blah, blah, blah.  I didn't know how to use the computer so I'm in there typing away on a little ol' peck and hunt typewriter and my secretary said, "You need to take some computer courses because everything up here is computerized."  So she was kind to me.  Everybody else barely spoke, including my boss at the time, and so I did.  And at that point, in the Chicago office, the president wrote a letter to me with a copy to my boss and to his boss and it said, "We are glad you're with us in Chicago," And you know, "You'll be an asset to us here as you were at the Hanes Group."  Three sentences at the most, but I knew it was worth gold.  I didn't go running to his office or anything like that, but he made it known, lay off.  And then I made a friend of the chairman and I also had a bunch of very radical women's groups that loved me dearly.  So the combination did me well.
Speaker 2: Now what are the--radical women's groups, like what are the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) NOW, National Organization for Women; the vocal ones, the ones who are in the paper, the ones who were making noises about injustices and stuff like that.  So, at that time, I was very isolated and I was living at the Palmer House [Palmer House Hotel; Palmer House Hilton, Chicago, Illinois].  I finally got a place to live.  I got a letter from Parren Mitchell [HistoryMaker Parren J. Mitchell, III], and it said, "We're starting an organization, and our first meeting will be in Washington, D.C. Will you wanna come?"  I said "Heck yeah; it can get me out of here."
Story_ID: 641289
Speaker 1: He invited me, he--they were starting this group of corporate people and they're meeting for the first time in Washington, D.C., so he [HistoryMaker Parren J. Mitchell, III] threw us a reception and Kennedy [Edward M. Kennedy] was there, which I went, "Whoa! Look at that." And so we met the next day and I had seen people I had never seen before, who were in my position and much higher, [HistoryMaker] Mannie Jackson who ended up owning the Harlem Globetrotters, Jim Kaiser [HistoryMaker James Kaiser] who, I think he's one of the HistoryMakers who was CEO of Corning [Corning Glass Works; Corning Incorporated] at the time.  I didn't know anything about these brothers and sisters.  Actually, it was all brothers.
Speaker 2: You were the only woman.
Speaker 1: I was the only woman.  There was another woman there who was just overwhelmed and she decided not to join.  Kaiser had brought her with him and she was a manager and she just didn't think she belonged in the group. But see I, hey, I was probably low man on the totem pole, but I didn't care.  I thought this is exciting.  I mean, I had been around the horn.  I had been to a lot of functions and stuff and I had never seen these people before, and we started the Executive Leadership Council and now it's, it has a life of its own.  I remember in the early days, and this is a network of African American corporate executives, they are at least two levels below the chairman and it was formed for doing community work, for paying back, we got a group called the NextGen [NextGen Network, Inc.], which would bring in students, not students but young people who are trying to make it.  It's a wonderful organization.  We have the Wall Street Project now that gets a lot of press; I mean, it's pretty huge but at the beginning it was rough.  We had no money, we talked a lot about disbanding.  I mean, I used to try to keep, I used to introduce myself as [HistoryMaker] Elynor Williams, director of public affairs for Sara Lee Corporation, and the conscience of this group, as they always try to say, "Okay go home and get your tuxedos put on."  I said, "I don't wear a tuxedo.  I wear a gown." So I was always the mouthy one.  I was always trying to keep 'em in line, but one of the things that kept me going to that organization, which we have kind of lost, because it's much bigger now, but I hope they're still doing it in smaller groups, and that was, these guys told their stories and they were getting their butts kicked because they were black.  And they're being sidelined and they were being maligned and because we were together, we were supportive of one another and if I didn't know how to do it, then somebody else knew how to do it, and I remember Bob Johnson [HistoryMaker Robert Johnson] from Sears [Sears, Roebuck and Co.], he was the VP of Sears, and he was with the original group of ELC founders and he said, I said, "Bob, I've had it.  I can't do anything else.  I'm hitting the wall here.  I'm out of here."  And he said, "Why don't you come on and have lunch with me?"  So he took me to, where did we go, not the union club, but one of those places, university club, something like that.  Anyway, he said, "Don't you dare quit."  He said, "That is not acceptable."  He said, "What you do is win." And he said, "Now I want you to go back there and win." And if it hadn't been for Bob Johnson and Jim Kaiser, I would have left the company.  I mean, it was just, it was just hard.
Story_ID: 641290
Speaker 1: Was there any incident that precipitated the crisis, that made you want to leave?
Speaker 2: I'm sure there was, but I can't remember exactly what it was because I just really had had it, because I wasn't being respected by the people, my boss at the time.  I was getting slammed down for my ideas, and this was after.  I came to, and I'm all around the map but let me go back one moment.  When I came here I had done a program at the Hanes Group [Hanesbrands Inc.] called the Women of Hanes [ph.] and it ended up being a brochure and they wanted me in it and I said, "No, this is for them."  And Paul [Paul Fulton] said, "No, you should be in it." So I said, "I'll take a picture on the cover."  So, I took a picture on the cover and it had little vignettes of the women in Hanes of different levels, so when I got here, I said, "Well that's something else to start with." Because first of all they wanted me to be director of urban affairs and I said, "Unh-uh.  This isn't what I do." You know.  "I'm not here to be an urban affairs person.  I'm here to be director of public affairs."  So, I told him what title I would take and they wanted to make me senior manager because the director in the regional office was equivalent to senior manager in corporate, and I said, "No, I'm a director.  That's what I've been.  That's what I've known, that's what I've known in this company."  So, I fought them on that and I won.  So, I got to be director of public affairs and I'm making this sound easy.  It wasn't.  It was like painful and it was hard.  I was selling pencils on the street in a cup (laughter).  I was going through the whole nine yards, but I had people at my back, Bob Brown [Robert J. Brown], Paul Fulton, who never spoke to me once we moved up here, because he knew he had to put some distance between us and he was the president and I was where I was, but I helped to save the company.  So, I brought the idea of women being their sole customer to the corporate office, and then I decided I wasn't just going to do this booklet, I was going to do a program.  This is one of my proudest achievements in my life.  And, I taught the vice presidents of human resources, because I was reporting at that time to the vice chairman; no, the vice president of corporate affairs, that's who I was reporting to.  He was reporting to the vice chairman, and I said, "I'm going to go and sell this idea."  He didn't care what I did, because he didn't really want me up there in the first place, up here in the first place.  So, I learned that at Western Electric [Western Electric Company], you get people to buy in.  When I ran for office, you get people to buy in.  That's the key thing for success.  You get them to buy in, and once they bought in you got 'em.  So, I made these presentations that I wanted to do this program, a booklet on the women in Sara Lee [Sara Lee Corporation], but I wanted them to nominate these women, and then I wanted them from the plant level all the way up to the vice presidents of each company, to select the woman that's going to represent them, and then those names would come to corporate and I had a team of people that would review them and pick the ones the ten that we would, would choose. And I had the categories of management, secretarial, we had, in the end, Bill Clinton [William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] sent a letter when he was governor of Arkansas to this woman who had won it from Arkansas.  It was an amazing program, because it still brings tears to my eyes at every level. We gave women an opportunity to be recognized and we ended up with a truck driver, she was one of the winners, an executive secretary from one of the divisions, one of the women, one woman who had done, gotten another degree through the corporate education program and she was now manager and she had started out as a secretary.  Of course, we had to have some diversity in there.  I mean, I told my committee what I wanted from them.  We had women in so many small cities getting keys to the city.  There was one women who wrote me a letter.  You have changed my life.  She didn't think anybody noticed.  The truck driver, she's like eighteen pounds soaking wet--118 pounds soaking wet, a little bitty thing, driving an 18-wheeler.  She had no dresses.  The company, her friends got money together to buy her some clothes to come to Chicago [Illinois].  The division president heard about that.  They bought her luggage.  They bought, it was just amazing.  Even women who didn't win.  So, I said okay.  This is good.  So, what I want to do is, we aren't gonna just do this booklet.  We're gonna have them present it at the annual meeting, and then I got a video tape done of all their stories.  Then we did the booklet, and then we, we had them meet the board of directors.  Every time I kept pushing, pushing, pushing because we only, there was a pot of money in the annual meeting budget for public responsibility, but they were always sharing something that they were doing at the foundation.  I said, "No, this is more important.  Give me that money."  So, they gave it to me and we took them out to dinner, we got them in box seats.  Some of them hadn't even travelled out of their city.  I mean, it was just, I just loved it for what it did for the people's self-esteem, even, you know, even if they didn't get to come to Chicago.  I was very proud of that program, and I did it with no money at all.  I had just enough money to do a brochure and I kept finding little pockets of money that I could squirrel together.
Story_ID: 641291
Speaker 1: And what year was this?
Speaker 2: That must have been '87 [1987].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause it was right after I came up here.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But that one, that one made me proud.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, let's see.  Then I started, I started something in the Hanes Group [Hanesbrands Inc.] called Women Who Run the World.  It was part of the L'eggs Mini Marathon and we'd have a breakfast before the L'eggs Mini Marathon where we'd have something like Billie Jean [Billie Jean King], what was it, the tennis player, come and talk to the group, and so Gordon Wanger [ph.] would say, "You know people aren't going to come out for breakfast, but they'll come out for lunch.  You know that'd be better for people in New York [New York].  Nobody comes for breakfast."  See, the whole thing was to tie it into the L'eggs Mini Marathon, which was a 10K [10 kilometer] which I absolutely did.  I was so proud of myself.  Oh, my god.  I had--an aside--I had back problems and I had been training and my doctor told me I could not do it.  He said you need to stop training because your back is out.  I had a terrible car accident when I came to Chicago [Illinois].  I went to therapy for a year and I used to fly out every weekend to get a treatment.  I was going to do this run.  So, I got myself a back brace and every step I took, I thought you're gonna be a cripple the rest of your life.  I finished.  I didn't finish last.  I might have been fifteenth before the last person, but I got my medal and I cannot tell you.  That was a moment.  When I got to the end and I heard all these people cheering for me, and me and my bum back and I made it across that finish line and honest to god, it was like nothing I had ever felt before.  So, anyway, the, so we started calling it the Frontrunner Awards.  And, it got to be pretty cool. Ended up just to make this short, we ended up, I got money from the foundation and we would give fifty thousand dollars to each recipient's favorite charity.  And it was the arts, business, government, art, business, government and the humanities and our chairman, John Bryan, gave me credit.  He said, "You made me, you helped me, you introduced me to some fabulous women."  The people who were on the selection committee were absolutely fabulous.  Lena Horne, [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou, Madeleine Albright, [HistoryMaker] Marian Wright Edelman, Johnnetta Cole [Johnnetta B. Cole], Ann Fudge [Ann M. Fudge], I mean we, our last Frontrunner Awards was held at the White House [Washington, D.C.] with Hillary [Hillary Rodham Clinton] was our emcee.  But, it was, that was exhilarating.  We had, we started putting ads, full page ads, and I made sure that we were in the Chicago Defender, that we were in some of the black papers because they said, "Who is this?"  I said, "No, we have to be in there."  We did an Ebony, full page ads with, and they would run consecutively one for each, no, it was all four, and yeah. One we did a double spread with all four pictures, we had coverage in The New York Times.  It was probably one of my favorite programs.  We had, we did a video tape and we had the luncheon that brought in people from, I mean, it got to be the event in Chicago--in New York for women to attend, women of accomplishment.
Speaker 1: In around 2000, 2001?
Speaker 2: Yeah, around that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We had, we did it for ten years, so the last one, Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] was coming out and John Bryan was close to Clinton at that time and I said, "Well why don't we do it at the White House." You know because they were going to cut it off because of budget constraints, and so forth and so on.  When I left I was not a happy camper.
Story_ID: 641292
Speaker 1: When you retired, you're saying, or? 'Cause did you feel that these programs were gonna end because of you, you left?
Speaker 2: Everything was ending.  By the way, Mitch Kimberly [ph.] said to me that, she said, "You know we, I admire you so much."  I said, "Why?"  She said, "You're the first person in the corporation that made all these corporations pay attention to black organizations."  I said, "What?"  She said, "Yeah, nobody was doing anything with the black community, but you came in and you made that happen." But see I took that from Hanes [Hanes Group; Hanesbrands Inc.] and I brought it here because it was important to me for a lot of reasons.  You know, you gotta give back.  I mean, I don't care what you do.  You know, you could be selling pencils on the street, but you know if some kid comes by and needs a pencil for school, give it to him, you know.  I had no idea that nobody was doing anything here, and because Sara Lee Corporation was the leader at that time, what we did made waves and so the others just started falling in line.  I thought that was very fascinating.
Speaker 1: Hm.
Speaker 2: And I did start.  I was the first black corporate vice president for Sara Lee Corporation, and when I got nominated, that was the last time they did it.  They used to announce the new vice presidents at the annual meeting and I stood up and I went to the reception and this white vice president came up to me and she, I had a ruffled blouse on.  She slapped my ruffled blouse and she says, "Well, I guess anybody can be a vice president now."  I looked at her because I thought we were friends.  That's when I said you know, "You know you be careful." And she resented the fact that I had become a vice president.  When I was leaving and I'm skipping ahead but this is important, three women came to my office and started crying and told me that they were in the chicken roof section when I was named and they both started, they all started, see the whole section hooted and hollered, and they were so proud of me.  They had never told me that, because I was the first one and I was deserving because I was one who cared, who absolutely cared, and I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--now you were also, it appears here that in 1990, you hosted a meeting that, where the Chicago chapter of 100 Black Women [National Coalition of 100 Black Women] was organized here.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  I started, helped start that.  And I also helped start the Elynor--what's the name of that group, oh golly gee.  It should be in there somewhere.  It's now going very strong too.  I hope to start that in Chicago [Illinois].  It's a national organization and got some of the women in Chicago in our company to go through that program.  What do they start, I forgot about the black, 100 Black Women.  My most proud accomplishment, of course, is the Executive Leadership Council, and to be able to start a company, a department in a multibillion dollar company is pretty significant, I thought.  I got a Drum Major for Justice Award.  I got a lot of awards and plaques and things like that.  There was one I was very proud of.
Speaker 1: Now did, you retired and you were age fifty-two, you said?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: You retired.  I mean, was it a, did you retire because you could at that time, or did you think that--
Speaker 2: Okay.  Let's see, what's the real story here?  I can tell it now.  We were changing.  John Bryan was getting ready to retire. John Bryan is a very special human being.  Paul Fulton had already retired.  He was my other mentor, if you will.  John Bryan wasn't a mentor, as much as he was a supporter and I knew his gatekeeper.  By the way, that's another secret.  Get to know the gatekeeper.  I knew his director of the chairman's office, so she would get me in there when nobody else could get in.  I'd make her mad all the time because she'd give me one minute and I'd take five, ten, and she'd come in and they'd throw me out and it would be said that you'll never get in again, blah, blah, blah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's something now.  We don't want to let that go by too fast.  I've heard this from a lot of people.
Speaker 2: Got to know the gatekeepers, and you have to treat them well (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Somebody told me once if you want to get a Ph.D., you have to know who's the chairman's secretary.
Story_ID: 641293
Speaker 1: You've got to know--
Speaker 2: And who is (simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) the gatekeepers because most times, people don't understand.  They are really the power brokers.  John Bryan used to be mad because everybody used to say she, Jan Tofte [ph.], ran Sara Lee [Sara Lee Corporation].  She did.  She absolutely did.  She told him where to go.  She got to be one of my best friends, because we went to Smokenders together.  I was the only one out of the ten of us to stop smoking, but she was in the program.  We were kind of, we would, she was she supported me and I think because she believed in what I did, but we got to be friends after the Smokenders program, and everybody started smoking again but me, and then I used to cry and say all my friends are gonna die from smoking and I'm gonna be the only one left standing.  I did that on the street.  It's probably because I was missing the nicotine.  She said, "Would you shut up?  People think I'm beating you." (Laughter) But anyway, yeah.  You have to get to know the gatekeepers because people would understand how did you get in there?  And, so I knew he was retiring.  And I knew that the guy that was coming, he's eventually going to be chairman.  I tried my best to get even an appointment with him and I knew his gatekeepers.  He didn't believe in anything that I did.  He would make an appointment and then he would cancel it.  He didn't think what I did was important, but I knew, and I had taken too much time and energy to educate all these people (laughter) of what was important and what was not, and they drank the Kool-Aid and now nobody was, looks like nobody was coming anywhere near the Kool-Aid much less drink it, and I was exhausted and I knew it was time to leave and I knew I had to leave before John Bryan left because of everything that I had built up.  I did the Sara Lee Women's Roundtable where we had all kinds of people, Linda Fairstein, I don't know if you know her, but they got together.  We did one in the National Press Club, and all these very high powered women in politics and there were some hot discussions and they cut my budget.  You know, it was just a bad time and you know you gotta know when to hold and when to fold and when to walk away.  It was time to walk away.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I mean, I was influential in helping them develop this program for upward mobility for black managers and I was on the team and we fought.  I had some good people fighting with me at the time and they ended up putting me reporting to the vice president, vice president of HR [human resources], which I hated, because I, I wanted to keep reporting to the vice chairman because that's where I thought I belonged, but, he was a good guy, I mean, he supported me as best as he can because I had supporters, John Bryan was one of my supporters, Paul Fulton was one of my supporters, and he actually did believe in what I was doing.  He was a political animal, but he was okay.  I remember one day he called me and he said, "Elynor [HistoryMaker Elynor Williams], you're usually here very late."  I said, "Yes, sometimes 'til ten, eleven, twelve o'clock at night."  It's because I got in at 8:30, 9:00 because I was just not one that was gonna be there at eight o'clock in the morning because I put in a lot of hours and apparently somebody complained and that's all he said to me, and I knew why he said it, but it didn't change what I was gonna do, because if I was putting those--weekends, oh, my god.  And that's another reason I got to be friends with Jan Tofte, the chairman's secretary, because she was there those times and hours too, and she'd call and she would say, "You want a pizza?"  I said, "Sure."  And so, we'd have a pizza and then we'd go back to work.  But, yeah, and I was exhausted and it looked like everything that I had put together, because I got to be, as they used to say, the chairman would say, "I can't go anywhere if people ask me, do I know Ely- do I know Elynor Williams." Because I was the face of Sara Lee.  I was everywhere.
Story_ID: 641294
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this.  When you look (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And--
Speaker 1: --back on everything you've done you did in your career, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: ELC.  Executive Leadership Council without a question, and all the young people.  Not so many men as young women were helped.  There was some woman who came up to me at some meeting and she says--I said, "Who are you?"  With ELC.  She told me she was the vice president of some company, and she said, "You know, you came in, you let me come in my office [sic.] and talk to you about your job."  She says, "You know you helped change my life.  That's why I'm here today." And I did not remember who she was.  And it didn't matter, because she was there and that I'd paid her for it and that was important to me.
Story_ID: 641295
Speaker 1: Oh, I was just--while we were off camera, I was talking about [HistoryMakers] Toni Fay, who was, ended up being vice president of Time Warner [Time Warner, Inc.].  She was sort of like a counterpart to me.  We were directors together and I made sure that she was the second woman to be a part of ELC [Executive Leadership Council].  I brought her in and together, I mean, you know she asked me how I ought to get to be a vice president and I sent her my whole stuff.  We always shared it with each other.  We were also kind of competitive with one another, and we're still friends.
Speaker 2: Did you mention, I know you mentioned Ann Fudge [Ann M. Fudge]? Was she a part of--
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.  Ann Fudge was one of my Frontrunners but she was also a friend.  There was a bunch of people, oh god, I can't remember her name, she'll kill me, but she got together all these powerful women, black women, and she would, we would go to a spa every year because she said--Brenda Schofield, ah--Brenda was a director at Pfizer [Pfizer Inc.] at that time.  When she first started, she was a director at Kraft [Kraft Foods Group, Inc.].  We went for ten years together.  Ann Fudge was a part of that group.  [HistoryMaker] Joyce Roche, who was a part of then she was COO of Avon [Avon Products Inc.].  Anyway, there was a lot of us so I got to be friends with Ann Fudge, because of the Spark group [ph.] that went together.  Toni Fay, myself, a bunch of others, and some other names you might know, a woman who ended up being president of Nine West [Nine West Holdings, Inc.], my Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] sister, vice pres- she's now back at Spelman, she got a Ph.D. from Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], the senior vice president of PepsiCo, [HistoryMaker] Ingrid Saunders Jones, we will apply this for our group and we would go and just get well and just heal.  We'd get villas that face the pool and we'd work out and we would eat together and it was amazing.  Oh, the one with the braids from Essence--
Speaker 2: Susan--
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Susan Taylor is one of the members, and the reason I remembered her is because we were the first black group and we were like fifteen of us and we were there at the spa, so one day somebody asked was [HistoryMaker] Whoopi Goldberg in the group, and it was because, it was Susan.  They saw a black woman with braids and she was livid.  She could not believe somebody would think she was Whoopi--not that Whoopi's that bad, but she looks nothing like Whoopi Goldberg, and so Brenda told us whatever they ask, just tell them you don't know, because they thought we were a church group.  It just shows you how racism works.  We had the one trip through the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and here we were just accomplished women paying our own way, just trying to do the same thing they're doing to get help, and the other thing we'd do, we were pretty obvious.  We'd sit together at dinner and then we'd all come out in dress; you know, black women can dress, the flowing caftans, the black wraps on our head, and we'd all come in together and stop conversation (laughter).  We had fun with that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It was fun to do, and then, and we did get better.
Story_ID: 641296
Speaker 1: Now, when you look back on everything you, you did, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could do it again?
Speaker 2: Oh, sure.  Lots of stuff, there are lots of things I'd do differently.  One thing, for I wouldn't have passed out that guy's flyers.  I mean, come on now.  I've been lucky in that I've had people to stop me, because when I was going down the wrong path.  Another secret is take good advice and know the difference between good and bad advice, but take good advice always, and learn to know the difference.  Take risks, I mean that's always a good one.  I'm trying to think of some of the other things, some of 'em I can't mention.  But I think for the most part, as I said, I had good people who looked out for my best interest and I tried my best to pay it forward. Stumbled a lot of ways.  I was a very hard manager, because I was a perfectionist and I expected it from myself which is an impossibility, so when I, I remember when I was working for Western Electric [Western Electric Company], and I had a typo in a letter I sent out and I thought I was gonna--I got visibly sick.  I went and threw up in the bathroom, but I also expected that of other people and that's totally unrealistic.  You know, you can't expect people to have that kind of dedication, so I was, I would have done that then.  I'd have been a better manager, I think.  I have a girlfriend right now, we used to, she's a dentist, Kyra Barnes, and we used to commiserate about our management styles and black people don't get it.  Because both of us were just perfectionists and a little bit more hands on, you know, getting into the minutiae of stuff when you need to trust your people to do what they know how to do.  I would have done that differently for sure.  I'm very proud of one of the women who, I took a risk on her.  Bob Brown [Robert J. Brown] gave me her name.  She was his goddaughter.  She was right out of law school and she had worked at Goldman Sachs [Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.] for like a hot second and I said, "This woman has no experience."  He said, "Talk to her."  She came up and blew us all away.  Right now I am so proud of her.  She's another one of my successes.  She's vice president of a health company.  She's vice president of corporate communications.  She has the lobbying group, she has minority affairs, she has the media.  She's got the whole ball of wax, and she's kicking butt and, Eva Chess is her name.  I'm so proud of her, and I took a risk on her because she was bright as a new penny and she was a quick learner, and she came in and the vice chairman, I was reporting to him at the time, he interviewed her and he says, "You gotta hire her.  She's a sharp cookie."  She had no experience at all in media, public relations, nothing, and she took it by the horns and she learned and she got good at it; and then she left me, sniff (laughter). But, proud of her.
Story_ID: 641297
Speaker 1: Tell us about your family now.  Did, I heard a lot of boyfriends, but did you get married at any point?
Speaker 2: No.  I've been engaged four or five times.  I didn't leave them--I didn't leave all of them.  Some of them left me.  Yeah.  Some of them sure did.  But I have children.  I have a daughter.  She's not my biological daughter, but her name, I have a picture of her [Natalie Shelton (ph.)].  She is, it took, we went through some times which I really would not like to discuss because her mother was my best friend in Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York].  Dr. Lenora Moragne taught my daughter's mother at Cornell, so she says, "You need to go look up Gladys Shelton Gibson [sic. Gladys Gibson Shelton] when you get up there."  And so I did, and she was leaving, but she was the one that helped me get a house and all of that, and when I came down to North Carolina, she was working for the agricultural extension service [North Carolina Agriculture Extension Service; North Carolina Cooperative Extension Service] too, so we got to be friends.  And, I stood up for her when she got married and the daughter, her daughter became mine because she just said she was just gonna worm her way into my life.  And, oh my god.  She was gonna be a lawyer, then she was gonna be a social worker, then I got her into Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] on a legacy thing.  She was smart enough, but she, you know, getting in Spelman is hard and I wrote 'em and said, "Hey, she's a legacy child.  She's like my daughter, come on."  So, I got her in and she did well and she learned she had a brain.  She's been going to all these white schools and they made her think she was dumb.  She's smart as a whip.  And, so she finally settled into nursing and now she's wanted all over the country because she's so good at it; in fact, she's now got a free ride to get her master's degree in nursing, and she's having a baby.  She just had a baby, so I'm a grandmother.
Story_ID: 641298
Speaker 1: My boys, my sister's children, my sister worked for the [U.S.] Department of Defense, she and her husband.  First of all he was in the [U.S. military] service and then he started working for the Department of Defense, and then she started working for the Department of Defense.  She was principal of a number of schools all over the world.  She taught mostly, she was an elementary school teacher.  That is a quiet secret and I guess it still is.  The armed services has some of the best educational schools in, that America owns.  As a teacher, my sister had to get a master's degree.  She had to go to training every year.  They had classes that were very, very small that had, she had two assistants in her classes to help her with the students.  I mean, it was just amazing what they were doing in those schools and you wouldn't have known it.  She also taught at the, for the, in Japan she taught for the diplomat school that taught English speaking children of diplomats, and so forth.  And that school was even much, more amazing than the one that the Department of Defense was running.  They had, I went through because I used to travel to see her when she was wherever she was, whether it was in Korea, Philippines, whether it's Germany, and then she got sick.  She went back to Jacksonville [Florida].  I said you know, "I miss coming to see you." You know, because I used to drive, and it was cool because she was living there, so she knew all the places to go and we'd go shopping.  It was really a lot of fun.  Now she can't travel anymore.  I miss that a lot.  I'm over it now, but when she first got sick it was really hard for me.  But anyway, this school was opened up to a Japanese garden and they had violin in and you name it, they had, they were teaching in that school, so her sons, because they were living in Germany at that time, the oldest one came.  He went to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] where his father went to school, so he was like my child because holidays and stuff.  He would come back to see Aunt Elynor [HistoryMaker Elynor Williams] and stay with me and then he stopped coming and I called him and said, "I can't." Because he started having to get friends.  They would go skiing and she says, "You know what you're having?"  I said, "What?"  She says, "You're an empty nester."  You know, he found friends and he didn't need to come see me anymore.  So I have him.  The youngest one is closer to me now.  Both of them have a son and a daughter, and Darrien [Darrien Demps], he's always been my friend but I was throwing him out of my house, because he's just like me and I didn't know that.  When he came to live with me, he was, they put him in pilot school because he wanted to be a pilot, so, he was a troubled child, like his dad told him, "Do not stay out all night for the prom." When he was graduating.  And, of course, he did.  He said, "Well, you know you're grounded?"  He said, "Yeah.  I expected you to do that."  You know, he took his lumps.  A born leader, he was the youngest assistant to the general who was over all of the armed services.  He was an aide to the general when he was in the service and everybody couldn't believe how he got the job because he's charismatic and he's smart and he's all that stuff.  He's, well when he first came to the states, because she sent him here early just to get him out of his buddies being back at school and stuff, and he would go out and I had said, "I have very few rules, so don't have anybody in my house when I'm not home, and you know come into my house at a reasonable hour, like midnight." For eighteen years, that's not bad.  He'd come in when he wanted to.  So I told Gwen [Gwendolyn Williams Demps], I said, "You know, pack him up.  He's out of here."  And she said, "He's a good boy, really he is." So after that and on the second call she said, "You know what the problem is?"  I said, "What?"  "He's just like you."  And once she said that, I saw it and we've been good friends ever since.  He's my favorite nephew.  I shouldn't have put that on the tape, but it's true.
Speaker 2: You can have two favorites, you know (laughter).
Speaker 1: And my daughter is definitely top of the line, so I've got two kids.
Story_ID: 641299
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything I haven't mentioned that we need to raise before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: You've been pretty thorough and I've been talking--motor mouth.  I'm sure I'll think, I'll go home and oh, I didn't mention so and so.  Not that I can think of.
Speaker 1: All right, well, last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different.  Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered as somebody who cared enough to try to make a difference in the world that I had to work with them in the corporate world.  I think I made some differences and some changes and changed some minds and some thinking and helped a lot of people along the way.  When I was working for Sara Lee [Sara Lee Corporation], for instance, I used to tell people I have a win-win job and it was good for the company and it's good for the organizations and the people that I'm working for.  It doesn't get any better than that.  So that's how I'd like to be remembered: as somebody who cared and tried to make a difference.
Story_ID: 641300
Speaker 1: This is me with Lena Horne in New York [New York].  She was one of our Frontrunners.  It's May of 1990.  We were at the Waldorf Astoria [Waldorf Astoria New York], one of the locations where we had the luncheon for Women Who Run the World.  Jill Krementz was the photographer.  We used to try to pick the famous photographer to do this for us.
Speaker 2: This is in the White House [Washington, D.C.].  This is the last time we had the Frontrunner Awards. John Bryan, who was chairman of Sara Lee, is to the left, Hillary Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton] in the center.  She was first lady then, and she was our host, and, of course, me.  This was at the White House.
Speaker 1: That's my mom when she was, I think, about eighteen, and it's my favorite picture of her.
Speaker 2: Okay, what's your--what's her name?
Speaker 1: Naomi Theresa Douglass Williams [Naomi Douglass Williams], and that's my dad, who was a pretty much dandy in his time.  My mom said he used to dress impeccably and somewhat of a lady's man, but he loved us dearly.  That was all that was important to me.  Albert B. Williams [Albert Williams].
Speaker 2: This one is self-explanatory.
Speaker 1: That's my alma mater, Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia], my degree and my senior photo, it seems like a hundred thousand years ago, and it really has been about a hundred thousand years ago.  Great school, great education, I grew up at that college; learned to grow up, I should say.
Speaker 2: This is an event at Sara Lee Corporation and Johnnetta Cole [Johnnetta B. Cole] was our honoree at that time.  To the left is Eva Chess, who was my mentor, mentee at the time and I'm very proud of her.  She is now VP of, and doing very well in Corporate America.  Johnnetta Cole, me, and Lauren Jiles Johnson, who was working for me at the time and I think she is now doing independent work.
Speaker 1: This is New York at the Waldorf again and I was the honoree representing Sara Lee Corporation for the Frontrunner Awards.  I got a huge plaque with my name on it, and these were all the people who owned property in Jamaica.  What's fascinating, all these rich people and they were all white.  I just found that fascinating.  Friends of Jamaica [American Friends of Jamaica].
Speaker 2: Oh, that's a terrible picture.
Speaker 1: That is with Michael Jordan at Juanita Jordan's [Juanita Vanoy Jordan] birthday party and I think it was at his restaurant, if I recall, which was Blue something [One Sixtyblue, Chicago, Illinois]--yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh that's right (laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): I worked in one of his Hanes' commercials [Hanes Group; Hanesbrands Inc.].
Speaker 2: Oh did you?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh, this is at one of the Executive Leadership Council meetings and those are my buddies, Jim Kaiser [HistoryMaker James Kaiser] on the left was one of my mentors.  He was one of the people who kept me working at Sara lee and not quitting, Vaughn [ph.] is on the right and the guy behind me, I can't remember his name, but he'd love that part.  But he worked on Wall Street, and those were the good times.
Speaker 1: There's a winner if I've ever seen one.  That was the first time I did a 10K [10 kilometer] in New York City for the L'eggs Mini Marathon.  I had a group of women from the women in state government.  I used to coalesce with them, bring them up to New York.  There were governors, there were mayors, there were, they were in executive positions with state government all over the country and I got them to be on my team to run this race.  I was so proud.
Speaker 2: On the right is my daughter, I call her my daughter, her name is Natalie, Natalie Shelton [ph.].  On the left is her friend, Leeza Cox [ph.], and I love them both very dearly.  They're my daughters.
Speaker 1: There are the three of us again.  I'm in the shades, but Nat took us to see the Ellen Show ['The Ellen DeGeneres Show'].  I went out to California.  This was just last year and I went to see the whales and she had no idea that that was on my bucket list.  So, we saw whales in California.  She was out there as a nurse.  They asked her to come, and she got paid and they paid her all kinds of money.
