Story_ID: 317232
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Neculai Burghelea; observing is [HistoryMaker] Paul Brock.  Sir, could you please state your full name, and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Richard Womack [HistoryMaker Richard G. Womack].  I'm sorry; you want my full name, Richard Gilbert Womack, I should say--Richard Gilbert Womack.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Richard, R-I-C-H-A-R-D, Gilbert, G-I-L-B-E-R-T, Womack, W-O-M-A-C-K.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Eleven, eighteen, nineteen thirty-nine [November 18, 1939]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --born in Danville, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is definitive now, right (laughter)?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: All right.  And, sir, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date?  Today's the 29th of June [June 29, 2005].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at the headquarters of the national AFL-CIO [American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations], which is located at 16th [Street] and I Street NW [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a trade unionist. I'm a--my occupation is a union member, see.
Speaker 1: Now, you have an official capacity, I think, with the union, you can just give us the title and we--all right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: My title is assistant to the president of the AFL-CIO.
Story_ID: 317233
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are four, I mean five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that we are compelled to ask that only require a short answer--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and the first one is: do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: A favorite who?
Speaker 1: Food.
Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite--yes, I do have a favorite food.  Oh, you want me to tell you what it is (laughter)?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Yeah.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I'm sorry; I don't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's the second time this week somebody's done that (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I'm sorry; I'm messing up your interview.  Yeah, I have a favorite food; my favorite food is fish.
Speaker 1: All right; any kind?
Speaker 2: Particularly salmon.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: All right, a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: The spring of the year or the fall of the year.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm--no, I don't--not a favorite, but I like vacations away from civilization basically.  Well, I shouldn't say it like that; let me say I like vacations, I'm not a beach person--I know you told me a small--short answer, I'm sorry.  Am I messing up here?
Speaker 1: No, go ahead--just go ahead.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I like to--I like the outdoors, you know, the scenery--I like to walk particularly in the--I can't say forest, but you know, I like to go to the parks, Shenandoah Park [Shenandoah National Park, Virginia], you know what I mean--places like that; the Blue Ridge Mountains, you know--that's my (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, someplace in the forest, or something, you know--with the woods nearby?
Speaker 2: Yeah. Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, the last one is: do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I got away from favorite phrases and sayings 'cause the one I had wasn't nice (laughter).
Speaker 1: Wasn't appropriate (laughter), okay.
Story_ID: 317234
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask you about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Gilbert Womack] side, but we'll start with your mother's side of the family.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name, and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Louise Patrick [Louise Patrick Womack]; Louise, L-O-U-I-S-E, Patrick, P-A-T-R-I-C-K.
Speaker 1: All right, and what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side?
Speaker 2: My mother had a very large family; she had thirteen brothers and sisters.  She lived in Virginia, and I lost my mother at--when I was three years old, so I don't know a whole lot about her except for what I've been able--people have told me, basically.  I guess my memory of my mother is just seeing her--'cause she was basically a housewife--and at three years old, it's hard to say a whole lot, so--and, and, you know, even though I lost her at an early age, she was a person that really--you know, I, I regret--in fact I didn't--growing up, I regret the fact I didn't have a mother even though her--my mother's sister [Carrie Patrick Irving] actually raised me, basically speaking, so, so I have this fond memory of her even to today, even though I real--I--you know, I--so I can understand when people can lose a person; I can understand what they go through and what they feel, so it's been a tremendous loss for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, are there any stories about her family, you know, way back?  Were they always from that part of Virginia, or did they come from someplace else, or--?
Speaker 2: No, I think she was born and raised in Virginia.  The family itself was--in fact, they owned a farm in Virginia; they raised tobacco and watermelons, and I know during the summer even--you know, I used to--when I--you know we had left--I used to go back down there during--especially when school was out, for a couple of years 'til I got to be a teenager, or twelve, and I decided it wasn't for me; I wasn't going back there anymore.  So, no, she--you know, I guess in that day and age if you had your own farm, you know, I mean, you're looked at as, as someone; now I mean you wasn't sharecropping or working for Uncle Charlie, or whatever it was but no, they had their own farm.  I guess with thirteen kids, or fourteen kids I should say, you had enough people to, to work a farm.
Speaker 1: Okay, so her--as far as you know, her parents and family were farmers and came from a line of farmers (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 317235
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name, and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: His name was Gilbert Womack, G-I-L-B-E-R-T, last name W-O-M-A-C-K.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what was his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: He was born in a little town in Virginia called Rifeville [Rifeville, Virginia; Dayton, Virginia]--Rifeville, Virginia.  His date of birth was--I wanna say it was April, and I can't give you exact day in April, of 1915.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side?  I mean how far back can you trace 'em first of all?
Speaker 2: I can't go back but so far and I, and I guess that's one of the tragedies inflicted in my family; we didn't have all these great family reunions where everybody came together at least once a year, or every other year--whatever; I just don't remember us having family reunions, but I can go back to his father or my grandfather, so to speak, but that's about as far as I can go back.  I can't go back any further than that.
Speaker 1: Now--well, what do you know about his family?  I mean was his grandfather like a--were they farmers, too, in Rifeville?
Speaker 2: Yes, they were farmers as well.  I guess it came back--I came from a family of farmers, I guess, but I was determined not to be a farmer, so--for all--in fact, all of--well, I guess nobody's farming today, and not--even all of the kids, all my uncles and aunts, they all--they ended up leaving Virginia, basically speaking; I think I only got one aunt that lives in Virginia now, rest of 'em are either in Washington, D.C. or Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] or somewhere else; they, they, they're not on the farm anymore, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you--are there any stories passed down in your family about life out there in rural Virginia?  A place like Rifeville, you know--I mean it seems like it be a, a good device for a novel or something, to have a town named Rifeville, but--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --are there any stories associated with it?
Speaker 2: --I'd heard some stories but I tell you, I (laughter)--I don't wanna get into them stories, okay?
Speaker 1: Are they bad stories, or--?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean it was--they wasn't all bad and--well, you gotta realize something; the, the South was very segregated, so I heard a lot of stories about terms of what people had to endure and go through, how they was mistreated in a sense and, and I can even relate to my own experiences when I was going down there during the summertime, and I'll just give you a good example.  One summer when I was there, and I guess I was probably 'bout eight or--eight or nine years old, and I went into this drugstore to get some--what did we get--some ice cream--it was me and one of my uncles and, and the young lady behind the counter, she decided she wasn't gonna wait on us; she went in the back room, the man come out and he told me if I wanna be waited on, I--'cause I had sat down at the counter--told me I had to--"You have to stand up if you wanna be waited on."  And so I decided I--it wasn't nothing in here I wanted that bad, so I left.  But in leaving, we was confronted by the police--yeah, and so the police wanna know, you know, what--wanna know my name and where was I from, and why was I down here, you know; he asked me a whole bunch of questions, so I told him where I was and who I was--and who--where I was visiting, and you know, where I was at.  Well, he told me, "Well, when you come down here, if you wanna be served, you don't, you don't sit down, you just stand up."  And then, as I was walking down the street, it was a--I guess a, an older man sitting on a box--a little ole--you know, they had the little crates, wooden crates, you know.  There was a bunch of white folks decided that they wanted to kick on the box and everything else, which kind of set me in a--in--a little bit, you know and I just, I just couldn't understand it, and so that got me in even more trouble.  But what really got me in trouble was, I guess, before I could get back to my grandmother's house, I guess the police had already been there (laughter) and told her, you know, "You need to get your grandson under control here."  So they was telling me I can't--what I couldn't do--I had to, you know, obey what they were telling us to do, so--and I think that's what really kind of got a little next to me, even at an early age of eight, or either nine, you know.  So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That seemed like a lot of manpower to be applied to an eight-year-old, a nine-year-old coming into a store, you know?
Speaker 2: I couldn't understand it, I really couldn't, you know.
Story_ID: 317236
Speaker 1: So, no, you don't--you take that back up north.  'Cause see, I was in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] at that time, and that was just during the summer I went down there [to Rifeville, Virginia; Dayton, Virginia], so.
Speaker 2: Well, yeah--so those kind of stories--well, that's why we're here, for oral history to get that kind of--you know, to find out what it was like, 'cause somebody's gonna say it wasn't that bad, you know.
Speaker 1: Oh, it was bad.  It was even bad to the point that, you know, a farmer up the street a little ways from us, he had, had some children, and I figured it was okay to go play with 'em, right?  Well, I went--you know, I got my butt whipped for playing with them little white boy and white girl.  Said, "No, you can't go over there and play with them."  So, you know, it was--I guess, I guess I'm telling you, life in the South, particularly in, in that part of the South anyway, how people were treated or how, or how they viewed themselves as being treated.  I mean it was something or other that I just didn't--I didn't--I couldn't appreciate and didn't understand it either.  I didn't know why they were putting up with stuff like that there.  But even at that, I know you wanted to--but let me just tell you now, while I'm at it, in a little place called Sharon Hill, Pennsylvania--it was, it was actually segregated because black folks lived in one area and white folks lived in the other area, but it was like, like connecting neighborhoods, and usually them white folks had to go through the black neighborhood to get to their own neighborhoods; not that these were elaborate, you know, expensive houses, these were just moderate houses, you know, and, and I mean you talk about in the, I guess, late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s], houses weren't like they--'course the houses weren't like they are today; I mean you could buy a house for thirty-five, forty thousand dollars, and you had a nice, nice house, but here was--black man decide to, to move into this neighborhood, and I guess I was in junior high school [Darby Township School, Glenolden, Pennsylvania] at the time--move into this neighborhood and I will tell you, they destroyed this man's house--destroyed his life.  And here again, I guess, I gotta (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They killed him, too?
Speaker 1: They didn't kill him--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --but they sent him to the mental--I mean he lost his mind behind all of this, lost his family, his wife and everything else--destroyed the, the house; I mean they tore the house up.  In fact, it was so bad, they had to get the state police to stand guard because--wouldn't let us into the neighborhood, you know, couldn't go in there; unless you lived in there, you couldn't even go in there.  If you wanna go to a store or visit somebody, you couldn't do it.  You'd have to show identification or proof that you lived in that even to get into the neighborhood.
Speaker 2: So, did a mob go over there and do this, or what happened?  I mean how did they do it?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean white folks just gathered and said, "You know, you're not gonna--we're not gonna accept you moving in our neighborhood."  I guess they--they threw rocks, they tore the fixtures outta the house, everything else.  And, and then when we gathered to go and try to provide some means of protection or to protest, we weren't allowed in the neighborhood--we couldn't get in there; they stopped us, you know, then.  But the good part about it, although you can call it the bad part about it, they had to go through our neighborhood to get to their neighborhood, so we figured one way to deal with this is that we had a--what do you call it--a, a rock fest--so when they come, they come driving through there, we would bombard their cars with rocks and stuff like this here, until the police decided they had to come and patrol that area and, you know, we would--naturally, when somebody say the police come, we was running--we scattered, but they found another way to get to their neighborhood, though.  But, you know, it's just experiences like that there--except all that didn't happen in the South, this happened in the North, that's what I'm saying, this come right outside of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.  This man had a decent job and everything else, and he lost all of that.
Story_ID: 317237
Speaker 1: So you've seen quite a bit of discrimination personally--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --growing up.  Did your father [Gilbert Womack] have any stories of not just discrimination, but any--you know, any stories that he passed down to you about growing up in Rifeville [Rifeville, Virginia; Dayton, Virginia]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he had some to share with us--stories in terms of how they were expected to stay in their so-called place, and I guess the thing that really troubled me was--so much was that, I think he told me one day that--'cause he had a shotgun.  I mean in the, in the South in those days, you know, you had shotguns and rifles because a lot of people went hunting and, you know, and I think a lot of times we got--our food was from his experience out there hunting like rabbits and squirrels and deer and this kind of stuff, and he loved to fish as well.  But I think his story was that there was a couple occasions where he got shot at--yeah, and the words they used was--the word nigger became a famous word, you know.  "You niggers know that you don't come down here in these woods without our permission," and this kind of stuff here.  And he say, "You know, I could hear the bullet zinging, you know, by my head."  I--it wasn't so much--he said they wasn't trying to kill him or anything, it was more putting fear into you.  And then, I think, it's one evening--and I don't know--and I, and I don't--it escapes me in terms of what triggered all of this, but what he said was one evening, before I was even born--'cause I have an older sister and everything else.  He said they--somebody threw a rock through the window with a note tied to it, you know, "If you wanna," (unclear), "If you wanna stay here," or "If you--," what did he tell me?  The note said, "If you wanna continue to live here, you better mind where you, where you shop at, and--," and, and I hate to say this and I, and I, and I viewed my father as a--my father was basically a minister.  "Mind where you shop at and where you put your eyes at."  Apparently, it was something--he'd looked at a white woman or some woman and it's like this here, so--and so I guess--it wasn't on after that, we left from out of Virginia.  So, I can't tell a whole lot of stories, but I know one of my uncles was killed by the police.  They said he was trying to get away from 'em and they was trying to stop him for a car violation, or whatever, but the way it turned out--the way--you know--and I guess--the way it appeared--I know that I have to put it that way, from what they was telling me that, seemed like he wasn't trying to get away 'cause he wasn't shot--running from nobody, but the problem was he--'cause he stood up to 'em and they didn't like it, and so they shot him, you know, but there was nothing they could do about it, and that was on a--nothing ever happened of it anyway.  So--South was not one of my favorite places.
Story_ID: 317238
Speaker 1: Can you describe your father's [Gilbert Womack] personality to us?  What was he like and--?
Speaker 2: He was a very kind, meek person.  Like I told you, he was a minister, so he was always doing something for, for people, and I guess this what, what got him in trouble most of the time.  He was always going to the aid of somebody else, defending 'em.  I mean when you--I guess when you minister, you minister people, I mean not just in terms of their own spiritual needs, but also in their social and economic and other issues, so he was pretty well-recognized in the community.
Speaker 1: Was he the--the pastor in the community--the only?
Speaker 2: I would say he was the pastor; in, in that small community, yes, he was.  But I mean in--but there was other--
Speaker 1: In the area.
Speaker 2: --in the area (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --yeah; but in that little--he had the--I guess, the--and, and, and it's hard for me to explain it 'cause I'm saying at--I was a early age, you know what I mean?  I--and I can only go by what I was told, but he was--I can't say revered, but he was pretty well-liked, and people came to him with their issues and their problems.  And I guess it's like today, you know?  A minister is looked upon as someone that you can go to and talk to when you got issues or concerns, and from what I gathered from him was that--he had a small--it was a small neighborhood; wasn't a big large community, a small community, but on--particularly on Sundays, you know, he said he had a maybe a hundred folks, you know; it wasn't a large congregation--about a hundred people, and I guess about--best I can describe it, he was a hard-worker; I mean he--you know, being a minister then, I mean you still had to work, so he worked or he farmed and, you know, this kind of thing.
Speaker 1: They just gave him another job to do, I guess, on some level, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean he had to spend time being a minister as well as earning a living as a farmer.
Speaker 2: Right, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now, what denomination was he, or did it make any difference?
Speaker 2: He was Pentecostal.
Speaker 1: Pentecostal?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay. Did you all have a church in that community?
Speaker 2: Run that by me again?
Speaker 1: Did you have a church building in--
Speaker 2: In that--yeah, it was a little--I've seen pictures of it, or I've seen--it's nothing but a little shack, you know what I mean; I mean it wasn't no elaborate place 'cause even the little house we had was a modest house, you know?  They call it shotgun houses today, I guess, what you call 'em, but--hey.
Speaker 1: With three rooms--one in the front, middle and back.
Speaker 2: There you go; you got it, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did--was there a school?
Speaker 2: There was a school.  I never went to school down there, but there was a school, so--and I don't know much about that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, how old were you when the family moved to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: I was three years old.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were--okay.  So you just visited during the summer (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) During the summertime, yeah.
Speaker 1: And you moved to--it was outside of Philadelphia?
Speaker 2: It was outside of Philadelphia, a little place called--I guess called Darby Township [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, what'd you say?
Speaker 2: Darby Township.
Speaker 1: Oh, Darby Township, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Some people call it Sharon Hill [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you were about three years old, so you were really raised near Philadelphia, I guess--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --really, in essence.  So--so you moved in with your aunt, and what was your aunt's name?
Speaker 2: Carrie, C-A-R-R-I-E, Irving [Carrie Patrick Irving].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: I-R-V-I-N-G.
Speaker 1: Now, was that the same--that's your mother's [Louise Patrick Womack] sister, right?
Speaker 2: My mother's sister.
Speaker 1: Did she have the same maiden name as your mother?  I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, she was a Patrick before she got married, yeah.
Speaker 1: Patrick, okay, all right, okay.  Now, how many people were in your household--in that household with you and your aunt?  Did she have children, too?
Speaker 2: She didn't have any children.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, it was just me, my brother [Orlando Womack] and my sister--three of us.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, are you the youngest of that group?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My brother is younger than me.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, your sister's the oldest then, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Your sister's the oldest, then comes the brother--then you, and then your other brother (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Then me, then brother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 317239
Speaker 1: Now, do you have a--an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: No, I--I can't remember too much of my early childhood.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It's not a first memory you have (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My first memory was us on a train leaving out of Danville, Virginia--out of Virginia 'cause it was me and my brother [Orlando Womack] and my sister, 'cause we had lost our mother [Louise Patrick Womack], right?  And the only thing I remember is I had a little hat on, and rushing to get on the train, I--my hat came off, and my father [Gilbert Womack] told me to leave it.  "You ain't got time to find"--'cause I, I don't think he realized I had lost my had when I had lost it--when I got his attention 'cause when I lost my hat, it was just too late to go back and get it, so he said, "We gotta get on this train," so--but I guess in terms of my early childhood, moving here [Darby Township, Pennsylvania]--'cause I said living with my [maternal] aunt [Carrie Patrick Irving]--and I will say this, you know, having come from the South, coming up here to live with my aunt, she--I guess we'd been with her about--I guess maybe two years I guess, when she moved--she moved to another house; but in moving to another house, here again, we moved into a neighborhood that was predominantly white, and I remember we was--they were bringing furniture in the house--whatever, and one of the neighbors decided he was gonna park his car so we couldn't get our car out, you know.  Oh, yeah, I mean this, this--I know it seemed like it followed me everywhere I went, this discrimination of people acting up, and I remember one of my uncles saying that he could move it, "Or I will get something or other and move it--I'll move it for you," which caused a little confrontation, but I think what happened is they ended up calling the police and the police came and made the man move his car so we could get out of there, you know.  But it's just the resentment, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's a story of a--you know, that's an American story; I mean that's--it's not unusual (laughter).
Speaker 2: Right, you're right.
Story_ID: 317240
Speaker 1: Can you describe the neighborhood you lived in in Darby Township [Pennsylvania], and what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, let me tell you what--the, the Darby Township situation was an area where there were farms--pig farms and, you know, all kind of animals; I mean it like a rural area.  It wasn't, it wasn't real rural, it was--wasn't--it was outside the city limits anyway; had big ole--I, I guess you could call 'em big truck farms and pig farms, and this kind of thing, where a man grew different kinds of vegetables and, and I know a lot of the young folks would go down there, particularly the black folks would go on the farm, they'd work and get paid by the day, you know, he would hire 'em out for the day to go out and work his farm.  I guess when I got a few years, I figure I'd can go try it one day; I didn't last the whole day, I say, 'cause, this is not for me; I couldn't do it, you know--picking tomatoes and cucumbers and all that kind of stuff.  He had cabbage and, and greens, and plus he had a whole bunch of pigs and, and cattle out there, so it was a--I can't say it was real rural, but it was outside the city limits, modern--well, I can--very low in--it was very low income; houses were--they were nice houses, but they--maybe at that--and I would say probably in the price range probably twenty, thirty thousand dollar houses, so it wasn't no expensive housing, and--
Speaker 1: And I know they didn't cost that much in those days, I know.
Speaker 2: No, you're right.  So, I mean you had--we had, we had lots of--I mean it wasn't like we all had to sleep in the same room or anything 'cause we had our own rooms.  I think me and my brother [Orlando Womack] slept in the same room; my sister, she had her own room, and then, you know, my [maternal] aunt [Carrie Patrick Irving] and her husband, they had their own room, so we had, I think, like four bedrooms, this kind of thing, so.
Story_ID: 317241
Speaker 1: I was asking you about the sights and sounds and smells of growing up, the neighborhood [in Darby Township, Pennsylvania], and what it was like, and--so you lived in a neighborhood--you had like--it's a mixed neighborhood, basically, or--?
Speaker 2: It was--no, it wasn't mixed.  I mean, it was a predominantly black neighborhood--
Speaker 1: But it was more rural, would you say, like--
Speaker 2: --but it was more rural.  But now--the neighborhood--but right outside of the neighborhood, like I say, they--there're people who had these big farms and whatever, and they weren't us; they were the white man who had the farms out there, and a lot of people in my neighborhood would go out there and work the farms, you know; that's how they got their little spending change.  But then, I mean, he didn't hire on no regular basis, you know; you just show up, and if he needed you, then he'd put you to work, and that's how that worked.  And like I said, I tried it once and that was enough for me.
Speaker 1: Now, how did your [maternal] aunt [Carrie Patrick Irving] find out about it?  I mean, was another family member already there in that part of Pennsylvania (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think she was the first one to, to move up here from Virginia 'cause she was here--'cause I know--'cause after we--I mean my father [Gilbert Womack] came up here, and I think only reason he came because--you know, like he's saying that he had lost his wife [Louise Patrick Womack] and he was ready to, to move on.  He had three young children, so--and she was willing to take, take us, you know, until he could, could get on his own, which he did eventually, and we all, you know, left my aunt and went and lived with him.
Speaker 1: So when did he come and get on his own?  I mean when did--when was that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, now, I didn't--we didn't go right away when he got on his own; now, I'll be honest with you now, you know.  My aunt--she was a love--a very loving person, and we had--she provided a good home for us, so we wasn't in no hurry to leave her, to be honest with you now, as much as loved my father, but I wasn't in no hurry to leave my aunt.  I think I was probably about twelve years old when decided to go live with my father, and--because I guess he had remarried at that point, and I guess my thing was--my brother [Orlando Womack] didn't wanna go when I left; he decided he wanted to stay 'cause he didn't wanna--I guess, I guess when kids have these little notions that--I don't want no other woman in, in my life or whatever--in our life--didn't understand why he had to have this woman, you know; so it was a little rebellion there that I would--never mind, I ain't gonna go there.  So, I mean when you have something good, you know what I mean, and you comfortable with it, it's hard to turn it loose, and I guess that's the best way to describe it 'cause she--and, and we had a nice, nice--the school wasn't bad--predominantly--now, there was--well, that was later on, though, 'cause the school [Darby Township School, Glenolden, Pennsylvania] I went to was, it was pretty--there might of been one or two white folks, I'm not so sure, but I remember couple experiences in the classroom.
Story_ID: 317242
Speaker 1: Now what was the name of your school?
Speaker 2: All right, the first--what did we call it?  What's the name of it?  Darby--it was called--it was actually called Darby Township [Darby Township School, Glenolden, Pennsylvania]--junior high, elementary.  And this--the irony of it is, it only went, I think, up to the eighth or ninth, ninth grade--ninth grade, and once you got to the ninth grade, then you had to decide whether you wanna go to school in Darby or--well, you had three choices: you could go to Darby [Darby Township High School, Glenolden, Pennsylvania], you could go to Collingdale [Collingdale High School, Collingdale, Pennsylvania], or you go to Ridley Township [Ridley Township High School; Ridley High School, Folsom, Pennsylvania]; those were three choices you had when you got to high school.  I chose to go to Darby High School, my brother [Orlando Womack] chose to go to Ridley Township High School, so we all went to different high schools, which were predominantly white schools; they didn't--we didn't have a high school in our neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you were getting ready to tell a story before I asked you the name of the school (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: --and you were almost on it and I--I'm sorry I threw you off, but--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --it was a school story, and I asked you about the school.
Speaker 2: Oh.  You know how it is when you go to a, a new school or whatever; you always get challenged by somebody, and my [maternal] aunt [Carrie Patrick Irving] was one of those people who said, you know, "You don't go around fighting," you know; I couldn't go home and say I got put outta school for fighting now, you know, so--but I wasn't gonna take no stuff off nobody either, but I figure if I didn't fight, or stand up for my own self, then I'll be picked on forever and a day, so I learned that lesson early in life.  So--I guess it didn't really come out to a--you know how kids would gather around and, you know--at, at that time you just put sticks on your shoulders like yeah, and you say, you know, "Knock the stick off," you know.  So, they put the stick on my shoulder, I say, "He can knock it off if you want, that's up to him."  But anyway, we got in a little scuffle, and didn't last long--it just broke up.  But I think the thing was that, that I became accepted basically, in the school--in the school system.
Story_ID: 317243
Speaker 1: Being in a predominantly black school [Darby Township High School, Glenolden, Pennsylvania], and being--and I guess there was--there's always bullies around, and we had our share of bullies, I guess; I don't think they came to school to learn, they just came to, to bully, and they, they wasn't so much picking on me as picking on other folks, and I guess I just resented the fact they was just, just picking on people, you know?  And so we had a couple of confrontations 'cause I just told 'em, "I don't think you ought to be picking on these individuals."  Now, I was pretty big for my age at that point.  In fact, even when I played sports or whatever, I always had to bring my birth certificate to prove how old I was 'cause everybody thought I was older than what I was.  And so I became the defender of those who couldn't defend themselves, I guess what I'm trying to get at, particularly, you know--at that age when you twelve and thirteen, you know, people always wanna try you; we had our little scuffles here and there, but--didn't last long.  People finally said, "If Womack [HistoryMaker Richard G. Womack] steps in, then you step out--don't do nothing," you know.  And I'll say that--you know, and it followed me all the way--actually, that process has really followed me throughout my life, and I guess that's why I ended up in the kind of work that I'm doing at this point.  And, and let me just follow this through for--just for a minute because when I--I even went into the [U.S.] military, and we had this--I call it big brute who was always picking on somebody.  And I had a couple little friends, they were my friends, you know--small dude, you know what I mean; they in the military and this dude--one day he was--we was all in the game room, you know, playing, and he used to come in there picking on one of--one of these friends of mine, and so I told him, "Man, this man ain't bothering you, leave him alone."  "Oh, you wanna take his place?"  "Well, why not?" you know.  "Well, let's step outside then."  Now, I can't tell you I was a fair fighter, now; I can't tell you that.  He wanted to go outside, he'd go first and I'll be right behind him.  But he didn't realize that being behind him I was gonna do some damage for him when he walks out the door, so--you know--and I guess, even in the military, I guess I had a lot of respect from people; not respect in terms of--this was in the--I probably--you want--you don't want me to go too far ahead, I'm sure, right?
Speaker 2: No, not too far, no.  In fact, we need to reel you back in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, okay.  We can back up some.
Speaker 2: --to get to--but that's an interesting point, to establish that aspect of character 'cause that--you know, we always ask people what they were like when they were a kid, you know, what their personality was like, what did--how did other people see 'em--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --and that's-that's important.
Story_ID: 317244
Speaker 1: Now, when you were in grade school [Darby Township School, Glenolden, Pennsylvania], did you have a favorite subject in grade school?
Speaker 2: Oh, math was my favorite subject, yeah--loved math.  In fact, when I went to school, I know--I probably knew--well, see, my sister being ahead of me, so when she come home, do her homework (unclear), I was right there with her, so I was pretty well-advanced when I went to school because I had paid attention what she was doing, you know, sitting down with her.  So, I guess the--when I first went to school I, I didn't like school; I mean I--it wasn't that I didn't like school, I didn't wanna be there.  I'd become so accustomed, you know, with the family life that I--going to school and gonna left me here with all these people I don't know.  This was--I said, "No, I wouldn't"--so I wouldn't go to school; my parents had a hard time getting me--well, my [maternal] aunt [Carrie Patrick Irving], anyway--had a hard time getting me to stay in school 'cause I just didn't--I feared all those people.  So I--so the first year, I really didn't go to school 'cause I didn't, I didn't make the first grade, but when I did finally go the second year, what then ended up doing was putting me in a class with my sister so I would go to school.  So they ended up skipping me, so I didn't really lose out by the fact that I didn't go to school the first year, because they skipped me up, so I was still caught up with my class.  And it worked out pretty good because I think having a sister in front of you and--and we were pretty close.  In fact, me and my family were--my brother [Orlando Womack] and sister were really close, and so it helped me in, in my schoolwork, so I say math was my favorite subject.  Other than that--what else?  'Cause I wasn't good at geography or, or social studies and what--I liked social studies; even today I--to find out what's going on in the world, so--no, give me some math, I'm ready to go to work.
Speaker 1: Now, did you have any--were there any teachers that were your favorite teachers, or--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had a favorite teacher (laughter); I sure had--in fact, I had a couple of favorite teachers, and one was name--her name was Mrs. Smith, and her husband--actually, her husband was the principal and he was a minister, too, and she was--her thing was, and I guess this was--I don't know, we was in about the fourth, the fourth, fifth grade.  She would line people up according to your grades, and--'cause she was always bragging on her girls--how smart her girls were 'cause all the girls--and you had seven seats in a row, and it was about what--I guess about five rows, and in the first row, which was all girls, and the second row, I think, was me and another boy; his name was--I know it was Leon--Leon Moore [ph.]; we were in the second set of rows.  So her thing was, "My girls are smarter than the boys." So, I think him and I made a pledge with each other, "We gonna get in the first row, that's what we gonna do."  And so we worked hard, and sure enough, I--he didn't quite make it, but I got into the first row; in fact, I got into the third seat in the first row.  So I enjoy--I enjoyed the challenge, anyway, so--and I--and at that point, you know, I was really beginning to like school and so I pretty well did pretty good in school.
Story_ID: 317245
Speaker 1: Were there any other activities in the neighborhood?  I mean, was church a big factor, or was there a boys club or something, or a recreation center or something like that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Church--let me tell you what; church was a big factor in, in our--in all of our lives, my brother [Orlando Womack] and sister, because like I told you, my father [Gilbert Womack] was a minister; when he moved up here [Darby Township, Pennsylvania] from the South, he found a church.  I think he was the assistant pastor in the church; he wasn't the pastor of the church, he was the assistant pastor, and it's Pentecostal, and they had church service on--let's see, it was Tuesdays and--let me get this right 'cause they--what they call--we had to be at church every day.
Speaker 1: Was Wednesday prayer meeting?  'Cause I know usually Wednesday --
Speaker 2: Yeah, Monday you had--it was Tuesday, Wednesday, Friday, and all day Sunday.  And you're right; and we had to--when my father said, "I'm ready," we better be ready--in front of him.  And so that became our way of life; you go to school, come home, do your homework, you might get a little chance to go play, but it wasn't--after you got our homework done, and if there was still some daylight out there, and you wasn't going to church that night, you could go out and, and play.  Now, at this--and I guess church has been a--it's been another part of my whole life 'cause my father insisted, you know, that--"You're going to church," you know, "And if you can't go to church, you ain't--you can't go out and play."  So that's it, you know.  Like you might say, "I don't feel good, I'm feeling--I don't feel, you know, well."  "Well, you go--can stay right in this house and you don't go nowhere."  But, I think basically we all got up every morning, and it wasn't like--this church was really like a family affair, basically, because it was like--I can remember the Fishers [ph.], the--oh, shoot, oh, shoot--the Rivers [ph.], the Johnsons [ph.], you know, and these were families, you know; they were the mainstay of the church.  'Cause, again, it wasn't a big, large congregation; I guess maybe, I don't know, sixty, seventy people--something like that, but it's community folks, you know--family--everybody knew each other, the kids knew each other, we all played together--this kind of thing; we grew up together, so--as far as community activities, yes, we played sports.  Now, like I say, being Pentecostal--'cause I finally end up getting a little job in a grocery store (unclear) stocks--you know, stock the shelves after school, something like this here, until the man decided I had to work on Sunday, and that was a no-no; couldn't work on Sunday.  So I had to give up my job 'cause I couldn't work on Sunday; he insisted that.  "No, you can tell the man you can work any day, but you can't work on Sunday."  I said, "Okay," so--so that was--wasn't a whole lot to do in the neighborhood.  I mean, you know, we had a basketball court and you go down there and play, had a baseball--I played baseball, played basketball, ran track; so I did all those things.
Story_ID: 317246
Speaker 1: What about high school?  Did you go--where did you end up going to high school?  I know you told me earlier (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I went to--yeah, Darby; I went to Darby High School [Darby Township High School, Glenolden, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Was that in the same building with the grade school [Darby Township School, Glenolden, Pennsylvania], or was that a different building--
Speaker 2: No, it was a different place.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In fact, you had to take a bus to go there; it was out of the neighborhood, it was in a different neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Was that like an integrated school then?
Speaker 2: It was an integrated school.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so what happened at Darby High School?  How did you like that?
Speaker 2: I enjoyed it.  Well, see, now--you know, the irony of the whole thing is--like I say, I played sports.  The irony of the thing is that I had these three schools that you could go to, and you know--and I was actually recruited by the basketball coach at Darby High School to come to Darby, even though they tried to get me to go Ridley Township [Ridley Township High School; Ridley High School, Folsom, Pennsylvania].  I, I was pretty good at basketball.  In fact, I think we won the state championship at Darby High.
Speaker 1: Now that sounds like it's--you must have been pretty good to be on the team (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, but you know, you got different levels, you know; you got the PIAA [Pennsylvania Interscholastic Athletic Association, Inc.]--what's it called?
Speaker 1: Oh, the different--for different size schools?
Speaker 2: --size schools, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, for that size school--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you all won the state championship.
Speaker 2: You're right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you weren't playing big school for Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]--
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: --Overbrook [Overbrook High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and all the--
Speaker 2: No, we weren't playing those schools, no, no--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --even though we scrimmaged a few of 'em, you know.  And we, we've done pretty good, so--had a pretty good basketball team.  Now, baseball--I think baseball is probably my most--my favorite sport.  I played baseball--in fact, even when I was in junior high school [Darby Township School, Glenolden, Pennsylvania], I was a pitcher.  Well, I played several positions; I pitch, I catch, play first base, third base; even played the outfield every once in a while.  I can't say I could hit nothing but (laughter)--but I, I--I held my own, I guess.  But in baseball--in junior high--when I was in junior high school, they had a, what did they call it, sandlot team, which is the older fellows.  Well, I guess I--they thought I was good enough that I could play with them, and I guess--but even before I got to high school, when I was still in junior high, they had a couple scouts were looking at me for the pros.  I remember the Phillies [Philadelphia Phillies], the St. Louis Cardinals, and the--you know, a few other teams.  But it didn't pan out that way, didn't quite make it; I messed around here and messed up my arm on that sandlot team, you know.  Actually, I was out there clowning around; I should have been being more serious, you know.  But they told me at--I don't know if you remember the pitcher who played for the Phillies, his name was Robin Roberts.
Speaker 1: That's right, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, they was telling me I--and I was--I had a curveball better than his, you know, so--and then when (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, you threw your arm out some kind of way, huh?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I threw it out; I never could--they, they told me--well, in fact, they told me I had to stay off of sports for about a year to try to get it to come back, but it never fully came back.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you could--you could throw, but not like that.
Speaker 2: Not like that, I could.  In fact, even when I played basketball--I was still playing basketball, and sometimes when I--my arm would lock up, even playing basketball, and I'd be in such pain, but I managed to get through it, though.  It was just disappointing and, you know, I was looking forward to this, you know.  I could envision myself playing professional baseball.
Story_ID: 317247
Speaker 1: Did you continue to make good grades in school?[AB1]
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  Well, you had to make good grades in school (laughter), you know; that was, that was not an option, you know.  And I guess my father [Gilbert Womack] who--he actually never finished high school, and that was one of the things he insisted on--that we were gonna go to school, and you were gonna learn, "I didn't have that opportunity, but you have an opportunity."  Now, I--I graduated--well, that's my high school.  So, I did pretty good in high school [Darby Township High School, Glenolden, Pennsylvania], I had good grades.  The fact--and let me just go back to my favorite teachers for a minute because I have a couple of favorite teachers.  I said Mrs. Smith was one of my favorites [at Darby Township School, Glenolden, Pennsylvania], and I had a--a male teacher; his name was James Norwood and we had--he was in charge of--oh, what do you call it?  Crafts or whatever it is, you know--wood shop--'cause I was one of those who said, "This ain't for me, wood shop; I can't do nothing with"--he encouraged me; he told me, "Oh, no, you, you're gonna do good."  And I remember making this little stool, a little three-legged stool, you know?  In fact--and they put it on display; people wanted to buy--actually wanted buy that little stool, and he was telling me, "See, you the guy come in here talking about you wasn't gonna do anything, and now look at you," you know, so--kind of excelled at that.  In fact, my [maternal] aunt [Carrie Patrick Irving] kept that stool for forever; in fact, when I grew up, I wanted that stool--she wouldn't give it to me (laughter), you know, which--yeah--but--so, so I had some enjoyable moments in high school and junior high school.  And then there was a--my baseball coach; his name was--call it Mr. Beckett [ph.] and he was--he's a character 'cause you know how you gotta condition yourself; you gotta get in shape, you gotta run and do all these things and, you know, I told him, "Hey, I'm playing baseball, I don't need to do all that running" (laughter), you know.  But like in physical ed [physical education], we had--in our physical ed, you had to go--I'd call it--we had to run about three or four miles, and what made it so bad--see, and then it's like I told you, the school itself was in a nice neighborhood where you had fields and stuff, so you could do some shortcuts so you wouldn't have to do all that running.  Well, see, he got smart, see; he get in his car and he ride around and check off names (laughter), and so--and I remember this one day, we decided, me and a couple of other fellows, decided we were gonna cut through the fields and make a shortcut; we don't run all the way around this, this--it wasn't no track or anything, you know, just a road, really.
Speaker 1: Like a cross-country course or something (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right; there you go.  So, he got in his--this day, he decided to get in his car and gonna check to see who did it, so when we didn't--when we saw we didn't make it and we had cut, he failed us for physical education, and so he was a baseball coach, too, and so I think it's--when he failed us on this day, we had the baseball game, and it was three of us, I guess three of his good ball players.  So we decided we wasn't playing, and so, you know, he--you get dismissed from class to go play your ball, so we decided we wasn't going; we stayed in class.  So he came and wanna know, "What's y'all's problem?"  Say, "If we can't pass physical education, we sure can't play no baseball," you know?  So, he got his little attitude and so he, he kind of convinced us that we was taking the wrong attitude.  And we, we rebelled for about twenty minutes, I guess (laughter), and so we went out and played ball that day, and so we got a passing mark in physical education so I say, "Okay," so--
Speaker 1: So it's tough negotiations (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Right.
Speaker 1: Now, see, all this is leading up to (laughter) what you do for a living.  So--
Speaker 2: I, I guess, basically, yeah, you're right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that is something.  You know, I mean, you looked at, you know, the unfairness of that--of course you all were wrong, but you thought the punishment was too much for the--
Speaker 2: That's what we said--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: "No, no, no." "Okay."  'Cause we had a pretty good baseball team, too.
Story_ID: 317248
Speaker 1: Did you have any black teachers on the--at your school?
Speaker 2: Oh, in the--well, they all were black, tell you the truth.
Speaker 1: At--in high school [Darby Township High School, Glenolden, Pennsylvania] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In junior high [Darby Township School, Glenolden, Pennsylvania].  No, in junior high, they all were black.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: In high school, only had--I don't think I had any black teachers in high school; they were all white.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I wondered, you know, because that seemed to be the pattern, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --even if the high school is integrated in that kind of a setting, it probably be all white teachers.
Speaker 2: All white teachers, yeah, yeah.  But they all were all black in junior high, and even elementary school [Darby Township School, Glenolden, Pennsylvania] they were all black, but in high school they were all white--that make a difference.  In fact, the classroom itself--well, Darby was in an integrated neighborhood, so I guess the classroom was about fifty-fifty in terms of black and white.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, did you--were you a honor student in high school?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Definitely, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you run for any class offices or anything like that?
Speaker 2: No, that wasn't me; I didn't run for no class office.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were in high school in the late '50s [1950s], I guess, right--from '53 [1953] to '57 [1957], I guess or somewhere around there (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, late '50s [1950s], late '50s [1950s], yeah.  In fact, I graduated in '59 [1959].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay.  Now, when you were on the verge of coming outta high school, what were your prospects?  Were you thinking that you would go to college?  Did you think you'd play--well, your baseball career kind of was--
Speaker 2: It was ruined--
Speaker 1: --ruined, yeah.
Speaker 2: --but I--football--I played football, too.  So I came out of college, I mean--came out of high school; I had a choice of going to Cheyney [Cheyney State College; Cheyney University of Pennsylvania, Cheyney, Pennsylvania] or Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida], at that point, to play football.  So I decided to go to Florida A&M, and I went down there and stayed, I guess, through the winter anyway, and went out for football and everything.  And I got sick, and I came home and I just didn't go back.
Speaker 1: So what happened to you?  What'd you get?
Speaker 2: I don't know what happened with it.  I just--I don't know what happened.  They never did determine what happened, but I was just--I was throwing up, I got sick, didn't have any energy, no strength or anything like that there.
Speaker 1: Sounds like it might be mononucleosis or something, but did they talk about that?
Speaker 2: I--they never did tell me what it was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I came home, and I decided to go in the service, so I went and volunteered for the [U.S.] Army.
Story_ID: 317249
Speaker 1: Now we're gonna go back to Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida] for a moment and just talk about--we were talking off-camera.  Bob Hayes was there, I think, when you were there--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: --the famous Olympian; he wasn't a famous Olympian then, but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: --he was close to going 'cause he ran in the '60 Olympics [sic. 1964 Summer Olympics, Tokyo, Japan], right?  Didn't he?
Speaker 2: He did, yeah.
Speaker 1: And you were there fall of '59 [1959], right? Yeah.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.  Yeah, I didn't, I didn't--
Speaker 1: Was he already famous at that point, or--?
Speaker 2: No, not to me anyway.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: He might have been famous to somebody else.  I mean, I was--well, like I said, I was there for practice, and time the football season got started I was out of there; I didn't start anyway, so I wasn't a starter or anything like that there.
Speaker 1: What position did you play?
Speaker 2: I played end--defensive end; and they also tried me out at guard, but I wasn't--I didn't think I weighed enough for being no guard or tackling, I said, "No, no," so I ended up playing end.  Now, see, in high school, you know, you can play them positions--guard and tackle and this kind of thing, but them boys got a little bit bigger in, in, in college there; I said, "No," but--so I just went out there, and I tried my best and when I got sick, I said, "It's enough for me. I'm outta here."  So I went into the service.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, well, what branch of the service did you go into?
Speaker 2: I went into the [U.S.] Army.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I guess the Army was--it was, it was good to me; I enjoyed--I guess you don't hear most people say they enjoyed service 'cause I ended up in Virginia--a place called Fort Lee, Virginia, and I guess I got into an outfit that--the company commander and--who was he?  (Unclear) the company commander and the--oh, I'm trying to think of the guy's name; he was a colonel, I know that.  He was head of the battalion whatever he was, and he loved sports, too, so if you played sports, you were in, and good, and so I played sports--particularly football and basketball.  In fact, we had a company A and a company B; I was in company A, and each company had they own basketball team, and in company A we weren't doing too good; company B had a better team, so they were--end up--they got to be in a playoff.  They had--they played in different companies around the area, right?  So they had a chance to, to play for some championship at the end of the playoffs, so what happened, they transferred me from company A to company B so I could be on the basketball team (laughter), and so--and then in football we had a pretty good--well, it was--they combined A and B to play football, so we had a pretty good football team; in fact, the captain of the company, he was even on the team and played, and I guess him and I used to go head--head-to-head, you know, so we'd have our fun days.
Story_ID: 317250
Speaker 1: So, I enjoyed it; I mean, I didn't do a whole lot of other stuff except--'cause we played sports you got to do, do a little less than what other folks did.  So I had a little, little job in the, in the--fact I was a little office clerk when I was in, in, in the [U.S. military] service.  But the irony of this whole thing is I missed home, so I used to go home more--quite often 'cause I, I mean be in Virginia and going back to--right--you know, right outside of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], it wasn't that long, but the point was you could only get a pass--you couldn't go more than a 150 miles or a hundred miles or whatever it was, but this was longer than that, so you wasn't supposed--you wasn't allowed to go that far, not on no three-day pass or whatever.  But anyway--
Speaker 2: But you managed to do it anyway (laughter)?
Speaker 1: I did it anyway.  And a couple of times I went home and I didn't get back in time (laughter).  In fact, one day I went and stayed seven whole days, so when I come back--well, the first time--let me tell you--the first time I went AWOL [Absent Without Official Leave]; I went--I was AWOL, that's what they said.  I was in Fort Dix, Virginia [sic. New Jersey].  So the first time I went AWOL, I came back; that's when you're a recruit, right?  And so they told me I had been re-assigned--I had been assigned down here in Fort Lee, Virginia.  So when I come back, all the people that I was in there with, they had left--they were gone, and so when I showed up, the old sergeant told me, said, you know, "Where you been?"  I told him, "I been home."  He say, "Well, get your stuff and get on outta here.  You been signed down to Virginia, right?"  So, I went on down there and stayed a little while and got comfortable and went home and got homesick again, so I stayed home again.  I went back, and I just fell in with everybody else; that ole sergeant saw me in the hallway and said, "Where in the so-and-so have you been?"  So I told him, "I went home."  He say, "Well, come in my office."  I went in his office, he asked me, he say, "Well, did you have a good time?"  I told him, "Yeah, I enjoyed myself, but it wasn't long enough."  He told me, "Get the so-and-so out my office," (laughter).  But anyway--he didn't do anything to me.  But now, the irony of the thing was there were other folks who went AWOL for a couple of days, they were sending them to the stockade or sending 'em off to the jailhouse, you know, but I guess--the only way I can say it is that me and the company commander had a pretty good relationship; in fact, when we stand inspection, he'd come by and we'd have a nice conversation and, and the thing that really got me was--this was in Fort Lee, Virginia--Fort Lee, Virginia.  One of the sergeants--in fact, the, the first sergeant, and the sergeant under him--I guess he was--I don't know what, what you call him now, but the first sergeant, he was from--big ole dude--he was a southerner, and the--I ain't gonna say the company sergeant--whatever he was--he was a staff sergeant, he was from Georgia, and he said one day, he says, "I'm a Georgia cracker, and I'm proud of it"--yeah.  And--now, I--you know, I believe in trying to do the right thing; I do believe in that, and I always try to--kept my stuff neat, clean and whatever, and try to, you know, be a good soldier, in a sense.  So this one day he says to me, "You know, you're not like the rest of them."  I said, "What do you mean?"  He says, "They ain't nothing but losers, dropouts," he said, "but you're different."  "I'm not--no different," you know.  But I guess I--you know, it went over well anyway, whatever it was.  So, they tried to get me to re-enlist; I wouldn't re-enlist though--no, I can't stand somebody telling me when to go and when to come--I'm outta here.  Fact, at one point, they offered me a promotion; I told 'em I didn't need no promotion.  "Give it to some--one of them career soldiers over there, I don't need it, I'm outta here.  I come to do my time and get outta here."  Because what happened was, I couldn't get a job because I'm classified 1-A, and at that point, you know, the Vietnam conflict [Vietnam War] was heating up here, and so they figure I'm gonna get drafted one way or the other, so ain't no sense in hiring you, so I said, "Well, I"--that's why I say I volunteered for the [U.S.] Army; I just went on in the Army to get it over with.
Story_ID: 317251
Speaker 1: Again, I guess I had a good opportunity to learn some, some things; I think it helped me in life itself because one of the things that happened while I was in the [U.S.] military was that Virginia Beach [Virginia] was--which was off-limits to black folks, well, this sergeant decided one day--this was like a Fourth of July weekend, and for those who were staying on base, he decided he would have transportation to take 'em to Virginia Beach.  Well, that meant all of us black folks couldn't go to Virginia Beach 'cause we weren't allowed on Virginia--couldn't go to Virginia Beach; but here was this military vehicle to take these other folks to Virginia Beach.  So I went around and organized all of the black folks, said, "Look, y'all gonna put y'all name on the list; we all going to Virginia Beach.  If this vehicle goes outta here today, we gone be on it."  So, sergeant got wind when people start signing up; I guess somebody told him this was some of my doings, so he called me in his office and wanna know what is this all about.  I say, "Well, Sarge, you made preparations for, for those to go to Virginia Beach but you didn't make any preparations for us 'cause you know we can't go to Virginia Beach; we not allowed on Virginia Beach.  So I'm saying if, if anybody goes, we all go."  So he cancelled the trip, so nobody went.  So that didn't make me a popular guy with the other folks, but it also made a popular guy with, with my folks, anyway, you know, so--and I guess--I want to call this guy--he was head of this whole battalion; he was a, a bird colonel, and he was from Pennsylvania, and when he found out I was from Pennsylvania, he--I mean we struck up a good relationship (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, this isn't a black man, is it?
Speaker 1: No, he's white.
Speaker 2: Okay, white?  Okay.
Speaker 1: He's a white man.  In fact, all of my sergeants were white, well, except for one or two; they were less of--they were lower down the ranks, though.  In fact, we had one guy who'd been in there for twenty years and he was nothing but a corporal, and the man wanna make me a corporal when I'd been in there less than a year, and I told him, "No, give it to somebody else."  But I guess a couple--you know how they go through these practices and you have these--you got standing on guard, on alert, go stand guard, whatever--play soldier, I call it.  I guess I wasn't for playing soldier, and so you got to put all this gear on, and I decide just one day, I wasn't putting all this stuff on.  So everybody walking around with their gear on so this one guy comes up to me, one sergeant, he comes to me and tell me get my gear and go stand guard up at the headquarters building, and I--my response was, "All these people in here with their gear on, why you asking me to go?  You get one of them."  And so he did, but--and then, so--then he and I went to the bathroom--well, he went to the bathroom; I figured, you know, I'll go, too.  So I told him, "Look, let's understand each other.  I'm here so I can get it over with; you're here for a career.  You do your career and let me do my time and get on outta here, okay?  I ain't here to play no soldier; I just wanna get it over with."  Well, he, he doing me a favor.  "I'm just trying to do you a favor."  "No, you ain't doing me no favor," you know?  So, we had a good understanding.
Story_ID: 317252
Speaker 1: Now, the one incident I will tell you about was the incident--while I was in there, we had details, so this one day, this sergeant told one guy to get four people to go on detail, so he picked four people and it just happened to be four black folks that he picked, and I was one of 'em.  And so I asked him, I say, "There's something wrong with this picture," you know.  "What's your problem?  You got--you must have a problem."  So he said, "What do you mean?" I say, "Just take a look.  Told you to pick four people, who did you pick?"  So he told me, "Well, if you got a problem, you go back, I'll get somebody."  I say, "No, you get four more people, that's what you do."  So he say--well, I say, "Or either that--," I say, "Well, you know, you and I can go back behind this shed and we can settle this one way or the other, but we four, we not going."  And so we didn't go.  So, he went and got him four other people.  "I don't want no trouble, I don't want--."  I ain't have nothing to give up anyway; I ain't--he got some stripes, I ain't got none, you know; so, so, we got along fine after that.  In fact, I got along fine the whole time I was in the [U.S. military] service.  Sometimes I wonder why I didn't stay in that career, but then again, I can't stand not being able to go when I wanna go, so.
Speaker 2: So, when did you come out?
Speaker 1: I came out in sixty--what was it--'61 [1961], '62 [1962]--'61 [1961] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.  Now, that's just as the Vietnam War was trying to heat up a little bit and--
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: --there were supposed to be advisors, I think, in--
Speaker 1: Something like that, yeah.
Speaker 2: --advisors to the South Vietnamese.
Speaker 1: Right.  I said, "Okay."
Speaker 2: So, did you know anybody that went over while you were in the service?  Did you know of any--
Speaker 1: In fact, I tried to go; I, I wanted to go.  In fact, I tried to trade places with a guy 'cause he was going; I don't remember his name now, but wouldn't let me do it.  We had the same MO [modus operandi] and everything else, but say, "Nope."
Story_ID: 317253
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, so what happened when you came out?
Speaker 2: I came out and got a job.  I went to work for Nabisco [National Biscuit Company; Nabisco Brands, Inc.].  And here again--Nabisco made--this was--they made cereal--puff wheat, puff rice, and I don't wanna--can't forget this--and it was predominantly black workforce with white supervisors, and I guess--again, I decided I had bad work habits, so I'd take off every now and then, but I--when I was there, I worked, though, no question about that.  So one day, the foreman told me, he says--he told me to come in his office.  He says, "I don't know why you here wasting your time, your skills and everything else; you don't even belong here, you know?  Why don't you go get you another job?"  Which was some good advice, and I took that advice and I went and got a job, went to work for Reynolds Aluminum--Reynolds Metal Company [Reynolds Metals Company; Reynolds Group Holdings].  But you know, the irony--and then I need--I need to tell this story here because the irony of this thing is I had applied for a job at Scott Paper Company--Scott Paper Company in Chester, Pennsylvania.  I went down there, and you had to take a test and everything else--went through the interview.  So the guy told me, he says, "You did well. We'll give you a call."  So I said, "Okay," so, you know, I wait a little while.  I went back, "I wonder where--where are we at on the--," you know, "I'm waiting to get a job."  He pulls out the piece of paper, he says, "You are number one on the list to be hired."  And I guess a couple more weeks go by, I still hadn't got no call to get hired.  I go back, I was still number one on the list to be hired (laughter).  So, I finally--I think I finally got the message, you know.  You're not going to hire me; let's forget it, you know.  So, I went--then I went to Reynolds.  Now, my brother [Orlando Womack] was already working for Reynolds; in fact, he was the one who told me, "You ought to come down here--come over here and apply for a job."  So I went over there and applied for a job.  In fact, I applied for--it was an office clerk job and had to take a--you know, you gotta take these test and to through a interview.  So, I didn't get hired for the office job, I got hired for another job.  The guy--one of the foremens came over, he told me, he told me that the personnel manager had asked him what did he think about a black guy working for him in the, in the, in the office, right?  And now he's, he's telling me this.  And he said, "I told him, look, it don't rub off, you know?"  And I said, "You know what?  I don't even want the job.  I mean that's the way I feel about it.  I don't want to work for you in that office."  But I end up taking the job anyway at Reynolds; I wouldn't take that job--I didn't want that job, I took another--they gave me another job.  I took that job, and this--and this--it was a unionized plant, and so I got involved with the union and everything else.
Story_ID: 317254
Speaker 1: I think the first year I was there [Reynolds Metals Company; Reynolds Group Holdings], I became a shop steward, and my brother [Orlando Womack] was a foreman there.  This--and being a shop steward, I guess, you know, you, you get some latitude to do certain things, but you (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now what--
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: Can you define what a shop steward is for those who're not, you know--
Speaker 1: Well, a shop steward is actually a, a first-line union official, basically, who handles people's complaints or grievances, you know, on a, I guess, on a first level--first-step level.
Speaker 2: Okay, so if I was in your shop and I, I had a complaint, I'd take it to you first--
Speaker 1: You'd take it to me first.
Speaker 2: --then you'd take it to the--
Speaker 1: Right.  And you--
Speaker 2: Is that same as a committeeman in a--
Speaker 1: It's like a committeeman, right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And it's like its--each area--each section might have a shop steward, so I'm a shop steward for this area, so if you got a problem over here in cable division--when it was in cable division, then you bring it to me and I will deal with it.  And if, if it went beyond dealing with the foreman, or the personnel man had to go to a higher step or go to arbitration, then somebody else would take it over; I wouldn't, I wouldn't--that wouldn't be my job.  So my job is just to do the initial investigation and handle it and try to resolve it at the first-step level with the foreman or the--or his--or person's immediate supervisor.  So I became a shop steward working on grievances and--which brought me into contact with the manager, the general manager, and a few other folks.  And then, in working in the plant, I then became involved because they had to go--they, they, they elected a, a negotiating committee--bring up each year--well, every three years there's--well, in this case it was every three years, they negotiated the contract, and I ran for negotiating committee and I got on, and I--fact, I got more votes than anybody else for the negotiating committee, but we only negotiated local issues, but see this was a national thing, and there's other people negotiating on a national level.  So--but we were able to take whatever our concerns to the national level 'cause these are what affects our plant.  Because when they negotiate--this was in the--I work for the steelworker--this was a steelwork--I didn't work for the steelworkers; this was a steelworkers union.
Speaker 2: But it was a--an aluminum plant?
Speaker 1: Aluminum plant.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And they represented people from--all I can say--I mean it wasn't just the Pennsylvania or the Chester [Pennsylvania] or, you know, plant itself, it was other plants involved in negotiations, so they had what they call a master agreement that would cover everybody, but they also had local issues that you had to deal with.
Story_ID: 317255
Speaker 1: Not only that, I became involved with what they call the--they called it--the AFL-CIO [American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations] has like small, I guess, offices scattered all over the--like, particularly in major cities, they have state federations and they have what we call central bodies--local central bodies.  For instance, major cities will have a, an off-shoot of the AFL-CIO, the national AFL will have an office, and then the state--there's a state office as well.  And I became secretary-treasurer of the Delaware County Central Labor Council, so here I am as shop steward [at Reynolds Metal Company; Reynolds Group Holdings] and also a treasurer of the Delaware County AFL-CIO, and then I got elected grievance committee.  So I guess I was filling my oats at that point, so I figured, why not run for president of the local union?  Now, I must tell you, the local union was 80 percent white, so when it came around to nominations for finding who was gonna run, I decided I wanted to run, so happened was they sent a small little delegation to come talk to me, and their thing was they would vote for me for anything except president; they were not ready for a black person to be president that they could--but I could be anything else I wanted to be.  In fact, they said, "You can even tell us who you want to be president, but you can't be--."  I can't be president (laughter).  I said, "This is a little bit too much for me."  But me--I say--I figured, well, y'all can vote for me for negotiating committee, to be the shop steward; in fact, you can even vote for me to be vice president, but not president.  So, what I decided to do was--I said, okay, I'll run for, for vice president and--I'm trying to figure--and I'll run for pre--I told 'em I'll run for vice president, and they said, "Well, that's fine; we don't have no problem with that."  And then I changed my mind and said, "I'm going for president."  So I ran and I--but I didn't win, though--I lost.
Speaker 2: Was the election fair, you think?
Speaker 1: I think it was fair, but see, the irony of the thing was, and what really got next to me was my own brothers wouldn't even go vote.  I mean it wasn't like--I mean when I think about it and--and the margin I lost by, if every--well let me say, if most of them had--well, some of 'em did--now don't get me wrong; now, some of 'em did vote, but some of 'em wouldn't even take the time to go vote, and that's what really annoyed me.  Some of 'em wouldn't even--they went--and I'm saying, "Why?"  All you had to do was--when you come into the plant you, you--the, the voting booth was right there at the plant gate, so you could come in and just cast your ballot.  They walked right on by and wouldn't even vote, you know.  And I said, "Don't come to me complaining later," you know?  "You didn't think enough to take, to take time to go vote?  I ain't got no time for you," you know?  So, anyway, I didn't win it.
Speaker 2: Do you think they were afraid to vote?
Speaker 1: No, they wasn't afraid, they were just complacent, I guess--that's the word I would (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They didn't really feel the value of it, I guess.
Speaker 1: No.  Well, they figured I wasn't gonna win anyway, so why waste my time, you know.  I said, "Okay."
Story_ID: 317256
Speaker 1: Then, the other thing was they wouldn't go to the union [American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations (AFL-CIO)] meetings, see, and that's the other irony thing.  Most of 'em wasn't even eligible to run for office because--I mean even I tried to get some to do it, because they didn't go to union meetings; you gotta go to so many union meetings to be able to--eligible to run.  Well, let me just give you another example of something that happened while I was in the local.  I think this one day I did not go to the union meeting, and in that meeting, they was trying to pass a resolution--I think Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]--this is--Martin Luther King had been assassinated--well, had, had been killed, and was--passed a resolution in honor of Dr. King, right?  And so they decided that if this issue is not important enough for us as blacks to be there to support something, they weren't gonna pass it, so they didn't pass it.  So I said, "Okay."  So, the next time around, our next meeting, I said, "We're going to this meeting next time; we gonna put this issue back on the floor and we gonna get it passed."  Now, I go around and talk to maybe twenty, twenty-five people to get 'em to go to the next meeting.  Sadly to say, maybe ten of 'em might have showed up--that's about it.  And so--but the fact is, they--we were--that we were represented there, and we put the resolution back up and they passed it.  Their statement was, "If y'all weren't concerned enough about it, wasn't concerned to be here, why should we do it?  So we wasn't gonna pass it," but they passed it this time.
Speaker 2: It's a political (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: --act.  I mean it's a--you know, sort of a--it's a thing they're doing for you more than anything else, not for themselves; they--'cause they probably don't--didn't really care.
Speaker 1: Right, right, they didn't care, you know.
Speaker 2: So--yeah, but the turnout thing--now, it's interesting.  Did they teach you any union organizing?  I mean when you're a steward, do they--are there workshops to teach you how to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) There are workshops, yes.
Speaker 2: --how to organize people?
Speaker 1: Right.  There're classes you can go to and everything and it's--I did go to a couple of classes.  In fact, they used to put--they have classes that to that, but when I first ran and got elected, no, I had not participated in a class, but--
Speaker 2: Okay. But after you got elected, they--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I did.
Speaker 2: --they had workshops, though.
Speaker 1: And plus, you have a representative who serves as the various locals and stuff, they come out and give you advice and everything and tell you what you can do and what you can't do and they, they assist you, really--give you a lot of help.
Speaker 2: Okay, 'cause this is an--this ad hoc.  I mean there's a way to organize people--
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, definitely.
Speaker 2: --and to build relationships with 'em and to get 'em to turn out.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And when you got 50 percent of the people you thought--who said they're gonna show up, that's pretty good.  I mean, you know, I'm just putting this in perspective.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but I was disappointed, though, because they didn't have no excuse for not being--you know, it, it's--even after--excuse me--even after that, they still would not go to the union meetings; I mean we tried all kind of gimmicks to get folks to come to union meetings--give 'em their union dues back.  If you come to a union meeting, you get your union dues back, or we have pizza parties or pizza and beer, you know, something or something to get--still, you know, you still get this low turnout.  See, my thing was, if we could get twenty, twenty-five of us to go to a meeting, we can run the meeting 'cause that's all--they're not gonna have but about seventeen or eighteen people there; all we need do is get twenty of us go there and we run it, we take it over.
Story_ID: 317257
Speaker 1: I was asking you about like how to agitate people to vote, and what some of those dynamics are in terms of participation in the union [American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations (AFL-CIO)] and--or anything else.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, we try a whole lot of things to try to get people to participate in the political process, and one of the things we do is, you know, we do these little miniature rallies and we go by and tell 'em what these issues--how it's gonna affect them, especially when there's an issue on the table that's gonna really hit their pocketbooks, so to speak.  I think that's the only thing--way to get their attention, and I guess I can give you a, a good example of that--I guess is the, the tax--the--what's that--car tax they had in Virginia--which kind of got people a little--all upset.  I don't remember all--I don't live in Virginia, so I--I mean--but I, I--but I knew about it, and that was a, an issue for a lot of folks--how to repeal this car tax that was on us.
Speaker 1: It was a car tax?  See, I'm not from here either, so what was it (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. It was some kind of tax on cars.
Speaker 1: So, if you had a car, you had to pay extra tax every year?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Almost like a property tax or something?
Speaker 2: Like a property tax, you know.  They were getting a little irritated with that tax 'cause it was--I understand it was pretty substantial.  But, you know--and I--it's--and I go back to what we were saying earlier (unclear); when you take the issue of some candidates, some candidates have the ability to inspire folks to get them energized enough that they will go out and encourage other folks to go out, and I think the candidate, whoever the candidate, has a lot to do with what the turnout is and plus, I think it also has a lot to do in terms of who their opponent is as well, or how they vision this here.  I--and you, and you mentioned how Washington [Harold Washington]--what--you know, I look at a Wilson Goode [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. W. Wilson Goode, Sr.], too, out of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], 'cause see, some people saying it was like a religious revival, so to speak--just got folks energized.
Speaker 1: You know, the Coleman Young election in Detroit [Michigan] was like that (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right--in Detroit, right; it's those kind of--and I, I don't know why it's gotta be, you know, like little ole incidents, you know, whether we--why we can't keep this spirit all the time, but we don't; that just takes something or someone to motivate us.  We can try all kind of gimmicks, but I think it has a lot to do with the candidate him or herself.
Story_ID: 317258
Speaker 1: I remember when Hubert Humphrey was running for, for, for president and I was working his campaign and, and trying to get folks to go out and vote for him, and I listened to some of the answers that people gave me why they wasn't gonna go vote.  It becomes an issue of what the candidate looks like, how he sounds, you know, this kind of thing, you know.  I'm listening--what--this man's gonna--look what he has already done; he's gonna even do more if he get to be president.  But you couldn't convince them; they couldn't get past--he wasn't charismatic enough, you know what I mean?  He spoke with this certain, you know--
Speaker 2: That pleased as punch, you know, kind of--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, right, yeah, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I remember how they used to imitate him.
Speaker 1: And so it just--people just--for those reasons they wouldn't go vote.  And I'm saying, how you judge a person based on, you know, these--what they call character flaws, I guess, in a sense.  But, you know, when you take a person like a John F. Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] comes along, you know what I mean--very chris- charismatic, whatever--
Speaker 2: He had a full head of hair.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right, yeah (laughter), you know.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Hubert Humphrey was bald.  Adlai Stevenson [Adlai Stevenson II] was--but it was Stevenson against Eisenhower [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower]; they were both bald.
Speaker 1: Both bald, right, so hey.
Speaker 2: But they voted for the tallest bald guy, I guess--I don't know.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) There you go. Maybe that's what it is.  But, you know, I just don't know what it is; I wish somebody could find the answer to it; maybe we can get our folks mobilized a little bit more so here.  But you're right.  And then the other thing is you got to hope and pray that the weather's gonna be nice that day--ain't gonna be too hot and ain't gonna be too cold, and let--and don't let it be raining, now.  But I don't know; and like I said earlier, if sacrifice been made for us to go out here and vote (unclear), to see how we been treated over the years, and not have enough energy or get-up-and-go to go out and cast that vote.  I mean it ain't like you gotta stand in no long lines all the time, but I mean that might happen once in a while, but I look in terms of what happened, and when Nelson Mandela ran in South Africa.  I mean those folks were ready for this here; I mean to see the lines that were formed.  I mean these folks stood out there in that hot sun for hours just to vote for this man, and we can't stand in line--and, and most times it's inside a building and we got air-conditioning going, and they can't do that.  So, I mean it just tell you it's--it's the old saying is, ain't no difference in these candidates, you know?  But there is a difference.  And that's the reason what people say--and what--and, and a classical example right now is, we're in a battle right now with the, the justices, and there might be an opportunity for a [U.S.] Supreme Court justice.  Would you rather have a John Kerry support a Supreme Court justice, or George Bush [President George Walker Bush] support a Supreme Court justice?  I think these the kind of things people got to look at, and hopefully we will get to that point soon, but we ain't there yet.
Story_ID: 317259
Speaker 1: Yeah, you think maybe people feel--black people represent, in this country, probably the poorest constituency in terms of money, I think, other than American Indians [Native Americans] maybe, and I think they've taken a leap up since they've got these casinos (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Casinos, yeah.
Speaker 1: But I think it's that people think they have no stake in the status quo, you know--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --in a sense, but they, they don't partic- so they don't participate.  You know, when you look at the Republicans, their constituency are the people that have jobs and--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --have a church to go to, and have--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --other things that they have a stake in, you know.  Maybe they--
Speaker 2: That's a good way to look at it because I feel like they, they, they protecting something; they wanna see who, you know, who's gonna give them the best deal.  For instance, you make certain commitments, there's a certain philosophy with different parties, you know what I mean, so--they say the Republican Party's basically for the affluent more so than anybody else; the Republic Party is for those who are less affluent--I mean Democratic Party is for those less affluent, so--and the less affluent is the ones who really have a problem with going voting 'cause they feel like don't have anything to go vote for, you know, so I think you're right, you know.  Okay.
Speaker 1: So, in the union [American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations (AFL-CIO)]--I mean--so you tried everything to try to cut the issues so they'd understand what was at stake if they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.  That's the one thing we try to do is--these are the issues.  Right now we think--like if it's social security, you know what I mean?  Gotta protect your social security, and if it's in terms of your, your pension, you know, I mean, I mean what's going on now, you know?  So there are issues that really will affect the less affluent more so than the affluent, and these are things we try to drive home to 'em, you know, what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you think now that the history of black folks in terms of unions has been like a--one of discrimination as well from--you know, until, you know, I guess maybe the late '20s [1920s] and--well, the '30s [1930s], people--
Speaker 2: No, you can come on up some more.
Speaker 1: --even--come up some more.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: 'Cause the unions even discriminated against black people; they wouldn't let 'em join--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --and so if you couldn't get in the union, you couldn't have the job, and--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --is there--do you think there's maybe a certain amount of resentment towards the whole structure of the union as being just another arm of racism?
Speaker 2: For some people yes, that's true.  And let me--I--let me just step back for, for a minute 'cause you're right.  My father [Gilbert Womack], who wanted to become a--I guess a bricklayer, could not get into the bricklayers union--wouldn't--couldn't--wouldn't, wouldn't give him entry into it because he happened to be black--couldn't get into it.  So, even though he ended up becoming--doing a--getting a--admitted to the labors union, but he couldn't get in the bricklayers union.
Speaker 1: Now that's really where substantially more money was.
Speaker 2: Right, you know.  But, I mean I look at it in terms of--there is--and I, and I'm like--I want--don't wanna mislead anybody; I think there is still discrimination--not just in society by itself, but even in some, some of our unions there is discrimination because if you look at the heads of most of our unions, it's still white males basically running things.  Now, we're gaining some--we're, we're gaining entrance into a lot of these positions within these unions, there's no question about that; we're making inroads, but it's been a--it's been a battle all the while--all along.
Story_ID: 317260
Speaker 1: The labor movement, I think, has been probably the most democratic institution in America, even in terms of the church, because I think a lot of our churches still have these bastions of discrimination, and that's not to say there's not pockets of discrimination within the labor movement, you know, there are these pockets; I think we're working to get rid of those pockets as well.  I mean I see the leadership today as a lot more aggressive, a lot more democratic, and they're trying to make sure that they're doing the right thing.  The question becomes is how do you get more people in leadership or decision-making capacities; this is what we've been working--trying to make sure we can enhance those positions. Because it's like in football: we know there are certain positions in football that commands more respect and more money.  If you're a quarterback, if you're a wide receiver, even a, a guard's position; and then there are certain positions that leads to coaching positions.  So what we're saying, in the labor movement, there are still these positions that will lead to other high-up positions.  If you become administrative assistant to the president, which gives you a leg up on becoming elected officer or something like this here.  So, our thing is there are key positions that we need to get into--slots we need to get into so that we can have the opportunity to get the experience others get because what they always--the underlying thing is: do you have the experience and the know-how?  And how do you get that experience?  You got to get in certain jobs, certain position to get that experience.  So that's one of the things we're pushing, saying, you know--having a mentor and all this is great, but you've got to be able, be able to push your way into that arena where you can get into those positions where it commands the fact that you can move up to, up to different positions; and we've been able to do that in some instances.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's just not enough.
Speaker 2: Now, what you were saying earlier before I think we changed tape, was that only seventeen, eighteen white people actually show up for certain meetings, and if the black folks (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 2: --showed up, they would actually run the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Run, the--yeah.
Speaker 2: --but it does--it says something about the white participation, too, though (unclear) their members--yeah.
Speaker 1: Oh, no, oh--totally.  One of the things about union meetings, if it ain't contract negotiation time, you don't get no large turnout.  Now, when the--when it's time for your contract to be up and you're trying to negotiate a contract and you got ratification?  Oh, they will come out then. But regular meetings?  There's no hot item on the agenda?  They will not come out.  And this is what I try to tell our folks: look, we can run this local; all we got to do is get our act together and we come out in these meetings, we got the votes--we do what we wanna do.  But it's--they don't see it, they--couldn't get 'em to see it that way, you know, hard as we tried.  But no, in any union meeting, if you got thirty-five, forty people, that's considered a large gathering.
Story_ID: 317261
Speaker 1: Let's go back to your, you know, positions and so--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You're at Reynolds [Reynolds Metals Company; Reynolds Group Holdings] aluminum steelworkers union, right? And you--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you went from--you were a shop steward, and you became a secretary-treasurer, and--
Speaker 2: Of the Delaware County AFL-CIO [American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Then you were elected to the negotiating committee, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.  Let me say now, these are in--within the union; these are not union-paid--paying positions.  Like paying job is what--my job at Reynolds, I was a machine operator, and in that--shop steward and that machine operator now, what happens is if you get called to go represent somebody then, you know, you can--somebody else can go do your job for you.  Now, as I told you earlier, my brother [Orlando Womack] was a foreman at Reynolds, and here I am a machine operator.  Now, if someone filed, or had a complaint against my brother, that's when--that was one complaint I would not deal with, so I--and I would tell anybody that; I will not deal with any complaint or grievance that involves my brother--that I won't do, but any--somebody else have to handle that because I don't want nobody saying, because it's my brother, I didn't push hard enough or, or it felt like I was a little lax in representing them, so I felt it best that I not represent against my brother.  Now, I will also tell you that by the fact that--and I think that most people would call on me; they wanted to make--regardless what part of the plant they was in, even though they had they own shop steward, they wanted me to come represent 'em.  Now, I was also on the grievance committee; in fact, I was chairman of the grievance committee--became chairman of the grievance committee.  Now, as chairman of the grievance committee, you get to sit in on all the grievances, and you get to make, or recommend, which grievances will go to arbitration, and you get to sit in on the arbitration hearings as well.  Now, as chairman of the grievance committee, and as a shop steward, we had a few incidents at this plant.  In fact, one incident--what was it?  Here again, they had the practice of lowering the flag half-mast when there was someone that passed, or some incident had taken place.  Well, in this instance, when Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated, the flag didn't go half-mast, and me and--I said, "Okay, wait a minute, hold it; you can't have two standards here, so I'm insisting that the flag come down half-mast."
Story_ID: 317262
Speaker 1: So this is me and the personnel manager [at Reynolds Metals Company; Reynolds Group Holdings].  But, now, having said that, even though the personnel manager and the general manager, who said to me was, "You're right, there's no reason for this flag not to be flown half--," this was the, the general manager, this was the guy who's over everything.  So, he and I had a good relationship; in fact, he offered me a job--another job.  And the irony of the thing was, he says to me, "You can write your own figure of what you think you ought to be paid; you tell me."  I said, "First of all, I don't want the job, so there ain't no use of me writing a figure."  He bugged me for about a whole month to become one of his managers.  In fact, he even offered me the job of assistant personnel manager 'cause he said (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So you had to flip the script completely, then, you know (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I said, "No, thank you."  And the reason for that was, I told him, "Look, I can't defend your policies; I can't, I can't, because I don't agree with the way you treat your workers; I don't agree with this."  I said, "I don't--the way you treat some of your managers; I don't agree with that either."  I be- you know, I am--and I don't know how I survived, I really don't.  I have this thing about authority, I really do, of somebody telling me when I can do something and when I can't do something.  And how I survived to last this long, I don't know, but I will say this, I turned that job down.  In fact, he even off--then offered me a job to come down to Richmond [Virginia], in the headquarters office, and I told him, "No, thank you."  It's something about just dealing with people, or defending people; I can't defend 'em over there working for him.
Speaker 2: So, you couldn't defend him to the people, but (laughter)--
Speaker 1: No, no, no, no, no.
Speaker 2: --but it had to be the other way around--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --because it's--that's what your life had been to this point?
Speaker 1: Right.  So, I just--I turned it down.  Even though my brother [Orlando Womack] was foreman, manager--in fact, he became a general manager with a big ole plant down in Arkansas.  I said, "No, not me; can't do it."  And my brother and I, we had our little differences, you know, here and there, so we got to the point where we didn't talk--you didn't talk no work, no union [American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations (AFL-CIO)] stuff 'cause see, he was one a those people who thought unions protect worthless or shiftless people who don't wanna work, but then my thing, no, it protects workers from management who wanna do arbitrary things, you know.  So, they might be caught up in this thing--some folks who get some protection.  And I'll just give you a good example.  There's one guy that I--that--in the plant who always late, always late, and they decided they were gonna fire him, and his excuse was--we had this--we had the grievance meeting and brought him in--"You know, look, we keep telling you you can't keep coming in here late; we gonna fire you."  He said, "Well, I'll tell you what."  He said, "Don't ever buy a $2.99 alarm clock 'cause it don't work," yeah.  He said, "That's why I'm late."  And so--I mean--so they let him explain his story and they decided they wasn't gonna fire him.  I said--so I'm saying, "That's fine with me."  So, he got reprieved.  Sure enough, he didn't do no better; he still come in late, and they let him slide for a little while.  So, what happened was, he negotiated his way outta the plant.  He told 'em what it would take for him to leave and they gave it to him.  He tell 'em, "Y'all give me six weeks' pay and I'll be out your hair."  And they decided to give him six weeks' pay and he was gone.  But now, here's the strange--well, it wasn't (unclear); I shouldn't say a strange character.  He had his way of doing things; he was, he was, he was an artist--he made it clear, "I'm an artist," you know.  "I'm doing this part-time."  Well, if you want--if you a artist, go enjoy your art.  Now, he was a good artist, no question about it; I seen some of his work, but he just, just wasn't for coming to work on time, that's all.  And what made it so bad, him and my brother got into it one day.  I told him, "Don't call me."  But wasn't nobody else there, so I say, "Okay, we'll resolve this later.  You just take whatever it needs to be done now, and we'll deal with it later 'cause I'm not gonna go there and argue with my brother over this, I'm not gonna do that."  So, we did that, so--no.
Story_ID: 317263
Speaker 1: So, I guess I'm saying all that to say this here--it's not that I got something against managers or whatever, I'm just not a manager even though, as I moved up the ladder, I became the head of the Civil Rights Department here at the AFL-CIO [American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations] where I had to manage people.  But, in managing people, I think there's a way to manage people and a way to treat people.  I know everybody has their management styles, and there some styles even around here, that I don't agree with, but it's just not my style.  I believe in giving people a free rein; long as you do your job, that's fine.  I'll tell you what it is I need, and if you got a problem, just come to me; otherwise, I expect you to do what you need to do--(unclear)--it's simple as that.  But, in terms of leaving Reynolds [Reynolds Metals Company; Reynolds Group Holdings], I left Reynolds.  I went to work for the Appalachian Council [AFL-CIO Appalachian Council], which is a--it's a funded--government-funded program to assist and help people find jobs.  And I also went to work for the Job Corps; I worked for the Job Corps for, for a little while; this was to help young folks who were having problem on the outside who was maybe high school or drop-outs 'cause you had to be at least sixteen years old to get into the Job Corps--or who was having family problems or needed to get away, you know, and may--rather than have 'em incarcerated, maybe the Job Corps would help 'em.  So, I became a Job Corps recruiter in a sense, working with young folks, working with schools (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) About what year is this?
Speaker 1: This was in--not sure (unclear) stuff on a piece of paper--
Speaker 2: Job Corps--Job Corps didn't--was started up in, I guess, the Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] administration was '64 [1964], '65 [1965], I guess?
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause this was around about '66 [1966], '67 [1967].
Speaker 2: Sixty-six [1966], '67 [1967]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: 'Cause it's '68 [1968], what happened?  Sixty-eight [1968], I went to--I left the Job Corps and went to work as a job development--working for what I call HRDI, Human Resources Development Institute [Working for America Institute], which is a part of the AFL-CIO.
Story_ID: 317264
Speaker 1: There's a HRDI [Human Resources Development Institute; Working for America Institute] in Chicago [Illinois] now so (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, they have one here, right.  So--and I guess what I liked about this was the fact that here again, you was helping people who really needed help--youngsters.  And I, and, and I guess I'm--always liked working with youngsters anyway, so we'd go meet with the families and talk to 'em about what the benefits of Job Corps was, you know, whether it was something or other they were really interested in, and then to follow up and make sure they were doing okay once they got there, this kind of thing.  So, I did that for about two years, and then I worked for the Appalachian Council [AFL-CIO Appalachian Council] itself which, which was dealing with--again--with companies in terms of finding jobs or developing the jobs for--call it economically disadvantaged individuals.  We would pay or, or provide the stipend to companies to hire individuals, you know, who, on they own, wasn't gonna get the job, but with some assistance and help, help pay for some of their salaries, go out and train and learn the job.
Speaker 1: Now, where was the Appalachian Council at? I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I worked in Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: In Pennsylvania?
Speaker 2: In fact, I had the--what I call the eastern part of Pennsylvania--Harrisburg [Pennsylvania]; York, Pennsylvania; Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]; Chester [Pennsylvania], you know--that area, and so--done, done that for a little while.
Speaker 1: So, how long did you do--I mean when did you stop that, I mean, move away from that one?
Speaker 2: Let me see--it was probably in '71 [1971] or '2 [1972].  Must have been '71 [1971] 'cause I came--that's when I came to work for the AFL-CIO [American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations] and the--as the assistant director in, in the HRDI where I was responsible for the--for managing the field.  We had offices in what?  We had about fifty-some office--fifty-some--I'm sorry, fifty-some offices (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Around the United States, or--
Speaker 2: Around the United States.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 317265
Speaker 1: Now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I was the field director [for the American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations (AFL-CIO) Human Resources Development Institute; Working for America Institute], responsible for assisting, or working with 'em anyway.  And then I became the assistant--what I was--I was a field director--
Speaker 1: This is still in Pennsylvania?
Speaker 2: No, this--I moved to Washington [D.C.] then.
Speaker 1: Moved to Washington?
Speaker 2: Yeah, this was in '71 [1971] I moved to Washington; well, the job was in Washington.
Speaker 1: Now, in '71 [1971], A. Philip Randolph was still around.  Did you get a chance to meet A. Philip Randolph?
Speaker 2: I never--you know what?  I really never got to meet A. Philip Randolph.  And when I say meet him, I mean I--our paths crossed but we never--I just never actually sat down and really had--just say meet him, no--in a crowd--
Speaker 1: I mean, so, you never had a conversation with him.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I guess between him and Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], I think that was my two biggest disappointments that I really never really got to meet them, you know, really.  But--
Speaker 1: Were any of the other people from the old days around when you showed up that, you know, could talk about, you know, some of their early black struggles with the unions and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Well, see, I don't know how popular--like a guy named Fred O'Neal [Frederick O'Neal], who was a--went to act as an artist of America (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, Fred O'Neal, of Southern--Free Southern Theater?  Is that the O'Neal?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well he played in a couple of movies--
Speaker 1: No, that was John O'Neal.  Free Southern Theater--
Speaker 2: That was--yeah, that was--
Speaker 1: Was he related to John O'Neal?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I really don't know, but Fred O'Neal was the guy who played in some of them 'Tarzan' movies, you know, 'cause I don't think--at that point we hadn't quite arrived in Hollywood yet, and not in those main roles--this kind of thing.  Now, let me see, what's his name?  Dellums [C. L. Dellums] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Ron Dellums [HistoryMaker Ronald Dellums]?
Speaker 2: Ron Dellums--I think he was his uncle--it's Ron Dellums' uncle.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, he with the Sleeping Car Porters [Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters].  So, I did get to meet him, even though I didn't get to meet Randolph.
Story_ID: 317266
Speaker 1: Now, Bill Pollard [William E. Pollard] was one of those guy who was a porter [Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters], but he was also a civil rights director.  In fact, he's the guy who hired me into the Civil Rights Department [of the American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations (AFL-CIO)].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  I worked with Bill.
Speaker 1: You worked with Bill?  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, you know, there's a direct relationship between civil rights and social change and union organizing, you know, despite--you know, we--we mentioned some of the discrimination as the union--that some of the unions practice, but also when people got involved in the union, they often found a tool, you know, for social change, and John Lewis [John L. Lewis] was a mentor to Saul Alinsky, for instance, and then--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --you know, a lot of the civil rights--black civil rights workers, you know, had a union kind of connection, you know, in one way or another, you know, so--now, during the '60s [1960s], I mean was there much interaction between the unions and the Civil Rights Movement that you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah--oh, definitely.  In fact, I would say that during the move for the Civil Rights Act of 1964, labor would play an integral role in that, even though the AFL-CIO itself was not in the picture.  But a lot of our affiliates, particularly UAW, United Auto Workers [United Automobile, Aerospace and Agricultural Implement Workers of America], were a major player in the civil rights struggle.  I mean they were able to get people cars, you know what I mean, and drivers--this kind of thing.  So--and money, I mean in terms of money--putting up money for people.
Speaker 2: Did you--were you at the Democratic National Convention [Atlantic City, New Jersey] in '64 [1964] when--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that--I mean that was a big--that's when the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party showed up--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and I think one of their chief supporters who was supposed to testify on their behalf before the Democratic National Committee was Joseph Rauh [Joseph L. Rauh, Jr.] on a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, Joe Rauh, yeah, yeah, right.
Speaker 2: --who's a lawyer of the AFLC--I mean the United Auto Workers, right?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: That's George Meany?  What is that?  Is that Meany?  No, no, he was not the auto workers.  Who was the auto workers union--
Speaker 1: Walter Reuther.
Speaker 2: Walter Reuther, right--Walter Reuther, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you know, he is highly thought of in the civil rights struggle, you know.  In fact, I would say even George Meany with the Title VII of Civil Rights Act [Civil Rights Act of 1964]?  He insisted now that, that there'd be a Title VII, and the reason for his rationale for that was the fact is that the labor movement needed a force of law to help it do the right thing; so if there's gonna be employment discrimination, you know, our unions need to be brought into line, too, in that regard.  So he fought hard for that piece of legislation.  In fact, he--as the story goes, he met with Lyndon Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson]; now, I think he was out of the country and called back, and Lane Kirkland then, who was the secretary-treasurer--and had Lane to go and deliver this message up there to testify on behalf of the AFL-CIO that we were in support of a strong civil rights act, even with our own shortcomings, you know, so--so, no, labor movement over, over the years, I think, even though it had its discrimination, it was still a force in the civil rights struggle to get things through, because if you go back to the--before the Civil Rights Act, we had white and black local unions; we had to get those unions merged.  The guy who was my predecessor in the Civil Rights Department was involved in a lot of--lot of those mergers of these black and white local unions; I came in on the tip end of it, to be honest with you, so it was only a few out there that had to be dealt with.
Speaker 2: Who was your predecessor again?
Speaker 1: Guy name Bill Pollard.
Speaker 2: Bill Pollard, okay.  So, yeah, okay, the person you're mentioning before--all right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And where did--did he come out of the--was he black or was he (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He came out--yeah, he came out of--he was--he came out--he was a dining car waiter, you know, on the trains?  Yeah--so he could tell you about discrimination.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So he was a dining car waiter, which is different from a Pullman porter, but they--were they all in the same unit?
Speaker 1: Same, yeah, same--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 317267
Speaker 1: We've got you, I guess, in the late '60s [1960s] now?  I guess (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, early '60s [1960s], anyway.
Speaker 1: With the AFL--well, late '60s [1960s] now, AFL-CIO [American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations], right?
Speaker 2: Right--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --'cause I came to work for--well, actually, I came to work for the AFL-CIO in '71 [1971]; I wanna say '71 [1971], '71 [1971].
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is '71 [1971].
Speaker 2: And then--that was with my work with the Human Resources Development Institute [HRDI; Working for America Institute] in '71 [1971], and I left in '77 [1977], and I went to work in the Civil Rights Department of the AFL-CIO; that's the guy Bill Pollard [William E. Pollard] who came and asked me to come work for, for him in the Civil Rights Department.
Speaker 1: Okay, so let me go back and maybe we can straighten out the chronology (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: In '71 [1971], you were working for--with AFL-CIO as the assistant director which--HRDI?  Is that true?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And then in '77 [1977]--
Speaker 2: Seventy-seven [1977]--
Speaker 1: --you joined the Civil Rights Department of the AFL-CIO?
Speaker 2: --of the AFL-CIO.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, '77 [1977] was--you know, the Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] administration was in and things were a little bit better for--
Speaker 2: Yes, it was.
Speaker 1: --workers, yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I thought it was a good year, anyway.  We was able to do some--a lot of things under the Carter administration; it didn't last long enough, that's all, I think; he was a one-term president.
Speaker 1: Now, after Jimmy Carter, I mean, I mean--and then a lot of--labor suffered a lot of blows under the Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] administration, it seems.
Speaker 2: Yes, we did.
Speaker 1: The Air Traffic Controllers [Professional Air Traffic Controllers Organization (PATCO)], that was--that strike was really a big--he just broke that union, you know--didn't he?  I guess he broke--
Speaker 2: Yeah, because I think what happens, in my opinion, I think labor went to sleep on that one.  First of all, the Air Traffic Controllers really supported Ronald Reagan in his election, and they had--or at least from my impression, they felt like Ronald Reagan was gonna support them in this strike, so they was counting on his support which they didn't get; in fact, he went just the opposite way, and what happened was I think a lot of unions--and this is my perception of what happened--a lot of unions felt like, well, they get what they deserve; they supported him, so let them go on out there and defend themselves, I guess, and then what really happened is when they did that, it didn't just affect the Air Traffic Controllers, it affected the whole labor movement because now there's this push back now; people feel comfortable now.  I mean he made it easy now for employers and what--everybody else to, to give all this big--great big push back to unions and, and has continued since then.  And I think that the fact was that the Air Traffic Controllers felt so comfortable with Reagan, and I think it lowered them to sleep and a false notion that, you know, that they could do this and get his--gain his support, and it just didn't happen that way.
Story_ID: 317268
Speaker 1: I know I can't remember any time when a union looked so weak as the Air Traffic Controllers [Professional Air Traffic Controllers Organization (PATCO)] looked in that situation and--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --'cause we were just coming out of an era where UAW [United Auto Workers; United Automobile, Aerospace and Agricultural Implement Workers of America] was strong, and the Teamsters [International Brotherhood of Teamsters], everybody--you know, a strike really meant something--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and the employees were getting a lot of benefits in the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s] and earlier '70s [1970s] that they don't get now; they don't get the same benefits anymore.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Retirements--my father is still living off of General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company] retirement, you know--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --I mean from United Auto Workers.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: He's eighty-seven, he's been retired quite a while now; gets good benefits, but not the same (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, not the same anymore.  I mean, the sad thing is when you see people who worked all their lives and think they have a pension, and get there and there is no pension, you know what I mean.  I just look at what's been happening lately, you know; these--like the airline industry, you know what I mean?  They get in debt, and they take the pension money and pay their debt off, and the workers are left without--with nothing, you know.  The Enron [Enron Corporation] situation--it's a whole lot of--you know, and it's--I don't know--how do you justify that?  How do courts--I don't understand how the courts can go along with that kind of stuff, I really don't.
Speaker 1: I mean you think that--I mean I'm just surprised at the lack of agitation on the part of--I know--we know how we got unions--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, right. You're right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) because of agitation.  Workers got out in the street and they, they walked off the job; they applied pressure.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But is it, is it--nowadays, is it impossible to apply pressure anymore?  I mean are there too many options for an employer?
Speaker 2: Laws need to be updated for, for number one, because I think what is happening now, employers have found out that they can get away with a lot of stuff that before they couldn't get away with.  The courts wouldn't--sometimes, the courts wouldn't allow 'em to do some of the stuff they're doing now.  I think that under the Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] administration and even under the first Bush [President George Herbert Walker Bush] administration, and even under this present administration [President George Walker Bush], they're appointing judges that have no regard or no respect for worker rights.  I mean, it's, it's--they're so conservative and slanted the other way that unions and people--for instance, it was a time if you were a unionized worker and you went on strike, employer could not replace you; you ha--he had to bring you back.  Now, the courts have ruled he don't have to replace you; he can get rid of--he can replace you, you know.  You, you go on strike now, you may not have a job, and that's a new phenomenon now, you know?  And that's why some (unclear) reluctance of people to go on strike.  Now, you can try to negotiate your way back, but that's up to the discretion of the employer if he wanna negotiate bringing all these workers back.  If he go out and find replacements, he might decide he wanna keep the replacements, and you don't have a job.
Story_ID: 317269
Speaker 1: As I said, we know how we got unions.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I mean, there were no laws in favor of the workers--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --before.  I mean, the people got what they wanted because they actually agitated and struck, and voted in a block for certain candidates, and politicians knew they had a price to pay if they didn't support labor (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: I mean, it doesn't seem to be that way these days, and I think it's just 'cause it's lack of, I guess, consciousness on the part of the workers, I guess, you'd have to think.
Speaker 2: Well, I think it's a little bit of both.  One, the union membership has declined to a large degree--declined in a sense that we don't represent the percentage of workers we used to represent.  I mean, people like to go back and point out like in the 1930s and the '40s [1940s] we were like--we represented like 35 percent of the workforce.  Today, we probably oper--represent probably 11 [percent], 12 percent of the workforce, so that's a big drop-off.  Now, that's if you looked in terms of numbers; I think the numbers--the number of workers we represent is probably the same number of workers, but the percentage--but in terms of percentage of the total workforce, which has grown, we haven't been able to keep up in that regard.  And that's for--I think it's for a number of reasons; one, employers are more reluctant today.  You take a company like Walmart [Wal-Mart Stores, Inc.]; I mean they would do whatever to keep a union out, which I would think you'd take a large employer like that would welcome some union, but no.  And plus, Walmart put pressure on other companies, because they don't pay no benefits, and they able to sell goods at a much lower price, so to compete with Walmart, you gotta almost do the same thing, so you can't go out and unionize your own--have your force unionized and compete with a Walmart--put you outta business.  So, the mom and pop stores are gone; I mean the small businesses don't stand a chance today.  So, if you ask 'em to unionize, it's, it's pretty tough.  So--but that's the kind of thing we have to work on--how do you get folks--but, see, people don't understand--I know I shouldn't say people don't--some folks don't understand the environment that we operate in when we deal with a Walmart-like corporation.  One of the things we try to do is point out in terms of probably 50 [percent], 60 percent of their workers, who they hired, are still collecting--not unemployment--
Speaker 1: Welfare?
Speaker 2: Welfare, yeah, you know?  I don't think people understand that.  They don't even make a living wage; they can't live off the wages.  I mean, most of 'em are part-time workers, not full-time workers, so they don't get no benefits, and so who pays for this when they have to go to the hospital, you know?  It ain't--you know--whereas, you got a--another company for instance, you take--well, let me put it this way.  Walmart is so--has expanded so much and it sells so many different products.  For instance, it is now into the meat--grocery business, you know what I mean?  It ain't just like it's dry goods, no; they got full-service stores (unclear).  So, it makes it real difficult for some of these companies to compete against this, this environment.  I look at a--like we just had a big ole strike out in California with the grocery stores, and their big argument is, the Walmart mentality or environment, we can't compete with it--to pay the wages we pay and compete with a Walmart--put us outta business.  Then you look at the cost of health care, which is going through the roof.  And I don't know how you explain this phenomenon about--we are the richest country in the world, and, and yet we have the, the worst health care plan of all industrialized nations, just about.  And I don't--I just don't get it and, and you tell me you can't lower the cost of some of these drugs?  I mean I look at--oh, it's pathetic what people have to pay for drugs in this country.
Story_ID: 317270
Speaker 1: Catch your career up (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: Now, what--now are you still in the--now, you were in the civil rights--
Speaker 2: No, no, I stayed in Civil Rights Department [of the American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations (AFL-CIO)].  I came in, like I say, in '77 [1977], I worked as a staff person, and in 1986 I became the director, 'cause the director retired and I became the director of the department in 1986.  And I worked as director for up until ninety who--ninety--this is '95 [1995]?  Must have been ninety--three years, three years, three years, three years; '92 [1992], '93 [1993].  I became assistant to the president in '92 [1992] or '3 [1993].
Speaker 1: Now, before we get you there--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I just wanted to ask you about--I know that labor and the United States--now, I wonder what role you may have played in this, but I know labor here in the United States did a lot to free South Africa.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: A lot of discussion about that; there are some people in labor that say that they did it--actually, labor did it, and it wasn't the sanctions so much as it was the workers in South Africa, you know--the Internet, the SEIU [Service Employees International Union] and other people's claim that they basically broke apartheid.  Is this--what's your opinion?
Speaker 2: I think it was a combination; I can't say it was one thing that did this, I think it's a combination of things.  I think the sanctions--'cause we had a difficult time getting the Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] administration to place sanctions on a lot of these goods and services going to South Africa; people start pulling their investments out of South Africa.  We put pressure on the banks, you know; people who were doing business in South Africa--the pressure on 'em.  Plus, the labor movement in South Africa was very instrumental.  So, it, it was a number of things, and I--you know, we had our demonstrations at the South African Embassy [Embassy of South Africa, Washington, D.C.]; every day we're out there demonstrating, people going to jail, doing everything else.  Yes, I was involved in all of that, no question about that; there was a lot of us involved in this whole thing.  There were those of us who was going to South Africa assisting the trade unions over there.  I mean I had an, an opportunity to go over there and work with the trade unions over there, to work with the educational system and everything else, to try to get people to embrace this idea that there's got to be a free South Africa, that we gotta have a democratic society, and to tell unions what they could do, couldn't do, or how we did it over here in terms of our civil rights struggle--giving them some ideas of some of the things that--can do to, to move this movement or this struggle forward.
Story_ID: 317271
Speaker 1: I can't say it was just one thing; I think it was a combination of, of all these things coming together, working together, that put pressure on the South African government to say, look, we gotta change our way of doing things.  When you start hurting people in their--where it hurts most, in their pockets--and the fact is that people were seeing the conditions that were existing in South Africa--how people being treated.  I mean, even I was appalled with some of the conditions that existed in South Africa when I went there; I just, I just couldn't believe it.  I mean I had an opportunity and I--you know, and I just wish more people had this kind of opportunity to see how the living conditions and how people are treated in the government.  Now, I'll just give you a good example.  I was invited over there to involve--in--in terms of an educational program, and I had an opportunity to speak to several companies about their hiring policies and their practices, and I guess I--this is something or other--we [American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations (AFL-CIO)], had a representative over there, her name was Barbara Lomax; some people get--think it's Womack [HistoryMaker Richard G. Womack] and we'd get confused sometimes and they wanna know, "Is this your wife or," you know, whatever.  But no, she was our representative over in South Africa who really worked with the trade unions.  I worked with her, along with other folks; it wasn't--I'm just saying is--it wasn't just me.  I remember this one incident when I was over there and I spoke to the Chamber of Commerce [South African Chamber of Commerce and Industry], of all these business folks, and what I said to them in terms of what they need to do, in terms of hiring and training and this kind of thing, there was the--the audience was so engaged in this, this here thing, and I don't remember the phrase they used, but it's a African phrase they, they--that they use, which in--in my language say, right on, tell it like it is, you know, this kind of thing?  And they was just energized with this here, and this--Barbara Lomax said to me, "I didn't know whether to go out there and get the car warmed up to get you out of here or whether we're gonna be able to get you outta here after what you had just--," what I had just finished saying.
Story_ID: 317272
Speaker 1: I guess I've been fortunate enough to be able to say some things and get away with some things.  I can recall we had this case [Firefighters v. City of Cleveland, 1986] involving the Cleveland [Ohio] firefighters in terms of their affirmative action program, for bringing in folks, and when this case--in fact, I'll be--I, I had, had a discussion with the firefighters to explain to them that they have a--let me break it--they have a policy--they had a policy.  If the union asked the international [International Association of Fire Fighters] for resources to fight a--go to court to fight a case, they could get monies to go to--to, to go to court to, to--to go to court, right?  Well, in this instance, what I'm saying to them is, "How can you justify giving money to white firefighters to fight black firefighters and they're in the same union?  How do you justify this here?"
Speaker 2: 'Cause they were, they were fighting a anti-discrimination case--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --brought up by the black firefighters--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --with union money.
Speaker 1: With union money.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that happens in police unions all the time.
Speaker 1: Right, well I--right.
Speaker 2: Fraternal Order of Police always fights discrimination complaints by black police officers with union money, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes.  Yeah.  And what I'm saying here is, there is--this is not black or white money, this is everybody's money collectively.  You don't--you can't separate out and say, "This is so much go for white and this so much goes for black."  But when black firefighters ask for money to adjudicate a case, they don't get it, and so I'm having this discussion with 'em, right?  And so when the [U.S.] Supreme Court ruled in favor of the black firefighters, in terms of this case, well, here come the papers, right?  And so they got a quote from me, and my thing was, if you do wrong, you pay the price.  In this case, they were wrong; they're paying the price for it.  Oh, this international union president was so incensed.  "Who in the hell give you the authority," you know, "to say what you are saying?"  Right?  Well, they didn't come to me, they went to my boss, which at that point was Lane Kirkland.  And I remember Lane calling me up to his office and told me about his conversation with the firefighter president, which happened to be--his name was Gannon [Joseph Gannon], and said he had this complaint from him.  He wondered what did I say; I told him what I said, and I said, "In fact, here's the quote."  And the quote was in the paper.  So he said, "I don't disagree with you, and I think you have a right to say certain things, but just keep in mind I get elected, you're appointed."  "Okay, I understand," (laughter), you know.  But, but he understood, though.  I mean I, I--and I understood where he was coming from and I understand that.  But I just thought they were wrong in this case.  In fact, they were wrong; the court said they were wrong, so you were wrong.
Story_ID: 317273
Speaker 1: The firefighters [International Association of Fire Fighters] have been my biggest challenge; I'll be honest with you, they been my biggest challenge in terms of trying to deal with discrimination within the labor movement and trying to get them to understand--for instance, they have, or had, an all-white executive board.  Now, I'm trying to figure out how do you have, I think it was twenty-three people on the executive board, and no person of color, no women either.  And I'm trying to get them to, to see they need to change this whole thing.  The--they, they had a convention down in Florida, in Miami [Florida], in which the black firefighters had decided that they were gonna boycott, or to picket the convention, and so I get this call to say, "Can you help us out here?"  And I said, "Okay.  Why don't we get the two of y'all together, black firefighters--the head of the black firefighters union [International Association of Black Professional Firefighters] and the head of the white--well, the head of the international?"  And I called the head of the black firefighters and asked him would he meet.  Well, he said to me, "Richard [HistoryMaker Richard G. Womack], I will be glad to meet but I can't meet on this day; I can't do this, but I'll be glad to meet any other day."  I tell this to the president of the international that--okay. Excuse me. He says, "Okay, well, this is the day I wanna meet."  "Well, he can't meet that day."  So, what does he do?  He has a press conference and announced the fact that this guy has been invited but he chose not to show up.  I say, "I don't believe you did this."  I don't believe you did it; but anyway, to make a long story short, put me in a hell of a situation.  I said, "Okay, we still need to find a way to work this out."  So I sat down; he was gonna--but I tell you, the black firefighter, he was incensed because this is--"Was not what I said, or I did not want to be--I wanted to be--I just couldn't do it that day."  So, anyway, I explained it, I said, "You know, I think he did an injustice here, so we need to find a way to amend this whole thing."  So, I think it was the next day, we agreed we would meet, but the black fighter said, "Y'all come"--they was at one hotel downtown; the fire--white fighters was in a hotel on the beach--and said, "No, y'all come to us."  So, we're gonna take the white firefighters over to meet with the black firefighters, and so I'm arranging, setting all this up.  So I had one of my, one of my people--one of my staff people with me, right?  And I asked her, "I'm gone--I'm going over here, I'm gonna be over here with the black firefighters; y'all bring the white firefighters on over."  Well, one of the guys decided to go out on the golf course, and naturally, in Florida, you know how these rains come up all of a sudden, and he got drenched, so he had to go change his clothes.  So he called--Stepperd [ph.] calls me and says, you know, "We're gonna be a little late."  I say, "No, we can't be late, you gotta get over here, 'cause they already got--we already got a bad tension going anyway so can't be, be late."  He say, "Well, they wanna go--they gotta get--they had to get this guy off the golf course, and now he gotta go change his clothes."  I say, "He don't have time to go change no clothes, tell him that he can come later; the rest of 'em need to come."  "No, they not gonna come without him, so he gotta change his clothes."  I said, "Oh my gosh, here we go again."  So, anyway, they go, he changed his clothes, and here they come, and then time they come--and I'm sitting there trying to keep these black firefighters calm and whatever.  They said, "Richard, we ain't waiting no more.  This is disrespectful; I mean how many times we gotta get kicked in the teeth before we realize, you know, they playing a game with us?"  I said, "No, I think the guys"--and when I--and I thought he was sincere, and I, and I had to agree with him.  I said, "Okay, I'm not gonna ask you to stay." I mean they'd already waited a half-hour, you know.  And so I said, "Okay."  So as they are leaving out, the white firefighters are coming in.
Story_ID: 317274
Speaker 1: And so they [International Association of Fire Fighters] try to plead with the black firefighters [International Association of Black Professional Firefighters], "Let's meet," and they said, "No, we're not gonna meet; we waited for you and we're not gonna meet."  So that just blew up all together, and so out of that came a big ol' lawsuit now.  And here again, you know, I, I think I got crossed--double-crossed in a sense, 'cause I met with the black firefighters and said, "Look, it's only one way to resolve this whole thing; you can't resolve it on the outside.  And I know you don't wanna put your money into what you consider a racist organization; you, you don't wanna--you don't wanna pay your union dues."  They had--I think they had tried--they expelled a lot of the black firefighters for the fact they called 'em--for setting up what they call a competitive organization or, you know, when they formed what they call the International Association of Black Professional Firefighters, and then when they wanted to negotiate with the, with the--I guess with the administration of fire--folks, they expelled 'em from the, from the union, so I tried to get 'em to, to bring 'em back in.  I say, "You know what I mean, you're weakening the union--," this kind of thing; expelling 'em is not gonna solve the problem, and to try to get the black firefighters, you know, you know you need to pay the union dues so you can stay inside and fight.  You can't win from fighting from the outside; you got to fight from the inside.  And, and, and, and if you can't get your folks to participate, then you know, it's a losing battle, so, we made some progress.  They finally agreed to hold what they call a couple of conferences to bring folks together.  They, they, they created a civil rights--well let me put it--they--I know they, they had a civil rights conference--I'll put it that way; they didn't call it civil rights conference on diversity--conference on diversity, to try to educate people, the white folks and the black folks together--bring 'em together into--at a conference.  And I will say it was very well--at first it, it didn't start out all that well because I think the first one they had the, the media was there and, and then you had some--the--some of the black firefighters on the outside criticizing other black firefighters for participating in such an event, so it was a kind of divisive thing, you know.  I got called a whole bunch of names--Uncle Tom being one of 'em, you know, all kind of--I mean it was just, it was just wild.
Story_ID: 317275
Speaker 1: But then, when I agreed--again agreed to try to bring both parties together again to have some civilized discussion about how we can resolve some of this here, I talked to both sides now, and then what happened was I said, "Okay, we agreed to meet and set up this meeting."  And so I went--flew down to Florida to, to have this meeting.  Now, I should have known something was up when the president, who was Romeo Spalding at the time--they got a new president now--of the black firefighters [International Association of Black Professional Firefighters], said that he could not go--he couldn't make it but his folks would be there, I should have known then something was up.  When I get there, walk into the office, the man throws his document at me--what it is?  A lawsuit.  He says, "Now, you--."  I said, "Well, I didn't know nothing about--didn't know noth--they didn't tell me about a lawsuit."  So, I just said, "Okay."  I said, "Well, I'm going back out here and get me a cab; I'm going back to Washington [D.C.]."  I came back; now, I talked to Romeo at the time and said, well, "Romeo, why didn't you tell me that y'all had filed a lawsuit?"  He gonna play out like he didn't know about it; he didn't do it.  (Unclear) I say, "No, you're not gonna convince me that you didn't know about this here.  Now, how could your local folks file a lawsuit and you not know it?  No, you're not gonna convince me of that," you know?  But anyway, I said, "Look, I'm through with this; y'all do the best y'all can."  So, I just--I thought we made some progress, but--they're doing some things.  At least they had a minority on the executive board [of the International Association of Fire Fighters], and they was having these regular, yearly conferences--diversity conferences, which wasn't just limited to just for people of color, but for everybody--bring in everybody.  And it, and it has grown; it's grown from--started out, I think, first one was about--and I attended, I guess, a whole bunch of 'em on the initial start-up.  In fact, I helped 'em put it together, and I attended probably the first ten of 'em that they had, which grew from maybe a hundred participants to over six hundred participants in the conference.  So I thought they was making some progress, but just not enough.  So, that was--I'm saying the firefighters were probably one of my biggest challenges that I faced when I was in the Civil Rights Department [of the American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations (AFL-CIO)].  Now, we had other stuff, too, but I don't think any of 'em compared with what I had to endure with the firefighters.
Speaker 2: And where does it stand today?  I mean are they--
Speaker 1: They're much better today, but they still have the International Association of Black Professional Firefighters.  There are those who still will not belong to the international [International Association of Fire Fighters], but now they done went through, what--this is probably the third--third president, and at least, I think each president gets a little bit better.  They had Gannon [Joseph Gannon], Whitehead [Alfred K. Whitehead], and now it's [Harold A. Schaitberger]--oh, what's his name?  His name escapes me right now, but at least it gets, it gets better.
Speaker 2: But the big--the big firefighters, I mean the union--the white union is--which is supposed to be the union for everybody--
Speaker 1: For everybody.
Speaker 2: --is getting better, you're saying.
Speaker 1: It's getting better.
Speaker 2: Getting a little bit better over time (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  I think times itself makes it better.  Still ain't where it need to be, but it's--it's made some progress, that's what I'm saying, yeah.
Speaker 2: Are the black firefighters still unified?
Speaker 1: No, they split.  'Cause you got some that's outside, and you got some that's inside.  I would hope at some point they could all join together.  See?  What I try to get 'em to understand is, you can do more in unity than you can being divided and calling each other a bunch of names because some won't stay in and fight and the other wanna get out and fight; you got the same fight so why not just unify it and fight, you know?  But it just hasn't happened.  And I've been away from it for, now, for at least three years, so I don't know where it stands right now.  Somebody else has that responsibility now.
Story_ID: 317276
Speaker 1: Can I just go back and touch on what brother Brock [HistoryMaker Paul Brock] had said in terms of labor movement's involvement in civil rights?  We have a lot at stake.  One of the things I would point out to you is that we realize that, that the labor movement, in and of itself, cannot do a lot of things; it has to form coalition and partners with other groups.  One of the groups that we have been able to, to coalesce with and work together has been the Civil Rights Movement because we have found out, as Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] has pointed out in a couple of his speeches that he gave to the convention [American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations (AFL-CIO) Fourth Constitutional Convention], that, you know, we face the same enemies, we deal with the same issues and same problems, so it behooves us to kind of work together.  So I think we have found this common ground where we try to work together on different issues.  The--like for instance, the appointment of judges, right?  They affect the Civil Rights Movement as well as the labor movement, in terms of their decision.  When you look at the kind of legislation that is moving before the [U.S.] Congress, if you talking about raising the minimum wage, you know what I mean?  You talk about (unclear), you talk about pensions, you know what I mean?  If we--whatever we talk about--we talk about trade.  These things impact the, the folks that the Civil Rights Movement represents as well as the folks that we represent; in some cases, they're the same people.  So we have this--I call--a common ground in which we can form partnerships and work together on various issues, so the labor movement has really been a strong supporter of the Civil Rights Movement, I think, for a number of reasons, as Brock is pointing out, in terms of the Port Gibson [Mississippi] situation.  When the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] found itself facing a lawsuit and facing distinction [sic. extinction], Lane Kirkland, who--George--George Meany was president [of the AFL-CIO] then, who--and Bill Pollard [William E. Pollard] was director of the department of civil rights [AFL-CIO Civil Rights Department].  The one thing--and, and Bill Pollard was also a board member of the NAACP, and he went to the president of the AFL-CIO and says, "We cannot let this happen to the NAACP; we cannot let them put 'em outta business, we've got to step forward."  So, what they did, they put up the--I guess it was a bond, whatever, to guarantee that the NAACP would have the right to go to court--file a law--to challenge this lawsuit because they had to put up so much money in order to appeal--to appeal, to appeal the lawsuit.  So they guaranteed this; it was like a million dollars just to do this.  So, we rec--and even today, we still support--for instance, I think we have a contribution budget, strictly for civil rights groups, that we make yearly contributions to.  Not only that, we participate in a lot of their events, and plus, they support us in a lot of our efforts that we put forward when we talk about the right to organize.  I think one of our biggest supporters in this effort is the Civil Rights Movement, particularly, NAACP.  I would say the NAACP is probably our number one--I shouldn't say it like that, but is our strongest supporter, and I think we, we recognize that.  We have a lot in common with them--the leadership conference on civil rights--Southern Christian Leadership Conference [SCLC].  I mean, I--you know, I can go down the--Rainbow PUSH [Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois]; I can go down the list, you know?  These are organizations that we really have an affinity to, and I think it's a mutual thing with us.
Story_ID: 317277
Speaker 1: As vice president now, I mean what, what's your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I'm--I'm assistant to the president.
Speaker 1: Assistant to the president. Okay, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Assistant to the president of AFL-CIO [American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and in that capacity, I advise him on different issues and different concerns.  For instance, there are several issues that--I'm still overseeing civil rights policies and whatnot.  Immigration is another issue that I'm involved in, dealing with some of these other organizations.  For instance, I represent the AFL-CIO with the--on the executive committee of the Leadership Council of Civil Rights [sic. Leadership Conference on Civil and Human Rights] branch on, on some legislative issues.  I still do lobbying on the Hill [Capitol Hill, Washington, D.C.] on, on different issues.  I coalesce with--particularly the Congressional Black Caucus, black state legislators, black elected officials.  So, I'm really his advisor on a lot of issues, and I guess you could say he has a couple advisors and I'm, I'm involved in--basically, on social justice issues with press, say.  Gay and lesbian issues--I mean it's, it's across the board, really.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the current president is--?
Speaker 2: John Sweeney.
Speaker 1: John Sweeney, right.  Okay.  Let's get that on record (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, there's a--there's some--I know there's--really there's some crises going on with John Sweeney's election.  I don't know if you wanna talk about that or, or his (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, I don't (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Well, I can just say this here.  There is folks within the labor movement who feels like we need to do some restructuring, and which we all agree; there needs to be some changes made.  The question is to what extent do we make those changes?  This is where the debate is in terms of is it organizing, or is it political action, or is it legislation?  So, there are those who thinks that we should put more resources into organizing, there are those who think we should put more in political action.
Story_ID: 317278
Speaker 1: I think it's a fundamental issue in terms of whether you do more organizing and less political action, or more political action and what? Also organizing.
Speaker 2: Okay.  What--well--now, the question is where do you stand on that?  I mean do you think we ought to do more?  I mean what's your preference?  Where would you put the emphasis?
Speaker 1: Well, now, I work for the president [John Sweeney] of the federation [American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations (AFL-CIO)], okay?  And I don't disagree with his, with his policy, I really don't disagree with it because I think you got to do both; you can't have one and not have the other.  We can't organize unless we got the right political environment, and if we don't have the right political environment, then I mean there's little we can do.  I mean the--in order to organize in this climate, you got to have certain laws; the laws right now needs to be changed.  It's got to be, for instance, as I mentioned earlier, the--you go to the National Labor Relations Board--I think it's stacked against unions.  We haven't changed our labor laws since 1935, so they outdated in a sense; they need to come up with--so we need a [U.S.] Congress and a White House that will look at what it's doing; they--I mean we change laws all the time; we update 'em, we, you know, bring 'em into compliance with what is going on now, so we saying that we need to do something about our--to protect workers, to give workers the right to have the freedom to decide whether they want it.  We not saying make 'em union or, or that it's mandatory, we saying at least give the workers the right to decide whether they wanna be unionized without the threat of termination or, or retaliation or something against them; that's all we're saying.  So, if you ask me where am I, I think that we got to do both; you got to do political action, you got to do organizing--you got--they both go hand-in-hand, and you got to have the right environment to do this in.  So I don't think you, you can give up the political action part just to do organizing.  If you gonna organize, you got to have some political clout and you got to have some folks that work with you, we just can't organize by ourselves, you know.
Speaker 2: Now, what does the future of labor look like?
Speaker 1: Well, I would say the future of labor should be--well, let me back up for a minute.  The labor movement has a good future if we can bring our resources to bear collectively, and by that, what I mean we can't be going off in different directions; we got to come together as a unified body for the labor movement to grow and to prosper in the future.  I think if we start splintering off and dividing ourselves, we weaken ourselves, we can't do the things we need to do.  So what I'm saying here is that for us to have a viable future, it's gonna take us working together collectively to have that future, and we gonna have to put our resources into organizing, as well as political action.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, we always--now, in terms of your own personal future in labor, do you--what do you see for yourself in the future?
Speaker 1: Well, that's an easy question.  I see retirement in my future (laughter); I'm ready to hang it up.  I, I--you know, I think I have come to the point, and I realize, that it's time for somebody else to step in; I wanna assist and help somebody else.  I'm not saying I'm gonna walk away from all of this here, but I wanna do less, but I wanna do it on my, my time, not having the com- the complement of having to work a specific day, you know what I mean?  I, I think you reach a point in life where you wanna enjoy some of it, you know, with less restriction, less time constraints on you, and I think I have just about reached that point.  So I--so my future saying is, get prepared to retire soon--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --that's where I am.
Story_ID: 317279
Speaker 1: We always ask this question, and it's more broad and general, but what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: You know, there's a lot of issues that face the African American community, and I guess in terms of my hopes and concern is that we gotta do something or other to make sure that we have--and I guess to eliminate some of the barriers that--particularly in healthcare.  For instance, we need to make sure that--it's--well, there's too many of us who don't have proper healthcare.  Too many have died at an early age for no reason at all, and I think these are related to a lot of things--a lot of things in terms of having--being stressed out over a job, being stressed out over the fact that you can't afford to pay for, I'd say, decent housing or decent healthcare.  Discrimination is still a thing--it's not a thing of the past; I think if you ask Oprah Winfrey right now--you know, if you take a person of her stature, with her resources--and she get treated the way she gets treated--so you can imagine what's in store for some of us who not even reached that status in life, because there some people don't care how much money you have, or who you may be, as long as your complexion is a little bit different than theirs, there's, there's discrimination.  So I guess--I guess what I'm saying here is that I would like to see the day--and I'm like, like Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] at this point, you know.  I may not see it in my day and age, but, you know, you keep hoping and, and stressing the point that as Americans, as people, that we will see each other as, as that, and not start putting us in categories and different compartments, or we are so much different than somebody else.  I think the other issue I think I look at is in terms of--which is an issue I been working on for, for a number of years, is the issue of immigration.  I think immigrants should be treated with respect and dignity; I don't think they should be disrespected.  But I also think, in terms of that, there are certain rules and, and, and, and guide--and guidelines people have to respect as well, so there is this, this--there's gotta be a happy medium here somewhere where we meet this here.  We keep saying that we're a nation of immigrants--yeah, most of us are immigrants, but not all of us are immigrants because the Native Americans are not immigrants, most African Americans are not immigrants in, in a sense, but what I'm really saying here is that even at that, there is still room, and I think that if we can have a place where the job situation is on an equal footing where employers are forced to pay people a decent, respectful wage, we can eliminate some of these problems, but until that day--when you got employers who can--I'm--say use the underground system, in a sense, and, and get away with it, I think it's, it's not gonna benefit any of us.  So until the day that (laughter) we can stop looking at each other as competitors in a sense, and that's where I think this is headed--and, and, and we're forced to compete against each other in terms of the job market and to a lot of other things.  So, I guess, to make this short, let me just say this here.  The issues of employment and health, discrimination--those issues--we need to come to grips with those issues, and I think we can do it if we are a community, and I hope that we can become a community of one.
Story_ID: 317280
Speaker 1: Now, when you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing you would do differently?
Speaker 2: Major thing I would do differently.  I can't say there was any major thing I would do differently.  I always tell myself that hindsight is 20/20 vision.  Yes, I'm sure there are things I would do differently because with the--I would say with the information that I have, and the knowledge I have now, it would tell me to do things differently, and you get different result.  I look in terms of how I have approached, in some instances, discrimination in terms of it being sent my way, or against somebody else.  I probably wouldn't do it the same way now.  Let me, let me just--let me just tell you what.  I recall an incident where I was with my father [Gilbert Womack] one day, and--you know how you can walk down a way, and people blocking your way and you gotta go around somebody?  Well, would I--today, if I was confronted with that situation, would I go around, or would I say, "Excuse me, I wanna get through here."  So, I think there are some things I would do differently--I don't think I would react the same way.  And I know it's--I can see--I guess once you reach a certain age or a certain point in life, there're certain fears you don't have anymore, and I know they say when you're young, you're full of piss and vinegar, I guess.  And I guess I've had my share of that.  But I think that I'm more settled in my ways at this point, so I--yeah, I definitely would do some things differently, no question about it.  I, I can't just sit here right now and just point out some good ex--some, some good examples of something I would do differently.  I don't disagree with what I've done; I really don't disagree with what I've done, but I'm sure I would do it differently.
Speaker 1: But now, at this stage, would you be more inclined to say, "Hey, excuse me, I wanna get through here," or would you be more inclined to go around?
Speaker 2: No, 'cause I demonstrated just the other day (laughter).  I'd be more inclined to say, "I'm coming through here."  Then, I would have probably walked around--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but not today.
Story_ID: 317281
Speaker 1: Once again, if you had to look back at everything you've done to this point, what would you consider today to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: My legacy is that I think I have championed a cause--of those who were less able or less fortunate.  I think I've been a spokesperson or one who has pushed to get things for those who couldn't do it for themselves, and I know--I can give you--that, I can give you a couple of examples with.  I look in terms of--even within the AFL-CIO [American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations] itself, I look in terms of several departments we have had that didn't have any representation of people of color, where I have pushed and said, "You--this cannot, cannot continue; we've gotta find somebody.  You got--don't tell me you can't find nobody," and I have insisted that we do things differently.  And I--and, and I--and I guess I've gotten pretty good responses to this here, and I know there are people who have called me and said, "Richard [HistoryMaker Richard G. Womack]," you know, "I've got this problem, I got that problem."  And I've been willing to address those problems--even sometimes what I considered as going into the lion's den; it has not stopped me.  So, I think the thing is that I feel like I've been able to stand up and address issues concerning people who I felt like who were being mistreated or who should be treated differently anyway.  We ought to change some practices, some ways that we do things, so I would say I think I have stood up when I needed to stand up, and I don't feel--and I feel good about it.
Story_ID: 317282
Speaker 1: Tell us about your family now.  Do you have any children, or--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I do.  I have--well, this where I get in trouble at.  I have a son who's--probably be down here in a few minutes, who works for the AFL-CIO [American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations], which--who--son who--he's my oldest.  Very proud of him, for what he has accomplished.  He's a, he's a fighter, I will say that; I have to calm him down sometime, and I guess all my children are fighters.  I got two daughters who are all fighters.  In fact, I'll tell you, I--how many times I had to go to school because they wanted to have their say.  I said, "But the teacher is the teacher; you can't be challenging the teacher all the time, you know."  "But Dad, you told us that if we don't agree with something or other, to stand up, speak up, stand up for our rights."  "Yeah, I agree with you; stand up, speak up for your rights, but in the classroom, the teacher is the, is the person; you can't get up challenging the teacher, you know what I mean?  If, if you think she wrong, you have to find a way to do it and do it in a subtle manner, but you just can't get up and challenge her."  So, I guess I got--like I say, I got three children; they all have turned out pretty good, and I feel good to be associated with 'em.  My wife is very supportive, and she has been supportive.  There's no way I could have done the things I have done without her support.  We're spending--meaning I've been away from home many, many days and many nights, and I guess she's had the biggest hand in terms of raising the kids, so I don't--I can't take the full responsibility of how they turned out.  And like I tell here, though--what she used to say, "Well wait 'til your father get home."  No, don't wait 'til father get home.  And I think they respect their momma more than they respect their father, to be honest with you 'cause, 'cause she'll get in their case before I will, so--no, families are very--the kids have been very supportive; all of 'em have been very supportive, so I've been blessed in that regard.
Story_ID: 317283
Speaker 1: Tell us about the National Coalition of Black--for Black Civic Participation [sic. National Coalition on Black Civic Participation]--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and who founded it and what's your role in it, or what was your role in it?
Speaker 2: All right, the National Coalition of Black Civic Participation was founded, I guess twenty-nine years ago; we be celebrating the thirtieth anniversary next year.  It was founded by three individuals--well, actually it was more than three, but the three prominent persons involved in it was [HistoryMaker] Eddie Williams from the Joint Center of Political Studies [sic. Joint Center for Political and Economic Studies, Washington, D.C.], Bill Pollard [William E. Pollard] who worked at the AFL-CIO [American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations], and [HistoryMaker] Margaret Bush Wilson who at that thing--was the chairman of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], right?  Yeah, she was the chairman of NAACP.  They saw a need to get involved in the political process to do something to enhance the black vote.  At that point, it wasn't called the National Coalition of Black Participation, it was called Operation Big Vote.
Speaker 1: Operation Big Vote?
Speaker 2: Operation Big Vote.
Speaker 1: That--yeah, that sounds more catchy (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) And they still use it (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When was it founded?
Speaker 2: I, I--that's why I said twenty-nine years ago, 'cause I can't--
Speaker 1: Oh, twenty-nine years ago.
Speaker 2: --tell you actually what--actually what year that was.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Seventy-six [1976].
Speaker 2: Yeah, '76 [1976].
Speaker 1: Sounds like about right, yeah.  And it was merely because of the fact they wanted to do something about increasing the participation of blacks in the political process, and they felt like they needed an organization to do this here, because there were so many blacks who were not voting, and they--we need to do something to educate them and to mobilize them, so they formed this organization and, and, and then they reached out to other folks to come in and join this whole thing, so Eddie Williams became the first chairman of the National Coalition, and he served in that capacity for--what?  I guess about ten years I guess, and after him, I came on board as the chair, and I've been there ever since.
Speaker 2: Ever since, now, what time?  How long?
Speaker 1: Shoot, look like forever--seem like.  But (laughter)--oh, I've been chair for about twelve, fifteen--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --one of them years.
Speaker 2: Since about 1992 or '3 [1993]?
Speaker 1: No, ninety--'92 [1992] or '93 [1993], I'm not sure which one it is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 317284
Speaker 1: What we [National Coalition on Black Civic Participation] try to do now is that we've had a couple of sessions where we try to reorganize and restructure ourselves because we felt like rather than just being there just during election time, and that's how I started out, was we would mobilize for certain elections, particularly in the black communities.  So what we try to do now is have a year-round operation where we're now engaged in issue campaigns, trying to educate particularly African American community in terms of the issues affecting their communities.  We do like town hall meetings, you know--seminars and this kind of thing, and we have a--we now have established local chapters in various communities, Operation Big Vote chapters, and we try to fund those to the degree that we can.  Now, we do get funding from several sources; we get 'em from foundations, from unions, from companies--this kind of thing; it's a non-profit organization, 501(3)(c) [sic. 501(c)(3)] operation, and so we've been very successful in terms of mobilizing our communities.  When I say our communities, the black community, around issues.  We are, we are non-partisan, so we don't go out--advocating on any particular party, so our thing here is if we get people to the polls and vote, they will vote the right way once they get to the polls.  We just gotta give 'em the issues--what candidate--we can tell 'em what the candidates stand for, how they gonna affect their communities--this kind of thing, and that's what we try to do.  And then what we try to do is that after we do all a that, we then go in and try to set up a, a, a mobilization operation so that we can get people to the polls if it means renting cars or getting vans or whatever; we also go and do registration.  People who haven't registered, get 'em registered, and then we try to follow up with those registrants, you know; we need to give 'em information, keep 'em involved.  So, it's been a pretty good operation that we've seen expand and grow, and we're seeing the impact it's had on our community in a sense.  And I think to our--be less than fair to say that--the communities that we work in are predominantly African American communities, and we know from past history, past practices, if African Americans go to the polls and vote, we practically know how they're gonna vote anyway, so in that regard, we have tried to work with the Republican Party and the Democratic Party and say--'cause we're non-partisan--now, if--we, we want to--the Republican Party to embrace us, to come in, talk to us to see how we can work together; we've done the same thing with Democratic Party, so we don't want one party to say we have not reached out to them; we have reached out to both parties.  Now, I will say that the response from both party has been less than satisfactory--put it that way, more so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's amazing.
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: That's amazing, to me, that both of 'em--
Speaker 1: Well, you would think the Democratic Party would be all over us to do this, but no--
Speaker 2: You would think so, yeah.
Speaker 1: --what--we got lukewarm response from the Democratic Party and we got practically no response from the Republican--even though they have said they wanna work with us and do some things with us.  And the fact is they wanna make these inroads into the African American community, they're doing very little to do it, at least through us.  So, maybe they don't, they don't really trust us; I don't know what it is but no, so--and I've been fortunate to serve as its chair and, and to feel like we have made some progress in this area.
Story_ID: 317285
Speaker 1: Tell us about being on the board of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].
Speaker 2: This is a really unique opportunity, and I would say that.  It's not--and I think to have this opportunity to serve on a national board of an organization like the NAACP, it's--it's a golden opportunity, and I would say that over the years--and I've been on the board now for about--what?  Ten years, I guess I say--roughly about ten years.  I've seen the board go from chaos to some form of democratic process.  I think the board has gotten much better over the years; we've had some turbulent times, no question about that--very divisive board--but I think it's in the last, I guess few years--last--I think even under--in the last years--well, I can't say that.  Myrlie Evers-Williams, and I think [HistoryMaker] Julian Bond, have really moved us into a more democratic process, and people who dedicate their time and their effort to this board--it's not--it's, it's a non-paying position--a lot of things you do at your own expense, and I think I've been blessed, and the fact is I've had an organization [American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations (AFL-CIO)] that has supported me in this effort, and has given me the kind of resources to do the kind of things or have a voice and to be involved in the board activities of the NAACP.  So I think--you know--and I'm saying I know it's a large board of sixty-four people, but I'm saying that this is--when you look at the major civil rights organizations in this country and you look at the kind of things that it is involved in and doing in terms of its civil rights issues and stuff like this here, I think the--you know, to have a voice in terms of that policy and that structure in terms of how this organization move forward, I think a lot of folks would give up a whole lot to have that opportunity to do this, so I feel like it's been a wonderful opportunity for me to sit there on this board.
Story_ID: 317286
Speaker 1: Are you on the board of the Federal Bureau of Prisons, as well?
Speaker 2: I was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was appointed by Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] to serve on the board of directors for the Federal Bureau of Prisons, and the reason I--and I thought this was a wonderful opportunity, 'cause the board is made up of six individuals; these six individuals determined a lot in terms of how the federal prisons are really run, in terms of the kind of things that happen.  As you look at the prison makeup, it's, it's probably black and brown more than anything else, and what, what this done for me anyway is to have an opportunity to see that there was some meaningful--occupations that were developed and put forward in these institutions so the people were able to gain at least some work experience or, or some habits, more than anything else.  As I saw it, a lot of the individuals who were incarcerated, lot of 'em lacked work experience; they haven't had the opportunity to get up every morning to go to a job and have to punch a clock at a given time or to have a, a, a trade or a--or a skill or something or other.  And so I think even the fact is that the--we were able to implement certain programs within the federal prison complex; I thought it was a, a good opportunity to do something to enhance, particularly brown and black folks who were incarcerated.  I don't agree with the prison complex--I don't agree with it--it's there, though.  But the fact that it's there, let's try to make sure there's something meaningful in it for those who are in there.  So, I guess my whole thing was that here was an opportunity to have a way to shape, or have a voice into some of the kind of activities goes on into these federal prisons; too bad I couldn't do it on a local or state level, but at least on the federal level we can make some impact.
Story_ID: 317287
Speaker 1: We have like one more question, but before I ask that question, is there anything I haven't asked that you think you want to mention before we ask the last question?
Speaker 2: No, I think I've pretty well covered everything.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, the last question is similar to legacy, and it's this--sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Well, see, I guess the words that come to mind is the words of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]--that I tried to help somebody.  I think I'd just like to hope I have not hurt or hindered anybody in what I--whatever I've done.  I think my whole thing has been to assist or help wherever I can, and I hope that that assistance and help has moved us as a people further along in terms of our progress.  I know there are certain institutions need just a little push, a little nudge to move them in, in the right direction.  I hope I've been able to at least give a nudge to some, some institution, particularly the labor movement, in terms of moving in that direction, whereby we can look and say that we have been fair to people of color as well as women and, and, and other groups.  I would say that--let me just--and I--and maybe this is the part that will probably set me aside, or cause me a little bit of criticism, 'cause it has already, is that I feel like a person is a person regardless, and that they should not be discriminated against because of what their beliefs are, or who--or their lifestyle, so to speak.  I know there is some pushback in terms of gay, lesbian, bisexuals or transgender--this kind of thing, or people with disabilities.  I think I have looked at this whole spectrum wanting to do the right thing by every group.  For instance, I think I have looked out for people with disabilities; I have lobbied on their behalf to make sure--I have lobbied on the 'half of gays and lesbians, I have lobbied on the 'half of African Americans, Hispanics, for Asian rights--for everybody.  I mean, I don't think I have left out anybody out of this equation bec- even though I felt like the--my biggest concern was about African Americans or people of color, but I think it--I have not forgotten other folks because they have--if they don't have same, they should have like issues and that--and again, I go back and say a person is a person and they should be treated as a person.  We may not like what they do.  I'm saying that what they do, somebody might take offense to it, but I'm sure that there are things in my life that I do that people may not like how I do it or--or whatever, but only thing I'm saying is we have to look beyond some of these things and look at the individual, the person.  Dislike what they do if you want, don't discriminate; that's all I say.  We gotta get beyond discrimination, that's all I'm saying--regardless who a person is.  Not because of their disability or their sexual orientation or whatever--or their color or, or national origin, that's all.  And I think in that regard, I would like to be remembered as someone who did not look at a person and then shun that person, push that person aside because of some identifying characteristic of that individual, or have not made any gestures against somebody.  I'll just give you a good example.  I know people, and I've seen this, will see a person on the street and will make fun of that individual.  Well, that person could be on the street for a number of reasons; he could be a Vietnam veteran or something or other and, and his fortune wasn't as good as somebody else's and that's--he's in that predicament.  Everybody didn't choose to be in the predicament they're in; circumstances might have forced 'em to be there, and the only thing I'm saying is I like to look at it in terms of giving the person the benefit of the doubt and saying maybe circumstances placed that person--what can I do to change those circumstances, if I can.  If I can't, I will--not gonna criticize the individual unless I know what his or her situation is--that's all so.
Speaker 1: All right.  Well, thank you, sir.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Thank you.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
