Story_ID: 15673
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe; I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Observing is Heather--
Speaker 2: Humphreys.
Speaker 1: --Humphreys. Sir, could you state your name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Robert L. Woodson, Sr., R-O-B-E-R-T, L. Woodson, W-O-O-D-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: April 8th, 1937, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: And, sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: The president and CEO of a national non-profit organization that serves low income communities.  And the organization's name is The National Center for Neighborhood Enterprise, headquartered in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is--what is it?  September the 22nd 1903--
Speaker 1: 2003.
Speaker 2: 2003.  1903?
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: Washington, D.C., 1424 16th Street, N.W., Washington, D.C.  Suite 300.  This is our headquarters, our national headquarters.
Story_ID: 15674
Speaker 1: What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: (Chuckle) My favorite food is probably veal.  Veal is my favorite food.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Virginia.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes, "The people suffering the problem have to be involved in the solution."
Story_ID: 15675
Speaker 1: Can you give me the names of your parents, spell them for me, and their dates and places of birth?
Speaker 2: Annie--Anna Woodson, A-N-N-A Woodson, W-O-O-D-S-O-N, maiden name, Thompson.  I do not know--and my father's name is Ralph L. Woodson, R-A-L-P-H, Woodson.  And, but I cannot tell you--I know my mother, my grandmother on my mother's side is Victoria Thompson, but I don't know the name of my grandfather on this side.  And I do not know the grandparents on my father's side.
Speaker 1: Do you know their dates of birth?
Speaker 2: I know my mother's date of birth is December the 15th, 1902 and my Dad's July the 21st, 1898.
Speaker 1: Okay, so on either side, it's hard to trace back very far, huh?
Speaker 2: It is, except--and my mother's side, it's just because my mother and father were both only children.  And, therefore, there are no aunts and uncles on either side to reference.  And there has to be a lot of pain because whenever I used to ask her about it, she said, "They're just a bunch of poor folks.  You don't need to know."  And so my dad's side, he died when I was nine [1947].  And he was sick in the hospital for two years.  So it was difficult for me to get to know anything about him except that I remember as a child visiting Farmville, Virginia.  And I do know that the Woodsons are from Farmville.  And I've been told by people that I've met that, that we're related to Carter G. Woodson because--and, and there are several other things that connect us to that family.  So we sort of are just exploring that right now.
Story_ID: 15676
Speaker 1: Did you mother [Anna Thompson Woodson] have any stories about your father [Ralph Woodson] that she shared with you?
Speaker 2: No, just that, in those days parents very seldom talked to children about things.  Children were just sort seen and not heard.  And so they very seldom would share anything about past or even present.  They, you know, there were adult conversations, then there were things that kids talked about among themselves.  So it was--I just remember seeing, I think the, the sister of my grandmother who was, she looked like a Cherokee Indian.  And so I got to know some of the cousins from that side.  I remember an Aunt Jane who used to visit.  She had a long braid and down her, to her waist.  And, but they're just vague memories of little, little snapshots of, of incidents.  But parents very seldom in those days sat and talked with us about the past or the present.  You were just--
Speaker 1: Day to day, huh?
Speaker 2: Day to day.
Speaker 1: What part of the country was your mother's family from?
Speaker 2: Wilmington, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did she ever talk about why she ended up in--now, you were born in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  No, she just married my father I think very young and moved to, to Philadelphia.  Again, it's, it's, it's--when my kids asked me that question, they are perplexed because they know everything about us and we talk all the time.  But they didn't understand that in those days, children--it was disrespectful for children to ask questions of parents--
Speaker 1: Right, I know--
Speaker 2: --at least where I grew up.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that is a tradition in some places.
Speaker 2: Yes, it was disrespectful.  And you would never think about doing it.  Parents told you what they wanted you to know.  And you weren't to ask any questions outside of those parameters.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that, no, you can't think of anything that they might have said about growing up or--
Speaker 2: Just that it was rough.
Story_ID: 15677
Speaker 1: She [Anna Thompson Woodson] also used to teach us very powerful lessons in saying that, no matter if, even in this racial times, as tough as it is, never be hateful to anybody; that if six white boys were to beat you up, don't hate all white people 'cause they all aren't that way.  And so that was were the only of--
Speaker 2: But what about the ones that beat you up (laughter)?
Speaker 1: She wouldn't say anything about that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: My father [Ralph Woodson] always said "Defend yourself."  But they--we, we lived in a blue collar neighborhood where all of the people had moms and dads raising children, no matter how tough it is.  And all of us could read.  I don't ever recall anybody in my classes who was illiterate 'cause we had to read out loud.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, did you mother talk about going to school herself?
Speaker 1: She went to about the fifth grade.  And my dad, I think joined the Army when he was sixteen, and he was in the first World War [1914-1918].  He was a veteran of that, of that conflict in the Black Forest [Germany] and got shot and, and seriously injured there.
Speaker 2: So was he kind of disabled--
Speaker 1: Yeah, he, it left him with a severe heart condition, and they told him he would have to be hospitalized.  He said, "I've got a family to raise," and so he went ahead and worked until he was able to raise his family.  And he died as soon as we moved out of this very violent neighborhood.  He moved us to west Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] that was just opening up to blacks.  And almost within one month of the time that we moved into this new safe, safer neighborhood, he died.  He became ill and, and died two years later.  So his goal, I guess, he, he had a lot of determination to, to survive and thrive in the presence of adversity. And I think it's a legacy he left me with and the people, and my brothers and sisters.  We were left with that very, very important and vital legacy.
Speaker 2: Now, we don't talk today a lot about the World War I vets. To even get involved on World War I was an adventure because you had to join the French Army basically, to be involved.  You couldn't really go through the United States Army to be involved in--
Speaker 1: Well, he was a member of the United States Army.
Speaker 2: Really.
Speaker 1: Yes, when we entered the war, when the United States entered the war.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But prior--so when we entered the war is when he, he fought because he is formally listed as a veteran of the, of the U.S. Military.  That's why we were able to get veteran's benefits.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  So he got in when the U.S. entered the War.
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, anything else about your mother?
Speaker 1: No, except that she was a hard working lady.  She did what they called Day's Work in those times, which is a maid.  She was a lady of dignity, a lady of hard work.  As she used to say to us, "When I leave work, I don't go to the bars like other people do.  I come home to you."  And so she always was able to communicate these kind of values to us, even though we were poor.  We were broke, but we weren't poor.  And so, but I always saw her as a hard working person who put the interests of her children first, which is a legacy that I think is shared by all of my brothers and sisters, that we take family seriously.  I think we got that from her.
Story_ID: 15678
Speaker 1: How many brothers and sisters do you have and can you name them for us and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I have a brother who is still alive, 74, Charles Woodson.  And a deceased brother, Rudy [Rudolph], who would have been 72.  A deceased sister who would have 70, named Jean.  A brother who's alive, who's 69, James, and myself.  So there are three of us who survived and two members deceased, and I'm the youngest of five.
Story_ID: 15679
Speaker 1: Tell me about the neighborhood you grew up in, and what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: The, the neighborhood I grew up in was a very small street in South Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] that was like a little village.  You could take one leap and be across the street on the pavement on the other side.  And it was a real close knit community, comprised primarily of mothers and fathers raising children.  And there was a lot of sharing.  If somebody fixed rolls on a Sunday morning, they would share it with your immediate neighbors.  You could--parents could go to--no one had cars, so when parents walked to the market, there were black-owned stores, a laundry.  There were a lot of black-owned stores and restaurants and all this in the neighborhood.  And, and you'd walk to the store.  The parents could leave their children on the streets.  They would tell you, "Don't go back into the house."  And they could leave you on the street to be watched by other neighbors.  There was always a Ms. Hattie who had a pillow on her, on her window sill who was, who leaned on it all day.  And she was the monitor or the busybody.  There was an old man, Sandy Walker, who, at the time was 85, who used to talk about life, post-slavery.  He used to talk about the city when Broad Street was a woods, when he remembered stage coaches used to run the length and breadth of it.  So it was fascinating to sit and listen to this old man in the middle of the summer with long johns on and old man's high-top shoes, talk about the old days.  On Saturday mornings, they were a most colorful, vibrant time because that's when the hucksters came through, selling their wares and the an old Italian man had a spindle where he'd sharpen knives and scissors.  Wagons, horse-drawn wagons would fill the streets selling peaches, string beans. The women would stand around and gossip.  Children would play.  It was a very, very pleasant time on Saturday mornings in our, in our neighborhoods.  And Sunday, everybody went to church.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what church did you all attend?
Speaker 2: We went to St. Matthew's Baptist Church [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  And we had to wear thick wool suits in the middle of the summer.  And you were sweating all the time because we didn't have summer suits.  I never heard about that until I became an adult.  I just assumed everyone wore thick wool suits all year regardless of the time of year.  So it was a--we couldn't wait to get out of them to get home.
Story_ID: 15680
Speaker 1: But we were very poor too, and without realizing, cause I remember the rationing during the second World War [1939-1945] when we, when we--shoes wouldn't have soles in them.  There were holes in them quite frequently.  We would just cut cardboard and put them in our shoes.  You didn't tell your parents that your shoes had holes in them because everybody's shoes has holes.  And, and you didn't ask to get a new pair. You just fixed what you had; and with your parents telling you that you can always be clean, you don't have to have a lot of clothes.  But cleanliness was really emphasized by everybody's child.  You, that you--if you wore the same thing, even if you had to wash it every day, you can always be clean.  So these were the kind of value lessons that I was taught.
Speaker 2: Now, what did you do for enjoyment when you were coming up?
Speaker 1: Played stick ball.  It's interesting.  We played a game where you would tie a magazine with rubber.  And we would toss it back and forth.  And we called it Rubbie.  And I, and from, and later on, I realized that it was a version of the Rubbage game that I guess some of the men in this war brought it back, and we picked it up.  It wasn't quite football, but it was called Rubbie.  And all the kids would take this little ball that was fashioned out of folded magazines and tire rubber.  And we would toss it back and forth until you got to the goal.  And you would always attack the person with it.  And we called it Rubbie.  And it was Rubbage, as I saw it played in England one time--and we played, rugby.
Speaker 2: Rugby, right.
Speaker 1: Rugby, so we called it Rubbie.  And so there were always a lot of interactive games, Hide and Seek at night.  But a lot of group games, and riding of scooters made of old skates because skates were rationed and, and all that.
Speaker 2: So people could get skates?
Speaker 1: You couldn't get them that often, but when you did, they were usually broken.  So you just nailed them to the end of the, a piece of board and put a peach crate on it.  And that became your scooter.
Speaker 2: I wondered how that happened because you see that, all the scooters and the skates.  And you know that boards were probably fairly cheap to find a board, but the skates, where are people getting the skates?
Speaker 1: Well, they were just broken pieces that you, you gained from the, from the time before rationing, but no one had new skates.  I remember my father [Ralph Woodson] being a very resourceful man at the time because he always took jobs that blacks weren't able to take.  He, he used to drive a truck from the, from the dairy, from the train to the dairy.  And they told him that blacks didn't have those jobs, if he can keep it, he could have it.  So I remember seeing brass knuckles and blackjacks in the back of his truck.  And I was told that he had to fight to keep his job.  And he was a short, stocky guy, and hot tempered and tough.  And so he was able to then make friends once he could fight to keep his job, and he did.  And so that kind of fighting spirit, he's just sort of shared with us.  And we respected him for it cause the older brothers [Charles and Rudolph] used to talk about dad having to fight to keep his job.
Story_ID: 15681
Speaker 1: You say you changed neighborhoods, and you were about seven or eight?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I remember as a--even though it was a cohesive neighborhood, and we were--I remember when my brother who was in high school, junior high school at the time, came home, chased by a gang, a black gang.  And they chased him in my street.  And so I guess it was around five o'clock, and my father [Ralph Woodson] was home.  And about twenty men came from out of their houses and surrounded this gang.  And my brother, my father said to the leader of this gang, "He will fight any one of you."  And so, my brother came in and went out and put some leather gloves on.  And they formed a big circle, and he fought the leader of the gang and beat him.  And so when the other gang members started to, gang him, the men just stepped up.  And they became intimidated, and they left.  And, and I tell young people today that that's what I remember as a young person, the cohesiveness of, of what--how black men in those times, that were troubled, how they were in those homes, in order for them to be able to step out of those homes.  And they defined their responsibility as protecting, not only their own homes and their own children, but protecting anyone in that neighborhood.  And I felt such a great feeling of comfort knowing that, that resource existed.  And my brother then went back and forth to school unmolested after that cause they knew he would fight.  But they also knew that there were men ready to stand up and support their kids.  And that's, that made an indelible impression on my mind, even as a young boy.  But at age seven, I also remember walking out of my neighborhood and walking down a street and watching these two drunken men argue, and one pulled out a knife and slashed the eye of another one.  At seven years old, I'm standing there watching this one man just slash this other man's face.  And I, to this day, I can remember it.  And, and I said, what a horrible thing.  And I think that my father then moved us out of South Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] to West Philly where there was not that same kind of tension.  In other words, you were all right as long as you were on your own block.  But if you went one block over, you had to fight the kids in that neighborhood.  So even back then, even though there was cohesiveness, there was still a lot of violence and threat.  And, and so we moved to West Philadelphia where they had porches and trees and big streets and traffic lights.  And I remember as a kid standing there in cultural shock to see this, the streets quiet at night and not see people congregating on the stove.  One other thing that I didn't mention that's very important is, when Joe Louis fought on Friday night, it was a celebration because I remember that's the only time we could stay up late.  And radios and owned bars, no cars were moving or anything because Joe Louis was fighting.  So this was, these were some very pleasant memories.
Speaker 1: Okay, so South Philly, you didn't have porches or anything?  You had--
Speaker 2: Oh, no, South Philly there were little townhouses.  They called them townhouses.  When you're rich, it's a townhouse.  When you're poor, it's a row house.  And so there were just these little, little row houses and little shotgun houses where you slept with your brothers and sisters in small rooms.  You bunked up together.
Speaker 1: I was told a long time ago that in a neighborhood, in the East Coast neighborhoods with the row houses, it was expedient really to know everybody because if you didn't and you got chased, there were no alleyways to run through or no gangway to run through.  You couldn't hide in a gangway, so you had to run the whole block or go into somebody's house, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you really did.
Speaker 1: If you didn't know anybody, you were really in trouble.
Speaker 2: Well, you always had friends.  Whenever your mother would tell you to go to the store, you had to knock on the doors of buddies to, to, so no one would take your money.  So you, you--they forced you to depend on other people.  And that attitude of living in, depending on other people was just sort of enforced as a part of the culture.
Story_ID: 15682
Speaker 1: So this new neighborhood in West Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], you were there, I guess--you'd already started school, I guess by this time?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was in third grade when we moved to West Philadelphia, and it was the first time that I ever had a white teacher. All my teachers--the other thing about the, about it is that on, when we were in second grade and we had plays, they were always at night because we had 200 or 300 parents attend a second grade play at Smith School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Now, this is in South Philly?
Speaker 2: South Philly.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: I mean that amazed me that, to this day, I'm sixty-six years old.  And I can remember a second grade play because there were so many parents who turned out at night and, and lunch pails and, and what not to watch their children.  And the superintendent was black, the teachers were black.  And contrary to a lot of myths about these integrated neighborhoods, professionally trained people did not live in South Philly where I was raised.  They, they lived in West Philly to all the other areas or Yeadon [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] or Germantown [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  There were always enclaves where middle-class, trained people, educated people lived.  They didn't live, to my knowledge, in and among janitors and laborers and people like that.  There was always class divisions, even back then.  So, somehow, some of these social scientists talk about this myth of, of desegregation sort emptied out from these neigh--black neighborhoods, all the so-called middle-class role models.  It was just a myth.
Speaker 1: In some places, it did actually.
Speaker 2: It may be.  I'm just telling you from my experience, it was--
Speaker 1: In Chicago [Illinois], it actually did.  I mean they were living like, side-by-side in Chicago.
Speaker 2: Well, not in South Philadelphia.
Speaker 1: Restrictive covenants only--blacks could only to live in one area of the town, you know.
Speaker 2: Well, in Philadelphia, there--well, well in most major cities, I know, there's always been middle, middle-income enclaves that blacks established in--I can name five cities where there're, there're areas that, that were, for some reason, people were able to build and live, that was not down in the, in the neighborhoods where I grew up.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, well, what was it like in this new environment and what was school like?
Speaker 2: It was just very open and peaceful at night.  People could sit on porches and go to the store unmolested.  It was, it was very, very different.
Speaker 1: Was it a mixed neighborhood?
Speaker 2: No, it was black.  What happens is that, you know the pattern, when a few black families move in, all the white families flee. And I was delighted because it opened opportunities.  And, and you developed relationships in those neighborhoods that exists to this day.  I went around with seven fellows that I've known, some of them from the time I was in fourth grade.  And to this day, we're getting ready to have a reunion in about two weeks where about seven of us will be coming back together again as we have.  So those relationships in those neighborhoods remain to the day.  But there you did have some professionals living across the street.  There was a couple of doctors and what not, teachers and what not.  And there were basketball games and teams and dances and things.  But it, but I still used to pedal on my bicycle all the way back to South Philadelphia to go back to what I was used to.  So it took a little while to adjust to living in this--no matter how bad something is or troubled, there's something to say about it being familiar to you.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it took a little while to make the adjustment, but I, I did and really enjoyed it.
Speaker 1: Was the new neighborhood as cohesive?
Speaker 2: It was cohesive in the sense that I didn't have--my dad [Ralph Woodson] died soon afterwards, and there were Cub Scouts that were--troops formed.  And there were men--one of these seven fellows, I'd cling to his father.  His father became my father.  And, and so we all, through all of our whole teenaged and young adult life, looked to him as our father, several of us had fathers who were deceased.  But we--there was always men and women who stepped up and became surrogate fathers to us.
Story_ID: 15683
Speaker 1: School was important.  And education wasn't emphasized in my house, but my mother [Anna Thompson Woodson] gave me the permission to seek out kids whose families believed education was important.  So I took the academic curriculum in high schools, not because I was advised about by my, by at home, but because my fellows were taking it (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And so your peer relationships are very important in, in making life choices very early on.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, what school did you attend in West Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 1: I went to George [L.] Brooks School, elementary school; Shoemaker Junior High School, and Overbrook High School.  It's the home of Wilt Chamberlain.
Speaker 2: Right, right, the Dipper, as they call (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I went to school, elementary, junior high and high school with Dip.
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah, Dr. Art [Arthur E.] Thomas went there too, I don't know if you know him.
Speaker 1: Art and I were in junior high school together.  Art and I are good friends.  Art--in fact, when we did have one violent death at the Junior High School, Shoemaker, a young man, Donald Brown, was stabbed to death five minutes after we were playing in the band together.  And Art's family moved into New Jersey to get away from that foolishness cause the violence was beginning to emerge a little bit.  And so, but Art and I remained friends throughout the years.  He was the president of Wilberforce [University, Wilberforce, Ohio] and--
Speaker 2: Central State [University, Wilberforce, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Central State.  Yeah, Art, Art and I knew each other back in, back in those days.
Speaker 2: Did you know Wilt Chamberlain?
Speaker 1: Yeah, and his family and our families were friends.  Wilt was a year older than me, but a year behind me in school.  And I remember at--when he'd played intramural ball, basketball, I was in ninth grade, and he was in eighth.  And he used to come out with long pants on because he was afraid, ashamed of his bony knees.  But--and he couldn't play.  You'd give him a little head fake, and he would just fall into the stands.  But Sam Cozen, the coach at Overbrook, took him away to summer camp for one camp, for one summer, where he worked as a bus boy and taught him basketball or at least brought out his natural talent because he was averaging forty points the following fall.
Story_ID: 15684
Speaker 1: Was Wilt Chamberlain in grade school with you?
Speaker 2: Yes, he was.  He was in--they had what they called an OB class, orthogenic backward or something, and they--cause he was a slow learner. So he was a year behind me, but--and our families knew one another.  My sister [Jean Woodson] played basketball with his sister, girls basketball was pretty popular then.  So to this day, I know Margaret, the--Margaret, his sister.
Speaker 1: He said people didn't mess with him even though he was real tall.  You would think that--you know, he was really conspicuous I guess being seven foot--
Speaker 2: He was.  He was--in eighth grade, he was 6'8" or 6'6".  No, they didn't, in those days, you know, anybody had any malady, they could get teased, but not Wilt because he was tough.  He was always tough.
Speaker 1: So what he didn't know about basketball, he knew about streets, at least?
Speaker 2: He really did.  So no one said, "How's the weather up there?" cause he would grab you and say, "Come up and find out" and punch them in the top of the head (laughter).  I remember him pounding a guy and telling him to come up and find out and bam, and--so he, you know, he, he held his own.  They never messed with Wilt.
Speaker 1: Now, this story is interesting in another aspect too is that, you say he was a slow, slower class when, you know, as an adult, I mean he certainly was an intelligent man.  Everybody seemed to agree with that.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: You know, does it speak to the social, you know, stratification of people and--
Speaker 2: No, I don't think it had to do with that.  I just think that kids grow at different and learn at different paces.  Some people are slower at, early on, and then they accelerate.  So I just think that, I mean at the time, that's, I guess how he tested and how he performed.  But he, he then progressed afterwards.  I mean children learn at different paces, you know.  Some, some of them get it.  I have a friend who was a C student all through high school and then second in his class at law school.  When he reached law school, he just took off and, and just--I was amazed that he achieved so well, but his--he finally got it and got interested and, and applied himself.
Story_ID: 15685
Speaker 1: Now when you were in grade school, did you have any particular mentors or teachers that really stood out as important?
Speaker 2: No, exc--not, not one particular teacher.  It's, it's very interesting that I went from a situation from, I guess, kindergarten through second grade where there were all black teachers.  And, and I remember Ms. Thompson who was a teacher who just took personal interest in me.  In fact, I spent a weekend at her home in West Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  It was the first time that I--in those times, teachers would actually occasionally, and I went home with her and her husband and spent a weekend there, staying at this beautiful home in West Philadelphia.  And so that's the kind of personal interest they took in me.  Then when we moved to West Philly, they were all white teachers except one.  It was not the same level of personal interaction, but they were all very caring, and they did a lot of extra things to help us learn.  And I remember learning a lot, at least feeling engaged,--.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what about subject matter?  What was your favorite subject matter in school, in grade school?
Speaker 2: I could--I didn't have a favorite subject, but I always had a good memory. So I was always selected to be in plays and things cause I could learn.  I would learn everybody's script.  I knew everyone's part whenever I played.  But often, I was misbehaving, and so they always had a back-up.  So I used to always make it, and then I'd get thrown out before the play (laughter).
Speaker 1: And so were you--
Speaker 2: But I, but I was always known as having a good memory and always learning.  I could learn fast.  And so that's--learning during that time was pretty easy.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you had like some, you kind of a behavioral problem of some kind?
Speaker 2: Well, just troublesome, joking, talking too much, nothing confrontational, nothing disrespectful, just kid stuff--
Speaker 1: Just playing?
Speaker 2: --always trying to get attention, being a jokester, enough to get you, you know, but not enough to get you kicked out or anything.
Speaker 1: So you had a pretty good sense of humor?
Speaker 2: Yeah, all the time.  Laughing was everything (laughter)
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, one of those things.  So that's what I used to get kicked out for.
Story_ID: 15686
Speaker 1: When you got to high school--I mean were your grades good in school?
Speaker 2: My grades were great in high school--not in high school, when, up through junior high school.  I became sort of the president of my class, and I was doing really well.  I always excelled in math.  I was all straight-A math student.  But I think what happened was, when I came to my graduation from junior high school, none of my family members came to it.  And I think my mom [Anna Thompson Woodson] was working hard.  Dad [Ralph Woodson] had died, and so she just sort of left me to older brothers and sisters to raise, I just think, which builds up a little resentment at the time.  But, but as a kid, you don't think about that.  You just think about what your needs are.  And so, my motivation for, for learning just sort of dissipated then.  And so I stayed in school and took the courses that I did cause my--I could be with my friends.  So I didn't really, in high school, engage, unless the subject was easy.  So I, but I used to get--I did, I did enough to pass.  But in math, I'd always get straight A's cause I didn't have to do homework.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I was a straight-A math student from, from probably sixth grade up through college; straight-A math student--never got under an A in math at ever--at any time.
Speaker 1: Did you get involved in school activities like, did you run for office in high school?
Speaker 2: No, when I--high school was just different.  I, I--my interest level just bottomed out once I got to high school.  And a lot of it had to do with that experience.  I mean I didn't have anybody checking on homework or signing report cards.  I'd sign them.  And so there was just a, there was just, I think in my household, there was more of an appreciation for people who did things with their hands.  And I couldn't do anything with my hands, so there was not an appreciation for people who were academically involved.  And so I think that was not valued.  So I think that had an influence on my school participation.
Speaker 1: Were there a lot of books around the house?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so when I went to--what's interesting, I was academic, but--and I was not performing very well.  And, but they put me in an AQ class.  They put me in an experiment, put me in classes with the top students in the school, where we went to a small room closely monitored by teachers.  We had to write a paper every week, and we would grade it, and I got a B.  When I was placed in the AQ English class and AQ History, I excelled.  But then I was put back into the general population and the grades went back to C's and D's (laughter).  I've never understood that.  And that's because somebody was monitoring me.  I was too embarrassed not to turn in assignments because I knew the teacher was gonna be looking for it.  So that expectation helped.  And so I finally dropped out of school in eleventh grade, when my friends--I was a year younger than my buddies.  And when they all graduated and went on to college, I suddenly woke up one summer saying that I don't have anybody with me.  So I, four months into my seventeenth birthday, I quit high school and joined the military.
Story_ID: 15687
Speaker 1: I went away to the military.
Speaker 2: What branch did you join?
Speaker 1: Air Force.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, that--why did you choose Air Force?
Speaker 1: Cause I knew I wouldn't be crawling around in mud and shooting at anybody.  I was gonna be an air-conditioned place (laughter).  And I was gonna eat at a table.  I wasn't about camping and any of that other stuff, so that's why.
Speaker 2: Well, this seems like a decision.  Did somebody advise you?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Cause that's often--I think young guys that do join the service, they end up joining the Marines or something for the glamour of it.  And that's the, probably the worst, I mean they get in harm's way right away--or the Army.
Speaker 1: No, that wasn't even an option for me.  I wanted to do what was easiest.  And the Air Force sounded it was a--and I look at airplanes and say, gee, they were air-conditioned planes in those days.  And everything's nice.  I said, "Nah, I'm gonna join the Air Force."  So, I called a friend of mine.  He said, "Are you crazy?"  He graduated, so I called him, and I said, "Hey, how about joining the Air Force with me?"  He said, "Are you crazy?"  I said, "Um-hum."  Four days later, we were gone.
Speaker 2: Now, before you dropped out, were you like working and stuff too?
Speaker 1: No, I was just in school.  But my, my grades were so bad that even if I had stayed till twelfth grade, I didn't have enough points to graduate.  I would have to go to summer school and then go to summer school for almost a year.  So, and I said, there's no way I'm going. So I, so I just felt I had to get out of Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  I just had to do something different with my life.  So at that point, I just said, let me join the Air Force cause I had not traveled out of like three states.
Speaker 2: It sounds like, from what you're saying, you needed like structure to really get yourself, you know--
Speaker 1: Right, the best thing that happened to me.
Speaker 2: And you weren't gonna find that at home at that point?
Speaker 1: No, no structure, no discipline.  Nothing.  The rules were set by my fellows, and I was--and none of us got in trouble or police involvement.  We had wholesome relationships with girls.  We didn't drink.  We played basketball all the time.  So, I, I was blessed to have friends who were raised in households--and my mom [Anna Thompson Woodson] raised me also to be law-abiding and to be responsible and respectful.  And so to me that, that was most--that was the more valuable lesson.  But my friends in their households, they had respect for learning.  They were--some of them had moms and dads who were college graduates.  And they were highly motivated.  And so I sort of got vicariously the importance of, of that.
Speaker 2: So you were in the [Boy] Scouts though with some of these friends--
Speaker 1: Yeah, we were, yeah, Scouts were like an alternative home for me cause every Saturday we had something to do.  And I think the young person growing up, you can survive all kinds of pain and inconvenience if you know that once a week something special is gonna happen with you.  And that something special was Saturdays cause we would either put a tent over someone's clothesline and build a tent or we were gonna get on a bus and go to an amusement park.  But there was always the fellows.  And I guess that's why I did so much work with gangs because they were a gang for me, a peaceful gang.  And they were more important to me than my parents because they got me to and from parties safely, everything.
Story_ID: 15688
Speaker 1: What was the Air Force like?  Now, you're in the Air Force--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm in the Air Force--
Speaker 1: Was it what you expected sort of?
Speaker 2: I didn't know what to expect.  All I know--and this sounds strange, but at age seventeen, I went into the Air Force believing that black people were a majority in America because that's been my reality.  I mean I, I'm in an all-black society and even though the demographics that you learn in school say otherwise, your reality speaks to something different.
Speaker 1: You didn't watch television (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Well, we didn't have tv back in those days.  It was  Muntz TV with a--and you had a big thick glass in front of it.  And tv was just wrestling and 'I Love Lucy.'  I didn't watch that.  So the only thing I watched on tv was wrestling.  And so, remember I went in the Air Force in 1955.
Speaker 1: Yeah, tv was kind of new thing--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so it wasn't TV. It was radio.  I can tell you all the radio shows.  But when I went into the, the Air Force, they were inducting, at that time, four hundred people a week.  And I saw all of these white folks, and from all over, different accents.  And, and I was at Sampson Air Force Base in [Geneva] New York, and all of a sudden, I'm in a squadron of eighty fellows and only four blacks.  And I'm staying in a barracks for the first time, living with people from different parts of the country, accents, different colors and Germans, Jews, people with accents.  And it was a, it was a real culture shock, but the Air Force was a godsend because they provided the structure needed.  And so, I, I adjusted right away.  It was very lonely at first, but, but I adjusted and--but the Air Force, what the Air Force did for me is tested me, extensively, for about a whole day.  And when I had a, a session with a psychologist, he said, "You know, you're smart enough to do whatever you want to do."  He said, "We're assigning you to an elite school, Airborne Electronics School."  So only four guys were selected.  So I was selected to go for crew training.  So I went to Keesler Field [Keesler Air Force Base] in [Biloxi] Mississippi for about six months where I was training on classified airborne electronics equipment, where you couldn't take textbooks home.  So we had three hours of theory, three hours of practice.  And you had to learn it and tested every week.  And if you didn't pass, you, you'd wash out.  And so I did, and I excelled in learning missile-tracking systems.  So that was, God--it gave me a little ego boost because then I was assigned to a flight crew.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you actually went on test flights with--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was at the space program when it first started, first earth satellite attempt and all, and helped expand the missile range.
Story_ID: 15689
Speaker 1: And so when you left New York, Sampson Air Force Base [Geneva, New York], you went to--
Speaker 2: Keesler Field [Keesler Air Force Base, Biloxi, Mississippi].
Speaker 1: Keesler Field, and that's in--
Speaker 2: Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Mississippi, okay.
Speaker 2: Where I got confronted with racism for the first time, in its raw form.
Speaker 1: And that's the rawest form down there--
Speaker 2: The rawest form, yeah.  I was going around with a Polish guy, got in the cab to go in town.  And the cab driver got us right off the base, and said, "I can take you into town.  I can him.  I can't take both of you."  And then that changed.  And you ran into some really rough stuff.
Speaker 1: So did you have any, any sense that that existed in Mississippi or down South before?
Speaker 2: I'm telling you--
Speaker 1: So you were always insulated.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  Yeah, it was, it was insulated.  You just thought that, you know, you were insulated, until you see the big Colored drinking fountains and you just feel enmity in people's eyes and voices when they greet you.  And you couldn't go to the bathroom when you wanted to or when you wanted to.  It was culture shock.
Speaker 1: Did they give you any kind of briefing before they--
Speaker 2: None.
Speaker 1: So they have these young recruits--
Speaker 2: Oh, (unclear) now that I think of it--they did give us some briefing.  When we hit Mississippi, they said, "I want all of the colored Airmen to stay in the room, and all the whites leave."  And so they, the Chaplain said to us, "You know, the laws are really tough down here.  You have to really watch yourself cause if you get caught drinking or doing all this stuff, they're gonna do this."  And so I raised my hand.  I said, "What makes you think that we, we were doing these things anyway?  I didn't drink.  I didn't do any of the things that you said, warned us against.  So why did you find it necessary to pull us together and ask us, warn us against doing these things?  You never asked us if we do these things."  And I remember the first time I ever spoke up and confronted this guy on this.  And he didn't know what to do, you know, but that was the only orientation we had.
Speaker 1: They didn't tell you anything about what they--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --the special laws for black people?
Speaker 2: No, you just learned it on your own.  (Laughter) You learned it real fast though; you learned it real fast.
Speaker 1: I guess if you ask "What's this mean?" somebody's willing to tell you.
Speaker 2: Somebody will tell you.  And the other fellows from the South take you under their wing.  And they show you where you can go, and how you, how you make it.
Speaker 1: So how did you feel about that, I mean--
Speaker 2: Bitter.  I was really bitter, but powerless.  It was like living in a state of anarchy.  It's like, you're more fearful of the police than you were the [Ku Klux] Klan.  So, no, I--that's what really motivated me to go to school, when I saw how uneducated blacks were mistreated in the South.  And then later on, when I got to my permanent base in [Cape Canaveral] Florida, we just sort of began to raise these issues back in the late, the mid--late '50s [1950s].  They would put up, paint-up, clean-up, fix-up signs with an Aunt Jemima pushing the broom.  But we would go to the Enginemen General and complain.  They would take them down.  And when they had dances at the Airmen's Club in Florida, at the Missile Base, they would send air-conditioned buses to white universities and bring young ladies there and send a little school bus in town to pick up just local girls for us.  And we had a little corner where we danced.  So we got tired of this.  We kept asking them, "Why don't you send buses to Bethune-Cookman [College, Daytona Beach, Florida] so we can have some college girls come in to dance with us?"  They refused.  So one Friday night when the music started, we all went up and asked white girls to dance.  And they did.  So we were dancing around the dance floor.  Within a half an hour, they called a Base alert (laughter).  Sirens went up and then there weren't dances for about three months.  Then they sent air conditioned buses to Bethune-Cookman.  So we went back to dancing with our own, in our little area.  So, but that caused a lot of problems for us because we were hassled by the local police.  I was locked up several times, put in the little county jails.
Story_ID: 15690
Speaker 1: Now, you were in Florida to do missile tracking and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was flying with a crew, and we tracked earth satellites, missiles.  In a typical week I would have breakfast in Florida, lunch in Cuba and dinner in Puerto Rico.  And I would go down as a part of a tracking crew, and we would station ourselves as far south as Recife, Brazil, like three or four days before the missile is to be fired.  And then when it was fired, we would go up and orbit around and track the missile to make sure that--we had all the equipment in our plane that the missile had.  So any signal that was transmitted, we could receive it and record it.  We would also search for erroneous signals, maybe a ship is coming over the horizon broadcasting in, and near the missile's signal.  So we would find it and then tell them to shut down.  So we had a lot of missions that we flew like that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, those were tense times for that sort of activity, I guess, with--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was.
Speaker 1: --nuclear threat, and then you've got space race going on with the--
Speaker 2: Sputnik went up.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that went up in '57 [1957], I think it was?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And so we were right, I was right there in the middle of that so--
Speaker 1: The U.S. was trying to get one together too there.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 15691
Speaker 1: But it's really interesting that, and, and you still had residues of racism on the base, in that they didn't keep high-ranking officers on the base.  But it was so funny, a lot of the civilians on our base.  And we got word that the new appointee to NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration], to head all your meteorological operations for, for that area, was a guy John Oxendine.  And so, they heard the name, and they assumed he was white.  So they rolled out the carpet.  He had a GS [General Schedule] rating, like a three-star general.  And when they rolled out the carpet and had us all standing there, and he came out black, we just fell out.  And they--their eyes just popped open and mouths dropped when they saw this man named John Oxendine walking down, receiving all the kudos from the generals and people scraping.  And they had to put him up in the Officer's quarters and give him all kinds of fancy cocktail parties (laughter).  So the space program was pretty progressive when it came to appointing blacks to key administrative posts cause there were several.  One of my friends was a civilian engineer who was black, and at that time working the space program.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, you were in the Air Force from--
Speaker 1: Four years.
Speaker 2: For four years, okay.
Speaker 1: '54 [1954] to '58 [1958].
Speaker 2: Now, while you were in the Air Force, the Montgomery [Alabama] Bus Boycott was going on and that was hitting the news.  That was the first--well, I guess, maybe the second major civil rights case to really get on the news on television after the Little Rock [Arkansas] incident, Montgomery Bus Boycott.  Did--what was the discussion, you know, amongst your friends about that (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Which club we were to go to in town.
Speaker 2: Okay, you were--
Speaker 1: No, when you're that age, we were concerned about dealing with racism on the base and the fact that they didn't have--they had riot stands.  And we were fighting issues on our base that pertained to us and our well-being.  We were not really attached to any larger social movement, that we, we just fought for ourselves.  But the other, the other thing that I'll never forget, is that no matter what differences that we may have had with one another, whenever one got in trouble, we all--we had underground way of helping.  It's like, I got a discrepancy report because I talked back to this sergeant.  It's, what they do is, they lock you up and they give you a discrepancy report.  Okay, since we had all the low-level jobs, except mine and a few other, two other blacks, the clerk typing it up would destroy it.  If he couldn't destroy it, then a messenger taking it to squadron would destroy it.  If he couldn't destroy it, the morning report clerk was my roommate.  He would destroy it.  So of our blacks, discrepancy reports that were written never made it to prosecution because our underground network took care of that.
Speaker 2: There's power in the ranks.
Speaker 1: You got it.  (Laughter)  And so we--now, we might have been beefing with you in town, but if you got into any trouble on that base, we took care of you.  And so, and so that was--it was funny.  But we used to, we used to take care of one another.  And very few of us got written up.
Story_ID: 15692
Speaker 1: You were in the Air Force till '58 [1958]?
Speaker 2: Four years.
Speaker 1: Did you spend most of the time in Florida during the (unclear) --
Speaker 2: Yeah, the whole time in Florida, flying down to the islands and what not.  And I just did what young people do, fooled around, drank, hung out until one day, I said that my life's not going anywhere.  And so I turned the keys to my car over to my roommate, and I went to the library and, and the began to get my GED.  And then I began to take college courses, and which means that I started going around with older guys who were married.  And so the course of my life changed.  Then I began to think about what I was gonna do when I got out.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, at this point, you weren't thinking about getting married yourself or anything at this point, right?
Speaker 2: No, just saying that there's got to be more to life than drinking and hanging, and so--cause I said, I've got to think about what am I gonna do.  And so I, then I just started--but, you know, when you're in that situation, going through what I've--you don't have any confidence in your ability to learn, even though you've accomplished some things in the Air Force, there's still that gnawing feeling that you're really not qualified; you're not very smart.  And so again, I got tested by the Air Force--Operation Bootstrap, I think it was a godsend cause they tested me academically.  And they said, "What do you want to do?"  I said, "I want to go to college, but I don't think I could qualify."  He said, "You can get in any college in the country."  He said, "You're intellectually sound enough, fit enough to get into any college in the country."  That gave me a little boost.  And so then, I started taking college courses.  And you couldn't, because of segregation, you couldn't attend the University of Miami [Coral Gables, Florida] and Rollins College [Winter Park, Florida] off-campus.  So the Air Force had those professors set up classes on camp--on base.  So I have nine credits from the University of Miami that I earned in 1957 because the Air Force arranged to teach classes on base.  And, you know, older fellows who were married and engineers and all would take them.  So I, I had classes with older fellows, but--so the Air Force was very creative about how it dealt with segregation.  And so we got full credit.  So--on the base, and the courses were taught by even better professors.  So I have to credit the Air Force with really doing a lot during those times to compensate for the in--social inequities.
Speaker 1: Okay, how did you choose Cheyney State [University, Cheyney, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: I, because friends were going there, we had--it was near home--
Speaker 1: In Pennsylvania?
Speaker 2: --the price, it was near home.  And it was affordable. And when I took the SAT's, I drank the night beforehand.  So I'd have an excuse for doing poorly.  And so when I got in at four o'clock in the morning, and took it, and really horrible scores.  And so I got admitted on a year's academic probation.  Again, you do real funny things.
Story_ID: 15693
Speaker 1: Well, tell me about Cheyney State [University, Cheyney, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Cheyney is a small black school, started by the Quakers, called the Institute of Colored Youth, and it's located about thirty-five miles southwest of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. And it's an old black college and it was affordable.  And a lot of my friends I grew up with, most of the Cheyney--the teachers in the public schools of Philadelphia are Cheyney graduates.  It's known.  It used to be a Cheyney State Teachers' College, and it just became a university.  But there was a man named James V. Oliver, who was a philologist with a PhD, and that's the--philology is the study of man to language.  It's a branch of anthropology.  And he could have gone to any university and taught, but he chose to stay at this small black college and, where he could engage people like myself.  I was admitted in academic probation for a year, along with thirteen other veterans.  But we were all highly motivated and he taught us literature, for many of us, reading our first book, cover-to-cover.  But he just motivated us to learn about cross references and introduced the classics to us and drew parallels between what Paul Laurence Dunbar had been writing and what [Geoffrey] Chaucer was writing.  The universality of, of thought and really taught us an appreciation for intellectual pursuit, and as a consequence, at the end of that first year, where half of us were admitted on academic probation, half of us made the dean's list because we were highly motivated then, cause we were a few years older than the other students.  But we understood that we had to prove ourselves.  And so we, we were imbued with a tremendous work ethic, and since I was good in math, I would tutor the other guys in math, after we worked eight hours.  So affirmative action for us was working for about eight hours a day, and driving thirty miles to school.  And then getting off at twelve at night and studying until three in the morning and then going to school at nine.  So we did that, and, and we all graduated together. Some of us went on to do great things.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you had a job in, in--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in Philadelphia?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And went to Cheyney State at the same time?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 15694
Speaker 1: I was blessed not to have been raised in affirmative action.
Speaker 2: Well, would that have made that much difference?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think it would have made a great difference because perhaps I would have been told that I should have gone to the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  And I was not intellectually equipped to be admitted as freshman to, with the demands.  And I could not have met the demands at the University of Pennsylvania at the time.  And I would have been put in a situation that was over my head.  And I would never have had the opportunity to get the personal attention and time that I did at a smaller, less competitive institution.  And so, therefore, it allowed me to--it served as a proving grounds.  And later on, in graduate school, I earned a full scholarship to the University of Penn [Pennsylvania] graduate school and did pretty good there.  But if someone had convinced me and others that I should have gone to Penn instead of Cheyney [State University, Cheyney, Pennsylvania], I don't think I'd be where I am today.
Speaker 2: Okay, well, I mean--I don't know--I'm just wondering if affirmative action really--I mean would have made that much difference in terms of--if it was applied directly to you I mean, but people could choose what they want to do, you know.
Speaker 1: Well, they say that, yeah, but I think some of the choices that we thrust on people are unfortunate for them, in a sense that we, we don't deal realistically of what expect--what their capabilities are.  And you don't know whether someone is grading someone based upon their notion of social justice or whether or not they earned it.  I remember Dr. [James V.] Oliver telling one of the students to get up and withdraw from his class cause he will never pass because he's not working hard enough.  I remember Dr. Oliver pushing us, making us do things that we didn't feel we wanted to do or could do, but he didn't have to worry about being called a racist because he was pushing us to do certain things.  And, therefore, we knew that the grades that we got were grades that were earned, not reflecting someone's pity for us or someone's sense of social justice.  I have taught with people, and I have seen people who had given black students a pass because of their feelings of the un--injustice they've suffered.  So therefore, their--the compensation was gonna be a pass.  And I--so, but that's a whole 'nother issue.
Story_ID: 15695
Speaker 1: During the era, I know, it was suspected by many people that some of the big state universities or other institutions were, you know, as they went out and got more black students, they had like federal funds to go get--increased their enrollment.
Speaker 2: That's right, and they just--they used things.  I think there was a, sort of a bait-and-switch game.  They used them to get up their numbers.  There was--and unfortunately, the students were misled into believing that they should have been there.
Speaker 1: Students often felt that there was a, they were being used.  I mean that wasn't atypical that people felt that the school was using their numbers, you know--
Speaker 2: Absolutely, they were.  They had been used--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) it started about their matriculation through the school.
Speaker 2: I, I really thought that some of the so-called advocates were using them as well, not just the racist student--schools, but some of the black advocates were exploiting these students as well.  I remember talking to five black men at, who were employed by these schools to set up tutorial programs so that underachieving black students coming in would be given a boost.  And, and they had--but these classes were voluntary.  And the only people who showed up were the Asian students.  And these fellows could not make it mandatory for those students to attend.  And as a consequence, they flunked.  And when they flunked out, then the advocates came back and said the school was racist because look at the high number of students who are dropping out.  And then there was a demand to change the threshold of what is defined as passing because then they said that the threshold was too high and was racist.  And so that, instead of somebody saying to those students, you must study; you're required to come to these tutorial programs, they were not given this as an expectation the way we were.  No, they were told that you're--it's not your problem, that it's the problem of the system.  It's someone else's problem.  And so a lot of those students passed through these institutions believing that their failures were never their own or they, they had no responsibility for their own failures; that their failures was always someone else's.  And I just thank God that I didn't have to go through that.  Never, you know, where, where somebody is saying, it's not your fault.
Speaker 1: Well, one thing's for sure, the black college is a solution to solve that problem in a sense, that you don't have to worry about that at a black college.
Story_ID: 15696
Speaker 1: Don't you think there's racism on white college campuses?
Speaker 2: Sure, there is.  But racism existed all the time--but be a champion; score in the presence of opposition, not, not in the absence of it, whether it's in sports or anything.  Fortunately, I grew up to believe that if your, if your teacher's racist, then work harder, prove it.  I think about these--the motto that I use a lot is The Magnificent Thirteen.  This was 1943, when Eleanor, when there were no black naval officers.  Eleanor Roosevelt insisted that these thirteen black men be trained as Naval Officers and the Navy finally acquiesced, but they set them up to fail.  That said that we're gonna give these naval officers in eight weeks, what we give whites in sixteen weeks.  Now, these brothers did not file a protest.  What they did was cover their windows of the barracks with blankets and stayed up all night and studied.  And when they were tested, they scored in the 90th percentile.  So the Navy said, well, they must have cheated.  So they put them in separate rooms, retested them.  They scored in the 93rd percentile.  And it was six months before the Navy commissioned them, and some of them are Rear Admirals today.  See that, that attitude is missing today.
Speaker 1: Well, I think I would submit that attitude is probably missing in most people--
Speaker 2: It is.
Speaker 1: --cause we're talking about exceptional people, with an exceptional work ethic, doing something that nobody else was required to do.
Speaker 2: But all of us during that era, we were told, it is a racist society, and you have to do better.  You have to work harder for half as much.  And you have to work.  And so it's, it's that attitude that was pervasive during that time, that caused many of us to achieve. I don't know anybody in all the schools I've been in who could not read.  And today to, to talk about 60 percent of students graduating and some of them can't even read at the third grade level, the question is, if, if racism was harsher--and it was back when I was a kid, and yet our achievement in the face of those conditions is better than it is today--
Speaker 1: Well, it's only--you're only talking about a small percentage of people--
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  If you, well--
Speaker 1: Most people didn't have a chance to go to school.
Speaker 2: Well, it is true.  But I'm not just talking about school.  I'm talking about family composition.  80 percent of all black families up until 1960 had a man and woman raising children.  We didn't have the out-of-wedlock births.  There are a lot of social conditions that have just spiraled downward today that in, in the face of the opposition of racism and slave--and discrimination back then, one has to ask, well, how was it that we maintained stable families, stable neighborhoods?  We weren't fearful that our elderly would be mugged in those communities.  How did we do that back then when we didn't have political representation, and we had no vote and we had none of the, the constraints that we have today. See, these are, these are issues that--
Speaker 1: There were challenges then.
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: There were plenty of challenges in those days.
Speaker 2: Oh, a lot of challenges.  We were being lynched every day.  Oh, sure, I'm not, I'm not discounting that.  But the issue, the point is, the principle here is how did we achieve what we achieved?  By maintaining families, men were men.  I was reading, listening to some of the doo wop songs,"when we get married","I love you forever".  How did we--we survived because of what we did, not because of what white people did or did not do.  But a lot of that has been abandoned today.  Everything that's, that's discussed today is what they are doing to us. Very seldom do we hear people saying, particularly, to our young people, yes, these are harsh conditions; yes, there's injustice and unfairness in the world, but you must attend to who you are.  And you must do all that you should do.  We don't say that to our young people today.
Story_ID: 15697
Speaker 1: I went in the Border's bookstore this weekend.  And I went to the black book section.  And I wrote down all of the book titles to find out what our scholars were saying to our people.  And 90 percent of them were victim's books. 'The Case for Reparations', 'The Case Against Racism', 'The Face in the Bottom of the Well', all of these books are saying to us, not how we can achieve or how we can start businesses or how we can achieve in the face of opposition.  It's all about how much of a victim we are.
Speaker 2: When you think about reparations, that's about how much of a victim we are?
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Well, I mean--but the point is, you know, you can do go down this, what are we doing with the money we already have?  Two hundred--a quarter of a million dollars is spent every year in the city of Detroit [Michigan] by retired black auto workers, going across the gambling tables in Canada.
Speaker 2: Well, they can go in Detroit now, they changed that rule (unclear)
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know.
Speaker 2: Casinos there (unclear)
Speaker 1: Right, but the point is, is--see, I always being something by asking, what does success look like?  If what somebody is advocating--you got all of what it is that you're asking for, what would life look like?  Given our, our patterns of spending today, if white folks gave us all the billions that we say we deserve, and they just wrote us checks, what could happen?  Within four days, they would have it back.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Because of what we do with our own money.  In other words, if what you do with your own money is any indication of what you would do when someone else gave you something.  So what does success look like?  And so I think that, to me, what has guided me in my work and my life, is I'm a, I'm a radical pragmatist.  I'm not an ideologue.  I know that I've got people who were drug addicts last year; they're free of drugs this year.  People who were struggling, out of work last year, they're now working and supporting their families this year.  To me, leadership should be defined by, not who can garner the largest group of victims; not who can organize protests or garner votes, it is how much can we do for the least of God's children so that we can measure by our performance who is better off as a consequence of what we've done.
Story_ID: 15698
Speaker 1: I think everybody pretty much agrees that we seem to be losing ground in terms of values--
Speaker 2: Some of us are losing ground.
Speaker 1: Values and economic opportunity, educational, even the desire for education is being (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, right.
Speaker 1: But I think that what I hear you saying, that other people are not saying, and what I'm hearing you I guess complain about is a--that somehow the fight against racism and the fight for civil rights is being part of the problem--
Speaker 2: It is.
Speaker 1: But I think that people would agree that we need, that only we can solve our problem in terms of our own self-directed activity.  Marcus Garvey talked about that in the 19th century--
Speaker 2: One of my favorite people.
Speaker 1: Elijah Muhammed talked about "do for self", you know--
Speaker 2: --right.
Speaker 1: And I don't think anybody disagrees with that.
Speaker 2: In principle they do, they don't.
Speaker 1: But I think that, I don't think people feel that if we had not had a Civil Rights Movement or didn't challenge power, you know, that we would be anywhere (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  Please, please understand.  I'm a, I am a civil rights veteran.  I went to jail in that Movement.  And I, I--and that's a celebrated.  It's an important.  But the challenges, and that was important, and I stand behind that.  Those were important battles to me, but some of us are fighting those same battles with the same tools that we used back then.  The challenges are different today.
Speaker 1: I don't know.  I guess some people figure there's still racism today, and they're still (unclear)--
Speaker 2: There is racism, but anyone who says that the racism that existed when we were being lynched every day in the South is no different than it is today, is lying.
Speaker 1: That's true.
Speaker 2: They are lying because the question that, that is, racism is important, but it's not the most crucial problem facing us.  If white people disappeared tomorrow, and all went to Canada and Europe, how would it affect the black-on-black crime rate?  How would it affect it the teen pregnancy rate?  The spread of AIDS, the poor work ethic?  The poor performance in our school systems?  That's what I mean by it's important to begin something by saying "What does success look like?"
Speaker 1: Now, that's disturbing to think--you think in a world without racism or the governments that we have today, doing what they're doing today, if that world disappeared, you think that black people would sink?
Speaker 2: No, we would be forced to confront the fact that our destiny is in our own hands the way our forbearers understood, and maybe we would act differently.  But as long as we have the excuse that somehow black kids are failing in [Washington] D.C. schools run by a black principal, black superintendent, black school board--we spend more per capita than almost anybody in the nation, that somehow white people are acting through remote control to cause us to miseducate our own children.  That's the myth that would be destroyed.  How is it, since the goal of the Civil Rights Movement was to put us in positions of power, political power, so that we could do better for ourselves than whites were doing for us, how is it then our children are failing in those systems controlled by our own, own people?  Whether it's foster care system--there are 55 foster care systems that are in court-ordered receiverships, most of them in these major urban centers run by us.  We have young girls as young as ten years sold into prostitution in places like Atlanta [Georgia] by black men who are pimping them.  We would never permit--they would be killed in the 40's [1940's].
Speaker 1: Well, there were pimps in the '40s [1940's] too.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but not children.  They were consensual females. In the '40s [1940s], I cannot imagine in my home in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], where they would allow a black man to take a ten-year old girl or a nine-year old girl and, and sell her on the streets.  I can't imagine that happening.  But it's happening today.
Speaker 1: It's hard to imagine it happening today really.  I mean--
Speaker 2: Well, I can give  you--it's a huge, trust me.  We, we have a major effort here, and we, we were working with the people in Atlanta, a black state legislature to make it a felony because in nowhere in the country was it even a felony.  Now, a man just got thirty years under a law passed by Donzella James, who is a black state legislator and Nina Hicks, who is a black judge.  We are working with them to, to get this problem surfaced.  And it is being done there and in five other cities.  But what I'm saying to you is that these kinds of moral outrages, I can't ever imagine that existing back in the day.  So when we look at, around and say that somehow, that racial discrimination is our biggest problem, I say, that's delusional.  But there are a lot of people who make handsome livings--a lot of middle class blacks can go to their conventions and scream racism and collect ransoms from these corporations and have cocktail parties and go back and convince themselves that they are serving their people by cussing out white folks and collecting the white folks money and going to their conventions and going back to their white neighborhoods where they live, where their kids are in white private schools, going to white universities, talking about how racism is the most important problem that we face.  They are hustling poor blacks.
Story_ID: 15699
Speaker 1: I agree with you, if one only thought that racism was the only thing you had to face, you'd be in trouble, but it would seem you'd be in trouble if you thought there was no racism.
Speaker 2: No, I, I agree.  No, I agree with you.  All I ask you to do is go to the 150 black organizations that spend about $3 billion dollars a year on goods and services at hotels.  It's the only time you see--when the [Congressional] Black Caucus has its conference, the only time the Hilton and the hotels will have a portable bar in the lobby.  It's the only time they only make them for these conventions.  That'll never happen when any white groups are in town, and we're gonna spend seven, eight dollars for a little shot of liquor.  And we're gonna spend 3 or $4 billion like this.  And I ask you, and others, to go to the agendas of those organizations and find out what we're talking about and see how many items on there that talk about what we can do for ourselves if white people didn't exist.  You may find one or two.  The majority of--I've looked at these agenda.  The majority of them are about what--our victimization, how horrible life is for us and what they need to do for us.
Speaker 1: So your critique is basically on those who are, I guess, of black leadership today, you think it's really going in the wrong direction, I take it?
Speaker 2: It has been that way for 30 years.  When the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] can spend $13million to defeat a Republican President, I don't care whether they're Democrats or Republican, $13million could better be spent doing something else, trying to get the right white man in office.  Poor blacks have suffered, I don't care which white man's in office.  By contrast, I was on Jim Lehrer News Hour with Myrlie Evers, John Jacobs, when he was running the Urban League, and a black architect who made a million a year and myself.  And that's when the Urban League, you know, issues its 'State of Black America.  And Jim Lehrer turned to me and said, "Mr. Woodson, what is the state of black America?"  I said, "For those sitting around this table, life ain't bad.  Our income has not gone down in twenty years, regardless of which white man's in the White House.  We need to stop lying to people, but for the poor blacks living in public housing, who are in troubled neighborhoods, who are in failing schools, whose kids are, are lost in the foster care system, I said, life is horrible.  And many of us who look like us are responsible for administering those systems.  But as long as we can keep the public's attention rooted on what white folks are doing, no one's going to hold us accountable for what is happening in those systems."  That's my argument.  It isn't that racism isn't a problem.  But, you see, I look at it, not from the point of view of some middle class black like myself.  I spent 90 percent of my time in, in crime-ridden, drug-infested neighborhoods dealing with solving the problems of people in Lawrence County, Alabama who don't have indoor plumbing, who are living in a shack.  I'm raising millions of dollars so we can build houses for them, put in sewage systems; getting gang members off of crack and out the drug trade.  There's where we need to be making our investment.  And I don't see anybody in those organizations spending a dime or any portion of that on those kind of issues.  Instead, we're spending them, going on Wall Street trying to make millionaires who are black, multi-millionaires.
Story_ID: 15700
Speaker 1: Cheyney State [University, Cheyney, Pennsylvania], you started to look at the world in a different way.
Speaker 2: It really did.  I saw that I was really helped a great deal intellectually by Dr. T.T.F. Fletcher and, and Dr. [James V.] Oliver and other--
Speaker 1: Now, who is Dr. Fletcher?
Speaker 2: He was an English--literature professor, just died.  Dr. T.T.F. Fletcher.  He [sic] was a PhD in literature.  And these are intellectual giants who really challenged us to think.  And I remember they would give us challenging, challenging assignments to defend positions that we didn't agree with, that he--they asked, what did you, what was your position on this?  Okay, I want you to make a case for the opposite.  And so this was very challenging to out and, and make the case.  And, but it, it left in us a sense of--to be objective in your analysis of situations and don't let your passion for something dictate what your position ought to be.  You want to let the facts speak for themselves.  And so when I went to the University of Pennsylvania School of Social Work [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]--well, first of all, I worked in a jail for three years and earned a graduate degree.  So my undergraduate is in that.  But in this juvenile jail, I fell in love with these kids that I grew up with, (unclear) same, same.  And so I changed my whole life when I was locked behind three doors in the juvenile jail with kids in there from gang murder to truancy, all in the same unit, sixty-five, sixth-eight of them.  Two of us, locked behind three doors for eight hours a day, at night, four to twelve.  It changes your worldview.
Story_ID: 15701
Speaker 1: So you're at the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] as a graduate student--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm a graduate student, but before getting there, when I was at Cheyney [State University, Cheyney, Pennsylvania], I worked three years at a juvenile jail, working eight hours a night, locked behind three doors with about sixty-five, sometimes seventy juveniles, with no program, just to survive for eight hours a night.  And a lot of the kids that I--they were in there from gang murder to truancy.  And, but all of them were from just run-down, rotten neighborhoods in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], but I really had an epiphany there.  I had a, what I call a burning bush experience, that I realized that somebody has to do something for these kids.  I loved them.  I was able to get their respect cause I grew up in the same neighborhood.  I knew who to lean on, how to lean on them.
Speaker 1: What did you see as a difference cause you, you grew up poor, but your family didn't do that kind of stuff or at least you didn't do that kind of stuff--what was the difference?  I mean your father [Ralph Woodson] died when you were young.  You didn't have a father around for most of the time, but you didn't end up doing that.
Speaker 2: No, I didn't, but I, but I--a lot of them, their mother used to drink, used to whore around.  My mom [Anna Thompson Woodson] never did that.  She was there for us.  It isn't, it isn't the absence of the father that determines whether fathering.  She allowed fathering to, to occur with somebody else's father.  But these kids had mothers who were prostitutes.  They had to fight the, the mother's boyfriend to keep him from molesting the sister.  And they were in jail because they, they beat up this boyfriend.  And the mother testified against them.  So a lot of these kids were in environ--came from environments and challenges that I never had to face.  And so I just naturally fell in love with them, and I said that I've got to go and spend the rest of my life helping them.  So I went to the School of Social Work instead of to GE [general education] in math and science, or missile nose cones.  Instead, I did, I decided that I've got to spend my life.  So I began to, from that day forward, got involved in the Civil Rights Movement, and I went to the University of Penn to try to hone my skills, personal skills so I could be a better help to the kids because love has to be disciplined.  And the School of Social Work helped me to discipline my love and affection for these kids so that I could use myself in a more effective way to help them.
Story_ID: 15702
Speaker 1: In terms of the Civil Rights Movement, what did you actually do and what (unclear)--
Speaker 2: When I was twenty-six or twenty-seven years old, I was head of the Westchester, Pennsylvania Human Rights Council.  That was the--and Vice President of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  Those were the two primary civil rights organizations.  So I came in and took over and organized demonstrations that shut down the West Chester, Pennsylvania school system over the issue of, of segregate schools and poor quality education.  I was also active in confronting the housing industry that was discriminatory.  So I, I have a very active life as a civil rights official and, and met Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.], one on one.  And Bayard Rustin was from West Chester, so we would have Bayard come in, fire up everybody, then we would do the follow up, as was the case in the Civil Rights Movement, that the leadership was really local.  And so I gained a pretty good reputation over the number of years.
Speaker 1: Did you learn organizing from Rustin, 'cause--?
Speaker 2: No, just, you know, just learned it from a local organizer.  He came in to give speeches.  And I went to some seminars, but organizing, you pretty much learn on your own from other local leaders, Stanley Branch, Walt Palmer, from Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  Most of the other leaders taught us what we knew.  And so I was very active in the Peace Movement as well.  And, but something very interesting happened that changed my life.  One was, when we were organizing demonstrations outside of Wyeth Laboratories, a pharmaceutical company, and when they desegregated, they gave jobs to nine black Ph.D. chemists.  And so when I approached these brothers and sisters to join us, they said, "We've got these jobs cause we were qualified, not because of what you all did."  And when this happened enough times, I realized I was in the wrong movement, and that the Civil Rights Movement was really about bait and switch.  Bill Raspberry wrote about this when he was young reporter for 'The Washington Post', and October 29, 1965, he wrote a piece that said poor Negroes are not benefiting from the gains of the Civil Rights Movement.  And then he went on to quote the fact that a lot of agreements were being struck that helped middle class blacks, but not low-income blacks.  And when Dr. King was killed [April 4, 1968], I was summoned to the town and physically interposed myself between the rioters and the police and the National Guard.  But what gave me the right to do that is because I knew ten neighborhood leaders who had the respect of the young people who were rioting.  And I assembled them, and I joined them and we stopped the death from occurring.  And then we gave voice to low-income blacks.  And a separate organization was set up of 500 of them because they felt they were not represented by the Civil Rights Movement.  And so, and then the whole issue of what is--their agenda was different than the agenda, and there were differences.  And I was trying to act as an intermediary.  The, the people in the community didn't want busing for integration.  They wanted to strengthen neighborhood schools, to hire a black principal, to spend more per capita on strengthening the existing schools, along with encouraging parents to help kids with homework.  And so I saw the, the grades of these students begin to improve, and yet the Civil Rights Movement said, "We need to bus them out to the suburbs."  So I said, "Well, I'm against that."  They said, "Well, Bob, your position is the same as that of the [Ku Klux] Klan and of the John Birch Society."  I said, "I don't care, that one has to take a position on, based upon what you define as truth, not who agrees or disagrees."  Because I like classical music and [Adolf] Hitler likes it, am I supposed to not like classical music?  And so I split with the Civil Rights Movement on those issues.  And then I realized that the Civil Rights Movement had a, had never really incorporated the interests of poor people, poor blacks, with their emphasize on busing, with their emphasis on race-based affirmative action that enabled black Ph.Ds to get hired, when the black janitors and line personnel who needed jobs weren't hired.  And so race-based affirmative action, I opposed it then.  I oppose it now because I saw it as a big hustle.
Speaker 1: Well, I guess I would just ask this in that regard, in this one pharmaceutical case, where nine Ph.Ds got jobs, but they had Ph.Ds and they were ready to take the jobs.
Speaker 2: Exactly, well, most of us at the Civil Rights Movement had--I had a, I had a--when you look at all the leaders and say--we all had college degrees.  Jim [James] Bevel, all, all these, all these people, Andy [Andrew] Young.  All of us had college degrees.  So when the Civil Rights Movement came along, it opened doors to all the people that had--they had Ph.Ds working at the post office.  You know, we call that the intellectual graveyard.  And they--and I'm not saying that that's bad.  That's a good thing--
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's what I'm trying to clear up (unclear)--
Speaker 2: No, no, no, that's not a bad thing.
Speaker 1: I would say it's good for a black Ph.D (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it is, it is, but they have an obligation to just not walk through the doors themselves, and say "We got these jobs cause we were qualified."  They have a moral obligation to say, "No, it's not enough to hire me, but you've got to bring my brothers and sisters through the door too.  And the condition of me coming to work for you, is that you hire nine people who work in the plant, that you'll hire nine people to work here."  But they didn't do that.
Speaker 1: So once they got in, they didn't agitate for anybody else?
Speaker 2: Heck no, and it's still that way today.  It's about getting certain classes of people in certain positions that benefit them, without demanding that somebody else come through with you.
Speaker 1: So what we're find out, we need agitation, you know, from all levels.
Speaker 2: Benefited those-- when [Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] died--it always blows my mind.  I have to laugh that everybody's talking about King's, 'I Had a Dream' speech [sic, 'I Have A Dream'], see, that's not the most important speech he gave.  Dr. King, when he--I remember being on the dais when he joined the Civil Rights Movement with the Peace Movement.  And he got cussed out, and called a Communist by Carl Rowan.  I agreed with King, and so did the nation.  And he, well, we moved.  King also realized that, what good does it do to have the means to eat where you want to or live where you want to without the economic means to exercise it?  So he was changing directions to go into, and that's why he died taking the case of janitors and, and--
Speaker 1: Poor people.
Speaker 2: Poor people.
Speaker 1: Poor people, that's right.  Garbage men, right.
Speaker 2: Garbage men.  Well, I don't see that on anybody's agenda right now.  I didn't see the Movement follow him and say that it's not enough to have black Ph.Ds on college campuses and white campuses.  That's fine.  That's one part of the agenda.  But it is not the complete agenda.
Story_ID: 15703
Speaker 1: If you look at the numbers--see, this is the part that blows my mind, race is such a passionate issue.  And we, and our beliefs are so entrenched that we refuse to look at information.  The very fact is, in the last twenty years that blacks with incomes between $75,000 and $150,000 are going up 200 percent.  Blacks with incomes above that are going up 300 percent.  But blacks with incomes below are getting worse.  So the biggest bifurcation is occurring, not between whites and blacks on income, but between blacks and blacks.  And so the question--
Speaker 2: --white people that make a certain amount are increasing too.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but I'm just talking about if you want to just take the raw numbers, the largest income gap is not between whites and blacks.  It's between blacks and blacks in terms of percentages of people.
Speaker 2: But with blacks being the poorest population--
Speaker 1: But I'm still, compared to their black counterparts.  If we were all suffering equally, why aren't we all suffering equally?
Speaker 2: I, well--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Wouldn't you argue that it's good to have some people that are not suffering?
Speaker 1: I'm not--yeah, of course.  But you see, we--then we always go back to that.  The issue isn't that should not the top thrive?  Sure, they should.  The question is going back to the nine black Ph.Ds, what obligation do you have to make sure it's just not you profiting?  See, I personally believe that I've got an obligation to use whatever influence I have to help the least of these.  You know, I don't get upset because Cornel West is forced to go from Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] back to Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey].  I mean, to me, that's not a big deal.  The question I have is why ain't he at Alcorn State [University, Lorman, Mississippi] or Cheyney [State University, Cheyney, Pennsylvania] or Lincoln [University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania]?  Why aren't they taking their, why aren't they taking their great intellect and sharing with blacks?
Speaker 2: Well (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Why don't they use their access--huh?
Speaker 2: They don't care about (unclear)
Speaker 1: Exactly, let's say that, you know.  But it always blows my mind to see them at a white university talk about racism and reparations.  They're not going to the, to the--
Speaker 2: It's two--it's the pay and the profile too.
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: You know, they want to achieve the high profile (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Exactly, all right.  But, no one, but no one, no one--and it's not politically correct to say there's a moral inconsistency there.
Speaker 2: He could maintain the profile perhaps if he went back now, after having been up there.
Speaker 1: Exactly, but no, there is, Skip, [Henry Louis] 'Skip' Gates is touting the fact that he's raised millions for Harvard, not for a dying black university.  But you see these little moral inconsistencies and little inconveniences, they're something we just brush under the rug.  You know, we don't, we won't discuss them.
Speaker 2: But should you focus so much on them or focus on what working-class black people can do or even non-working-class black people can do to organize themselves--
Speaker 1: That's what we do.  I spend all of my time in, not worrying about what they do, but just coming up with strategies of what ought to be done.  But it always blows my mind when I go in to get corporate contributors to these kind of efforts, they say, oh, we already gave to Skip Gates.  We already gave to Cornel West.  We already bought our table at the NAACP's [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] Convention.
Speaker 2: So that puts you in a juxtaposition with those--
Speaker 1: Exactly, none of those--we're letting people off the hook.  All they've got to do is, you know, spend a few thousand dollars making sure that someone has the jet to go to protest something somewhere, and they're all right.  And so when legitimate efforts come up that really could make a difference, so that's all.  I'm just trying to suggest that we need, we need to look at what proportion of our time and energy and money is spent on which part of the problem.  And I'm saying right now, there is no proportionality.  We spend most of our time whining and complaining--I said it, the three Bs, bitching, begging and busing.  Those are the three Bs that define who we are.  And I frankly have gotten to the point where I'm ashamed of our people.  I'm getting to the point where I'm ashamed to see another group worrying and begging and saying all the, you know, all, all the problems we face, white folks did it and unless they change, there's nothing we can do.  Meantime, they're taking their little money and living prosperous lives and traveling all over, writing these victims' books that Black Studies programs requires even white students to purchase.  And they use that as prima facie evidence that these are popular views.  The game has to stop at a certain point, sometime.  But I, I don't wait to stop the game.  I just go and do what I do.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I can understand your critique of them on a level, but I still, I mean books that are written as a critique of racism that actually does exist, you know, seems to me--I don't know if you're focused on the real critical thing.  I mean, I don't--
Speaker 1: The critical thing that I focus on is solutions.  Over the past twenty-two years, running this place [National Center for Neighborhood Enterprise], we have leveraged over twenty-eightmillion dollars--.
Speaker 2: From--
Speaker 1: From public and private sources, primarily private, that have helped to revitalize, rejuvenate, restore black families, neighborhoods and the like.
Speaker 2: Okay, now--
Speaker 1: That's we spend--that's what I spend my time doing.
Story_ID: 15704
Speaker 1: As I said earlier, Marcus Garvey, back in the teens and 20s [1920s]--
Speaker 2: Twenties.
Speaker 1: The Universal [Negro] Improvement Association and--
Speaker 2: There hasn't been a person like him since.
Speaker 1: --[African Communities] League of the World, had a program where black people gave money, poor people gave money--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And that money was collected, and then used and--
Speaker 2: Right, Negro Improvement Association.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Dorothy Height, last week, and she said, it was the most efficient organization she's ever worked for.  She used to proofread for the League of the World.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But, I mean in history now they tell us that Garvey misspent the money on something, but there's, there's no--
Speaker 2: He was sold out by the black middle class too.
Speaker 1: Yeah, there was, he was attacked, yeah.  But he was more popular than any leader in recent--
Speaker 2: And he was, and we haven't had anyone since.
Speaker 1: Right, but the idea of black people collecting their money, pooling it together and then buying factories and steamships and other things, that was something that was tough to do, but people were doing it then.  And the reason why it doesn't exist now as a success is because the Federal government actually destroyed it, you know, through the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation].
Speaker 2: Wait, wait, wait a minute now.  You say the FBI did it, right.
Speaker 1: The pre-FBI and J. Edgar Hoover.
Speaker 2: But who initiated the action?  Who testified in court? Who demanded that the racist Justice Department prosecute Garvey?
Speaker 1: Well, there was a Committee--you're probably getting into the Committee of black people that signed (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Thank you.  They were, they were the threatened black leadership at the time because he was physically--
Speaker 1: I don't think that they could--I don't think that they have that kind of power.  I think that they were an excuse for the Federal government to do what they already wanted to do, which is get rid of this powerful economic force.
Speaker 2: No, have you read--have you seen any of the--
Speaker 1: And one other--
Speaker 2: Wait a minute, have you seen any of the documents that talk about what they did?  And how can you then say that--in fact, the Justice Department didn't care what we did.  But these leaders insisted, they even testified.  Without their conspiracy, without them conspiring with the Justice Department, the Justice Department would have had no case.  E. W.--they would not have had a case.
Speaker 1: This wasn't actually--the United States at the time was not an innocent government, you know, being manipulated by Negro middle class people at that time, believe me.  Woodrow Wilson is the one that put the Colored and White signs in the White House, and I mean, you know, we've got a government here that, you know, at the time that Garvey rose to ascendence, he [Woodrow Wilson] was lynching black folks like flies in the South, you know.
Speaker 2: And white folks, white folks down there didn't care how high you got as long as you stayed on your own.  It was a--
Speaker 1: On your own?
Speaker 2: As long as you stayed to your--well, the reason you had more black millionaires in the South than in the North is because we could establish our own institutions and, and have them thrive.  The reason that Carver [George Washington Carver] and all of them functioned in the South is because they were given a level of autonomy, as long as you stayed over there.  But you know what, your attitude is precisely what I'm, what I'm talking about.  It always says that we were exempt from any responsibility for the self destruction that we, that we reaped, even on Garvey.  And if you read E. David Cronin's "Black Majesty", I can give you any number of references that talks specifically--
Speaker 1: He didn't even know Garvey's full name, but--
Speaker 2: But the point is that if you go in--but for you to say that somehow, their participation was fairly innocent--
Speaker 1: Who, the--
Speaker 2: The, the--
Speaker 1: No, I don't even say that.  I mean, I'm just saying there's no, it's not the power in it that you're giving it.  middle class black folks in those could not make the Federal government do anything.  I mean they--
Speaker 2: When it was destructive of blacks, they could, just as, just as people on plantations gave up slaves to say that they are threatening to take out the plantation.  And they gave their names up, yeah, they, white folk were always willing to listen to turncoats and, and people who were ready to rail away on people--
Speaker 1: (Unclear)
Speaker 2: Yeah, they would want--
Speaker 1: Because they already have an agenda.
Speaker 2: Of course, but the point is--
Speaker 1: Colonel Sanders already had an agenda, right?  And when the guy in the big house gives him the names of the bad niggers in the field, then sure he's gonna use them, but he's already got an agenda, and it's enslavement.  So I'm saying the Federal government in that instance was--already had an agenda of oppression which they were acting out and--
Speaker 2: So you and I have a different view of the world, and you're not gonna (clear)--
Speaker 1: So you're saying that--
Speaker 2: No, I, I'm just saying to you, I'm just saying to you enough said about this because we, you and I are not going anywhere on this.  All I'm saying to you is that the federal--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) you don't believe that the federal government (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Sure, they did, but the Federal government could not have acted against Garvey without the conscious and active cooperation of those black leaders cause there wasn't at one time, to say we have no evidence of income tax evasion.  And they said, we will give you evidence.  They never did have it, and they held up a empty envelope to say, we have evidence here.  And they gave it their sanction.  And they knew there would be no protests from the black leadership at the time if Garvey went down.  And they were assured there would be no protests.  There would be applause, and so it was a combination of the, of the information, testimony, and, and saying--the silence from groups if they took Garvey out.  And they were relieved because physically, he was too black for a lot of them.  He was also was the only person who could mobilize black people who looked like, looked like him.  And so, yeah, the government did what it did, but it could not have been successful if it were not the active collaboration of the so-called liberal black civil rights leadership.  Garvey would not have gone done without them.  The black guy who advised him to buy those bad ships from the New York ship company, Garvey relied upon this man.  And he was paid by the New York ship company.  And he, Garvey listened to him, and he bought the ships that were over-priced and underperforming.  If it wasn't that black man there whose advice Garvey was following, he would not have lost the money.  And he did.
Story_ID: 15705
Speaker 1: After you saw this problem in the Civil Rights Movements, the turning of things--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And let me just say that a lot of people were very alarmed about busing and the breaking up of black neighborhood schools in the North, especially.  I mean they were very--
Speaker 2: But there was a big schism between the black intellectuals, the black civil rights advocates and the people.  You know, Judge [W. Arthur] Garrity in Boston [Massachusetts], before he made that ruling, he asked the people whose children were on those buses what they wanted.  There were six months of town meetings.  They came back and said, we want neighborhood schools.  But Tom--what's his name?  Had the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and all these people, they said to Judge Garrity, forget what these people want.  Bus them.  Not one of them had their kids on those buses, not one of them.  And so to me, that's where the, the moral inconsistency comes, where one group of middle-class blacks thrusts policies on another group, where they don't have to suffer the consequences of those policies.  Tom [Thomas] Atkins, 'cause I was sent up there.  I worked for the National Urban League at the time, and I was sent as--to go and look into it and make a report.  So here's another example, a major social event that destabilized the learning for thousands of poor black and working-class blacks, where the middle class did them in by thrusting policies on them that they didn't even--that, where their kids wouldn't have to suffer the consequences.  And so that pattern I saw repeated endless times, which sort of caused me to then work, begin to work on behalf of poor people of all colors, saying what's more important than race today is the issue of class.  And so I began--I still believe that class is a more formidable enemy to the interest of poor people than race.  But that puts me at odds with the people who profiteer from the whole agitation on issues of race because it exempts them from doing anything.  You can, you can keep saying that white folks are the problem for the next forty years, make your money, retire and walk away feeling as if you've, you're committed.  And you don't change anything.  Or you can do what we do and that is to say, we want leadership to be defined by how many people are better off as a consequence of what we do.
Story_ID: 15706
Speaker 1: Well, let's follow up your career now.  Now, after the, in the '60s [1960s], you were involved in Civil Rights (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and then I went to work for the Unitarian [Universalist] Service Committee.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Liberal, white group, first black to run a national program.
Speaker 1: And how did you get that job now?
Speaker 2: I had been making the newspapers a lot locally and somebody from there heard about me and asked me to come and would I be their first--because they had the Black [Unitarian Universalist] Caucus--the Unitarian Caucus was putting pressure on them to do something since they had black programs--So they hired me as a counter to the Black Caucus, in a sense--
Speaker 1: The Unitarians hired you as a Caucus, a (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they hired, hired me to come up and run their national programs cause I had experience dealing with poor people.
Speaker 1: Okay, and in answer to--,
Speaker 2: In answer to Caucus saying, "What are you doing to get black folks?"  So I came up with an attitude of conciliation and met with Hayward Henry, who was one of the--I said, "Hayward, listen.  I'm here, you know, and I want to know what we can do to help poor folks out here in these communities," you know.  And so he, he ran his little power thing on me.  And--
Speaker 1: Hayward Henry, he's very--well, he's a well-known figure from the Civil Rights Movement and SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee]--,
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So we, we had an interesting encounter.
Story_ID: 15707
Speaker 1: So you're at the Universal--the Unitarian (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, I'm at the Unitarian [Universalist] Service Committee, and I'm all--this is my national job.  And I'm able to travel all over the country.  And I'm dealing with Native Americans.  I helped the Indians take over Alcatraz [Island, San Francisco Bay, California] by--
Speaker 1: How did you do that?
Speaker 2: By working with John Trudeau and trying to help them, help raise some money to buy a barge--I mean to, to buy a diesel generator to operate it.  And I just said to him, "John, you're poorly organized and you're poorly managed."  And so I teamed up with him and helped them in their take-over.  I helped Cesar Chavez and the farm workers by setting up a health, labor unit.  I did a lot of things, for groups like that; and brought them together every quarters, the leaders of these groups, and what I called the Rainbow Coalition, because then I gave them training because a lot of neighborhood activists were just poor managers of money, poor organizers of events.  You know, so, so I, I--I said my job is to train them in how to operate efficient organizations.  And they accepted some of it with varying degrees of success, but the point is, but then I got in trouble with the Unitarians because when I looked around, 70 percent of all the money they raised went for administration and only 30 percent for sal--for, for programs.  And I, I lived with that.  And then a cut came, they wanted to cut the programs by 30 percent and, and pay us more money and bring another administrator on who was losing his position overseas.  I said "That will dramatically increase the administrative and the proportion will be off."  And so I protested that and said, "Why don't we cut our own salaries by 10 percent.  Then I can go to the field and say, 'Well, you cut yours by 10 percent.'"  Well, I got fired.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's not a popular position to take in (unclear)--
Speaker 2: And, but the staff, they didn't do it properly and there was a big board meeting.  And I was reinstated.  And the president there for eighteen years was fired.  I was reinstated.  But I knew, once you kill the king, you have to go.
Story_ID: 15708
Speaker 1: So then I went to the Urban League, National Urban League, thinking, "Oh, those are white liberals.  These are black liberals.  So I know they--these are brothers and sisters."  And what I found there was no different than what the Unitarians were doing.  [Richard M.] Nixon gave the Urban League movement between--about $90million when he was in power to solve poverty. Thirty-three million dollars stayed at the national office. $60 [million] went to the field.  People stayed up all night for two weeks writing proposals.  I saw a lot of consulting firms set up and all the rip off occurred.  And so when the Ford Administration [President Gerald R. Ford] came in, after Nixon was, left office, Vernon Jordan went to Ford and said, "We want our money."  And he showed them the audit.  Then they had to pay back millions of dollars, misspent funds.  And townhouses were purchased and--and so I really became disgusted after, in the five years.  But I was able to get around and meet people and organize and do my thing.  And I was one of their top program people.  And I left in disgust and came to the American Enterprise Institute.  At the Urban League, I had to conspire to excellence.  See, if I wanted to run women and brag about what I had just done, and, and then have conferences for middle-class people at the Super Bowl, where I could fly in as consultants friends who could do things, see, I'd a been very popular.
Speaker 2: That's the kind of stuff that was going on at the Urban League?
Speaker 1: Exactly.  Yes.  But instead, what I wanted to do was serve poor folks.  And when I worked, and my staff worked over an Easter weekend because Xenia had just struck, hurricane [sic, tornado] Xenia, Ohio, and we stayed up all night--
Speaker 2: This is '74 [1974]?
Speaker 1: Yes, preparing brochures to help disaster victims avoid being exploited by contractors and what not.  And I worked with the Urban League Regional Director.  And we put these--
Speaker 2: That's in Dayton [Ohio]--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: That's Ed Krutchin, when (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Yes, and we put manuals on a Greyhound bus.  Instead of people applauding us, we were criticized.  We were told, from then on, no one can work after hours in the building or on weekends, because we were messing up the bell shaped curve.  So we were vilified.  We were all single, young staff.  We were vilified for working over Easter weekend to help some people.  So after that, I realized I'm in the wrong place.  And so I went to the American Enterprise Institute, a conservative, white think tank.
Story_ID: 15709
Speaker 1: Now, how did you get in--were you invited in that or did--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Dr. Peter Berger--when I was at the [National] Urban League, I was one of six consultants asked to come and comment on the new policy paradigm to empower people, he was developing.  And I argued with all of his conservative scholars in my area.  And six months later, Peter Berger came back to me and said--reintroduced himself, and he said, "Would you come and write a book based upon our paradigm and your experience?"  And I said, "Why, because I argued with all your criminologists?"  He says, "Precisely, because you argued and challenged them; that you had logical arguments based upon empirical evidence.  And I'm impressed with that.  And would you come and write a book based on your experience?  You can go out to those communities, bring them into the American Enterprise [Institute].  Do whatever you need to do, but write a book about the meaning of the things you've done all your life."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so Carter [President Jimmy Carter] got elected.  I changed my party to Independent from a liberal Democrat cause I just thought he was a disaster, would be.
Speaker 1: Did you think he was a disaster?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I do.  I think he was a disaster.  And then I went to Amer--work for American Enterprise Institute where I was for five years.  And I published two books and got, you know--and this was a philosophical foundation for my place that I started here, a national center.
Story_ID: 15710
Speaker 1: In the late '70s [1970s], mid-70s, Walter Williams, Thomas Sowell were emerging, black conservative voices and, and yourself, I supposed?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, all right.
Speaker 2: Clarence Thomas.
Speaker 1: Clarence Thomas.
Speaker 2: Clarence McKee from, who served on the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] for a while.  Yeah, they, they did.  And we were all--in fact, we met at the Fairmount Conference.  It was an attempt to bring us all together.  And Larry Thompson, who just, was Assistant Attorney--Deputy Attorney General, was a part of that.  And so we got a chance to meet blacks who were thinking similar.  I find it fascinating that when I held these same views that I held in the '60s [1960s], I was called a black nationalist.  And then today I'm called an conservative.  I haven't changed my views since the '60s.  [Minister Louis] Farrakhan and Malcolm [ X] all said that, that our destiny is in our own hands.
Story_ID: 15711
Speaker 1: What they [Minister Louis Farrakhan and Malcolm X] did though is different from many of the black conservatives.  They actually raise their own money.
Speaker 2: --that's right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Elijah Muhammad, you know, raised money from the black masses basically.  Malcolm X, you know, and likewise, [Louis] Farrakhan, they don't get funded by anybody.
Speaker 2: Right--.
Speaker 1: Neither did [Marcus] Garvey.
Speaker 2: Well, Garvey did get some support.  Garvey was supported by some racist groups who, who--not in, not in any large numbers, but he did get some support from some whites who agreed to his--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) there was some moral support around, it wasn't, well, it wasn't moral for him, but it was--they had, they agreed with the idea that black folks should go back to Africa.  But Garvey's position wasn't that all blacks should go--
Speaker 2: No, no, he never was that.  And he's unfairly defined that way.  He said there should be trade for those who want to, sure.  But essentially he was for self help and not back-to-Africa movements.
Speaker 1: And what he's--he's criticized by many today for meeting with the [Ku Klux] Klan at a certain point.  He met with the Grand Dragon on occasions to--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: -- discuss--cause there was a lot of UNIA [Universal Negro Improvement Association] members in the South when these lynchings were going on, and they were armed.  And it was like a, like a negotiation (unclear) --
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: You know, protocol around what should and should not happen down there.  And, but I'm not sure what his, what the outcome of all that was--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: But you see my thing is, you know, we--I don't get hung up on who funds who.  I just kind of, what do you do?  What do you do?  I mean, you know, we can, we can spend hours and days arguing about, you know, like, I mean I can criticize Jesse [Jackson] and them for holding up--Jesse and all them people, they wouldn't exist if those people they say are racists didn't fund them.  They wouldn't exist.  They don't get their money from black folks; very little comes from them.  And so, but the issue is not that so much.  It's what do you do?  I mean black conservatives and black liberals get their money from whites.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was trying to say--(unclear)
Speaker 2: Yeah, both of them get their money.  See, that's not an important issue to me.  To me, it is, is what is the consequence?  Where is the fruit of what you do?  And so I have the--so when I came to the American Enterprise Institute where I was for five years, I was able to go back, started the, helped the Resident Management Movement, public housing, which saw $48million flow from federal and state governments into public housing groups, that enabled residents to buy their own dwellings.  We were the pioneers of that.  We got the Federal law changed that enabled them to--and that kind of stuff.  And we did a lot about gang intervention that, that is the foundation of this place.  So I was able to publish at the--and ironically, I was able to publish more at a conservative white think tank than I ever was enabled to incur at a liberal black activists group, 'cause the first thing they said, well, "Well, Vernon [Jordan] hasn't published a book.  So you can't."  The crabs in the barrel thing.  But, I, I learned to form strategic alliances.  I found that conservatives are people of business.  And that's why the word "enterprise" is in our name.  In the, in a market economy, C students prevail.  A students teach at universities; C students endow.  So there's an appreciation for untutored people among conservatives, that you don't find among liberals, who are more concerned about your credentials.  And so I found a very interesting, comfortable place among conservatives.  Neither one of us have to worry about who's coming home to dinner.  I'm not interested in their social life.  They aren't interested in mine.  And so I think that my, my--the interests of my groups that I serve, my poor folks, are best served by conservatives who are business-oriented because they just want to know what the deal is.
Story_ID: 15712
Speaker 1: What really works now with, in neighborhoods that are in trouble and amongst youth that are in trouble today?
Speaker 2: What really works is taking the, I say that the human body gets healed by antibodies, right, inside the body.  When injury occurs, healing begins cause that's the natural state of the body, right?
Speaker 1: Or not.
Speaker 2: Or not.  But the point is, the natural state is that if you cut your hand, the bleeding stops in a healthy person, you know.
Speaker 1: It depends on how deep the cut is.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay, but nevertheless, it will stop if you are, if you're a healthy person and you just cut your hand, you're a hemophiliac, you're not.  But if, on a healthy person, so the natural state of the human body is health.  It's oriented towards health.  We go into shock before our brain traumatizes to prevent us from--okay, that's the orientation.  I'm saying that these antibodies--and that the best--that's why AIDS is so devastating.  It attacks the body's immune system.  Neighborhood leaders that have the trust and confidence of these violent predators in these neighborhoods are that potential antibody.  We go and find people who may be a drug dealer, may be a predator.  We reach him through our faith experience and change him around.  I just need one who's been to prison, who has influence, who God has touched his heart.  And through him, he reaches out to his peer inside this one neighborhood.  And then he, in turn, reaches another and another and another.  The next thing you know, we have a critical mass of maybe ten.  Just through those ten, we're able to change a whole neighborhood.  We did this in Benning Terrace [Washington, D.C.] seven years ago when there were fifty-five murders in the five, square-block area.  And I had them tutoring these guys to do this kind of intervention, based upon what I've known.  And so they said, "Well, Bob, yeah, we can do that cause we've got the trust, but where do we do it?"  And then this twelve-year old boy, Darryl Hall, was killed.  And I called him up and said, "God has given you to the place."  So they went up and brought, reached the leadership on both sides of these warring factions, The Avenue and The Circle.  And I had them bring them to my office here.  And they came in separate vans.  They were searched.  They all had bullet-proof vests on under their sweaters.  I said, "We're spiritual, but we ain't crazy."  And we brought them in here.  I knew from my experience that you give them a meal cause kids will fight when they're drinking together, not when they're eating together.  And so we got them in here talking.  And they said, "No one's ever asked us to be peaceful."  And we talked about three hours, and finally we had a second session, and they shook hands.  And we signed a Peace Pact.  But then we put them to work, after the press conference, all in, in all the newspapers.  They put them to work, fixing up the very community they used to terrorize.  But the leaders became foremen.  All of them defied the myths.  Everybody says that people won't give up the lucrative drug trade to take a $6.50 an hour job.  All of them did.  And they got respect from people who used to run from them.  And now, and seven years later, there has not been a single, crew-related killing out there, seven years.  People barbeque, do this.  I have written that up, taken--it was on PBS [Public Broadcasting System], CBS [Columbia Broadcasting System], all of the networks, I have taken that model now, exported it to six other cities.
Speaker 1: Now, that's impressive.  I know it's the kind of thing--I mean there's another program like this in Boston [Massachusetts] that, well, it was--
Speaker 2: No, I know, yeah.
Speaker 1: -- Reverend Eugene Rivers, Ten Point Coalition, did something similar, and they used the organizing approach where preachers in these store-front churches who were in the community, and who, you know, were part of the community, have them go door-to-door and meet the youth on the block and give them a similar offer, you know, bring them together around similar things.  And they cut violence down to zero in a couple neighborhoods in Dorchester [Massachusetts] at least, you know.  I'm not sure what's currently going there, but they did that for a couple of years at least.
Story_ID: 15713
Speaker 1: Well, we've taken our models, moved it to a whole 'nother level now.  We, in fact, are getting ready to have a conference in a few months here because our guys in Dallas [Texas] took it to another level.  They went into one of the most dangerous high schools, [James] Madison High [School].  It was the--of ninety-three schools, it was the most dangerous.  Now, it's the safest because of the presence of our--seven of our guys as hall monitors for three years, because the kids love them, know them, respect them.  Some of these had been in prison for eight, nine years.  They set up a program after, they called it a Time Zone, where the kids were going, it's a youth night club, where there's no nasty music.  There's no hats on, no drinking; where they can drink a milk shake and fall in love.  And now, that's been exported to three other schools.  And now, they're gonna go to seven.  But I'm bringing the fellows here and the principal and the, everybody so that we can teach others about they control violence in schools and violence in communities.  See, that's what I'm talking about, the fruit of something.  And so we're inviting, the funding--we've just gotten some major funding for this.  And potentially, you see, I think it can, it can go all over the country because you've got guys coming out of prison.  We're preparing them in prison, that when they come out, they need to be a part of the solution.  And so, so we are trying to set up models so that we can begin to use and restore these communities by using the antibodies.  These guys are antibodies--and women too.  We have some women involved because we use their reputations.  You see their charac--their characteristics don't change.  Their character changes.  As a consequence, their characteristics add value.  They're an antibody.  Collectively, they're an immune system.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you're saying--explain that.  Their characteristics don't change, but their character changes.
Speaker 1: In other words, they're tough.  They're respected.  They're feared.  That doesn't change.  The difference is, they're using that characteristic in a service of peace and restoration.  And so then it has an advantage in that situation.
Story_ID: 15714
Speaker 1: What's been your most successful project or program that you've been involved in?
Speaker 2: Probably a program that we support in San Antonio, Texas, Pastor Freddie Garcia, Victory Temple [Church], where this man used to be a hopeless drug addict thirty-six years ago; had failed all psychiatric programs.  Jail couldn't change him.  Psychiatrists couldn't change him.  An experience with Jesus Christ did.  Then he married his, his girlfriend and brought her to Christ, and now he's started something called Victory Temple.  And now thirty-six years later, he has transformed 13,500 hard-core drug addicts, thieves, cut-throats, prostitutes, people that people used to walk over with tattoos on their arms, coming off of a thirty, a twenty-year heroin addiction, they have--and so right now, and with about a 60 to 70 percent success rate, at a cost of about $60.00 a day.  That to me is the most--and we just helped them raise $3.6million that they're gonna build a brand new facility, that they've been operating out of little hovels, buildings, little barracks.  And so, but he wants to have it all paid for because he says, he doesn't want to preach to people's pocketbooks.  He wants to preach to their hearts.  So he doesn't want to have any debt.  So we send all of our hard-core cases from around the country to Pastor Freddie.  So people who, who jail couldn't change and what not, we send them to Pastor Freddie.  So, that to me, is, is an example of the most successful program I think around.
Story_ID: 15715
Speaker 1: How important is religion in this process?
Speaker 2: It is central to all of this because if the problem, as I--drug and alcohol addiction is, is probably the best example that, of how irrational our problems are.  See, drug and alcohol addiction cannot be addressed through education.  That's why we wasted millions of dollars--studies have proven that spending millions of dollars on ads with eggs frying on skillets, the assumption--see, that's a rational, education's a rational approach when the problems are irrational.  And it's because if there, if it wasn't irrational, then why do you have Leon Lett, the former Dallas [Texas] football player, multi-million dollar player, whose being tested ten times a month for drugs, on the eve of the Super Bowl, blows up his nose?
Speaker 1: Yeah, but you have so many more than aren't though.  Aren't--
Speaker 2: Sure, I know.  But the point is, you see, I'm--the point I'm making is that it's irrational, and you can't solve an irrational problem through education or rational approaches.  If you did, you wouldn't have Ph.Ds and doctors and pharmacologist who know what drugs will do to you, and still taking it.  When people knowingly do something that's self-destructive, educating them that that's wrong is not enough.  There's something else going on there, and I say that something else is a spiritual vacuum, that has to be filled with something.  And drug fills that vacuum.  But experience with God, either through the Muslim faith, Jewish or what not, the God of Isaac, Abraham and Jacob or to a Christian experience.  Some experience with the living God is the only thing that I know that fills that vacuum for people and so that, that's why the groups that I have found in my twenty-two years experience here of looking for solutions, when I find something that works, fundamental to that is they bring people into an experience with God.  And in my book, 'The Triumphs of Joseph,' I use Joseph and the Bible as a metaphor for how power should, should interact with the powerless because Joseph was an uneducated Hebrew shepherd who partnered with a polytheistic Pharaoh, and together they had a business relationship that fed the world.  One was Jewish, one was Egyptian, classic enemies.  And yet they saw value in one another and they came together.  That's what we've got to do today.  We've got to bring--people with knowledge about how to address these moral problems, have to come together with people with money and power who have a strategic interest in solving them.  And then they dictate to everybody else what needs to be done.
Story_ID: 15716
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?  As if you haven't already told me.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, my hopes--my concern first of all, is the moral pit into which we are descending, where our young people through our music vilify our women.  They elevate pimping and hustling, where this, this self destructive behavior is not only supported and promoted by black scholars.  I think how we are self-denigrating, that, that's what concerns me most.  What I find most encouraging is there's an awful lot of pent up moral demand in the black community.  There is a lot of pent up desire to return to the moral people that we were.  There's a pent up desire righteousness.  But it's not popular to say that.  And I think that change will come, not from the middle-class.  This time it'll come from poor blacks that we work with because they've got more at stake.  See, the middle class can delude themselves into believing because they may have some material comforts, that their pain and suffering is not quite as apparent as someone whose got children going to poorly-run schools, who have to go through the gauntlet of drug addicts and drug dealers to get them there, that their reality is, is much more acute than some well-educated black who thinks they're living the good life.  And so I think, I, I see nothing short of a moral backlash against these cultural practices that are killing us; and that we take responsibility for ourselves.  And one of the things that I did once in 1985, when I got 300 black folks together, activists all over the country, and I did something that we need to do maybe for a year.  I said, "For three days, we're not gonna talk about white folks.  For three days, we're not gonna talk about any problems for which we don't have a solution.  And for three days, we're just gonna talk about what we can do, if no one does anything else, what are we gonna do to help ourselves?  What resources do we have if no one agrees to help us?"  It was a fascinating exercise.  We need to do this as a people, that bring our conferences and conventions together for once and say, instead of whining and complaining about what white folks haven't done, why don't we take the 150 black organizations that spend $3 billion in hotels and goods and services on fancy clothes and liquor and food, in white hotels complaining about what white folks aren't doing for us, why don't we come together in clusters of five and agree to have our conventions in one city.  And then take that pledge to a black developer, or financier, and buy a Hyatt Hotel all over the country.  And, therefore, you don't have to complain about the employment practices at those institutions because you will be setting those practices cause you own it.  I'd like to see us just do this for one year.
Story_ID: 15717
Speaker 1: What would you consider at this point to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: What I consider to be my legacy is that I challenged the, the hierarchy of classism that says that only middle-class people have a right to make decisions and hold judgments about how institutions are run.  I hope the low-income leaders that I have worked with will understand that their destiny is in their own hands, and I have an institution that will continue to make that message and say to America that the tree should be judged by its fruit.  And if nothing else, I want people to say that the Josephs of this world have a rightful place at the table.
Story_ID: 15718
Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as, as--Ethel Payne, who was a celebrated black journalist, in fact, one of the best, the first black to be a White House correspondent.  She died some years ago, and she reached out to me when I first came to this city.  And she said something in describing me to some people that I remember.  She said, "Bob, I think you are black America's conscience."  I hope to be remembered as a conscience.  But not only as a conscience, as somebody who said there is truly power in the powerless and that I was able to focus attention away from the class of blacks who are exploiting the conditions of the black underclass and instead, let these black underclass take responsibility for raising up their own leaders through challenge and empirical ways, what is being done in their name because I really think we're into a bait and switch game that I want, I--and, hopefully, that my legacy is "Bob Woodson helped stop the bait and switch game.  Poor blacks stopped allowing themselves to be used as the bait and then when the rewards come"--no, they, they are used as the bait through the demands that are placed on white institutions for recompense for what is done to all black people.  In other words, when it's convenient, we generalize.  But when the benefits arrive, it only benefits those at the top, that I hope that my legacy will be that I stopped that bait and switch game and I educated and informed and inspired poor people, poor blacks to take charge of their own lives and their own institutions and to form strategic alliances with those outside, regardless of their race and seek out people who have strategic interests that are compatible with owns--their own and not allow race to prevent them from the search.
Speaker 1: Okay, is there anything that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: Anything that I would do differently?  I would just do what I'm doing with a higher level of intensity.
Story_ID: 15719
Speaker 1: About four years ago, I received a request from a group in Atlanta, Georgia that young girls, as young as ten years old were being suppressed into prostitution by these black pimps.  They were being beaten, forced to dance in strip clubs.  And so I went and helped organize a protest to bring this to the attention of the American public.  And here we are at a rally bringing, introducing this.  And following this, Representative Donzella Jones, a [Georgia] state legislator, passed legislation that would make it a felony.  And some pimp went to jail for thirty years.  So we celebrated with that.
Speaker 2: [Robert Woodson and others at a rally to end forced prostitution, Atlanta, Georgia, ca. 1999.  From the collection of Robert Woodson.]
Story_ID: 15720
Speaker 1: About twenty years ago, I was on the Navajo Reservation.  We trained a leader of the Navajo people and, and so I tried to spend a little bit of time in each of the physical environments of the people we serve.  And since Native American people were ones we served too, I spent time at, near Gallup, New Mexico, on the Ramah Reservation, and here she's showing me how to make wool (laughter) from sheep.
Speaker 2: [Robert Woodson with Navajo leaders, Navajo Reservation, New Mexico, ca. 1983.  From the collection of Robert Woodson.]
Story_ID: 15721
Speaker 1: This is one of my most famous people, Sister Isolina Ferre.  She is known as the Mother Theresa of Puerto Rico.  Here, about thirty years ago, I met her.  She was from a wealthy Puerto Rican family.  Her brother was the governor, but she, as a nun, took vows of poverty and worked amongst the most poverty-stricken area at El Ponc, Puerto Rico.  And she did an awful lot to help, and I've helped her for over thirty years.
Speaker 2: [Robert Woodson with Sister Isolina Ferre, ca. 1973.  From the collection of Robert Woodson.]
Story_ID: 15722
Speaker 1: This is a picture where I met President [George W.] Bush.  Two years ago he asked me could I bring together about 500 or 600 low-income people who were, many of whom were former welfare recipients.  And we had an event in one of the highest crime areas of Washington, D.C.  And so I brought the President, and he sat around a table with nine people, many of them who had been drug addicts and, and prostitutes.  And now they're married and living responsible lives.  And he heard firsthand how people can reconstruct their lives.
Speaker 2: [Robert Woodson with George W. Bush, Washington, D.C., ca. 2001.  From the collection of Robert Woodson.]
Story_ID: 15723
Speaker 1: Kimi Gray was the absolute leader of the Resident Management Public Housing Leaders.  Here's a woman abandoned by her husband at age nineteen with five children and on public welfare.  She got off public welfare within three years and sent all five of her kids to college and made it possible for 800 other kids from her one public housing development to go on to college.  And thus, almost eliminating teen pregnancy and violence from her development.  So she is one of my heroines.
Speaker 2: [Robert Woodson with Kimi Gray.  From the collection of Robert Woodson.]
Story_ID: 15724
Speaker 1: I did an awful lot of work with Jack Kemp when he was a HUD Secretary, Housing and Urban Development Secretary, bringing him together with people who would otherwise be political opponents, Marion Barry.  And here they're at a conference that we're discussing strategies to help people in low-income public housing communities.
Speaker 2: [Robert Woodson with Marion Barry and Jack Kemp.  From the collection of Robert Woodson.]
Story_ID: 15725
Speaker 1: When President [Ronald] Reagan was in office, we were able to mobilize the nation to support resident ownership at public housing.  And so we were able to sign seven amendments to the Housing Act and Law.  And we brought to the White House, H. R. Crawford who is on the right, who was one of the developers here and former Mayor of Washington, D.C., Marion Barry, we brought them together with Ronald Reagan to emphasize that these are non-partisan solutions.  And so I was able to, instrumental in bringing them together.
Speaker 2: [Robert Woodson (right) with (from left) Ronald Reagan, Marion Barry, and H. R. Crawford.  From the collection of Robert Woodson.]
Story_ID: 15726
Speaker 1: And after about six years of the National Center [for Neighborhood Enterprise] investing private dollars and empowering low-income people, here we are actually passing the baton on--the Amoco Foundation's, on the left, representative, and housing directors and all over the nation, and Jack Kemp, the [U.S.] Housing [and Urban Development] Secretary, and a number of city council, here we are passing the baton on to the resident leadership.
Speaker 2: [Robert Woodson (left) and Jack Kemp (second from right) pass the baton to resident leaders.  From the collection of Robert Woodson.]
Story_ID: 15727
Speaker 1: Barbara Bush, President, the first President Bush's [George H. W. Bush] wife took a personal interest in our children's programs.  Here she's visiting with me at a day care center, where she read to some children.
Speaker 2: [Robert Woodson with Barbara Bush.  From the collection of Robert Woodson.]
Story_ID: 15728
Speaker 1: Here I'm meeting with then [U.S.] Congressman Bill Gray from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] to get his support of our Resident Management Movement and Steve [unclear], who was a young social activist.  Bill Gray is from my hometown of Philadelphia and a friend.  Even though we have different political philosophies, we still remained good friends.
Speaker 2: [Robert Woodson (left) with Bill Gray (second from right) and others.  From the collection of Robert Woodson.]
Story_ID: 15729
Speaker 1: Part of the, the work of the National Center [for Neighborhood Enterprise] is dealing with transforming predatory young gang members.  Here, part of the process of helping these young people to go legal is that we invite them to our annual banquet, but tell them they have to have business suits.  So we take them to a clothing store and buy business suits.  And part of this is their transition to a legal life.  We purchase about ninety-six business suits for young men that affects even the way they dress casually.
Speaker 2: [Robert Woodson with reforming gang members.  From the collection of Robert Woodson.]
Story_ID: 15730
Speaker 1: Part of the responsibility turning young kids from being predatory gangsters into responsible citizens is that you make them responsible for others.  And here they're responsible for kids between the ages of seven and eighteen.  And these are--they formed, forty-eight are members of a football team.  And after their first season, we sent them to the Pop Warner Super Bowl and to [Walt] Disney World [Orlando, Florida].  And they're leaving to go on the bus.
Speaker 2: [Robert Woodson with children and reformed gang members.  From the collection of Robert Woodson.]
Story_ID: 15731
Speaker 1: One of the leaders of The Avenue, the infamous street gang that was responsible for fifty-eight murders in a two-square, five-square block area, was Wayne Lee.  And he was a, one of the leaders of The Circle , and he was the one who tested the peace.  And he lived with my family for about four months, and I took a personal sort of interest in him.  And to this day, he's still a part of my family.
Speaker 2: [Robert Woodson with Wayne Lee.  From the collection of Robert Woodson.]
Story_ID: 15732
Speaker 1: People don't realize that female gangs are many ways more treacherous that the male gangs.  And so our outreach has been to the 640 Honeys.  And they were terrorizing the Park Morton area of Washington, D.C.  But through supporting neighborhood outreach, we reached them.  Susan Kidd is the woman on your, to the, to the left of me, who was an anchor for one of the local radio stations.  And she emceed our event.  But these young ladies were purcha--we purchased dressy clothes for them.  And they were very proud of the fact that they were not dressing like gangsterettes, but are dressing like responsible people.
Speaker 2: [Robert Woodson (back, center) with Susan Kidd (in pink) and members of the 640 Honeys, Washington, D.C.  From the collection of Robert Woodson.]
Story_ID: 15733
Speaker 1: Representative Henry Hyde, at the time, was chairing the Judiciary Committee for the, in the Congress.  And he agreed to hold and have a six-hour hearing on Judicial--prevention of youth violence.  And we brought ex-gang members from around the nation.  And it was carried live on a lot of the network television, and we had an opportunity to showcase solutions.
Speaker 2: [Robert Woodson (fifth from left) with Henry Hyde (center) and ex-gang members, Washington, D.C.  From the collection of Robert Woodson.]
Story_ID: 15734
Speaker 1: This is a conference that we hold a retreat.  Every two years we try to bring together, out of the thirty-nine states that we have local grassroots leaders, we bring about eighty-six together, with their spouses for a four-day retreat.  Here, we're at Park City, Utah in July, and they have an opportunity to share.  Some of them are from Hispanic communities, low-income whites, Native American populations and blacks.  And we share together and have a, some recreation.  Six hours each day, they have a chance to just go and enjoy themselves.
Speaker 2: [Robert Woodson with grassroots leaders, Park City, Utah, July 2003.  From the collection of Robert Woodson.]
Story_ID: 15735
Speaker 1: Part of the process that we use to discourage kids from participating in gangs, once they change, we take them out of their neighborhoods, often putting them on airplanes and taking them to Hartford and other cities.  Here, the young people were flying to Hartford, Connecticut where they met with a gang who, years ago was peaceful.  And they had four days of fellowship and picnicking and playing basketball.  And for many of them, it's the first time they've ever been on a plane and the first time ever being out of their own community.
Speaker 2: [Robert Woodson with at-risk youth.  From the collection of Robert Woodson.]
Story_ID: 15736
Speaker 1: Part of my work is to chronicle in writing the successful efforts of grassroots leaders.  And here, Dr. Peter Berger, an internationally-known sociologist, is sitting for three days with an ex-gang members, to help me, as a, as a scholar, to understand how these young people are able to change their lives and their communities.  And a book was produced from this seminar called 'Youth Crime and Urban Policy.'
Speaker 2: Okay, what year was this?
Speaker 1: This was 1970--no, 1980.
Speaker 2: [Dr. Peter Berger with ex-gang members, 1980.  From the collection of Robert Woodson.]
Story_ID: 15737
Speaker 1: Here, President [George W.] Bush, again asked me to bring together people who were all former welfare recipients, who were now off welfare and buying homes.  And so he--I hosted him in the community on at least three occasions.  And this is one of those occasions at The Fishing School, a faith-based organization in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 2: [Robert Woodson (center) with George W. Bush and former welfare recipients, Washington, D.C.  From the collection of Robert Woodson.]
Story_ID: 15738
Speaker 1: President [George H. W.] Bush, the father--
Speaker 2: Bush I, as they say around--
Speaker 1: Yeah, Bush I, asked me to convene some neighborhood leaders so he could have some dialogue on strategies and economic development.  So I brought together a group of black scholars and economists to meet with him to talk about strategies of, of neighborhood empowerment.
Speaker 2: What year was this?
Speaker 1: Let's see--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) He looks so young there.
Speaker 1: Hmm?
Speaker 2: He looks so young there.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the first year he was in office [1989].
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: Charles Tate, from the Booker T. Washington Institute is to his--to his right.
Speaker 2: [Robert Woodson with Vice President George H. W. Bush and black scholars, including Charles Tate (L of Bush), Washington, D.C., 1989.  From the collection of Robert Woodson.]
