Story_ID: 534523
Speaker 1: We're gonna start by slating that my name is Evelyn Pounds, and I am the interviewer.  Corey Ball is the videographer, and Scott Stearns is the videographer.  Please state and spell your complete name.
Speaker 2: Lottie, L-O-T-T-I-E, H, period, Watkins, W-A-T-K-I-N-S [HistoryMaker Lottie Watkins].
Speaker 1: All right, would you state your date of birth?
Speaker 2: June 4, 1919.
Speaker 1: And the date--the place of this interview.  If you don't want to give the house address, that's fine, but you can just say in my home.
Speaker 2: In my home--
Speaker 1: In Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 2: --in Atlanta, Georgia.
Story_ID: 534524
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask you just a few People magazine-ish type questions, just a little warm-up questions.  What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Oh, I like chicken and fish.
Speaker 1: And your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: I like the spring.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Pastel.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I like Boston [Massachusetts], upstate.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 534525
Speaker 1: We wanna just ask you a few questions about your mother.  Tell us something about your mother, what is her name?
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Susie Wilson Heywood.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was in born in Atlanta, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay. And do you remember her date or year of birth?  Was it around the 1890s, or something like that?
Speaker 2: No, I don't remember that.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, but tell us a little bit about her, what kind of person was she?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother was a very loving mother, and she was a homemaker because my father [Eddie Heywood, Sr.] was a musician, and he traveled a lot, and mama took care of us.  We--there were five of us, and she took care of us and we loved her and she would take us to church and we wouldn't hardly eat out during those days.  She would always have a good dinner for us.
Speaker 1: So she was a good cook?
Speaker 2: Mama was good cook.
Speaker 1: Okay and did she, do you remember any stories she might of told you about when she was growing up as a little girl in Atlanta?
Speaker 2: Well, no, Mama talked about her sisters to (unclear)--she had four sisters, and they were all in Atlanta and they had a good relationship and they all had children so we had a big family.
Speaker 1: Okay so y'all used to have family dinners then (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: They--were they always at your house, or, you know?
Speaker 2: You mean my mother's house?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, at your mother's house?
Speaker 2: No, they would be at--sometimes we would go to her sister's house.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause everybody had children.
Story_ID: 534526
Speaker 1: What about your father, what is his name?
Speaker 2: My father's name was Eddie Heywood [Eddie Heywood, Sr.].
Speaker 1: Would you spell Heywood for us?
Speaker 2: H-E-W-O-O, sorry, H-E-Y-W-O-O-D, Heywood (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right.  And tell us a little bit about him, when was he born, do you remember?
Speaker 2: No, I don't know when my father was born, but he was born in Sumter, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay and did he tell you any stories or do you remember any stories about when he was growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, his father was a minister and he, and he would tell us that he always had to go church, and he learned how to play the piano and he would play for Sunday school.
Speaker 1: Oh okay, all right, and tell us a little bit more about your father?
Speaker 2: My father did a lot of traveling; we had a theater down on Decatur Street [Atlanta, Georgia] named Eighty One Theater.
Speaker 1: Eighty One?
Speaker 2: That was the name of the theater, and my father was the pianist there and they have vaudeville--different vaudeville shows to come in but he was still the piano for the--pianist for the, for the theater.
Speaker 1: Okay, and did he play with a band or did he play by himself, or--?
Speaker 2: Well he had his own band.
Speaker 1: Okay do you remember the name of that band at that time?
Speaker 2: No I don't.
Speaker 1: But your father was an accomplished musician, he was a--
Speaker 2: Yes he was.
Speaker 1: --very good jazz singer--player, wasn't he?
Speaker 2: Yes, and he traveled with a man and wife team, Butterbean and Susie [Butterbeans and Susie], and they were from out of Chicago [Illinois], but this was still a vaudeville show.
Speaker 1: Okay so he was going different states?
Speaker 2: Going to different cities, and mama [Susie Wilson Heywood] took care of us. But he would always send the check home to my mom where we could live.
Story_ID: 534527
Speaker 1: What is one of your earliest memories of growing up as a child in Atlanta [Georgia] that can come to your mind right now?
Speaker 2: Well, we lived on Larkin Street, but we had to move because the Atlanta Housing Authority came through there, so we bought a house on West End Avenue, and we had lovely neighbors over there.  My father [Eddie Heywood, Sr.] was deceased and I--my, my brother after my father was deceased, my brother could play the piano.
Speaker 1: And which brother was this?
Speaker 2: Eddie, Eddie Heywood, Jr.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So he followed in my father's footsteps and Mr. Bailey [Charles Bailey], the owner of the Eighty One Theater [Atlanta, Georgia] hired my brother to be the pianist there.
Speaker 1: And he started playing young, too, didn't he, your brother (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Your father taught he was when he was like fourteen?
Speaker 2: Yes, my, my brother was taught by my father, and he filled my father's footsteps, and he started playing at the Eighty One Theater.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he played there until he decided to hit the road and do something for himself, you know, because people just wanted him to play and he started traveling, and he traveled with a guy named Big Nickerson [sic. Charlie "Bozo" Nickerson].  He travelled with Benny Carter, and over so many years he formed his own trio [Eddie Heywood Trio], and he began to write music, and one of his pieces was the song of the year, 'Canadian Sunset.'
Speaker 1: All right and Eddie, he traveled with some of the big names, too (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: Didn't he, Eddie, Jr.?
Speaker 2: Yes, he did.
Speaker 1: He was (unclear) the '40s [1940s], 1940s?
Speaker 2: Yes, and he always gave--they bought a home up at Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts] and he always gave a concert on the island, you know how they had concerts over there?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Well he even played a concert that was in honor of Edward Brooks [sic. HistoryMaker Edward Brooke], he was a senator then.
Speaker 1: Yes, there's a building in Boston [Massachusetts] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, he lived there--
Speaker 1: --down in Beacon Hill [Boston, Massachusetts] that's named for Senator Edward Brooks.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Story_ID: 534528
Speaker 1: Well let me just--how many children were there?  In ther- you said there were four children, or five?
Speaker 2: There were five of us.
Speaker 1: You were--okay and what--give their names in order of birth, starting with the oldest?
Speaker 2: Margie [Margaret Heywood], my mother [Susie Wilson Heywood]--Margie was my father's [Eddie Heywood, Sr.] stepchild.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My mother had been married before.  Then it was Eddie [Eddie Heywood, Jr.], then it was Beulah [Beulah Heywood Griggs], then it was me and then it was Archie [Archie Heywood], so there were five of us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 534529
Speaker 1: And you said the first house that you lived on was on--
Speaker 2: Larkin Street [Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: --Larkin Street and then you moved, they bought--your mother [Susie Wilson Heywood] and father [Eddie Heywood, Sr.] bought a house--
Speaker 2: On West End Avenue [Atlanta, Georgia]--
Speaker 1: --on West End (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) because the Atlanta Housing Authority started building apartments.  They built the University Homes [Atlanta, Georgia] and the Techwood Homes [Atlanta, Georgia] under Roosevelt, President Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt].
Speaker 1: Okay and these were like apartment complexes?
Speaker 2: What, the apartments they built?
Speaker 1: The University Homes, (unclear), that was?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, they are still there, they have been renovated.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: They're still on Larkin Street.
Speaker 1: So about how old was it--how old do you think you were when you all moved?  Were in you elementary school [Edmund Asa Ware Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia], or--?
Speaker 2: When we moved from Larkin Street?
Speaker 1: From Larkin to West End Avenue?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, we were all in school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause it was a--the University Homes has been there a long time.  Roosevelt was the president, Franklin Roosevelt.
Speaker 1: Okay so that was--was that late '20s [sic.], early--late '20s [1920s] or mid-'20s [1920s], somewhere around in there?
Speaker 2: Something like that, yes.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, 1925 [sic.], (unclear).  Okay, now, do you remember what life was like on Larkin Avenue as a little girl, you remember the house you lived in?
Speaker 2: Well, it, it was nice, during those days everybody played together and you could--we didn't have any air conditioner so you could just sleep with the door open at night and nobody bothered you and--
Speaker 1: Did you all have streets then on Larkin, you know, like you had paved streets, or were they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, we had, we had paved streets, and we had a little hill we used to go up, and that little hill now belonged to Flipper Temple A.M.E. Church [Atlanta, Georgia], it runs from Larkin Street to Fair Street.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So we would play on that (unclear) hill.
Speaker 1: And then when you moved to West End what was it, what was the community like then?
Speaker 2: The same community, but different people.  We had lovely neighbors, on one side we had a Mrs. Jones [ph.] and on the other side of us we had a gentleman by the name of Joe Rogers [ph.], and he always looked out for my mother and us, and eventually his daughter came to live with him.  His daughter was named Minnie [ph.], she and her little girl.  So it was just like a family over there.
Speaker 1: And he was watching over, helping out when you father was out of town traveling?
Speaker 2: Yes, if he heard any noise or anything he would call and say, "Susie is anything wrong over there?"
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So he just kind of looked out for us.
Story_ID: 534530
Speaker 1: What else was the neighborhood [West End Avenue, Atlanta, Georgia] like, did you all play games in the streets, or did you all play in the back of the house or--?
Speaker 2: Well, all those houses had a backyard.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so we played in the backyards and in every house there was some children and Zilla Mays lived over there.  I don't know whether you remember, she was a singer.
Speaker 1: And her name was Zilla?
Speaker 2: Zilla, Zilla Mays lived in that neighborhood.  We had, we had good neighbors.
Speaker 1: And what did--she was a singer.
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did, did she sing with, did she travel with your father [Eddie Heywood, Sr.] or--?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, she, she was younger than my father, but she grew up to be a singer.
Speaker 1: Oh okay.
Speaker 2: But she--like Gladys Knight was from Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 1: Right, okay.
Speaker 2: But, Zilla has been dead about, I think about eight or nine years now.  She used to sing at the Royal Peacock [Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Oh okay.
Speaker 2: Zilla Mays, and she also was on WAOK [WAOK Radio, Atlanta, Georgia] during those days.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She had a show ['Dream Girl Show'] on that.  That was a station owned by the blacks--
Speaker 1: Okay it was a black-owned--
Speaker 2: --by J.B. Blayton [sic.].
Speaker 1: And was that during the '60s, '70s [sic. 1950s], or--?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 534531
Speaker 1: And now, just tell us a little bit more about what life was like in Atlanta [Georgia] for you when you were a little girl?  What were some of the sights, and sounds and smells that you remember from the neighborhood when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Well over that way there were plenty trees and had backyards and during those days there would be carnivals on vacant property, you know.
Speaker 1: And what were those like 'cause--
Speaker 2: Well they weren't as large as the carnivals are now, but they would be near the Washington Park [Atlanta, Georgia] area, which was-- it was nice for us during those days and the children would go over there and play and during those days everybody went to Sunday school and there was always a Sunday school picnic.
Speaker 1: Did you all stay all day? Oh, a Sunday school picnic?
Speaker 2: Yeah it was a Sunday--well we had Sunday school, but we all, you asked me about what we--what did we do for--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: But anyway, the Sunday school always had a picnic, you could look forward to it in the summertime, and we could invite the kids on our street to go with us because see it was a church Sunday school.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And there were always two buses on this picnic once a year.
Speaker 1: And (unclear) now okay all right, did you all have (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And then, you know, Sunday school during those days, you know, you had the little bible study, so you went to--you went to church more than just on Sundays.
Speaker 1: And bible study was during the week?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay like on Wednesday nights, or--?
Speaker 2: It wasn't at night, it was on Saturday mornings we would go to my church [Providence Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia].
Story_ID: 534532
Speaker 1: During those days, Dr. Hubert [Charles D. Hubert] was our pastor, my pastor.
Speaker 2: And what was the name of the church that you went to?
Speaker 1: Providence Baptist--
Speaker 2: So you all were Baptists (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Church [Providence Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia], yes, we were right at the corner of Maher [Street] and Larkin Street, our church backed into the University Homes [Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 2: Okay so you, you all were a member of Provident [sic.] like all of your life that you can remember right, real early?
Speaker 1: That's--I joined at Providence.
Speaker 2: About what year--how old, do you remember you were when you joined at Provident?
Speaker 1: No, I don't remember.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And Joyce [Joyce Rankin Bacote] was baptized at Providence.
Speaker 2: Joyce, your daughter Joyce (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) My daughter, Dr. Tobin [Lucius M. Tobin] baptized her, and he also baptized Judy [Judy Yvonne Barnett].
Story_ID: 534533
Speaker 1: What were some of the other sounds and sights that you remember from growing up on West End Avenue [Atlanta, Georgia], in that neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Well during those days you didn't have many sights to see, unless you went to Stone Mountain [Georgia] or something.
Speaker 1: But just everyday sights?
Speaker 2: Oh, every day the kids played in each other's backyard.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the little boys would be playing marbles and jumping rope.  It was a lot of love on that street, and sometimes some of the neighbors would make a pitcher of lemonade and the kids would leave and set it on the step, you know houses had steps, and they just loved to just sit on the steps and they would call, talk to each other, you know, sitting on their own steps, come on over here, and it was a lot of fun, clean, good fun.
Speaker 1: And adults didn't work at that time, they--the mothers mostly stayed at home didn't they, or did some of the mothers work?
Speaker 2: Well some of them worked, but my mother [Susie Wilson Heywood] had to stay home because my father [Eddie Heywood, Sr.] traveled, and I don't even remember her ever working because, you know, there were five of us.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you said he always sent home the check, your father did--
Speaker 2: He took care of us (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) for taking care of the family?
Speaker 2: Yes, he took care of us.
Speaker 1: That's good he had a pretty lucrative career as a musician, as a jazz musician, traveling.
Story_ID: 534534
Speaker 1: Now what elementary school did you go to?
Speaker 2: I went to E.A. Ware School [Edmund Asa Ware Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia].  Now the property is owned now by Morris Brown College [Atlanta, Georgia].  The school, the school is still there, but it belongs to Morris Brown College (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's a part--okay.  Now where--what was elementary school like?
Speaker 2: Just like everyday life during those days, everybody was happy.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: And it was a lot of fun, but that was a double session.
Speaker 1: A double session?
Speaker 2: Yes, you either went from eight to twelve, you know, during those days.
Speaker 1: Okay so one group would go from eight to twelve and another group would go in the afternoon?
Speaker 2: Yes and then they stopped with the double session, but I--see schools were integrated then.
Speaker 1: No, segregated right?
Speaker 2: I mean segregated.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  And what kind of classes did you all have 'cause we're talking what 1920--
Speaker 2: We had just regular (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) six [1926], 1927?
Speaker 2: --reading, writing, arithmetic and history.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, now was the school large or was it small, did you have different--
Speaker 2: It's a large school, it's still there.
Speaker 1: So it serviced like a lot of communities then?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Just your community?
Speaker 2: No, Morris Brown bought it, bought the school, Morris Brown College.
Speaker 1: Right, you said they bought E.A. Ware Elementary.
Speaker 2: That's it yes, that's the one we were talking about.
Speaker 1: But I was asking about E.A. Ware, was it a small school or was it a large school?
Speaker 2: It was a large school.
Speaker 1: And did it--was just for your community or was it for--?
Speaker 2: No, no children went--see I lived on West End Avenue.  All the kids near the Washington Park [Atlanta, Georgia], Ashby Street, all those streets close by, Washington Heights Terrace, everybody went to E.A. Ware School in that vicinity.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Were there any teachers at E.A. Ware that you remember, you remember who influenced you, or who you really liked at E.A. Ware?
Speaker 2: There was a teacher that I liked.  She was young, her name Ms. Pauline Minniefield, she was a lovely teacher to everybody at E.A. Ware.
Speaker 1: Do you know what she teach- did she teach math or writing?
Speaker 2: We didn't change classes when you went to elementary school in Atlanta [Georgia].  The teacher taught you everything.
Speaker 1: Everything, okay.
Story_ID: 534535
Speaker 1: What kind of child were you?  Were you quiet, were you rambunctious?  Were you--just what kind of child were you?  What do you think?
Speaker 2: Well, I thought I was a pretty good child because we had a good family life, we were never sad, and that played a big role in our family.  The things that my mother [Susie Wilson Heywood] thought was important she would take us to them, but we went to Sunday school every Sunday.
Speaker 1: So when she would take you to activities was that like downtown or to--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --the movies or to--?
Speaker 2: You see, churches had a lot of plays during those days, and you would maybe go to Shiloh Baptist Church [Shiloh Missionary Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia], Friendship [Friendship Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia] to see the play and during the holidays you know there was always Easter speeches, and we went to a lot of those at other churches and, you know, you had Christmas speeches, and then I sang in the choir [at Providence Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia], and we always had a junior choir.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So everything was--that was a happy street and everybody was kind of happy during those days and you could just feel the love in your neighborhood.
Story_ID: 534536
Speaker 1: Elementary [Edmund Asa Ware Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia] went from what grade to what grade?
Speaker 2: Elementary went to the sixth grade, and then you had to go to high school.
Speaker 1: And what high school did you--?
Speaker 2: Well, we only had two; we had Booker T. Washington High School [Atlanta, Georgia] and we had David T. Howard [David T. Howard High School, Atlanta, Georgia]. Now David T. Howard was across town, I think it's still there. Now the city has been using that, but I don't know what's there now, they still might be using it, they didn't tear it down. See David T. Howard was an undertaker and he, he was a civic worker. They named a school after him when it was built.
Speaker 1: So that's how it got that name.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But you didn't go to David T. Howard, you went to Booker T. (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I was on this side of town, I went to Booker T. Washington.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And I finished, instead of six years, I was in an accelerated class I finished in five years.
Speaker 1: Now what was high school like 'cause at that time high school started at what, in the seventh grade?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And went on to the twelfth?
Speaker 2: Well you change classes in (unclear)--now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You have different teachers, and you're so excited about it.
Speaker 1: Going to different classes and all that?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What was your favorite subject?
Speaker 2: I liked English, and I liked to sing in the glee club.  We had a lady named Mrs. Essie Groves, so she would let--you couldn't sing in her chorus until you got to eighth grade, (unclear) you were still you know with the younger crowd of people, but as you got older you graduated up to the real choir.
Speaker 1: That was, that was motivating.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That was really motivating. So she taught music?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right, and do you still sing today?
Speaker 2: I use to sing in my choir at church [Providence Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia], then I decided I wanted to be on the usher board.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: All right, but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So I got to be an usher.
Speaker 1: Okay, though when you were with the glee club at Booker T. Washington, did you go--did you all travel, did you sing at other schools or churches?
Speaker 2: Well I don't know, maybe the seniors did but I--I don't know (unclear) in eighth grade.  We didn't do that.  She--
Speaker 1: You did it just for--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she, she was nice.  She, she took care of everybody, you know, and if you were not ready for that grade, you know, you stay where you are, but she, she was so kind and that meant a lot to kids during those days.
Speaker 1: Now what other subjects did you like?  You liked English, did you have any other?
Speaker 2: Well, you had the same thing almost that you had in elementary school, only you changed classes, you know.  You had reading, writing, arithmetic and English and I would call that a minor subject, you know, like do you wanna be in the glee club, and you did get physically active.  A lady named Mrs. Mason [ph.] taught that, so had a good physical ed [physical education] teacher.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And by the time you did all that it was three o'clock, it was time to go home.
Speaker 1: Okay so you all went to school like from eight [o'clock] to three [o'clock], or what time?
Speaker 2: I think it was from eight to three and C.N. Carnell [ph.] was the principal.
Story_ID: 534537
Speaker 1: When did you graduate from Booker T. [Booker T. Washington High School, Atlanta, Georgia], you said you graduated in fifteen (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Thirty-five [1935].
Speaker 1: --years, I mean you were--
Speaker 2: No, I finished in five years.
Speaker 1: Five years?
Speaker 2: I finished in five years instead of six years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was in a class called accelerated class according to my grades.
Speaker 1: And what did you do after you graduated?
Speaker 2: Well, I had an aunt named Leanna Ramus [ph.], and she had a restaurant, and I asked her, could I come down there with her a while because I was going to this business school [Reid's Business School, Atlanta, Georgia] whenever they got a place, you know.  A lot of people went to business school during those years.
Speaker 1: They're not as popular now like it used to be.
Speaker 2: No, but I don't even think they exist now unless you go to college now, you know regular college and that the main subject like down at Georgia State [Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay and so you had an aunt, Mrs. Ramus, and you worked for her (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, had a little restaurant and I used to go down there and help her, and I met a lot of people.
Speaker 1: Where was her restaurant located?
Speaker 2: It was on Bell [Street] and Auburn [Avenue, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Do you know what's sitting there now?
Speaker 2: I don't know, but right across the street was the Odd Fellows Building [Odd Fellows Building and Auditorium, Atlanta, Georgia], and a man named Charles Brokthrow [ph.], he was a tailor.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I, I think, let me see.  T.M. Alexander's [T.M. Alexander, Sr.] daughter-in-law, I think, bought that Yates and Milton building [Yates and Milton Drugstore, Atlanta, Georgia], I might be wrong, but on the side I think she has that rented out, but I don't know to who, but on the front it used to be a smoke shop, and I think it's a beauty parlor there now, but I think Jan bought the whole block there starting on that corner and go- running on down to the Odd Fellows Building, her name is Janice Alexander [Janice Alexander, Jr.].
Speaker 1: And after you finished working for your aunt, how long did you think you--how long did you work with her?
Speaker 2: Oh aunt, then I would just go back and help her some Sundays--
Story_ID: 534538
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit more about your father [Eddie Heywood, Sr.] 'cause we were talking, you said he was trained formally as a musician, and where did you say he went to school before he met your mother [Susie Wilson Heywood]?
Speaker 2: Boston Conservatory [Boston Conservatory of Music; Boston Conservatory at Berklee, Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Of Music?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right, and did, did you hear any stories about how he met your mother, did they tell you how they met?
Speaker 2: I've never known, that's a good question.
Speaker 1: Okay, but she met an accomplished pianist--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and they ended up marrying.
Speaker 2: Yes, she did.
Speaker 1: That is, that's interesting.  So it had to have been like in the 19--well before, before who Margie [Margaret Heywood]--is Margie the oldest, or who is the oldest of your sisters and brothers?
Speaker 2: Margie was my mother's--my mother had been married before she married my father.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And Margie was my stepsister.
Speaker 1: Right, right, right, so it had to have been even before (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And Eddie [Eddie Heywood, Jr.] was my brother.
Speaker 1: And Eddie was born--
Speaker 2: He was born in 1915.
Speaker 1: --in 1915, so your father had to have gone to school anywhere between let's say 19--in the 1900s, early--early to mid-1900s, what is it anywhere 1910, 1915, somewhere around in there in Boston [Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: He was in Boston at that time, and then he ended up in Atlanta [Georgia].  That's, that's, that's good to know, and he played with some of the jazz greats.
Speaker 2: Yes, he played with the greatest (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He backed some of those.
Story_ID: 534539
Speaker 1: When you graduated high school [Booker T. Washington High School, Atlanta, Georgia] you went to business school.  What was the name of the business school in Atlanta [Georgia] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Reid Business Schools [Reid's Business School, Atlanta, Georgia], Mrs. Sylvie Reid [ph.].
Speaker 1: Now would you spell her name (unclear)?
Speaker 2: R-E-I-D.
Speaker 1: All right.  And where was that located in Atlanta?
Speaker 2: It was located on the corner of Fair [Street] and Chestnut Street.  Clark [Clark University; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] has bought that building.
Speaker 1: Okay, now--
Speaker 2: Do you know where Chestnut Street?
Speaker 1: I've seen.
Speaker 2: Oh, it's James P. Brawley [Drive] now.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now what, what was business school like?  Like what classes did you take and--?
Speaker 2: Well, I took typing and shorthand and English.
Speaker 1: All right and did you go all day or did you--what was school like?
Speaker 2: I would go from eight to one.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: And it was an accredited school.
Speaker 1: And then how many years did you attend?
Speaker 2: You finished in a year.
Speaker 1: In a year, okay.
Story_ID: 534540
Speaker 1: What did you do after that?  That was like '36, 1936 somewhere around in there (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, and I went, like I told you I helped Ms.--my aunt [Leanna Ramus (ph.)].
Speaker 1: Aunt, in the restaurant.
Speaker 2: And then, oh I worked over at the Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] for Mr. J.P. Whitaker in the business office.
Speaker 1: And what did you do for him?  You were his--?
Speaker 2: I worked the desk, this is where all the students paid their money.
Speaker 1: In the registrar's office?
Speaker 2: To go to Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], yeah.  He was the registrar for AU, not Morehouse, AU.
Speaker 1: That's Atlanta University.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.  Tell us what you--
Speaker 2: I, I enjoyed over there, met a lot of people, but when this other job came along from Alexander-Calloway [Alexander-Calloway Realty Company, Atlanta, Georgia], 'cause when I got married, and I had Joyce [Joyce Rankin Bacote]--
Speaker 1: So you got married in--?
Speaker 2: Around, I think I married in about, Joyce was born in '39 [1939], I think I married in '37 [1937].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now tell us a little bit about when you were at LSU--I mean Atlanta U, sorry, going back to Louisiana here, Atlanta U.  Was it a small campus or, just tell us a little bit about it (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Atlanta University?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Oh no, that's a big campus, it's over there at Morehouse, you know?
Speaker 1: Yeah tell us about it then?
Speaker 2: It was a--well Atlanta University was a graduate school, and Mr. Whitaker was over there, and a fellow named Jerome [ph.] was in charge of that.  I can't think of Jerome's last name, but I worked the desk you know when the students came in to pay--
Speaker 1: Um-hm, pay their money.
Speaker 2: --their tuition and everything.
Speaker 1: Were there any students there that you remember who have done things and had certain professions after they finished from there that--
Speaker 2: Well I really don't know 'cause I didn't stay there too long.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 534541
Speaker 1: So after you left Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] you went to work with--?
Speaker 2: Alexander-Calloway [Alexander-Calloway Realty Company, Atlanta, Georgia] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Calloway with the realty?  And what did you do for, for them--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --when you started out?
Speaker 2: The office was divided; T.M. Alexander [T.M. Alexander, Sr.] and Bill Calloway [William L. Calloway] were partners.  Mr. Alexander was the insurance company [Alexander and Company, Atlanta, Georgia] and Calloway was the real estate company [Calloway Realty Company, Atlanta, Georgia].  So Mr. Alexander had two people working for him, and Mr. Calloway had two working for him, so I was his secretary.  I was on the front desk during those days and I took in all the rent money, and a young lady named Jean Harmon [ph.] did the bookkeeping in the back but T.M. had Elizabeth Byrd [ph.] and Janella Walston [ph.] working for him, but they were partners.
Speaker 1: Okay, now if he was the--if Calloway was the real estate end, he had property that he managed?  Is that why you said you took in the rent money?  Or was that just his properties (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We sold, no, it was the real estate office.  We had about nine or ten salesmen.  We had a big company, and Calloway was one of the people that broke the--well, the people in the Peyton Forest [Atlanta, Georgia] area tried to put a barrier up, they didn't want blacks out there, and Calloway was one of the leaders with our mayor, Ivan Allen [Ivan Allen, Jr.] during those days that broke that barrier down where we could buy houses in the Peyton Forest area, so he was a great man in his time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was a leader, he knew what he was doing, and I learned a lot under him.
Speaker 1: So not only did he sell properties, he leased proper-, rented properties?  Did he do commercial and he did residential, or--?
Speaker 2: We, we had a rental department, but the big money was selling houses.  We had about seven salesmen, and they really did a lot of selling, and the one that I really liked, was the one I was just telling you the Peyton Forest barrier.
Speaker 1: So this was what around 1940s?
Speaker 2: Calloway broke that and he also over on Chestnut Street, it was the same way.  Chestnut and Kennedy [Street; Cameron Madison Alexander Boulevard], whites lived over there and they didn't want to sell--some of 'em didn't, but--now we had other black realty companies, but Bill Calloway was always the leader.
Speaker 1: The leader.  So did he have much competition then?  I mean was it a lot, or just maybe three or four companies that were in the Atlanta [Georgia] area at that time that were black real estate agen-, companies?
Speaker 2: We had Wilson Realty [Wilson Realty Company, Atlanta, Georgia], Williamson [Q.V. Williamson Realty Company, Atlanta, Georgia], Wolfe [J.L. Wolfe Realty Company, Atlanta, Georgia], Henderson [Henderson Realty Company, Atlanta, Georgia], Robie [Empire Real Estate Board, Inc.; Empire Board of Realtists, Inc.]--I think we had about seven or eight.
Speaker 1: Okay, now you said Mr. Alexander, his end was the insurance end?
Speaker 2: Mr. Alexander was the first-owned black insurance company, T.M. Alexander.
Speaker 1: Okay and now you worked for them for like how many--like nine years or how many years did you work for them?
Speaker 2: I worked for Bill about six or seven years.  I, I can't remember.
Story_ID: 534542
Speaker 1: And then I left [Alexander-Calloway Realty Company, Atlanta, Georgia], and I went across the street to work at Mutual Federal Savings Loan Association [Mutual Federal Savings and Loan Association of Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 2: And what did you do with them?
Speaker 1: Well, the president was impressed with me and when I first went over there he wanted me--the manager, a Mrs. Young [ph.] was retiring, and he liked me and he told me he would like to give me that job, and I told Mr. Whitaker [J.P. Whitaker] that it was too big for me because I didn't know how to operate all those machines and everything because I had never been to a big business school and, you know, he told me, "But I can teach you.  I will send you to school," and I said, "Let me think about it."  And when I did decide to over there and work I went over there and I told him I was ready.  He said, "I'm sorry the job's gone," he said, "but I will give you a job if you want to change," and I told him I wanted to change jobs.  And he had Remington Rand [Remington Rand, Inc.] to come down and teach me how to operate one of those machines.  And I was his fourth teller, he had three.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Now see Mutual Federal was a black bank.
Speaker 2: And Mr. Whitaker was the owner?  Who was the owner of it then?
Speaker 1: Stockholders--I mean you know it was a black bank, Mutual Federal Savings and Loan Association (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All right, he was the president you said?
Speaker 1: Mr. Blayton [J.B. Blayton, Sr.] and Mr. Milton [L.D. Milton] started that bank, just like they started Citizens Trust Company [Citizens Trust Bank, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But blacks was involved in both those banks and Mutual Federal was an all-black bank.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  Now you worked at the bank from what, '54 [1954] to 1960?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: All right.
Story_ID: 534543
Speaker 1: Kind of tell us what tellering was like then?
Speaker 2: Well the bank [Mutual Federal Savings and Loan Association of Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia] made loans for homes during that--this house I borrowed the money.  I wasn't working for him then, for this house here--I had lost my husband [Elmer Watkins (ph.)], we were going to build this house and after Joe Robinson drew the plans, I went and got a loan, but before the loan was completed, I lost my husband, and I just didn't want anything then.  I just--I didn't want this house.  I was gonna sell the lot, but Bill Calloway [William L. Calloway] said to me, he said, "You can't do that."  I said, "Well what am I going to do? I don't have a husband."  He said, "You're going to make it," he said, "Go on and build that house.  The loan's been approved, so don't give up."  So my boss talked to me a long time and this is why this house is here today and the loan was made by Mutual Federal Savings and Loan Association.
Story_ID: 534544
Speaker 1: Now what was your husband's name that you married in 1939?
Speaker 2: His name was Elmer Watkins [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay and then you said and you had a child, and which child--was that your first child?  What was her name?
Speaker 2: No, I had a second child by him, no I had one child by--I divorced Joyce's [Joyce Rankin Bacote] father.
Speaker 1: Okay you married Wat-, you married in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I married, I married Elmer Watkins.
Speaker 1: --in 1939 and that was--and then Joyce was born right?
Speaker 2: No, Joyce was born in '39 [1939], but she was not Elmer Watkins' child.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, all righty.
Speaker 2: I divorced Joyce's father when she was four years old.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right so you married earlier than 1939 then.
Story_ID: 534545
Speaker 1: Now tell us a little bit more then about the bank, tellering at Mutual Federal Savings and Loan [Mutual Federal Savings and Loan Association of Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia], and they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, a representative would come down there from Remington Rand company [Remington Rand, Inc.], and taught me how to use the machine because I didn't know how to use a postal machine like that.  So it didn't take me long to learn, and I was his fourth teller until I resigned.
Speaker 1: Now when, when the company came down to do the machine training, Remington Brand [sic.], did they have a class for just one person or did they come and train like all the people at the bank?  There was--was it a general class?
Speaker 2: They were already there; I don't know who trained them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But anyway, he gave me a job, and I didn't know how to run the machine.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Okay, so was Remington Brand local at that time, they were in Atlanta [Georgia] and they just--
Speaker 2: Remington Rand?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.  Were they in Atlanta, or did they come down from up- from another state?
Speaker 2: I really don't know.
Speaker 1: 'Cause a lot of time when, when people are trained at a business, they'll either have a general class, where everybody's trained at one time, or they'll have one person, you know, go to a location and be trained, but during that time during the, what was that the '50s [1950s], then that company came over and trained you on how to use the equipment.
Speaker 2: Well now the funniest thing about the machine, we had one in the back just like it when I worked for Calloway [Alexander-Calloway Realty Company, Atlanta, Georgia], but Jean Holman [ph.], a graduate of Morris Brown College [Atlanta, Georgia], ran that machine.  All I did was take in the money and type letters and things.  I worked in the front and Jean Holman worked in the back for Calloway, but she was the machine operator over there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I didn't know anything about that machine, but I could type; but when I went across the street, they had a rep to come down in the afternoons and teach me how to punch the right things on that machine (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 534546
Speaker 1: --Are there any experiences that you had at the Mutual Federal [Mutual Federal Savings and Loan Association of Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia] that you wanna share with us?
Speaker 2: Well, Mr. John Wesley Dobbs used to come in there once a week and--
Speaker 1: Tell us who Mr. Wesley Dobbs is so people that are listening to this tape will know, so they can put him in perspective as to who he is.
Speaker 2: Well John Wesley Dobbs was a big Mason, he was a big Republican.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was head of the Prince Hall [Prince Hall Masons of Georgia].
Speaker 2: Yeah, Prince, Prince Mason, something like that and he was Maynard Jackson's grandfather.  Mr. Dobbs took to liking me, and he would always say, "I want that young lady to wait on me," and I would wait on him every time he came in there.  So one day he asked me about my family.  He said, "Tell me about your family."  I said, "Well, Mr. Dobbs, I have two daughters, and I'm a widow."  He said, "You are?"  I told him, "Yes."  He says, "Well how old are your daughters?"  I said, "Well Joyce [Joyce Rankin Bacote] is gonna graduate from Washington High [Booker T. Washington High School, Atlanta, Georgia] this year."  "Where is she going to school?"  I said, "She's going to Clark [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]. I hope she gets a scholarship."  He said, "Well, you've been saving the money?"  I told him yes and my mother [Susie Wilson Heywood] was helping me.  He said, "Well I'll tell you what I want to do."  He said, "Put her name on a piece of paper for me and give it to me and tell where she's going to school."  He says, "I'm gonna help you," and I was so excited.  I said, "Well thank you."  The next week I got a letter that he had sent to Clark and his organization paid a half a semester for my daughter to go to school.
Speaker 1: Well congratulations, Joyce.
Speaker 2: I mean, I couldn't believe it.  So we have a scrapbook with that letter in it, but I waited on him every time he came in that bank and he just happened to ask me about my family.  So the first half of tuition that went to Clark University [sic.] for my daughter Mr. Dobbs gave it to me from his organization.
Speaker 1: Well tha-, congratulations, yes indeed.
Speaker 2: I'll never forget it.
Story_ID: 534547
Speaker 1: So Joyce [Joyce Rankin Bacote] finished Clark [Clark University; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and--?
Speaker 2: She finished Clark, and I was always a PTA [Parent Teacher Association] person all through elementary school, and no matter what was at Clark during those days the parents went a lot to the colleges, and I would go to everything over there.  I would take part in everything and if she was a queen or anything I was right there and she made good grades, and we were happy, and the day that she graduated, we just cried because I graduated my daughter from college and there was ten years between she and Judy's [Judy Yvonne Barnett] birth.  So we were happy, my mother [Susie Wilson Heywood] was happy and everybody.
Speaker 1: So your mother was alive to see Joyce graduate from college (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --'cause your mother didn't pass until when?
Speaker 2: I have it in there.
Speaker 1: Was it, 1964 I think it was.
Speaker 2: Something like that, Joyce, Joyce was--and I'll tell you--I think little Sammy [Samuel Bacote, III] was born when my mother passed.  He was--I might be wrong, but he was a little baby 'cause Joyce had married Sammy Bacote [Samuel Bacote, II].  When she finished college they became engaged, and he brought his mother in this room and said they wanted to talk to me.  And Lucia [Lucia Moore Bacote] said, "Well wonder what they wanna talk about?"  I said, "I don't know."  He went and got his mama and then he told me that he would like to marry my daughter.  Now he said this to me in April.  I said, "Not my daughter."  He said, "Why?"  I said, "Listen, when she gets that piece of paper you come back and ask me, but not now," and he, he looked at me.  I said, "I love you," I said, "but not now, Sammy."  So the day that she graduated he gave her, her engagement ring.
Story_ID: 534548
Speaker 1: So you gained a son-in-law, Joyce [Joyce Rankin Bacote] got her, her degree and what did your son-in-law--what family did he come from?  Tell us a little bit about what his background was, what his father did?
Speaker 2: Well when Sammy [Samuel Bacote, II] came up and asked for Joyce's hand his mother [Lucia Moore Bacote] was with him.  So she didn't know what they were talking about and I didn't either, but we looked at each other and then I made my little speech and the day that she graduated he was over to Clark [Clark University; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and gave her a ring.  So I told them they could marry Christmas Day 'cause he had waited, and the wedding was over at Davage Auditorium at Clark, and his father [Clarence A. Bacote] was his best man and he had all of his buddies in his neighborhood.  He had, you might of known Dr. Pierce, Joe Pierce was in his wedding, Harold Dawson [HistoryMaker Harold A. Dawson, Sr.] was in his wedding, just all of his buddies and it was such a beautiful wedding, and I had all of Joyce's friends in the wedding.  She made AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] at Clark and we used some of those girls and she still has that friendship with those girls, the ones she met at Clark.
Story_ID: 534549
Speaker 1: And what did her, her father's--her, I'm sorry, her husband's [Samuel Bacote, II] father do?  He was a noted (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, Bacote [Clarence A. Bacote], Bacote was a great historian, he wrote the history of Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and they had a reception for it ['The Story of Atlanta University: A Century of Service, 1865-1965,' Clarence Albert Bacote], and he--not only was he a historian, Bacote loved life and when he came here [Atlanta, Georgia], we couldn't vote, but he was part of the voters' right act [Voting Rights Act of 1965].  What he did he always used the blackboard to see where the black vote was weak, different precincts and he would analyze that thing and he would be on Channel 2 [WSB-TV, Atlanta, Georgia] sitting up there with the other people and they would ask him what was his opinion and he would look at that chart and give it to him, but he would always tell us where we were weak, you got to go back to that neighborhood, and blah, blah and there were some people there that doesn't vote, we got to get them to the polls.  So we took his advice 'cause we were trying to elect Leroy Johnson [Leroy R. Johnson] as well as the congressman Charles Longstreet Weltner [Charles L. Weltner], but we had to have that black vote.  We had good organization all in the black neighborhoods, north, east, south and west.
Story_ID: 534550
Speaker 1: And another good thing about Atlanta [Georgia]: we all had neighborhood clubs during those days.
Speaker 2: And what were some of the neighborhood clubs, like just name a few of those (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well the Pittsburgh [Atlanta, Georgia] was a big one, it was called the Pittsburgh civic club.
Speaker 2: Pittsburgh?
Speaker 1: Pittsburgh that's down off of McDaniel Street.
Speaker 2: Just spell that for us right quick?
Speaker 1: P-I-T-T-S-B-U-R-G [sic.] civic club and Bea Garland [Beatrice Garland] was the head, you know every club has a president and she was the president down there, and there was a lady name Rosa Bernie [ph.].  I think she was between Pittsburgh and Summerhill [Atlanta, Georgia].  Her name was Rosa Bernie.  She had a club, and we had two guys closer down on Jonesboro Road [South Atlanta Civic League], Lucius Simon and Benny Smith [ph.], they were great down there and we had a lady named Ms. Mattie Jackson, she was down there but when you come over to (unclear) Street, you had a man named--that was Fourth Ward [Old Fourth Ward, Atlanta, Georgia], you had E.J. Shepherd over there, and Mrs. Henderson, they took care of that end. Now you come on where I live, you had, we had a neighborhood club called the CAM Chapel.  It was named CAM for short, it was Chappell Road, Adele [Avenue] and Mathewson Place.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We had a neighborhood club and Morris Brown [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia], where Mrs. Glass [ph.] lived, I don't know the name of their club, but it's very strong.  It's down--it's right there by the library when you came down M.L.K. [Martin Luther King Jr. Drive] you saw that library.  When you make a left they got a strong club there.
Speaker 2: Now these clubs are still in existence today (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, yes.  We've gotten older, but we keep them going.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And what's happening, see the mayor always have a mayor's ball for the senior citizens?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You can't get in the hotel.  She has to use two ballrooms, but it's for senior citizens.  She has all those neighborhood clubs and these people still go to that thing, but so we had that strength where I knew where I had to go.
Story_ID: 534551
Speaker 1: We're gonna pick up from where we left off when we were talking about voting and how the clubs--the neighborhood (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, oh.
Speaker 1: --clubs played a role--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: --in helping with voting strategies.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause I want--
Speaker 1: So there were a few more clubs--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I wanted--
Speaker 1: --and neighborhoods you wanted to mention.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause I--
Speaker 1: Okay, now what are they?
Speaker 2: Now the next school, I'm sorry, the next club is near Pe- Perry Homes [Atlanta, Georgia].  Now Perry Homes has been replaced with a new Perry Homes now, and the leaders out there was Lillian Shepherd, and Odessa [ph.], and another lady named Mrs. Pullen [ph.] and a gentleman by the name of Mr. Shelton [Opie L. Shelton].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now they worked very close.  Now they had some--now some of these people had little homes out there, and the balance of 'em lived in the projects, which was called Perry Homes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But these women and the men was able to knock on all those doors and talk to those people in Perry Homes and get them some little teenagers to understand what he was talking about and they helped 'em.  So Perry Homes finally turned out to be a big precinct.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because, as I said, Bacote [Clarence A. Bacote] could go through his chart and see how many registered voters was there and where we had to work, always in the housing projects.  Some of 'em move so fast they don't register to vote.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: So we always watched that to see which way things were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They're gonna--
Speaker 2: --which way things was going, and they had a big neighborhood club right there and I use to go out there, and they would meet at the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] with a big meeting, big, big meeting, but, see, every neighborhood has its own leaders.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And you can't go out there and try to run it, you can go out there and visit them and you know this type of thing, but it turned out to be a great thing, and let me see I talked about Summerhill [Atlanta, Georgia], Pittsburgh [Atlanta, Georgia], my neighborhood, Perry Homes.  C.T. Barnes [ph.] used to congress--I'm sorry, he was the counselor for the Adamsville [Atlanta, Georgia] area.  Well he's so strong out there I don't know how many he has going but, but and he also has the Collier Heights [Atlanta, Georgia] and the Collier Road neighborhood.  Now in the Collier Road neighborhood those people vote. They are well-educated.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they go to all kinds of forums so they have great strength out there, they have a huge voting turnout there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 534552
Speaker 1: We were able, when the district was changed and they told us we could have a senator, we had a meeting at the Y [Young Men's Christian Association (YMCA)], west side Y, and we had two or three people stand up and testify--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --when Leroy Johnson [Leroy R. Johnson] was the best speaker.  So we took a vote so we got behind Leroy Johnson. Now for the [U.S.] Congress they always had a man that was segregation named James Davis.  They never could get (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now wait a minute, let me just back up now.  When Leroy Johnson and, and he was back running for senator.
Speaker 1: In the state.
Speaker 2: Then that was in the, um-hm, that was in--
Speaker 1: Sixty-two [1962] (unclear)--
Speaker 2: --nineteen sixty-two [1962], the--I think it was.
Speaker 1: --nineteen sixty [1960] then, try '60 [1960].
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay 1960, 1962 somewhere around in there right?
Speaker 1: Charles Weltner [Charles L. Weltner] won in '62 [1962].
Speaker 2: Okay, so that's good.
Speaker 1: I think the senator, am I right?
Speaker 2: Leroy Johnson, I had him--I think it was 1962.
Speaker 1: Well, maybe, maybe it was him, too, 'cause I have a picture, you might be right.
Speaker 2: Okay, you're right, attorney Leroy Johnson won in 1962 'cause Bacote [Clarence A. Bacote] stated, being the historian that he was, that Georgia had not had a Negro to be elected in--to the Senate [Georgia State Senate] in ninety-two years.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: The last one they had was in 1870.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Okay, so that was a great big celebration.
Speaker 1: Yes, so we could vote, and if we thought the turnout was low, we knocked on doors.  We don't have but just a few more hours, we got to get 'em out and we just turned it around, but before that Jesse Hill went downtown to the--to talk to the people about letting us stay open 'til eight o'clock and try and get some people.  So they finally agreed so they kept Washington High School [Booker T. Washington High School, Atlanta, Georgia] open for us.  So what we did we told--we would go and see some of the community people and they would say, "Well, you know the reason I can't vote; I don't get home until it's dark."  So we had cars and buses, and we went down on Broad Street and went on Peach Street [sic. Peachtree Street] and every time you stepped off that bus you got in our van and we took you to Washington High to vote then we gave you a sandwich and a Coke [Coca-Cola] until you home and we took you home.  So we picked up a lot of votes like that, but Jesse and Bacote thought of that.  We went to all the shopping centers and set up places.
Speaker 2: For--okay, all right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But see we had to cut it off at five but Jesse went downtown and they agreed to let us stay open.
Speaker 2: Until?
Speaker 1: Until eight.
Speaker 2: Eight, okay.
Speaker 1: And we caught the people that got off the bus coming from Buckhead [Atlanta, Georgia] that had been working, and we took 'em to register them.
Story_ID: 534553
Speaker 1: Let me ask you then 'cause you were in business working for the real estate office [Alexander-Calloway Realty Company, Atlanta, Georgia] and also working for the bank [Mutual Federal Savings and Loan Association of Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia].  How did you become involved in politics?
Speaker 2: Well, I was a member of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], well everything that black people had I just took part in it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know we, we talked about things at the church [Providence Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia], and no matter what was going on, you know, I would go.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So we would have meetings and decide what we were going to do and we would, you know, you know, I--
Speaker 1: You were getting it?
Speaker 2: I would pick it just like everybody else.
Speaker 1: And do (laughter)--okay.
Speaker 2: So, it's, it's a long story about that.  But I'll tell you some things about that.
Speaker 1: All right, okay, well then all right after you left the bank you started up your own business [Lottie Watkins Enterprises, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And tell us about that?
Speaker 2: Well, what happened to me, I told my daughter that I was thinking about going into business and she said to me, "Well, you know I'm working now, and Sammy [Samuel Bacote, II] doesn't care if I share my check with you to pay the bills," and et cetera, and I said, "Well that sounds pretty good."  So she said, "Well if this is what you want to do I'm with you."  So I made up my mind that I wanted to go into business, but even if you decide that you have to have a reason why you wanna do this.  I felt like that I had (unclear) reason, I had plenty of reasons.  I had helped so many people and I had a household name and everybody knew me and I had worked in a real estate office and I had worked in a bank, where I met gobs of people, and then I just decided this was for myself this is what I wanna do.  So I told some of my friends about it and the funny things about one of my best friends, she says, "Oh you're gonna be all right," said, "All you need is a pencil and paper in your hand and you can get some business."  I said, "Well it's not that easy."  She said, "But you're gonna make it."  So, I resigned my job and Fletcher [Fletcher Coombs] hated to see me leave and he told me, he said, "One thing about you, Ms. Watkins [HistoryMaker Lottie Watkins]," he said, "you took the first customer every morning the whole time you worked here in this bank."  I said, "Thank you, Fletcher."  He says, "You've done a good job with Joyce [Joyce Rankin Bacote]. I wish you all the luck, and I hope you have the same luck with Judy [Judy Yvonne Barnett]," and I was happy to know and, you know, I didn't know I was taking the first customer every morning until he told me.  He was the president, but that's what I was doing.
Story_ID: 534554
Speaker 1: I decided that I wanted to go into business.  Now there was not another black woman in business, real estate.  So--
Speaker 2: All the other companies were men?
Speaker 1: Yeah, but I decided that it was time for a lady to do something, and with me being a lady I can make a difference, you know, appearance-wise, pleading and everything.  So I had an office [for Lottie Watkins Enterprises, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia]--well you cut off my dining room just about this size.
Speaker 2: This was when you first started out?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: When you first opened up?
Speaker 1: Y- 774 Hunter Street [Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 2: And that was in 1960?
Speaker 1: It--near the en- in November near the end of the year in '60 [1960].
Speaker 2: November of 1960, and you were like forty-something years old?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Forty-one or so?
Speaker 1: So I stepped in the water and everybody was so happy, people were calling me.  So with me--I, I--the business was growing and during those days the whites managed all the big complexes, blacks didn't have any.  So a man named Bob Chennault [Robert L. Chennault] came by and said, "I want you to go with me when you have time."  I said, "Where Mr. Chennault?"  He said, "I have two friends, Victor Massey [ph.], and his friend is building ninety-six units on Anderson Avenue, and I would like for them to meet you."  He said, "Two other real estate companies is trying to get, get them, but I just want them to meet you."  I said, "Mr. Chennault, now you know I can't go any place during the week, now I gotta stay here and take care of this business."  He said, "Let me call 'em and see will they come down on a Saturday to meet you."  So Mr. Chennault took me to the Healey Building [Atlanta, Georgia] on a Saturday, and I met these gentlemen, and they told me they would let me know.  The next week, they wrote me a letter and asked me to come back to talk to them and I went up there and they told me they were impressed by me and they would like to give me the opportunity of filling up these units for them.  I couldn't believe it, so I got them, but I kept the lawn manicured and--
Speaker 2: This was a property management contract?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I kept the shrubs trimmed, and you didn't see nothing out there but clean, clean as a pin.  Oh, I had--Jasper Williams [Jasper W. Williams, Jr.] was a tenant.  He's one of the biggest preachers in this town now.  I had Moses Norman [Moses C. Norman, Sr.], he was superintendent of the schools, and I--there was a guy was named L.C. Crow [ph.] and Daphne [ph.].  Now Crow has a big restaurant in East Point [Georgia].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He was a teacher but he--but all these guys came from Anderson Avenue, and if they got out of hand, or the music was too loud, I would say "Hey, your music was too loud," blah, blah, blah, blah.  "Well we didn't know it, Ms. Watkins [HistoryMaker Lottie Watkins], we apologize," but they stayed there until they bought a house.
Story_ID: 534555
Speaker 1: Anderson Avenue [Atlanta, Georgia] made me. And Hameth [ph.] and Araghetti [ph.] and Victor Massey [ph.] told Albert Zetta [ph.] and Mr. Parson [ph.] about me.  So they had gotten a whole lot of land on the west side.  So they said, "Mrs. Watkins [HistoryMaker Lottie Watkins], we heard about you, may we come by?"  I told 'em yes.  They told me they were building two hundred units here and out on Jackson Parkway [James Jackson Parkway] and, but they told me this, they said, "But now I'll tell you," he said, "after five years we sell the property, but you will have them five years."  Well I said, "That's good enough for me."  So they built two hundred units on Jackson Parkway.  They built 3670 Gordon [Street], that's where [HistoryMaker] John Lewis was my tenant, he lived at 3670 and I had--that one had 120 units.  Then they built some down the street on (Unclear) Park.  I had about three hundred units there, but I filled 'em up with nice people.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: See, we didn't have any drugs out there then. Everybody was nice and I was fortunate enough to get nice residence managers, and even a young man that worked at B. Altman [B. Altman and Company], a big food company [sic.].  He had three boys and he would say to me all the time that when he was in that truck they liked to sit under the light and said Pete Cola [ph.] has to call them in.  I said, "Why don't you work for me then?  You'll be home with 'em in the day time, I mean the night time."  So Fowler [ph.] has been with me ever since I've been in business [as Lottie Watkins Enterprises, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 2: So how did you, how did you go about recruiting the workers and--did you--how did you go about getting people to work for you that were good people?
Speaker 1: Well if I had two good guys they'll tell me about somebody.
Speaker 2: Oh, referrals.
Speaker 1: Now Melvin [ph.] worked at the Ford Motor Company, this guy but he rented from me in (unclear) but he worked at night, but I knew Melvin could do repair work so I hired him.  I said, "Well you can save enough money working for me to buy you a house," and do you know Melvin saved my check and used the Ford Motor Company check and bought a house in Decatur [Georgia], and Fowler did the same thing.  I mean his house is bigger than mine he lives on Melbenan [Drive], and he's still cutting grass he's got so much business because he gave up the B. Altman and Company, but if you got the talent I think you need to use it.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And by, by getting them they would tell somebody else about me.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But if, if I didn't like you, well I didn't work you.  I didn't, and you know, you didn't have to do that job.
Story_ID: 534556
Speaker 1: Now how did you go about getting tenants, 'cause you had to get tenants, too, right?
Speaker 2: Well when my sign went up, they came to my office [of Lottie Watkins Enterprises, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia], they saw [HistoryMaker] Lottie Watkins' name.  See I had a good name.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they knew I took care of the property.  Now--
Speaker 1: So you, you actually got good tenants (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --who would come to even apply?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, but now one fella that worked for me he came in there one day and he said, "I'm mad."  I said, "What are you angry about?"  He said, "I had to get somebody told about you."  So the guy started talking about Lottie Watkins, and he said, "That's a mean woman, she put me out," and Gresham [ph.] said, "I told him if she puts you out, you didn't pay your rent, don't you talk about her."  He was standing in a pool room talking about me, but Gresham, he said, "I got him told about you, and he shut up."  But you see that man thought I was mean, but it was business with me because if I didn't get that money those guys would've moved their account to someone else.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But I was on the premise five years because it was something that they would do, I don't know how they handled that with the banks, but after five years they would get rid of it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it just went on and on and on.
Speaker 1: Now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So I didn't have to worry about selling a lot of property, but I sold some, but that wasn't my bag.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was the only woman that specialized in property management.
Speaker 1: So you found your niche?
Speaker 2: I found my niche.
Story_ID: 534557
Speaker 1: You always say that you had a good name, what do you contribute to having the good name for 'cause that has permeated on out through today where you've been able to have, I'll say good people migrate toward you of all professions, all walks of life from presidents to Joe Blow on the street, you know, so what would contribute (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) To that?
Speaker 1: --that good name to?  Where do you--?
Speaker 2: Well you see when you do a lot of social work like I was doing--well I was put on all the committees because they knew I was coming and I was gonna produce.  I went to everything and I felt like--and I wasn't the only one, I had a buddy named Eunice Cooper.  She's deceased now, and Johnny Eckstein [ph.], but Rich's--
Speaker 1: Department Store [Rich's Department Store, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: --they wouldn't do nothing, they just still wanted to be segregated, but during that time, I joined the Chamber of Commerce, Women's Chamber of Commerce [Women's Chamber of Commerce of Atlanta], and Kitty Lofton was a big woman at Rich's, and she liked me. She told me she wanted me to be on Rich's Business Woman's Board [Rich's Business Women's Advisory Board], so I came and told some of my buddies, they said, "Take it."  Said, "'Cause we need a black girl on one of those Dogwood [Atlanta Dogwood Festival] floats," so I got on that committee. And when we got ready to look for the queens, you know, we used to have Dogwood float in Atlanta [Georgia].  Sammy [Samuel Bacote, II] had a niece there named Sheila [ph.], she was at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], and I turned her name in.  So I don't know what made the tide change, but she came in second, and she was on that float.  So I won that battle, and I stayed on Rich's Business Women's Board.
Story_ID: 534558
Speaker 1: Was Mr. Dobbs [John Wesley Dobbs] happy, 'cause he was one of the ones to picket Rich's [Rich's Department Store, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Oh we--let me tell you what the students did to us.  We met--we had a place down at Atlanta Life [Atlanta Life Insurance Company; Atlanta Life Financial Group, Atlanta, Georgia] that, where the employees--see things were segregated.  They would go play cards on their lunch hour, so Jesse Hill started letting the students use the place in the back, this little house, so then we started going to the meetings and Herschelle Sullivan, I don't know where she was from, she was dynamic. [HistoryMaker] Julian Bond, he quit school, Lonnie King [Lonnie C. King, Jr.] quit school.  They were so dedicated to that and Ben Brown kept going, but we would meet with them, Mr. Dobbs, everybody.  So we weren't moving fast enough for them on Rich's. So I'm waiting in my little office with Leroy Johnson [Leroy R. Johnson] to pick me up as he come up Hunter Street, but someone came in there and said, "Ooh," said, "you don't see nothing but heads going up under that bridge up there by Morris Brown College [Atlanta, Georgia]."  I said "Heads?" He said, "It's students." I went to the phone I said, "Oh dear Lord, they tricked us."   He said, "How?" I said, "They've already started marching."  Leroy called Daddy King [Reverend Martin Luther King, Sr.] down in (unclear), and Daddy King told Leroy said, "Well it's nothing we can but join 'em."
Speaker 1: But join 'em?
Speaker 2: Join 'em.  Just come on 'cause see they tricked us.  So Leroy said, "Come on, get in the car," I said, "No, I'm gonna stay here, you go on 'cause they're waiting on you."  They got in front of Rich's, didn't let nobody go in there.  It was almost Christmas.  My daughter [Joyce Rankin Bacote] needed wedding gifts, you know.  We were registered at Rich's and everywhere.  Folks didn't go to Rich's, they stayed out.  She was married in December, do you know what Rich's lost--all the teachers turned in their charge cards.  They stopped shopping, and they told us at a meeting, they said, "We're getting outta debt, and we even turned in our cards.  And these students got us saving money."  It was real funny, but we did the teachers a favor 'cause everybody went to Rich's to buy, but he finally came in, but Rich's was the last one to come into the polls but the students beat them, beat them and that we had a restaurant named Leb's [Leb's Restaurant, Atlanta, Georgia] when the students went in there up there by the Rialto Theater [Rialto Center for the Arts, Atlanta, Georgia], the police dragged 'em and put 'em in a paddy wagon, locked up a lot of them.  So they were still in jail and somebody called and said, "We can't find any of the lawyers, oh we just got to go out there."  I don't remember the street, but we went to the stockade.  I said, "Horace Ward [Horace T. Ward] will take us."  And Eunice [Eunice Cooper] said, "Well let's go."  I said, "Oh but look, honey, Horace Ward doesn't drive no car.  You gotta drive."  Eunice said, "I don't mind," said, "I'm gonna get Grady's [ph.] van," and went we down to 361 Ascham [ph.], told Horace Ward our story.  So we went to the jailhouse, the stockade, Horace went in there and signed the bonds, and we got those students out and instead of taking 'em home we had a restaurant on Alban [ph.] named by Big Big Bigamon [ph.], Bigamon stayed open because the kids were hungry and we went there to eat and I didn't get home until two o'clock, but Eunice couldn't get over a grown man not driving a car.  He's been a federal judge and everything and right to the day Horace doesn't drive, but he went out to the stockade with us.
Story_ID: 534559
Speaker 1: And another incident we had.  We had a hotel on Courtland Street [Atlanta, Georgia].  The man was named Martin Rowinston [ph.].  And we decided to go in that hotel and eat in that dining room or do something--but I had two invitations to something else.  Hubert Humphrey was coming to town to speak, but we made this decision at Allen Temple Church [Allen Temple A.M.E. Church, Atlanta, Georgia] to go down to this place and picket it.  But I forgot so I go the Dinkler Hotel [Atlanta, Georgia] to hear Hubert Humphrey. I, I, you know how you got so much on your mind?  So that night the phone rang, Eunice [Eunice Cooper] said, "Hey."  I said, "Hey, now what's wrong with you?"  She says, "You know what's wrong with me."  I said, "No I don't."  She says, "We all got locked up today, everybody but you."  I said, "Well Eunice where did you go?"  I said, "Oh, I forgot it, I went to hear Hubert Humphrey."  She said, "Well you got your nerve," said, "Isabel Webster and Jesse Hill had to go through the kitchen and get outta there because somebody had to stay out to bail us out," and said, "Clint Warner [HistoryMaker Dr. Clinton Warner] and everybody got locked up but you," and I said, "Well Eunice, I'm sorry."  She says, "Well I got a think about whether I want your friendship anymore."  I said, "Well you can do what you wanna do."  I said, "I just forgot it."  She said, "How could forget the most important thing?"  But to show you I must've been wrong going there because when I parked my car at the Dinkler Hotel to hear Humphrey speak, I came back down, and the man couldn't find my car.  I said, "Well, you, you parked it."  He said, "Well I don't see it."  And by the time Leona Levitan [ph.], one of my friends, she was a Jew; she says, "We'll talk."  She says, "Well you've been here a long time."  I said, "I'm waiting on my car," and so he looked at her and he said, "Do you like Humphrey?"  She said, "Yeah." He said, "Well I don't 'cause Humphrey like niggers."  So what he did, see he put my car in a corner, and if it had not been for this Jew girl, I don't know what I would've done.  You know what she said to him.  She said, "Well you know I have two daughters, and they don't agree all the time, but we get back together."  You know, she's trying to smooth it over.  So maybe that's why he treated me bad.  I didn't go to the right thing, I went down there.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well you didn't get put in jail either, did you?
Speaker 1: No, but Eunice said I didn't wanna get locked up.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) She said you chose (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But she got all right, she's deceased now, but she was my--oh she would say one thing to me all the time, she would say, "Shut up 'cause I'm the social worker."  She was a social worker, you know we--but she was like me, she was dedicated.
Story_ID: 534560
Speaker 1: You've had Lottie Watkins Enterprises and Management Company [sic. Lottie Watkins Enterprises, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia] since 1960, and here we are in 2006, since, you know, we're starting in November.  What affiliation do you have with the business today?
Speaker 2: Well not anything much because I had surgery on my knee and I used to go to everything but you know you don't ever get well from that.
Speaker 1: So you're retired now?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And who's running in your absence (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My, my daughter Joyce.
Speaker 1: Okay, Joyce is.
Speaker 2: Joyce Bacote [Joyce Rankin Bacote] and her husband [Samuel Bacote, II] is retired from being a principal, he helps, and my other daughter [Judy Yvonne Barnett] is there, and now my grandson [Samuel Bacote, III], he gives us a hand.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 534561
Speaker 1: But for the years that you were working from 1960 when you started up everything and got the--you know, the accounts and everything you were really active.  I mean you were really busy, not only were you busy running the company, but you were busy in community affairs. I wanna talk about some of the activities that you were actually involved in while you were president and CEO, you know, of Lottie Watkins Enterprises [Lottie Watkins Enterprises, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia].  You ran for an office and won in 1977.  Just tell us a little bit about that?
Speaker 2: Well I didn't have my mind on that see, but Ben Brown got a job in Washington [D.C.].  That was his seat with Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And there was a lot of people wanted to run for just maybe about a year, 'cause Ben, Ben stayed there a little bit better than a year and everybody said, "Well Lottie [HistoryMaker Lottie Watkins], you run for it."  I said, "Well I can't do it, I got a business."  So they kept on and I ran for it, and I won, but it was nothing I planned in my life.
Speaker 1: And what was that, the position, just give us the title of that position?
Speaker 2: I was in the 34th district and whi- see you had to live in the district--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --to run for a seat, and, but--
Speaker 1: And that was the House of Representatives for the state of Georgia [Georgia House of Representatives] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it was nice those few months, but that's how I got the seat.
Story_ID: 534562
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about your involvement with the Democratic National Committee, the membership committee for that, and then some of your political involvements, and what you've done to help people get elected to office, and some of the presidents and the mayors of Georgia that you've actually had affiliations with.
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: I see in 1966 [sic.] you were on President Jimmy Carter's [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] campaign.
Speaker 2: Well, I--when he announced to be the president I was on the invitation.  It had two blacks on it; it had me and Andy Young [HistoryMaker Andrew Young].  My name was up at the top so I got involved with his campaign and there was some good blacks, like George Booker worked for the national Democratic Party, and he had been here to help us with [President] Lyndon Baines Johnson when we got the vote out for him.  So he would always come to Atlanta [Georgia].  He knew us and Jimmy Carter, I met him when he was the governor, and there was always some women like me.  We always joined a party just to have that card, and then there was the Democratic Women's Party [Democratic Women's Party of Georgia; Georgia Federation of Democratic Women], so we joined that and we would go, you know, all over the State of Georgia with them and they were just--turned out to be lovely people.  I was shocked to know that they were nice and even Sam Nunn's wife [Colleen O'Brien Nunn] was nice.
Speaker 1: Sam who?  Nunn (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nunn, he was our senator then.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was nice, and whenever there was a big function here I was always on the dais because I held an office in the state Democratic Party.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 534563
Speaker 1: We had something called a Peanut Brigade here in Atlanta [Georgia] for Jimmy Carter [James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Peanut Brigrade--Peanut Brigade, okay.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) for Jimmy Carter, I was on that committee.
Speaker 2: What year was that?  Was that during the--
Speaker 1: During his--
Speaker 2: Now that's during the '60s [1960s] when he--okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, when was trying to be the president.
Speaker 2: When he was trying, okay that's what I (unclear).
Speaker 1: And I even went on the trip, you know, he had people who would travel, and we would always have nice places to stay and we would campaign.  I went to Idaho and some other city, I've forgotten, but I enjoyed it.  I got tired--but--you--I was gone only for the weekend, we left on a Friday and I came back on Sunday night.
Speaker 2: So you all did campaigning in those particular areas?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, uh-huh. He had somebody in every state that was waiting on us but I only went out of town twice for him and there were some other blacks, like Horace Tate.  He had strong blacks traveling with him, and--well as I said now we know where to vote though 'cause we go all the way and analyze 'em, you know--remember the old-time school blackboards?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: They would have a piece of chalk and those blackboards and they would have those precincts.
Speaker 2: And they did that for city elections?
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: And national elections?
Speaker 1: Right.  And they would look at that board, they knew where the vote was, but they knew where we were weak, and they had people in all these little cities in the State of Georgia.  Those people would tell Bacote [Clarence A. Bacote] and them how many votes they had, you know, from down under, and he would say you got to work a little bit harder.  We would tell 'em that.  You know like well there were so many little towns, I don't even know all of 'em myself, but that's the way we had to do it to be a winner.
Story_ID: 534564
Speaker 1: Let's talk about, I wanna call him Senator Allen, but there were several Allens that were active in--
Speaker 2: You talking about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Atlanta [Georgia] politics.
Speaker 2: Oh, you mean Ivan Allen [Ivan Allen, Jr.]?
Speaker 1: Ivan Allen.  You helped with his mayoral campaign.
Speaker 2: Oh he decided, he decided to run for the mayor, so Grace Hammer [ph.], who was in the state house [Georgia House of Representatives], and she called me up and asked me could she come by?  I told her, "Yeah," she said, "Ivan's going to run for the mayor, and I told him I recommend you to run his campaign office on Hunter Street," and I said, "I can't do that, Grace, I just went into business [Lottie Watkins Enterprises, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia]."  She said, "Well, he'll pay for someone to be in there and help Joann [ph.] for you to help us in the campaign."  She said, "The office is right across the street from you at Hunter and Raymond Street."  I said, "Well, let me think about it."  So I called my running buddy, Eunice [Eunice Cooper] (unclear).  "Yeah, let's, let's get him elected, Lottie [HistoryMaker Lottie Watkins]."  So then a fella named Walter Leonard [HistoryMaker Walter J. Leonard] said to--and (Unclear) Lee [ph.] was, was in school, but Leonard said we got to have a good team.  So we ran two shifts, nine [o'clock] to three [o'clock] and three to nine. And we had six people on every crew.  So I would watch out from nine to three and Leonard would take over to be the night guy from three to nine.  So we would feed them and they would have to go to church, it's the evening shift.  'Cause see, we had meetings at all the churches and you had to go, and if Ivan Allen wasn't there we would have somebody speak for him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it ran real smooth, but Don Hollowell [Donald Hollowell] got in the race, a black guy, and we had another white guy named Muggsy Smith [Milton M. "Muggsy" Smith].  So Don kind of split the black vote, and Ivan Allen got in in the runoff.  So but my buddy is for Muggsy Smith, so she said, you know, "We can't talk 'cause we got different candidates this time."  I said, "I understand."  She said, "Now don't come down this way."  I said, "Don't you come over there."  She was further down, and we would kid each other, but she had to come into our camp because we couldn't let Muggsy Smith be our mayor.  But we elected Ivan Allen, but the first thing we told him that we wanted some shirts and ties in that city hall [Atlanta City Hall, Atlanta, Georgia].  See, they were janitors and everything, so the first somebody he hired was Hilliard Lee.  I always called him Buddy.  Buddy quit Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] to go--now you--now remember now you, you have Julian [HistoryMaker Julian Bond] and Yolanda King, they did this.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So Buddy quit and he started going to Georgia State [Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia] in the evening.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So by going to school in the afternoon he took that job.  They put him in planning; Buddy was real smart.  He's retired now, he retired from the city hall, but he was the first young man down there with a shirt and tie on.  Ivan Allen promised a lot for us and he did it.
Story_ID: 534565
Speaker 1: Now Hartsfield [William B. Hartsfield] wouldn't--he agreed on the black police, but they couldn't lock up anybody but black people and you had to go to Butler Street Y [Butler Street YMCA, Atlanta, Georgia] and take your--prison, prisoner.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And then the paddy wagon would come get him, but Ivan Allen [Ivan Allen, Jr.] stopped that so our black police could take you straight to the jail and they could lock up black or white people.  He did do that and he's the man that took that Peyton Wall [Atlanta, Georgia] down.  At first he didn't understand it but we were ready to jump him, but he understood us.  See the blacks wanted to move in Peyton Forest [Atlanta, Georgia], but the whites didn't want us there and they put this barrier up and looked like Ivan was taking sides with them, but when we got through with him he changed (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was--
Speaker 1: And Calloway [William L. Calloway] led that war against Ivan Allen, but it worked out smooth and he was a good mayor and he'd done a lot for us and he hired a lot of people.  I can't take that from him, and--
Speaker 2: Now this is Ivan Allen, Jr.?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's Ivan Allen, Jr., and a lot of us went to his funeral, he passed I think it was the year before last and I was there.  I saw Jesse Hill, I saw Herman [HistoryMaker Herman Russell], I saw Buddy Lee [ph.].  I saw a lot of blacks because it was at a church on Peachtree [Street].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And let me tell you what he did.  The procession, for his funeral, went down Hunter Street all the way to west (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --to the cemetery, you could stand and look and see his funeral.
Speaker 2: Everybody.
Speaker 1: Going down the street and--
Speaker 2: Now he was--okay.
Speaker 1: We thought that was so beautiful. He was buried at Westview Cemetery [Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now he was Maynard Jackson's predecessor, was it, or was there another mayor that came in between, he and Maynard (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I think Sam--let me see, I think Maynard, no yeah, that's right, no--Ivan Allen and Sam Massell was Maynard--was the vice mayor.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So then he ran for the mayor, but we beat him with Maynard.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: There's that black vote again.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: We beat him with Maynard, so Maynard served two terms.  Yeah, we--but Maynard was a politician, but we beat Ivan Allen--I mean we beat Massell with Maynard Jackson.
Story_ID: 534566
Speaker 1: Tell us how you became involved with presidents, John F. Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy], Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] and Vice President Humphrey [Hubert Humphrey]?
Speaker 2: Well when Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] ran I raised a lot of money and I don't know what he was talking about, thinking about then.  I was put on his national Democratic finance committee 'cause I could raise money, and they knew it.  So when Bob Strauss [Robert S. Strauss] came to town and saw me raising all that money and power sourcing everywhere for Jimmy Carter--so and Louis Martin [Louis E. Martin]--of course I wasn't the only one, but they put me on the finance committee so you know I really had to raise some money then.  So I would go to the national finance (unclear), and I held that position as long as Jimmy Carter was the president. And my grandson [Samuel Bacote, III] that just left--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Well when I went to the convention [1976 Democratic National Convention, New York, New York] he was like that, I took him with me.  He went to Jimmy Carter's inauguration and Andy [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] was up there staying at the Waldorf Astoria [Waldorf Astoria New York, New York, New York] and he, they came and got him and he went down there, you know, stayed with Gene [ph.] while I was in the meetings.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But he was so happy.
Speaker 1: And you did--you had all these affiliations while you were still running Lottie Watkins Enterprises [Lottie Watkins Enterprises, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, um-hm.
Story_ID: 534567
Speaker 1: Now when did you move to--you said you started out in a small office [for Lottie Watkins Enterprises, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 2: I started out in a small--oh yes, well, it was too small.  I had too much business, it was just--it wasn't large as this room, cut off the dining room.  And one of my landlords, Dick Hacknan [ph.], I told him that I was gonna have to move and I said, "But I don't know where I'm going."  He said, "I know Ms. Dennis [ph.]; she's one of our patients.  That's her gray house there next to where she already has two storefronts.  See--I'm gonna see will she tear it down for the building there for you."  So Dick talked to Ms. Dennis and she told him if I could move this lady into a nice neighborhood, she would tear it down. So God should have--and there was a little house right around the corner from where I lived, almost (unclear), and I said, "You tell Ms. Dennis I found a place," and she liked it.  So she tore the house down and that's how this second building is there next to the building where it used to be, she built it for me.  So then she asked me which side did I want and I looked and I said, I don't know.  One side was larger than the other side.  So I said, "Ms. Dennis I think I'll take the right side," and she rented the left side out to a dentist named Warren Bell [ph.] (laughter), so I stayed there and it was a lot of fun, but drugs had gotten strong, and I went out one day to Dixie Hills [Atlanta, Georgia] to check some property and while I was gone somebody jumped the counter and robbed the two girls that worked for me (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: And they were so frightened.  Of course I had good insurance, and I wasn't taking anything but money orders.  So my insurance covered all those money orders they took, but they were in name.
Story_ID: 534568
Speaker 1: And then I had another accident, something that had happened there [offices of Lottie Watkins Enterprises, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia].  Judy [Judy Yvonne Barnett], my daughter went by there from school and Big Sammy [ph.], he was the principal, and he'd been by there, he was always checking.  So Sammy went in there and somebody tried to rob me and had locked my little girl in the, in the toilet and I think they locked Big Sammy in there, I can't remember, but Judy was so frightened, she was so frightened, but I knew then I had to get off of Hunter Street [Atlanta, Georgia], but some of my landlords they had property on Simpson Road.  I said I don't wanna go that way, no, no.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But Big Sammy found this building on Gordon Street and he said, "I got something I want you to see, (unclear)."  I went over there, it was for sale.  I said, "I like this," so we found out how much it was selling for and I called the fella, and when I went to see him you know what he said to me?  He said, "I already know you," this is a white guy.  I said, "From where?"  He said, "From Auburn Avenue," he said, "Do you know Tom West?"  I said, "Yes."  He said, "Well he's my friend.  He's a friend of Bill Calloway's [William L. Calloway], and you used to work for him."
Speaker 2: Oh okay.
Speaker 1: So I told him what happened to me and he told me how much he wanted for it and I said, "Well my son [Watkins' son-in-law, Samuel Bacote, II] and I will be back with a contract because I like it," and he told me, he said, "If your loan don't go through, I'll give you your earnest money back, Ms. Watkins [HistoryMaker Lottie Watkins], because you are a great lady."
Speaker 2: What more could you ask for?
Speaker 1: But anyway I got that loan and during those days I have a building that has the Georgia Teachers' Association in there.  I have the black clergy [Concerned Black Clergy of Metropolitan Atlanta, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia], I have an insurance company and I'm in there so--
Speaker 2: And what, what year did you move into there you think?
Speaker 1: To the new building?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Well I had to where I was two more years because the guys down--the people downstairs had a loan company and our lease was still running and I couldn't, I couldn't get into it.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 534569
Speaker 1: But what frightened me when I--I asked (unclear), and I said, "Well how much is the note gonna be?"  He figured it out, he said, "It's gonna be $1,081.21."  I said, "Oh, that's too much.  Oh, no I can't do that".  So I called my lawyer.  My lawyer was a female and I told Isabel [Isabel Webster] about it, and she said, "Well Lottie [HistoryMaker Lottie Watkins], you won't have to pay no closing costs 'cause I'm your lawyer and all that's free, go on and buy the building."  I paid for it in ten years, ten years and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nineteen sixty [1960] to 1970?
Speaker 1: --next to me I bought the lot, on the other side of me I bought the house.  Now the house, that lady told me that she worked with me in Charles Weltner's [Charles L. Weltner] campaign.  She was white, but she was moving to Virginia because her husband's health was bad.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And she said, "Ms. Watkins, I want you to buy this house," and I bought it just like that 'cause she knew me and it just fell right in my lap.  I was nice to her, but she told me when she first met she knew me.  So that's how I got so much over there.  Now the only black over there was Leroy Johnson [Leroy R. Johnson] on Gordon Street.
Speaker 2: Oh okay.
Speaker 1: He owned a building.  All of those were white businesses--
Story_ID: 534570
Speaker 1: Well let me ask, is there anything that I have not asked you that you wanted to include right now about your life?
Speaker 2: Well, Johnson had a million women up there to me at his (unclear)--President Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson], but I wanted him to let everybody be equal, you know, with their lifestyle and he told us he was gonna do that, and when he did that, that's when we got busy trying to fill those slots where we know blacks didn't work, like the young man for the HEW [U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services], he was a principal.  I asked him, would he do that for us?  He said, "Anything," and the guys--can you imagine guys with degrees working, throwing mail in the back of a post office?  We told Charlie Weltner [Charles L. Weltner] that we wanted some pen pushers on the desk.  He said, "You got your wishes."  We pulled those guys from the back and he--not only did he do that, he built the post office down at C Street, but it's called Whitehouse Drive [Atlanta, Georgia] now, and M.L.K. [Martin Luther King Jr. Drive] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: And then he wanted to send some of the guys to the regional office in Alabama.  Those guys went over there and they stayed two years, but they broke all right, but Weltner kept his word, he kept his word.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So everything that Ivan Allen [Ivan Allen, Jr.] promised us and all that we didn't picket and win.
Speaker 1: You got it.
Speaker 2: Everything fell in place, but you know what did it?  We had that vote and it was the vote that counted and when you don't go to the polls we lose.
Speaker 1: So true.
Speaker 2: It has, it has really been a joy to see how we have moved in Atlanta [Georgia].
Story_ID: 534571
Speaker 1: You were active with the Civil Rights Movement, too, you worked with SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference].
Speaker 2: Oh yes, I chaired their first--ML [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was living when I--no, I didn't chair it, I was over housing, it was a national meeting and Johnnie Yancey [John Howard Yancey] was over national housing as usual.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it was beautiful and ML was living then, I have a brochure on that when, when they had a meeting like that, but I did chair the first big banquet for Evelyn Lowery [HistoryMaker Evelyn Gibson Lowery], me and Gwen Smith [ph.], so it was quite a success and everybody was happy, but Hosea [Hosea Williams] wanted to be the president in ML's place, but Joe Lowery [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Joseph Lowery] beat 'em out and (laughter) he came into the banquet and he was so mad at us.  We were afraid of him.  He wouldn't up to the dais, but everything worked out beautiful.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I remember when he was a chemist down in Savannah [Georgia], and they were mean to him down there, and he came back home and a lot of us went with him to Carl Sanders' office and I thought he was gonna hurt his knuckles.  He told Carl Sanders, "I'm sick of this," (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh rapping on the--
Speaker 2: "And I'm not going back," but Hosea was a fighter.  He finished Morris Brown [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia] but he was a fantastic chemist.
Story_ID: 534572
Speaker 1: Why did you f- need to tell your story?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm so glad you asked me because Joyce [Joyce Rankin Bacote] and Sammy [Samuel Bacote, II] might forget something, and they can just show the tape to Kelli [Kelli Bacote-Boone] and her two little girls and Joy-Joy [Joy Bacote (ph.)] can show them to her two little girls and little Sammy [Samuel Bacote, III] can show it to his children.
Story_ID: 534573
Speaker 1: How do you feel about the way that you have lived your life and what is important to you?
Speaker 2: Well, I think I've lived a good life and I've done so much to help people.  I have been--even in my church [Providence Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia] when I was on the finance committee [for the Democratic National Committee] I worked hard.  I even ushered in my church--
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: --but the funniest thing about my life, whatever I did for people looked like the Lord worked it out well for me where I could really produce.  Now you take the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]--one of my girlfriends asked me to come to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] because they had a Freedom Fund dinner [Fight for Freedom Fund dinner] every month, I mean once a year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I went up there and Delores Tucker [C. Delores Tucker] showed it to me.  She said, "See what you can do."  I stole her idea, and I came home and I started one with NAACP, but my first and second Freedom Fund banquet, it was at Butler Street Y [Butler Street YMCA, Atlanta, Georgia], and it was $25 to go in, but we filled the house and a guy named William Folks [ph.] told me, he said, "Who's gonna speak for you?"  I said, us women, "We don't know.  He said, "I know a guy in Mississippi name Aaron Henry."  He said, "You ever heard of him?"  We said, "No, but we'll be pleased, let him be a speaker."  He came over here and we fell in love with him.  He was our first speaker.
Speaker 1: And what year did you start that one?  Like how many have you had?  How many Freedom Fund banquets have you had?
Speaker 2: Oh, have we had?
Speaker 1: How many have you had so far do you think?
Speaker 2: Well I did the first five, and it was time to back off.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, but the funniest thing about it, they tricked me.  They gave me the first C.L. Harper Award.  It's on my wall. They told me I deserved that, and it's still going on, and, but we told the people that they could take our junior memberships.  So we started that along with the $500.  So I had three grandchildren, and so I saved $300 and I bought three $100 memberships.  They're all grown now, but they still remember and we would sell a lot of those, and it worked.
Speaker 1: And that was at the--is that the Freedom Fund banquet or was that the C.L. (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No that was something on the side, see you always do your, you always do your membership campaign, your memberships separate, and then there's a--then there's a meeting, you know banquet, small (unclear) a hundred club in a day.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: But the Freedom Fund and then we would have NAACP rallies and things you know, you get a membership card, but see I've been a member a long time and I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you've done several of those Freedom Award banquets then?  I mean like over--
Speaker 2: Oh, I've done, I've done four or five.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you--did you start it like in 2000 or before 2000?
Speaker 2: It was before 2000, it's in there on the wall and you can write the date down.
Speaker 1: Okay, and then we can--all right.
Speaker 2: It's hanging up and the other things for my grandchildren, they presented me that.  Of course they have their, their cards.
Speaker 1: Okay, their lifetime membership card?
Speaker 2: And they didn't cost but $100.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: See they was just about twelve or, well under fifteen you can buy one, so I just bought three, I wanted them to be a member.
Story_ID: 534574
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: Well, what I would really like to do when I--I think they're on their way--my grandchildren I love 'em, I think better than I do my daughters [Joyce Rankin Bacote and Judy Yvonne Barnett], little Sammy [Samuel Bacote, III] and Joy [Joy Bacote (ph.)] and Kelli [Kelli Bacote-Boone], and they have children now, but when little Sammy and Joy and Kelli were small, I used to put some money in a jar, and at Christmas instead of giving them money, I've always bought 'em a savings bond.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I was talking to little Sammy one day about it, and he said, "You know, (unclear), I still have some of my money," and for their children I do the same thing.  I go to the bank and I get a savings fund for Christmas and I get one for the birthday, so and I buy 'em a book.  I don't buy 'em any toys and I didn't buy Sammy and Joy and Kelli any toys.  I always tried to save 'em some money, but he's still got some of his money.  I don't know about the girls.
Speaker 1: All righty.
Speaker 2: His two sisters, but I would just--I'm so proud of them, they're doing a good job with their life and I would just want them to keep on keeping and live a good life like their grandmamma did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well I'd like to thank you being so gracious with your time, and thank you for allowing us to come into your home to, to interview you, and we thank you for the life that you lived.
Speaker 2: And thank you so very much for letting me participate with your program.
Story_ID: 534575
Speaker 1: That's me, and I'm coming out my door.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Going to work.  That's good.  That's my office and that's my--on the left I have one of my landlords, that's Earl Starling [ph.], on--the next gentlemen is named Claude George [ph.], he had a restaurant next to me, and the next young lady was a good friend of mine, her husband was working for me, that's Ed Sematocks [ph.] and the next one is my son-in-law, Sam Bacote [Samuel Bacote, II].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay what was the occasion this was taken?
Speaker 1: That picture?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Yeah.
Speaker 1: It was taken in '61 [1961].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay.
Speaker 1: No, that's in my office, I had a little small office like the size of a bathroom.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Was there anything special happening when this was taken?
Speaker 1: The--now I think that the Enquirer [Sunday Ledger-Enquirer Magazine] wanted to run something on me, you know how they do?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Great.
Speaker 1: And I had them to come, you know how you do, they wanted run a story on [HistoryMaker] Lottie Watkins.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Very good, next.
Speaker 1: Magazine.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  How about this one?
Speaker 1: This is a picture that was taken during the segregation of every- practically everything in Atlanta [Georgia], and what we needed here was more votes to win and put a black senator in [U.S.] Congress, I mean in, in the state and Charles Weltner [Charles L. Weltner], a white man, wanted to run to be a congressman, but during those days we had a man named Jim Davis [James Davis], but the only way we could beat Jim Davis was to get more votes.  So we--Bacote, put one, two, three that's my--C.A. Bacote taught political.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Which one is C.A. Bacote?
Speaker 1: Clarence Bacote [Clarence A. Bacote], he wrote the history of Atlanta University ['The Story of Atlanta University: A Century of Service, 1865-1965,' Clarence Albert Bacote].
Speaker 2: One, two, three, come no--this way, that's him, that's Clarence Bacote and Leroy Johnson [Leroy R. Johnson] is next to me.  Charles Weltner is on the end, he ran for Congress.  No.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  This one?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, next is Lottie Watkins, next is the senator--well he, he ran for senator and won.  That's Leroy Johnson and we have his son and his wife, Pat, we have Clarence Bacote and we have a guy named Dr. Reeves [ph.] that taught over at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] with Bacote, I mean Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and the next man is Warren Cochran, he was a director of the Butler Street YMCA [Atlanta, Georgia], which was, is a black Y [Young Men's Christian Association (YMCA)], it doesn't--metropolitan doesn't own that, we own it.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Voter Education Project met in Atlanta.  [HistoryMaker] John Lewis was the executive director.  We had a banquet, and in the banquet we just had--oh God I'm missing so many words and he's, he's recording this?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  What words are you missing?
Speaker 2: I'm not--I kept saying I think is that gonna be (unclear)?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Oh no, it's okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  No, they just listen to what you're saying and they use it to write a caption for the photo.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 1: I got worried 'cause you know--now, Voter Education Project that was to teach people about voting and we had this office open in Atlanta, but during the time that we had this banquet, John Lewis, who's in Congress now was executive director.  On the picture starting at the left is [HistoryMaker] Dr. Delutha King and his wife, Lois [Lois Weaver King].  Next was my son-in-law, Jim Barnett [ph.].  Ted Kennedy [Edward M. Kennedy] came to town to be the speaker.  Next to him is Lillian Lewis [Lillian Miles Lewis], John Lewis' wife, and next to Lil is Irving Taylor [ph.], he was a big Democrat with the Democratic Party.  The couple over there I can't think of their names.  I'm in the center with the beads on, and the next young lady is Delutha King's wife--I mean I'm sorry McGhee's, what was--Nelson McGhee's [Nelson McGhee, Jr.] wife.  Nelson McGhee was the big man just like Delutha King with the movement, and they're the ones that brought the sickle cells.  We didn't know nothing about sickle cell, they came from Washington [D.C.].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Right, we got that story from Dr. King (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, when him and Nels- (laughter), oh you tell, I don't have to tell you.  I was just telling you something about Lil.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  No, that's great.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay, this was what time period, approximately?
Speaker 1: Oh, B-A-P, I have it in a book.  I can give it to you 'cause I have that thing with the (unclear).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  No, no that's okay, all right, next?
Speaker 1: This is down in the legislature.  That's Grace Hamilton [Grace Towns Hamilton], our first black Negro woman in the house [Georgia House of Representatives].  Next is Bea Garland [Beatrice Garland]; Bea Garland was a civic worker.  We use to call her Ms. Pittsburgh, just like, you know, every, everybody has a side of town where they worked, you know, you had to divide Atlanta up, and the next one is Lottie.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Now why were you all together at this--when this (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: That was down at the State of Georgia in the House of Representatives, it was taken at--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay and what, what time would you associate with this, approximately?
Speaker 1: I have it in the book, let me see I can't remember, but I have the dates that I'll give you.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Nineteen seventies [1970s].
Speaker 1: It was?  Okay in the '70s [1970].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Very good, next.
Speaker 1: That's me and Daddy King [Reverend Martin Luther King, Sr.] isn't it?  That's me and Daddy King down there so that was in the '70s [1970], that Dr.--well we called him Daddy King, that's ML's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] father, and that's Lottie Watkins with him.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay, hold on one second, Shawn [Shawn Wilson], sorry.  Go ahead.  That's not Lottie, that's you.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, I'm Lottie Watkins (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay, now this one.
Speaker 1: That's me, and the next gentlemen is John Calhoun [John H. Calhoun], he was a big Republican--turn it over.  I think that's John.  Turn it over and let me see.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay yeah you can turn it over.  We got it.
Speaker 1: Yeah that's John Calhoun.  You see we had some big Republicans as well as some big Democrats.  John Calhoun and John Wesley Dobbs were Republicans, and Austin Walden [A.T. Walden] and Warren Cochran and Bacote, we were all Democrats.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  But who else is in the photo, 'cause you'll confuse them if you're talking about people (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well on, on the right side we have--he's just gone to Congress.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay this is you, Lottie.
Speaker 1: That's Lottie, John Calhoun--the guy just won--we got another seat in Congress.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: David Scott.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  David Scott?
Speaker 1: Um-hm, and the gentleman in the front he was the pastor of Mount Calvary Baptist Church [Atlanta, Georgia], his name was Reverend Johnson and he passed, his son is running that church now on (unclear)--B.J. Johnson [B.J. Johnson, Sr.].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Very good.
Speaker 1: Yeah, B.J. Johnson.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay, next, see you're cruising here.
Speaker 1: Oh, I don't know.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  You're doing well you're doing really well.
Speaker 1: Now we had a party here in Atlanta for the Democratic Party, big banquet.  The girl from Texas that died--Barbara Jordan, that's her seated.  She came to town and that's Eunice [Eunice Cooper]--I can't think of Eunice's last name.  She was a civic worker, and the next one is me.  I was a member of the party.  The next one was Edgar Levitas [ph.] and his wife.  He was at, he was at the state capitol [Georgia State Capitol, Atlanta, Georgia], too.  He was a senator, and when he retired, he went back into law practice.  That's his wife with him, and the guy on the left is, is a he was--in--from Washington.  He was a congressman down the road, but I will think of his name after a while and give it to you.  I can't think of it right now.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Down in front is?
Speaker 1: Oh, that's Barbara Jordan.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Barbara Jordan?
Speaker 1: Yeah she came to Atlanta to our affair.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Well, that's me and I always call Maynard the Big M, that's me and Maynard Jackson.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Um-hm that was in the--that was in the late '70s [1970s], I think.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Next.
Speaker 1: This is my family with me, I was awarded--I got an award from the Empire Real Estate Board [Empire Real Estate Board, Inc.; Empire Board of Realtists, Inc.]. So in the picture with me seated on my right is my sister Beulah Griggs [Beulah Heywood Griggs], the next on is my daughter, Judy Barnett [Judy Yvonne Barnett], in the yellow.  I have on the pink, that's Joyce Bacote [Joyce Rankin Bacote] next to me and that's Joy, Joy Bacote [ph.] on the end.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  In the yellow?
Speaker 1: In the yellow.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay and then the back row?
Speaker 1: In the back row is--oh, my daughter married Bacote's son (laughter), that's right I couldn't--I forgot, and his son will be here in a minute, he's coming.  He was down to city hall [Atlanta City Hall, Atlanta, Georgia] in some meeting and that's Lucia Bacote [Lucia Moore Bacote], that's Bacote's wife 'cause my daughter married her son.  The next one.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Oh, that's my niece, Delores [ph.] and that's my sister there.  The next one is her son Kevin [ph.].  The next picture is my cousin, Alice Mitchell [ph.].  The next one is Sam Bacote, that's Joyce's husband and the next one is my niece, June Elder [ph.], and I--oh, that's my grandson.  That's Sam Bacote [Samuel Bacote, III] up there, he'll be here in a minute and then that's Kelli Bacote [Kelli Bacote-Boone].  Kelli just left, she's here from Chicago [Illinois] and the children. So that's Kelli, and that was my Joy-Joy's boyfriend.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay.
Speaker 1: I can't think of his name, but I got that award.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay, that's (unclear) a lot of people, you did well.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  That is a lot of people you did great.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  And this was taken in the '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's when I got that award, let's see.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  You can't just say when you got the award, you got a lot of awards (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think but I don't know what that is back there.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Nineteen eighty-seven [1987].
Speaker 2: I don't know what that was, I don't--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Now, that's my family there, those are my daughters, and that's my grandson.  He'll be here in a minute, that's Sam Bacote, III, that's him right there on the left.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Hold on please.
Speaker 2: That's Joyce, my daughter.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay go ahead.
Speaker 2: That's Judy, my daughter, and that's me.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay, that's a good one.
Speaker 2: All right's, that's on--sitting next to is Sam Bacote, III, and then on the left is my daughter Joy Bacote and then that's Sam Bacote and that's Judy.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  You know I just thought of something, could you tell us how to spell Bacote?
Speaker 2: B-A-C-O-T-E.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay, thank you.  We wouldn't wanna get that wrong.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay we got that one.
Speaker 2: His daddy was named Clarence Bacote, the one with the voter registration.
Speaker 1: That's me and--what was Carter's [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] vice president's name, that's his wife.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Mondale [Walter Mondale], that's Mondale's wife [Joan Adams Mondale], yeah, they came from Atlanta.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  What's her name?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  I have it in the book (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah they came to Atlanta to our affair.  We were big here in.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Just say Mondale's wife.
Speaker 2: Mondale's wife.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Mrs. Mondale, okay.  When was that taken?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Well it looks like the '70 [1970]--well Carter was in office in the '70s [1970], wasn't he?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Must've been the '70s [1970s], huh?
Speaker 2: I'll look and see.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Who was running?  Oh, it was either--oh, Jimmy Carter was running and I had a benefit for him.  That's Andy [HistoryMaker Andrew Young], oh, that's a long time, and that's me and that young man there, he was helping us.  He used to be in the sign business.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  The sign business?
Speaker 2: Billboard, and when him and his partner broke up that's why I got a billboard on my--and it's mine on my parking lot, he gave it to me.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Well we wouldn't know, but you can just say we're not sure who was that is.
Speaker 2: I'm not sure, just, just a volunteer at my--at the party I had for Jimmy Carter.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  That's a good way of putting it, volunteer.
Speaker 2: He was a volunteer.
Story_ID: 534576
Speaker 1: That's [HistoryMaker] Lottie Watkins, Dr. Mays [Benjamin Mays] and Bill Stanley [William Stanley].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay, we got it, what year approximately?
Speaker 1: What's on the back? (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Give it your best shot.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Those ties look like the '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay, let's go with '70s [1970s] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I, I have the date on that, I can get it off my thing.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay the smaller ones?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Tell us about this one, Ms. Watkins?
Speaker 1: Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.]--I was on his finance committee and I raised him a lot of money and I was a member of the Peanut Brigade and I'd travel and everything with him, and when he announced that he was running for president I was right there.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That's me at one of the Democratic affairs in.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  I think your gentleman caller has arrived.
Speaker 1: There he is, now that's, now that's Bacote, III [Samuel Bacote, III].
Speaker 2: (SAMUEL BACOTE, III):  How are you doing?  How are you doing?
Speaker 1: We just did some of your photos and she kept saying, "He'll be here any minute."
Speaker 2: (SAMUEL BACOTE, III):  Oh okay, all right well (unclear).
Speaker 1: Sam, I can't, I can't think of any dates.  When, when was?
Speaker 2: (SAMUEL BACOTE, III):  (Unclear).
Speaker 1: When was Jimmy Carter president?  I got it in my books but see they tricked me.
Speaker 2: (SAMUEL BACOTE, III):  (Unclear).
Speaker 1: Yeah what date?
Speaker 2: (SAMUEL BACOTE, III):  It was '76 [1976] to '80 [1980].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Yeah, okay how about this one now.
Speaker 2: (SAMUEL BACOTE, III):  You can't recall that time?
Speaker 1: No, oh, when I got, when I won, when I was on the calendar that day, this picture here.  The guy took that picture on the southern--on the calendar.
Speaker 2: (SAMUEL BACOTE, III):  Oh, well which--well now which calendar? You talking about the one where they had all the--
Speaker 1: People--what they had done.
Speaker 2: (SAMUEL BACOTE, III):  State house?
Speaker 1: No, the southern belle calendar.
Speaker 2: (SAMUEL BACOTE, III):  The southern belle calendar?
Speaker 1: Women, you know, most outstanding women, and I was in the group with--I was an entrepreneur.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay, that's good.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so they had their own photographers and everything, that's how I got that picture.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  What did you decide? Nineteen nineties [1990s]?
Speaker 1: (SAMUEL BACOTE, III):  No.
Speaker 2: If you look, I'll tell you all you gotta do is look at my resume.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's on there when I got that award.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  All right, fair enough.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: I just got that one, there it is right behind you.  Look up there.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Aw, nice so this was is the most recent and you got a photo of it too (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  (Simultaneous) So this the most recent (unclear)?
Speaker 2: That's the last--Sammy what date is that?  This was this year.
Speaker 1: (SAMUEL BACOTE, III):  This one here is (unclear).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Two thousand six [2006]?
Speaker 1: (SAMUEL BACOTE, III):  October 29th.
Speaker 2: Take--put--give it down here and let him see it.  I don't think that's in my resume either.  That's the last one, I just got it.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Nice.
Speaker 2: What's the date?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKERS):  October 2005.
Speaker 2: (SAMUEL BACOTE, III):  Yeah 2005, October 29th.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah I just got it.  They had a lot of people there.  I was shocked.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Oh, gosh that's when I was having a (unclear), and I had gone down and they wanted a picture.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  This the '50s [1950s], '60s [1960s]?
Speaker 1: It had to be, yeah.
Speaker 2: (SAMUEL BACOTE, III):  How about '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: Wait, wait, I was down there helping in the '60s [1960s], too, I went into business.  That was about '58 [1958] or '59 [1959].
Speaker 2: (SAMUEL BACOTE, III):  Yeah, that's what I thought.
Speaker 1: Yeah I was helping Butler Street [Butler Street YMCA, Atlanta, Georgia], and I got their top award.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  What was the award?
Speaker 1: The Benjamin E. Mays Award, it's in there on the wall.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: And what happened--Delores [C. Delores Tucker] came down to go to the funeral and she said, "Let's get a picture".  I said, "Listen, I don't want no picture."  She said, "Why?" I said, "Well listen, I'm in mourning."
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Tell us about this one while he's cleaning that.
Speaker 1: And he heard me, he says, "Oh, I don't mind it," and that's how we got the picture and I didn't want no picture.  I'm the (unclear) and so look here, the next month he was assassinated.  I had that picture in my office.  It's just home to show, but listen he was assassinated the next month.  You remember?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  I do remember.
Speaker 1: And I was so glad and I didn't want that picture and here she is wanting to be the star, (unclear), I said, "Honey, I'm mourning," my heart was heavy (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Listen it's my town.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay, tell us about it.
Speaker 1: Goldberg [Arthur J. Goldberg] was an attorney; the next man is Ralph David Abernathy [Ralph Abernathy].  This was an affair now when Andy [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] was running for [U.S.] Congress so we--the next one is Coretta Scott King, the next one is named Alan King, he was a comedian.  The next one is Belafonte [HistoryMaker Harry Belafonte], and the next one is Lottie Watkins, behind Lottie Watkins is the mayor--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Lindsay [John Lindsay].
Speaker 1: --Lindsay.  Lindsay was the mayor, next to Lindsay is Andy Young and the next one is Jean Young [Jean Childs Young].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Very good, okay.
Speaker 1: We went up, it--the affair was fun and you know I was one of the vice chairs.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That's me and my girls, oh, that me and Joyce [Joyce Rankin Bacote], no, that's me and Judy [Judy Yvonne Barnett]. I got so many girls.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  When was this taken?  Have any idea?
Speaker 1: That was taken around--what was I in then?
Speaker 2: (SAMUEL BACOTE, III):  It's stuck on the glass.
Speaker 1: It's so old Sam.
Speaker 2: (SAMUEL BACOTE, III):  Yeah, it's kind of--the picture is hard to.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay, tell us about this magnificent.
Speaker 2: That's Bobby [Robert F. Kennedy], isn't it?  Bobby Kennedy came down to pay his respects to the King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] family, and I was in charge of the (unclear), you know, everybody had shifts, and it was my shift when he came down there and--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Came down where?
Speaker 2: To Atlanta [Georgia], this was taken.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  I know but where in Atlanta, where?
Speaker 2: He came to the King house down on Sunset Avenue, where they were living, and while Mrs. King was getting dressed, she would go backwards and forwards in the bedroom.  My girlfriend--he, Bobby Kennedy was mingling with the people, and my girlfriend said, "Well let's get a picture," Delores Tucker from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and I said, "I don't want any pictures, Delores, I'm in mourning," and he heard me and he said, "Well I don't mind it." And I was so embarrassed just saying that, see, so someone took the picture.  So the next month Bobby Kennedy was assassinated in California, and I was so sad about it, and the next week I get the picture 'cause Delores called the photograph and I didn't and that picture was sent to Philadelphia.  She sent me one.  I had to call and tell her, I said, "You're a winner on this," and we had a lot of fun talking about that.  She said, "Well, Lottie, I am so glad I did this," and as you know Delores died last year, Delores Tucker.  We were the very best of friends. And I met her at a Democratic affair.  We got to be very, very close and I went to Philadelphia one year to see her Freedom Fund banquet [Fight for Freedom Fund dinner] she was just saying that I had to come.  So I said okay, I'll be up there and it was such a success with NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], so I came home and I started it.  I stole her act, but I (laughter), I said, "Girl, I got it going on it."  When I got mine going I had mine at the Butler Street Y, and it was $25 to go in.  So it was there for three years and I had two good NAACP buddies, Isabel Webster, who was my attorney, she's deceased now, and Dorothy Coleman.
