Story_ID: 14725
Speaker 1: My name is George Wallace.  You can't spell George Wallace? G-E-O-R-G-E. What is it?  W-A-L-L-A-C-E? I never spelled it in twenty years.  I just write it.
Speaker 2: And state your birth date?
Speaker 1: July 21, 1978.  Hee-hee. (laughs) July 21.  Okay?  And born in Atlanta, Georgia.
Speaker 2: And what year George?
Speaker 1: 1952.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm starting to lie a little.
Speaker 2: Oh.  You're only two years young--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Okay.
Speaker 2: Is that true?
Speaker 1: Older than you or younger?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Older!
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  'Cause I'm 54.  Okay.  And today's date is?
Speaker 1: Hell I don't know.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) It's March--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) March the 7th, 2001.
Speaker 2: And we're in New York City [New York].
Speaker 1: And we're in New York City.  And it's a beautiful day in the neighborhood.
Speaker 2: [chuckling] Okay and your profession?
Speaker 1: I have no more profession.  I think I'm a professional comedian they say.  I'm not sure.  Radio broadcasting, morning host man here in New York City.
Story_ID: 14726
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite would be blue.  My favorite color is blue without a doubt.  Burgundy comes in a strong second.
Speaker 1: Okay and then your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Oo, my favorite time of year would probably be the fall because of the changes in the--And that's what life is all about.  Changes in different colors.  People in different colors of--and the masses coming together yeah.  The fall would be it.
Speaker 1: And your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Oo, without a doubt.  What do you mean a food or a particular type cuisine? My favorite food would be of course I love chicken.  Everybody--I, I'm the president of the chicken club.  Chicken is the best thing.  After man and woman, chicken is the best thing God ever put on this earth.  And chicken is just that good.  And I've been telling everybody if, if you cook chicken right enough, a chicken will eat chicken.  That's how good chicken is.  Chicken is the greatest thing in the world.  Its just--you can go down the line and its just--without chicken, you'd be surprised how important chickens are to the economy.  I mean they say carrots are good for eyes and I say chicken is good for your eyes because if you like chicken, you can see a KFC [Kentucky Fried Chicken] sign a mile away.  But just think how important chickens are to the economy.  If chickens stop laying eggs, you know how important that is to the breakfast industry.  I mean if no eggs, you don't need bacon right? And if you don't have bacon, you don't have toast.  And all of that's out of the window.  Just think if they were to stop laying eggs.  I was talking to the chicken man the other day.  He said they are tired of some of the things--you know some of the things that are going on.  And if they hear that joke one more time, why did the chicken cross the street--So they may strike.  And just think if they were to strike, what position this economy would be in? No chicken, no eggs.  You got no birthday cakes.  And if you don't have birthday cakes, you don't need candles.  So there goes the match business, right out of the window.  Right? So you'd just be surprised what the chicken industry would do.  And if you got no chickens, you got, you know, no chicken soup.  And now you're messing with the Jews.  So the Jews don't have to go to work you know.  And they say you know because the doctors and lawyers you got to make that Jewish chicken soup right? So if you don't do all that, things would--
Speaker 1: (laughs) George--
Speaker 2: It would be crazy.
Speaker 1: (laughs) George we said short.
Speaker 2: Okay because don't let me go on with this chicken.
Speaker 1: (laughs) Okay.
Speaker 2: I could just tell you about the chickens forever.
Speaker 1: (laughs) I got the point.  Chicken.
Speaker 2: I'm not really through with it.  You know.
Speaker 1: (laughs)
Speaker 2: Because if they stop laying eggs and the rooster stop crowing you know.
Speaker 1: Stop.  You don't want my cheeks falling out on the ground.
Speaker 2: Okay.  If that rooster stop crowing, then people can't get up in the morning, you messed up the whole day.
Speaker 1: George! (laughs) Okay what is your favorite place to vacation?
Speaker 2: My favorite place to vacation.  That's a very tough one.  I would have to go with Spain.  Spain.  Yes it's a choice between Spain and Argentina and Hong Kong [China].  But I would have to go with Spain.
Speaker 1: And also what is your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: "Something good is going to happen to you.  Whether you like it or not."  No that's not my favorite saying.  My favorite saying is "I love you and there's absolutely nothing you can do about it."  I forgot it just that quickly.  And that's what it is.  "I love you and there's absolutely nothing you can do about it."
Story_ID: 14727
Speaker 1: You were born in Atlanta [Georgia] right?
Speaker 2: The greatest city in America.  Besides New York City [New York].  Atlanta yes.
Speaker 1: And can you just tell me, I'd like to have your parents' names you know and I want you to talk about what you know about your--let's say your mother.
Speaker 2: Okay my parents are the greatest parents in the world.  That would be Mary Lou Wallace and George Wallace again and they were born in Albany, Georgia.  And they were the greatest parents with greatest parental guidance ever.  I mean my mother passed away when I was sixteen years old [1968] but she had me ready for the world at that time.  And the last thing she said to me when she walked out of the house, "Baby I won't be back in the house but don't you worry about a thing.  Your life has been well taken care of.  You're gonna be all right."  And when you're a kid, you don't understand that.  I'm thinking she's gonna go to the hospital and she's gonna get fixed and come back just like everybody else does.  But she knew what she was talking about.  Never, never came back.  I was in high school [Lynwood Park High School, Atlanta, Georgia], sixteen years old.  But there's a purpose for everything in life.  I'm the baby of seven kids and I'm sure had she continued living, I would probably be in Atlanta right now.  I would've tried to go to school there but it wouldn't have worked because I was living in a community.  And they were not very well educated.  They were just loving people.  And I would probably would have been--stayed at home.  And they would have demanded me to do those little chores that you do.  And plus I was with my peers.  And a lot of them--a lot of them did not go to school.  And I probably would've dropped out of school there.  But what happened? My mother passed away and I for some reason went to summer school up in Ohio.  The next thing you know, I'm working for Firestone Tire and Rubber [Company].  And they've got tuition assistance programs and, and, all of a sudden, I'm in the University of Akron [Akron, Ohio] and just happened to have a transportation program which was the first love, the transportation degree I wanted.  A lot of universities, universities didn't offer the transportation degree.  But the University of Akron did.  So there I am in school.  The first degree was in transportation all right.  And some more tuition money around there and financial assistance.  And we got a degree in Marketing and Advertising.  So we finished that and all of a sudden I just enjoyed school and I was the luckiest person in the world.  Maybe my mom knew what she was talking about.  I was in school for like one quarter and the next thing you know I'm Dorm [dormitory] Advisor.  You cannot be a dorm advisor until you're a junior in college.  One-quarter, boom.  Some way, boom.  In there.  Had a great time, great kids and, and kids would stand in line.  They'd be on a waiting list to get in the building that I was in.  And I was a dorm counselor.  And that was a lot of fun.  But it just showed that maybe my mother knew what was happening down the street.  And I went to school and got all those degrees.  Maybe I paid $2,000.  I don't know.
Speaker 1: Well I want to go back to--what do you know about her side of the family?  You know--I mean--I know you said they both were from Albany, Georgia but what do you know about--Do you know much about?
Speaker 2: I know that she came from Richmond and Sylvia Fields and I know there were twenty-three kids.  And there's about seven of--seven of them still alive today.  Great family.  Close families.  People don't have families like we used.  I notice the kids now only--they you know--They may be first cousins if they see one another, "Hi."  You know when we grew up in even that generation.  It's all about togetherness.  If you invite one for dinner--They all live in around the country, most in Atlanta.  If you invite one for dinner, you might as well invite them all.  There's gonna be thirty, forty people there.  And that's how close they were.  And I learned a lot from that.  And I grew up like that in my generation and just loving your whole family and sometimes blood has nothing to do with your family.  Just people around you.  So that's the kind of family she came from.  And my dad was the Wallaces.  They all grew up together.  So they growing up together, the Wallaces and the Fields and the Gamages.  They became one family.  And so.  My gr--my father, there were nine kids there.  But his parents--his grandparents they had twenty-one kids.  So the Fields and the Wallaces even though they were different people, they are still one family.  So they grew up together and it's just like--I just have a huge family.  And there's nothing but love in all over the place.  And, and I just a great upbringing with the love that they taught.  And respect for any man.
Speaker 1: Let me ask you so--
Speaker 2: And dad.  But we, we grew up in Atlanta.
Speaker 1: Now when--Do you know how your parents met?
Speaker 2: Well like I said they grew up--when they grew up in Albany, Georgia, they simply met by being a part of the family.  The Fields lived down here and the Wallaces lived there and they all went to the same church and boom! And that's how they met.
Speaker 1: Did they ever share any stories with you about growing up? Tha--that--would you remember or?
Speaker 2: They got lots of stories about growing up and can you imagine twenty-three kids in like a four-room home? But they were not poor because they had the land and they had the farm and they had the vegetation and the, and the animals so they were very well off.  And they use to ship agriculture to the North and so Mr. Richmond Fields he was--did pretty good.  And the Wallaces they did the same thing.  They had a lot of farming and they sold liquor on the side.  So they did very good. (laughs)  So I come from a very good family just you now--religion--very religious background.  And just good people.
Story_ID: 14728
Speaker 1: You were the youngest but you were named George after your father [George Wallace]? How did that happen?
Speaker 2: Well there's a lot of Georges in my family.  Not just my daddy.  There's like nine George Wallaces in my family.  And we were all over the place.  And some George Henry Wallace.  Let's make that distinction there.  And so we just--And plus it, it, it's actually Henry but I kind of changed it around once I got to Los Angeles [California].  There was already a Henry in the union.  So I said, "Oh flop-flip it around to George Henry."
Speaker 1: So you grew up as Henry.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.  I grew up as Henry yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you have a nickname?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Sometimes the kids at school would call me 'Jug Head' but that's about it.
Story_ID: 14729
Speaker 1: What are some your earliest memories that you have of growing up in Atlanta [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Oh, my earliest memories of growing up in Atlanta are just coming from this great home.  Definitely a religious background going to church.  I remember church from day one which is a great background.  I mean even if you're straight from the church and the religious rules, you'll, you'll always come back.  You'll know how to be a good person.  Simple things like the Ten Commandments--"Thou shalt not kill, Thou shalt not steal," little rules like that, "Do unto others as you would have them to do unto you."  Some kids today--This generation never taught that so they don't know any different to do anything.  But I grew up with that religious background and I know not to steal.  And I know not to kill or whatever like that.  These are just rules embedded in my head which I think are just great.  In that religion--The reason I do what I do today, I'm a comedian and going to church so much, that's the first comedian I ever saw was the preacher in the church.  Because he would tell a lie and they still do today.  That's the first thing a preacher would do when he walks into the pulpit is tell a lie every Sunday morning.  Right there in the pulpit.  You think I'm lying? You go to church Sunday.  What's the first thing the minister say? "I won't be long." See that's lie.  Especially in the black church.  I'm trying to stop now.  Well sit down.  There's always two or three hypocrites in the sanctuary saying, "Take your time Reverend." "Fix it." And I'm going, "You shut the hell up.  You know that game comes on at one o'clock [P.M.]!"  You know little simple things like that.  But going to church, that's why I'm a comedian.  And just seeing people gather together and church always made a lot of people happy.  And the preacher always told a joke.  And I always enjoyed seeing happy people and making people happy.  And seeing happy people and me making people happy made me happy.  And you can't go--"I got the best job in the world today."  Laughter.  The greatest medicine in the world.  Nobody in America has a better job than I do.  Now the doctor? They call me Dr. Wallace.  I make more people feel better in a night than doctors do in the hospital.
Story_ID: 14730
Speaker 1: How would you describe yourself as a young kid?
Speaker 2: Even at that time, a young, respectful kid.  Because we were taught respect from day one.  Morals and just--we were just taught do right.  Do unto others as you would have then to do un--respect each and every individual there was.  If we're walking down the street [in Atlanta, Georgia] and an older person sitting on the porch, we had to say, "Hello" and respect.  People don't do that today.  And, and everybody was--you know where I come from Georgia so we did use the "Yes ma'am, Yes sir."  We respected our peers also, our leaders and everybody you know.  And as a young kid, a good boy.  Not no trouble.  I didn't even--I never done any drugs in my life and never wanted to because I was always happy being who I am.  And I always thought, "I'm never gonna be in a position where I don't know who I am.  And not, you know, controlled."
Speaker 1: Did you, did you ever dream about something you wanted to be or you know as where you want--did you want--I mean as a young I'm talking about young life?
Speaker 2: I never dreamt about it.  But I know at six years old, I wanted to be a comedian.  At six years old I want--watching Redd Foxx and listen to Judge [Dewey] 'Pigmeat' Markham, [Jackie] 'Moms' Mabley and even Richard Pryor.  A lot of comedians in that day, Ooh!  And just watching--I was a kid I had the opportunity of watching the 'Amos n' Andy Show' and everybody was laughing.  That's the greatest thing a person could ever do.  Yeah I even had a chance to be--I would have been a great boxer or football player.  But I thought it would be easier if I was just to make people laugh.  So I even got out of sports in--early in high school [Lynwood Park High School, Atlanta, Georgia].  I said, "You know I want to make people laugh all my life." Well I didn't say that, I says, "I'm a bullshitter. So I'm gonna be a great bullshitter so why don't I start doing that right now.  No need in me getting my head broken you know playing football.  Start doing now what I'm gonna do the rest of my life."
Story_ID: 14731
Speaker 1: When you first heard your first comedian, I don't know if it was--Was it Redd Foxx? Or was it--
Speaker 2: It could have been Red Skelton.  It could have been Jackie 'Moms' Mabley or Judge [Dewey] 'Pigmeat' Markham.
Speaker 1: What, what struck you about them?
Speaker 2: They all had the same thing in common.  Making people laugh.  Red Skelton would come on TV and I mean it was just like, "Oh!  Come on!"  People are laughing.  And, and when people are happy, it's the best time of life.
Speaker 1: And what was your--Would you, would you say Red Skelton was one of your favorite com--comedians?
Speaker 2: Without a doubt.  I, I have always said that he's the reason I'm in the business.  However, I must give my credit to the, the Redd Foxx and like I say, Moms Mabley and Judge Pigmeat Markham.  I use to watch everybody on TV when I was a kid on the, on the 'Merv Griffin Show'.  You had Jack E. Leonard, old guy named Jack E. Leonard.  Even Danny Kaye.  And the comedic actor.  And Dick Van Dyke and people like that growing up.  Many different avenues of comedy that I always loved.  And I liked being happy because my dad [George Wallace] would do pranks and tricks and everybody would be happy.  And, and, and people tend to want to be around happy people.
Story_ID: 14732
Speaker 1: Would you say that you're most like your father [George Wallace] or most like your mother [Mary Lou Wallace]? Or what do you have of both?
Speaker 2: I have a little of mom about bringing people together.  She was like the--our home was the meeting place of the community--If you were nice people, you know.  And if you raised hell or anything like that, the Wallace home was not for you.  Because once again we're the church people.  But if you were a good kid, you could stop by any time and get anything to eat.  I, I mean that too.  If you, if you had any problems like a bad kid, a bad reputation, that was the house you don't go to.  My dad was a deacon of the church and a leader of the community.  Once again, Mr. Wallace was all about good.  We were like the house in the community.  He was a butcher and he was a contractor in the afternoons when he got off.  Butchers tend to cut meat 5:00 in the morning to 1:00 [P.M.].  And after that, he would come out and build homes.  And so he was a pretty smart guy with a second grade, second grade education.  And but what I learned from them both was just respect of your fellow man and just treat everybody right and just have a good time in life.  And to travel.  They taught my dad to love to travel.  And, and when I came out of Atlanta [Georgia], a lot of people didn't have the opportunity to travel.  But we traveled around the world--Not around the world.  That's not true.  We went fifty miles.  I thought that was a long way. (laughs)  But we would go to Florida like three or four times a year living in Atlanta.  Go to the beach and things like that.  And we'd come to Ohio and New York.  And so I've been traveling since I was a kid.  And it's the greatest thing in the world to do is to travel and learn what other cultures are about.  So I did that with my mom and my dad from Florida, to Ohio, to New York.  Then when I got a little older, I said "Oh! Let me get on an airplane and go to Europe and, and everywhere else." And I've been to probably--I've been all over Europe.  Been to Africa, Asia, you know Australia, South America, Argentina, Brazil, Chile.  I've been all over the place.  And I just love it.
Speaker 1: Now George I want to come back.  You said that your--okay.  You said that you think you got some of your comedic nature from your father.  And I'm wondering what would he tell jokes or--
Speaker 2: He'd just do crazy things like he would make us laugh all the time.  Like he had a communication system like if he were drinking coffee at the dining table, and the kitchen was like to my left, he would look at his coffee and point at the coffee and then he would point at the refrigerator.  And I would play stupid.  I knew what he wanted.  And he would point at the coffee.  And point at the refrigerator.  And I'd go, "What do you want? What do you want?" And my mom would say, "Why don't you tell that boy what he wants." My dad would say, "If he doesn't have it over here in two seconds, I'm gonna whip his ass." You now that was his joke.  So but he had--we had so much respect for him that I knew at that time it was time for me to go to the refrigerator and get that milk.  (laughs) So he just drink--He would do crazy little things like that and just keep us laughing.  My mom would like bake a cake and, and, and he would take a slice of cake and she would say, "How is it?" And you know he'd "I don't know." And he'd say, "Let me try another little piece." Now you know what would happen she would say--my mom would bake a cake and she'd say,  "How is it?" He'd say, " I don't know.  Let me try another little piece." And he would get the cake and eat it and she'd say, "Well what do you think of the cake? Is it good or what?" "Give me another little piece." And so he'd eat like about four pieces and things like that.  And she'd say "Well I'm not gonna give you any more.  How was it?" and he'd say, "It was all right." (laughs) But it was always some little joke there in the house there.  He would always just do something to keep us smiling.  He was the leader of the church.  He'd raise the money if anybody needed money in the community he was the guy to go get it.  And he would get it with a laugh too.  You know?
Story_ID: 14733
Speaker 1: You say you're the youngest of seven.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: Give me your siblings' names in order.
Speaker 2: Okay my oldest brother is George Wallace Junior.  My sister is Jessie Wallace.  My brother is Johnny Wallace.  My next brother is Napoleon Wallace.  And then Eddie Wallace.  And then Jerome Wallace.  And I'm a mistake baby because Jerome Wallace is six years older than me.  And I, I just woop! Here we got another baby here.  And here I am.
Speaker 1: And did you behave like the baby? Do you--I mean are you really truly the baby in the family?
Speaker 2: If you ask them--Don't ask them.  "He's spoiled.  He got everything he wanted."  And you know what? They might be right.  Because there's nothing I ever wanted for that I didn't get.  My parents [George Wallace, Mary Lou Wallace] if I, I never wanted a piano.  But if I wanted a piano, it would have been there.  My last Christmas I spent with my mom [1967], you know what she did to me? At that time the little transistor radios had just come out.  The little transistor radios.  I wanted that radio.  And I had never known any time and I hadn't gotten old enough about Christmas to know about Christmas and the Santa Claus deal.  I wanted that transistor radio.  And for some reason, at the time we went to the jewelry store, there was a little thing sold in the jewelry store.  My parents would just go get anything.  And, and they wouldn't get the radio.  And I use to tell my mom like; "Well you know its getting close to Christmas.  I want the radio.  Because I want to put it--" you know.  Wouldn't get it.  And then it got like December 23rd and I told my brother "I'm gonna get that radio." "I want that radio." "I need some money." And I was still a kid.  And I asked him to give me money to get the--And they wouldn't come up with it.  I'm going, "What's going on around here?" And I went back to the store.  That's it right there.  And I'd just look at it.  I says, "This is really--I guess I'm not gonna get it." You know because I had everything else in the house.  I didn't get the radio.  And I never had done. The first time I didn't get what I want for Christmas.  It kind of hurt me a little bit you know? Because we would have--You know any time I wanted a bicycle all that was under the tree and everything like that.  And they got me everything.  And so but Christmas morning we had to you know.  Because we didn't wrap gifts at that time unless somebody else gave you a gift it was under the tree.  And so we'd unwrap the gifts people would send us.  You know look in this one.  Oh, this is from aunt such-and-such across the country.  And this was from the church.  And this and that.  There was a little box and open that one.  I open that one and I open that one and I--O my God.  And that was the radio.  And that was the first time that I ever thought that I could feel it any time I talk about it.  And I, and I dropped.  And I went "Oh mom.  Mom I got the radio." Of course she knew she got the--And I just I, I can feel it today.  What happened to me then.  I mean I was--I was like I got the radio.  That was the biggest thing ever happened to me in my life.  Getting that transistor radio.  It was the biggest thing ever happened to me in my life.  Can you believe that?
Speaker 1: Now how old were you?
Speaker 2: Sixteen, still sixteen.
Story_ID: 14734
Speaker 1: This was the Christmas and she [Mary Lou Wallace] died in February [1968].
Speaker 2: So what was--what was wrong--What did she die of?
Speaker 1: They called it chronic disea--little things after the chronic, kidney disease and other little things were tagged on at the time.  And basically kidney.
Speaker 2: Was that hard for you? I mean I know your other, your other sisters and brothers are grown--I mean they were grown up more then.  I don't know how old your old--
Speaker 1: Was it hard for me in her passing?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Let me tell you something.  The strangest thing is that that my mother passed away.  And that was on a Thursday.  I went to school Friday morning for a half day.  And they come and got me and we went to like make the arrangements.  And the funeral was Monday.  That's the only day I missed out of school in five years was that Monday.  Was I ready for that? She had me prepared.  She had always had all her kids prepared.  "Because someday I might not be here.  You gonna cook.  You gonna sew.  You gonna clean.  You gonna do it all.  And you gonna love me and we all gonna love each other."  So when she passed away, I was actually ready for it.  Was actually ready for it.  The only time I had one bad moment was like maybe three Sundays after the, the, the funeral.  I came home one day and there was like no dinner on the table.  I grew up all my life like Sunday dinner.  Everybody ate together.  This particular Sunday I came in and there was like no dinner because we were invited somewhere else but it wasn't our dinner.  And I kind of ran out of the house.  But I was prepared and ready for the world.
Speaker 2: Now your father [George Wallace].  Did he take well to her passing away? Or that was harder.
Speaker 1: It was hard.  My--when she passed away my father was like I say a butcher.  Made a lot of money but had no education.  So at the same time that she passed away, his job moved from Atlanta [Georgia] to Nebraska.  It was Swift & Company.  So he lost his money.  Making a lot of money with no education, cut off.  You can't get a good job, the money he was making without an education.  So he lost a lot of money there so that kind of hurt him a little you know mentally so.  And then his brother died.  Then his best friend died.  And then I'm going off to college.  All of a sudden everybody was out of his life, the wife, the best friend, the mother and the child.  There was always the three of us.  So about two years later he just deteriorated after two years.  And he expired after two years [1970].
Speaker 2: He did.  See that sometimes when people you know--But that was too much occurring that was--
Speaker 1: Yes.  It was amazing to think.  And when you're a kid and you just thinking--You don't know when you're a kid.  You don't understand.  Even at sixteen.  Because you're still thinking, you know, "I need money."  You ask daddy to give you this.  And you don't even have any idea that daddy is--You got no money coming in and now he is taking it out of the bank, taking it out of the bank.  Its kind of you know, declining in that and his life is deteriorating.  And so that did happen.
Speaker 2: And then so you--that happened you were eighteen at that point?
Speaker 1: About eighteen yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.
Speaker 2: And you were at the University of Akron.
Speaker 1: University of Akron, Akron, Ohio.
Story_ID: 14735
Speaker 1: Now how was that experience [at the University of Akron, Akron, Ohio]? Because I mean I know you said you know I went there and I became you know--but you also--this--you, you were use to growing up in the South.
Speaker 2: Let's make this clear.  I had come from Atlanta [Georgia].  From a little small school called Lynwood Park High School.  L-Y-N-W-O-O-D.  That's the way you spell it and here's the way you yell it.  Lynwood.  Lynwood.  Yeah.  So. (laughs)  But we went to school there.  A little school, 1,000 kids.  From first grade through twelfth.  Everybody went to the same school.  Lynwood Park Elementary, Lynwood Park High.  We knew everybody in the community.  The teachers were our parents.  The teachers were everything.  They would spank us in school and they had parental control.  And we loved those teachers like--And, and at P.T.A. [Parent-Teacher Association] meetings, the teachers wouldn't go home.  They would come to our home for dinner.  Instead of going back home and coming back.  And, and it was a community.  The whole village as people seemed to speak at the time.  And going to that little school, when I graduated [1968] there was thirty-seven kids in my senior class.  I left Lynwood Park and I went to Ohio.  All of a sudden here I am in a big college, 22,000 kids in Ohio.  Totally different environment.  Thirty-seven kids in Lynwood Park High School, Atlanta, all black.  22,000 kids University of Akron, 22,000, 21,800 whites.  200 blacks.  And you could say that's night school and day school.  So I'm in a totally different environment.  I get to the University of Akron and walk around the campus and I'm going to places like you've seen the racial signs in the South.  "I hate niggers."  In the bathrooms in the University of Akron.  "Kill all Jews."  Now this is totally new to me.  I'm going like, "Oh!"  Because when you come from the South, you think it's just black people and white people.  And I knew some Jews.  I worked for some Jews when I was a kid.  I'm going like "Kill all Jews.  These people are really mean!" (laughs) I mean that's--because I'm thinking these is white people saying kill other white people you know.  I'm going like, "Ooh!" And so that was a little learning experience.  And I had to say, "Oh man! This is really terrible." And--But the greatest thing about living on campus at the University of Akron was living with people from all over the world.  And me being the leader, the dorm [dormitory] counselor, I used to love to say, "Listen I'm in charge of the dorm.  The only thing you're gonna learn here is respect and treat, treat each other right.  And I'm gonna respect you and you're gonna respect me.  I might have to kick your ass sometime but you will--I will get respect from you." I didn't mean that per se.  But, but that's what it was.  And I learned so much from just living with people.  I think 50 percent of the education that you learn is living in a dorm or living on a campus in college.  Living with other people and how they live.  And things they do and things they don't do.  And its just--it was a great--that was one of the greatest experiences I've ever had.  To live on campus in Akron, Ohio.  And I had so many situations.  Sometimes I would stay over on Christmas and, and a long holiday and some kids would come back to the dorm "Now what, what are you doing here?" "I had a fight with my parents." "Why?" "Because they had told me don't hang out with black folks." And I said, "You came back?" He said, "Yeah I did." I said "Why?" He said, "Well basically because of you." And he--then he had learned something that because if you have parental guidance and they tell you to stay away from something you tend to do it.  But when you find the difference, you go like, "No it ain't necessarily like that mom.  It ain't necessarily like that dad."  And I thought that was really good that somebody said, "No."  "Because I know you and you're not like that."  And I said, "Well I'm glad you feel that way." "But you will find some people that are a little different.  Everybody is not like me." And especially this being the time of the way and Black United Students and everybody was completely divided back in, in the, the '70s [1970s] and things like that.  And I thought that was great to have somebody come back and say, "Because of you I've learned the difference in people.  I can change."
Story_ID: 14736
Speaker 1: Was it a shock for me to go from the South to the North? Well yes it was a big shock.  Because what shocked me more when I got to, to college in Ohio [University of Akron, Akron, Ohio], was that I was confronted with other black students that came from a short distance, twenty-three miles to Cleveland [Ohio].  People were coming and living on the campus.  And like I said this was the time of Black United Students, BUS, SNCC [Student Non-violent Coordinating Committee], all these activities on campus.  Fight against the Vietnam War and stuff like that.  And I'm thinking, "These kids were fighting for something," I'm going--they wanted black history taught in classes.  I says, "What do you mean black history taught in classes?" And they were thinking like the did--the Negro National Anthem at the time.  Y'all don't know that?  You know, what do you mean black history?  You don't know anything in Ohio? You don't know who George Washington Carver, you don't know W.E.B. DuBois? You don't know the Underground Railroad?  Y'all don't know any of that?  I'm like, "Hell.  No wonder y'all pissed off up here!" They didn't know anything! And I'm going, (sings) "Lift every voice and sing!" Y'all don't know that? And I was like shocked and I'm serious about--y'all don't know that? You know when the voice go up to another octave.  And they didn't know any better.  I'm going "No wonder y'all mad up here." And so they would of course--courses would be taught in black history because when they went to school, there was none of that history in their books.  Now growing up in Georgia, every year February, you have Black History Month.  But it wasn't only that.  It was in the regular history books we had in Georgia also.  So we were taught black history from day one.  So by the time you got out of high school, you were already loaded with a lot of black--I mean as far as inventions and all of that stuff.  George Wash--Washington Carver and all that stuff.  That was a biggy in our lives.  That was like come on son, that was on your test in eighth grade.  In the fifth grade.  So it was a big shock to me when I got to Ohio and found out that there was no black heritage, not necessarily that, but no history.  No black history being taught in the schools there.  Because they went to all white schools.  It was like at the time, "We got it all up here."  Well, not necessarily.
Story_ID: 14737
Speaker 1: Was there anything else about the experience at Akron that was sort of life changing?
Speaker 2: University of Akron [Akron, Ohio]?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Let me tell you the greatest experience ever happened.  One of the greatest experiences ever happened to me.  When I moved to Ohio, I lived with my sister [Jessie Wallace].  And she had kids.  And after awhile you know like three months it's was kind of like you know sibling--It was kind of like, "You need to get out." (Laughs) So I moved and I went to church.  And I was invited to church.  And I met a lady that was--I don't know where she came from.  But I met her through my aunts or something like that.  And they said, "Well why don't--you need to come stay with us.  Why don't you come up to the house and stay?" And made me stay!  Donna June Hill and Lawrence Hill.  That's their names.  They became my parents.  Can you believe that? They have three kids.  You come here, you stay here.  Lawrence Hill.  Lawrence Hill.  He passed away about four years ago.  But Donna June Hill today is still my mother.  And she'll tell you right now and, and I share everything with them and trips and cruises and everything that she's just like my mother [Mary Lou Wallace].  But where did this lady come from? Her kids, her family, her aunts and everybody they're all like my aunts.  I call them aunts.  They're the people that she calls aunt.  I just met them at sixteen years old [1968].  But all of a sudden I got an immediate family (snaps fingers) just like that.  And I'm thinking I go back--my mom said, "Everything's gonna be all right." This lady is amazing.  And she was just like my mom.  Anybody--this was the house that people would come to.  But you--can you believe yet being sixteen years old going to another city somebody says "You come live with me."  And where did that come from? I met these two nice people Lawrence Hill and he became the greatest friend.  And they got three kids already.  Now those three kids? They're my brothers and sisters.  And to this day, if anything happens like when Lawrence passed away? (snaps fingers) It's on the phone like that.  Funeral arrangements? To me.  I'm, its just like you know--and they already said, "Now when we pass away, we want you to do this and we want you to do that and make sure everything is divided up between the four of you." And I'm thinking there is no way I--I, I don't need that.  I don't want that."  I will happily do that for their real kids and things like that.  But those--that's my real true family.  Regina, Darnell and Larry.  Just like an extended family of my other brothers and I left down in Atlanta [Georgia].  But it's amazing how that happened to me.  And not only those kids, their kids.  But like I said her aunts and her whole family become a part of my family.  Very unusual.  She has an aunt named Aunt Dorothy who lived in Akron, Ohio.  Her son Phillip Reeves (ph.).  We became friends and we went to college together.  I mean not friends.  We became family.  I tell you once again blood has nothing to do with family.  When you love people--when you actually love them.  Phillip Reeves's kids are my grand--my god-kids.  They live up in Boston [Massachusetts] now.  And in Akron I started going to a little church.  I met people there at church.  We became family.  Some of them live in Detroit [Michigan].  We would go to different cities.  Detroit, Georgia, Dayton, Ohio, back and forth to different churches.  We became family.  We loved each other.  It's amazing! Real family.  Just this Christmas back in my home in Atlanta.  People came from all over the United States into my home as my family.  From Detroit, from Ohio and we're not blood related at all.  But it's just great.  But we are.
Speaker 1: But that was good to have because you had lost this--you had a significant loss.  You had your you know--.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Significant.
Speaker 1: But that was, that was good.  It was almost like someone looking out for you.  Maybe your mother.
Speaker 2: Once again! You go back to that point.  That's what I'm saying, yeah.
Story_ID: 14738
Speaker 1: You said you went to school for transportation [at the University of Akron, Akron, Ohio] ?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What were your thoughts about that?
Speaker 2: Well transportation is because I love to travel.  So once again you start thinking about traveling.  And I said, "Let me learn about this." I was thinking about the air traffic control at one time.  Because I'm just fas--travel fascinates me.  Buses, trucks.  And I tell you what's fascinating about transportation.  A lot of people don't know.  And it's a lot of people never think about.  I'd say 99 percent of the people on this earth never think about, 9.9 [percent] think about the importance of transportation.  And it's probably the most important thing on this earth right now.  People never even stop to think about how I got this shirt I have on. Where'd this come from? What about the food I ate this morning? Where did it come from? The petroleum heating my home.  Where did that come from? How did it get there? It had to be--it has to be some form of transportation that's serving life today.  Transportation is involved in all our lives.  Sometime you mention the word transportation people are simply thinking about a bus and a train.  But what about a pipeline to get your water to your hose?  That's a form of transportation.  A pipeline to get the fuel, oil shipping.  A ship that brings your products and goods from all over the world.  There's five modes of transportation.  Air, water, rail, pipeline and another one I can't think of.  But, but transportation is the greatest source of life today.
Story_ID: 14739
Speaker 1: You finished school [University of Akron, Akron, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Yeah!
Speaker 1: Okay and you finished school.  What are your thoughts about that? You graduated with a degree in--.
Speaker 2: Yeah with a degree in transportation and a degree in marketing and advertising.  And I still want to be a comedian.  I just do that for, for--.
Speaker 1: Are you doing any standup during any of this time?
Speaker 2: No!
Speaker 1: You don't?
Speaker 2: Just making and telling jokes.  I mean in class making people laugh.  At that time I wasn't a comedian.  But even in church and places we go I was still the one preaching, mocking the preacher.  Got the telephone book as a Bible and say, repeating what the preacher say with his lying, you know.  And I would come, come home and we'd do what--and they'd say, "Boy sit down." And, and we would do this in the preacher's house.  And when my pastor Elder Benton (ph.) would say, he would get in church some time and he would say, "You know what? These kids play church better than we have church sometimes."  Because we'd wear it out.  You know we were in the [Christ's] Sanctified Holiness Church [Atlanta, Georgia].  We had the piano and, and we had the tambourine.  Sometime we didn't have the tambourine we'd get a pan out of the kitchen.  Ching-ching and just having fun and mocking the people.  And sometime we would have a good time and if you know anything about the spirit, when you're having a real good time, and gospel music, you can feel it.  You know and they would just love it.  Because we were playing church as opposed to playing drugs and playing video and shooting and killing people.  We were playing a good thing.  And loved it! And still to this day, as old as I am, when all of us get together, we're just like kids.  Pushing each other back again preaching with the Bible I mean with the yellow pages as the Bible, acting a fool.  Cutting a fool! They use to call it.  And it's just the greatest thing in the world to have done that and gone to school.  But I always knew I wanted to be a comedian.  Why? Because everybody, all the older comedians are, they were hungry.  They didn't have any place to live, anything like that.  I said, "I don't want to do that.  So let me go to school, get a few degrees, make some money and have a financial cushion."
Speaker 1: So you get out and what do you do? When you graduate.
Speaker 2: Well the Uni--Firestone Tire and Rubber Company at that time offered me $700 a month to work.  I says, "I ain't gonna do it.  Give me $760." And I was operating computers at the time.  They wouldn't give me the sixty dollars.  There was a reason for that.  I'm out of here.  Boy thank God they didn't give me that $60.  I would have probably still been in Akron [Ohio] right now making $80,000 a year at the most.  Alright! The hell with y'all.  I'm going to New York City [New York] and become a comedian.  Came over here and just reading in the newspaper who makes the most money.  There was an ad [advertisement] in the paper, $75 to $300 a day.  What the heck is this? I called the guy he says, "Come over let's talk about it." Came over to Third Avenue and 65th Street in the Phoenix Building and they sold rags.  Cleveland Cotton Products.  They were selling real rags.  I'm going, "I can sell anything.  Ain't no big deal."  Cleveland Cotton Products.  They just left Akron.  "You got to go back to Cleveland [Ohio] for training."  Cleveland was twenty-three miles from Akron.  I go back--I'm staying back in the dorm [dormitory] where I just left learning how to sell rags.  All different kind of rags.  Now let's go into another life.  You'd be surprised how many people need rags.  You'd be surprised how much a person that sells rags can earn a year.  Selling rags.  I sold all kinds of rags.  I sold disposable products, paper products.  The outside of a feminine napkin.  Very soft cotton.  Sold that to funeral homes.  Like they would puff up the body and put it inside the clothing, things like that.  Also that same piece of soft cloth, outside the sanitary napkin, you wax and polish cars with that.  It's a very soft cotton tissue.  Balbriggans t-shirt material.  People use that for polishing and waxing cars.  There's a little thing called the Handy Wipe.  You know the Handy Wipe? Well we put a piece of plastic cloth on the back of that.  Sold it to dentists for sanitary napkin.  The, instead of the white cloth, now you know you use the disposable one? We did that.  We would take a disposable cloth and go to an auto mechanic.  I had a little like a pencil but it was a skill.  I'd go pick up a big rag on the floor. I said to this guy, "How much, how much you paying per pound for rags?" He said, "Twenty-four cents per pound." Pick up a rag, "This weighs six ounces.  That's twelve cents for this rag."  I said, "I got a brand new uniform cloth here.  Disposable, sell it to you for three pennies each." (claps hands).  Whatever I wanted to sell as long as I was under that twelve cents.  And I would make 50 percent of the cost.  If I said--let's say if it were--that rag were twelve cents.  Hell let's get it down to eight cents.  If he doesn't like it, maybe I'll take it down to six.  I was still making more money than he was for that one rag with a brand new cloth.  It's just--and you were working in your head with numbers at the time.  Fractions.  And, and I was smart enough to do that.  It's just a lot of money made in rags.  You sold it to dentists, restaurant needs rags.  People need rags to dust in the offices.  Everybody needs a rag.  You'd be surprised.
Speaker 1: So what was your territory?
Speaker 2: My territory was Queens, New York.  Right across the bridge in Queens and then they gave me Brooklyn [New York].  And I said, "Oh, this is good." Then I called the company I was making big money.  Big money.  You know coming out of college in those days.  You know $150 and $200 a day.  And its two o'clock, I'm going to the beach now.  You know they won't know.  They in Cleveland.  Because I got my quota going any, you know.  And then one day I went to Earl Sheib [auto paint and body repair company] over in Queens, New York.  And I had a disposable cloth.  I did that same skill.  How much you paying for twenty-four--and this guy said, "I want to try this out." And the next week he ordered I don't know what it was.  But in one week my commission was $5,000.  And then I knew Cleveland Cotton Products, for some reason I lost the account.  They took it from me.  They took it from me.  That was too much money for one little guy to be making.  And I go, "What happened to Cleveland Products?"  And all at the same time I had said to myself, "Well I've been working here and I made a lot of money.  I've been out of school for six months.  I want to take a month vacation." They said, "Well you can't take a month off." I said, "I want to take a month off.  I'm going to Europe.  I've never been to Europe." And they said, "You--we can't give you a month off." I said, "Well I'm gonna go." They said, "We'll talk about it when we get back." They said, "Well we will."  So I'm in Europe and I was with a friend at Omonia Square in Athens, Greece.  And we was talking about advertising.  And a friend of his is in advertising in New York.  He said "My friend works for MetroMedia [International Group]."  He makes forty-some thousand dollars a year.  And this is still big money you know.  And I'm like when I get back to New York, I'm gonna work for MetroMedia.  Make that $40,000.  And so sure enough I got back.  I called MetroMedia and the guy said, "Well you sound pretty interesting.  Come on in here." And he says they introduced me.  Nobody here had ever been out in Queens, New York.  Selling bus advertising locally to the local stores.  So he says "Okay we'll start you off at $15,600 a year."  That's $300 a week.  $300 a week against commission. I said "Okay." So about the first three months, I didn't make a dime and they were getting ready to say, "Get up and get the hell out of here." But a little small--because when you're in advertising, and you--and you're out somewhere in a foreign account of let's say $30,000 doing advertising program in New York at that time, even $10,000.  Even if they were gonna buy it they couldn't make a decision like today.  They said, "Well we'll think about it." So we'll take three months for sometime the decision to come through.  Or six months.  You got somebody for $100,000.  So eventually I'm there working and all of a sudden, a little account comes through, like Queens County Mall Plaza [sic, Queens Center Plaza] over in Queens.  Queens said, "Well, we'll take a $30,000 account."  I'm on 15 percent commission going, "Oh that's $4500 I made in one day." And next week a little car dealership down the street.  A little local account $30,000, a little $10,000 account, a little dress shop up here $15,000.  And the next thing you know, you, you're running all over the place.  Another account come in and you know a little $50,000 account.  And it got to the point where one day they said, "Hey.  Come here we need to talk.  We got to put you on salary." So you know I'm making big money.  At this time I'm ad salesperson.  And they says, "Okay we want you to do this.  Go to Chicago [Illinois].  Maybe you can be the sales manager in Chicago."  Because we was--I was with MetroMedia working for the richest man in the world, John Kluge at the time.  And they did everything they could for me to stay there.  You know little--and I was one of the first blacks.  Little black token kid probably.  Once I got in, I made good of it you know? Because it's basically a Jewish world out there in that, in that advertising world making a lot of money.  And I became good friends wherever I go.  I'm friends with everybody.  And they taught me all the tricks and everything like that and the greatest people in the world in the advertising industry.  And they're still friends of mine today.  I became Vice President there.  I think I was like twenty-four [years old].  And then I said, "You know what? Comic Strip [comedy club] opened in New York City. I'm gonna put you on the back of all the buses in New York City on the East Side.  Eat, drink and be merry and come to the Comic Strip." And they said, "Okay we'll take that program."  "By the way I do a little acting."  You know I had started doing little things in college.  I didn't even have an act.  I went up as a preacher in a robe and a yellow page phone book.  I come in as Reverend Dr. George Wallace.  And I would just say, "Whatever you want look it up in the book.  The good book of Bell.  You want some shoes? Look it up in the book." And I became a comedian that--they said, "Well come in the next night." After I made the sale at the Comic Strip and put them on the buses, they said, "Come in and let's see what you do." I came in.  That was on a Thursday.  Friday night I was on stage and since that Friday night, I've been on stage ever since.
Story_ID: 14740
Speaker 1: Were there other things happening though in New York [New York] here? Were you--Because you're, you're jumping.  You first you're a Southern boy. You had only been outside Atlanta [Georgia].  And then you go and experience Akron [Ohio] which is you know a small town for all intents and purposes.  And then you hit the big city.  What were--I mean--
Speaker 2: Well let's make it clear.  As a kid I would come to New York.  Like I said I would travel all the time.  So I had been to New York even as twelve years old.  I had been by myself on the subway running up and down the streets in New York.  So I would come here in the summer and stay with my family that was here.  And New York wasn't strange to me.  Nothing is strange to me.  I'll do anything.  As I travel today people say, "Would you go to Bangkok [Thailand]?  You don't know how to speak the language.  You go to China?  You don't know how to speak the language."  I could care less.
Speaker 1: Now was there anyone--were you rooming with anyone--or you know--you had friends here, or you just came here.
Speaker 2: You know when I first came here I stayed with my relatives.  And then a friend of mine came from Akron and we shared a room--an apartment over in Queens [New York].  And then I came to New York.  I came over to New York City, Manhattan.  And when I started comedy that night after I sold the advertising to The Comic Strip [comedy club], I met a friend [Jerry Seinfeld] that became very popular.  We were roommates for like thirteen years--never there at the same time because I moved to California and back and forth but we were roommates for thirteen years.  And he became very, very successful and I guess we sold that place about fourteen years ago.  And uh--.
Speaker 1: Now what--.
Speaker 2: It was just a little studio.
Speaker 1: Oh so you had--.
Speaker 2: I had an apartment here.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay so who was that person?
Speaker 2: Just a little boy.  A little Jewish kid.  Again I ran into another Jewish kid and he just became very successful.  I was the best man at his wedding.  Just got married two years ago, and three years ago and still today the nicest person ever put on this earth as far as I'm concerned.  He had a little show called 'Seinfeld' on NBC [National Broadcasting Company] for a few years.  So that's my best friend ever.
Speaker 1: So you guys met here in New York.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 14741
Speaker 1: Were you observing comics and going to comic--Were you observing any of that while you were--or were you just--.
Speaker 2: Always through life.  No matter what I did.  No matter what did--let's make it clear again.  Since six years old [1958], I wanted to be a comedian.  I observed all of that time from six to today what comedians do.  What make people happy.  Be it a minister, be it a motivational speaker, be it a comedian.  I'm watching you.  They had a funny weatherman.  He make somebody laugh, I'm watching you.  And so all of that time I was in college [at the University of Akron, Akron, Ohio] and selling advertising my mind was still here.  Even the theater, in Broadway [neighborhood in New York, New York] making people happy.  That was always on my mind.  I was just getting a financial cushion to move to Los Angeles [California] to really get into show biz [business] arena.  And I did that only--.
Speaker 1: I just have one question though.  The first night you went on stage.  Can you recount how that experience was?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Like I said I went on--the first night I went on stage it was a Friday night and I had my robe on.  And walked in the room "When the saints go"--I had the whole audience.  "When the saints go marching in.  Oh when the saints go marching in (sings) oh Lord I want to be in that number,"--and everybody--"Oh when the saints go marching in."  And the audience was having fun with me.  And I said, "Brothers and sisters and all you Caucasian folks too." That use to be my open line.  You brought it back up (laughs) and I had--and I would just start to have fun like that.  That was a big joke.  I want to do that.  Next time I go--[Jerry] Seinfeld and I intend to go out to a nightclub sometime and try new material.  I'm gonna shock him when I do that.  "Brothers and sisters and all you Caucasian folks too." (laughs)  That was my opening line at the time.  I never will forget that--what was your question?
Speaker 1: My--I was asking you how that night felt.
Speaker 2: Yes, that night was good because let me tell you something I learned about that night.  And I, I didn't know this.  But going up on stage in front of a crowded room and of people I didn't even know.  It didn't matter to me.  At a Comic Strip [comedy club].  I bet--and different races.  When I say that but I, I guarantee it is probably 300 people in the room, probably 280 Caucasians.  But making those people laugh.  You know laughter has no boundaries so it doesn't matter who you are.  But making those people laugh at that time I knew like, "Boy this is it.  There ain't no drugs better than this.  I never did drugs but it couldn't be.  Ain't no sex better than this."  There is nothing better than being able to make people happy.  And to this day I still think the same thing.  I would rather perform.  I got the best job in the world to go up on that stage and making people laugh and then they give you a check for it? You got to be crazy.  The check means nothing to me.  It does in a way like I love what I do and I would do it for free.  Yet I'll charge you $100,000 to do it.  Because that's what the market says do.  But in the meantime, I've done gigs and people, AT&T [American Telephone and Telegraph Company].  They paid me a lot of money for doing a corporate gig.  And you walk off stage and you go down the street and do the same thing for free.  I don't know how that happens.  You know you could do the 'Tonight Show' [television program] and get $500 for doing the 'Tonight Show'.  But it's just the greatest job in the world.
Story_ID: 14742
Speaker 1: When you were--when you started doing the Comic Strip [comedy club], was that, Comic Strip, was that a regular gig? Or did you just--.
Speaker 2: That was a regular gig.  I mean we knew we could perform every night before an audience.  We got paid nothing.  And we did it for another year and you got some cab fare, which is five dollars a night.  But your joy and our high is to go on that stage and make--I mean people wanted to, wanted to--I mean every night you'd stay out there.  Sometime it'd be two o'clock n the morning before you get on stage.  It didn't matter.  I had to get up on that stage.  Jerry Seinfeld.  Larry Miller.  Paul Reiser.  The Jay Lenos.  That era.  People had to get up on that stage and really work.  And that's a generation of comedians that were clean.  And that's how we learned comedy in that day, clean.  Today it's a different story.  But it's still funny.
Speaker 1: Now when you--this was year are we in?
Speaker 2: In '77 [1977].
Speaker 1: '77 [1977].  Okay.  And you say you--How did you end up even rooming with Seinfeld [in New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Well he already had the apartment and then some way we both started to make money on the road.  So and he had moved to California also so we kept the apartment there.
Speaker 1: But look--okay so you met him how? Performing--.
Speaker 2: I met him in--standing against the wall.  And I was standing against the other wall and he had nothing going for him and I had nothing going for me.  And I looked at him, he looked at me and says, "We gonna be friends." I swear to you we became very good friends.  One night he was ill.  This is how we became friends.  He had a bad cold.  And I had a car.  He didn't.  Remember now.  I'm the young account executive down at the advertising company making big money.  He ain't making a dime! But we became good friends.  And I said, "Come on get in the car I'm gonna take you to get some medicine."  I took him to the all-night store and bought him some Nyquil.  All-night drug store down on 53rd Street and Lexington [Avenue].  Bought him some Nyquil.  "Take this," I said, "Because I'm the doctor.  It says take one capful, I say take two."  He took two and I started to take care of him.  Because he was new into the city.  Because he was from Long Island [New York] you know? And so we became friends like that.  And to this day anything happens to him or you or anybody, I will tell you to take Nyquil.  I mean if your feet hurt I will even prescribe Nyquil for you.  If you have a headache, I--Nyquil will do it for you.  (laughs) I'm the Nyquil man.
Speaker 1: They should have you as their promotion--
Speaker 2: No matter what it is.  Nyquil.
Speaker 1: Now so, so do you have any--you said the people that came you know--I mean there was a group of you.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Start performing.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now was there competition among the group or was it supportive or was it?
Speaker 2: Aw, tremendous support from one another.  We'd meet each other.  Like when you do your spot and you come off at night? You come off that stage at two in the morning.  Everybody'd finish up and we'd go to a place called the Green Kitchen [Restaurant].  Sit down and go over everybody's act if you needed help on your act but it was camaraderie there.  We loved one another.  It's the greatest fraternity.  And to this day we still see each other and we like to get together.  I mean its, its such a--Its not a problem but its such a camaraderie that even if your, your wives or your girlfriend I, I'll be right back.  I'm going here with the guys.  We loved one another.  And its it's the greatest thing.  This was a real fraternity.  I mean going to college was nothing like this experience, experience.  Going on stage and doing jokes and making people happy.  When you come off you network.  Oh, you know they need a comedian up in, in, in the [Catskill] mountains.  They paying you know over in Brooklyn [New York] they got fifty dollars a night for a set.  Oh! Fifty dollars! They paying twenty dollars downtown.  Go down and do a set.  Go over to The Improv [comedy club].  They need somebody.  And sometimes we were doing six, seven sets a night.  On a Friday, Saturday get off stage, get in a taxi, get out of the taxi, somebody getting out of a taxi.  You go down to imp--Go over Catch a Rising Star [comedy club], go to the Comic Strip [comedy club].  Two shows a night each and then go down to Once Upon a Stove [restaurant].  Go down to Good Times [comedy club].  We could make things funny.  If it wasn't funny in three months, you know, you know to throw it out.  If you had a joke.  This joke is not working.  One day you had breakfast at four o'clock in the morning at the Green Kitchen.  "Maybe you should try it this way."  Seinfeld was always the best at making anybody joke work.  He's a joke doctor.
Speaker 1: And why do you think that was?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  He's just good.
Speaker 1: He has a talent for it.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That's why he has $500 million dollars in the bank and I got $5,000 in the bank.
Speaker 1: Oh, come on George. (laughs)  Hold on a second.  Now when you when--That's what I'm wondering.  As a young comedian, are there things that you, you know you learn in that process about what, what makes and what doesn't make a good comedian?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: What makes a good comedian is new jokes.  Always writing and discipline.  And enjoying your craft.  Always working on it and, and most people that make it enjoy what they're doing.  They don't want to do anything else.  And that's--those names that I mention, we all work a lot.  Just rather do that than anything else.
Speaker 1: Now when you okay so you're talking from 1977 to what period here in New York before you go to L.A. [Los Angeles, California]?
Speaker 2: I was here two--I was like a little quickie guy.  From '77 [1977] to--well actually I left the same year.  The next New Years [Day].
Speaker 1: '78 [1978]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was out of there.
Story_ID: 14743
Speaker 1: I was still selling advertising.  So I said one summer I'm gonna go out to Los Angeles [California] and see what The Comedy Store [comedy club]--what they're doing out there.  Because I know Jimmy [J.J.] Walker on 'Good Times' [television program] and these little kids are making these TV spots.  So I'm gonna see what its like out there.  Like maybe I can go out there and get into television.  I don't know.  So I went out there and I said to my people at the advertising agency [in New York, New York], "We need somebody out there.  We got these record companies out there.  We got all these things out there.  We could sell some deals out there." And so I went out there on vacation just doing a little survey and two weeks I came back with like $250,000 of business.  Then that's when I really made up my mind to come back.  I said, "Somebody needs to represent us out there." Knowing full well that I was going out there just to get into comedy.  And I was making a few sale calls for the first three months making a little money.  And then it started to deteriorate.  And they said, "Well you're not selling.  The sales are not coming in like they use to." I said, "Well, I'm out there." Because I was on stage at The Comedy Store every night having fun telling jokes.  They said "It seems things are not working out like we planned."  I said, "Well do what you got to do." And a week later I was on stage and I walked off and Redd Foxx's people said, "We want you to write for the show.  Can you write for the show?" I said, "I can't write any jokes." And they said, "Well, we'll give you $1500 a week." I said, "You know maybe I could come up with a little something at the time." And this was many years back you know? I said, "Yeah I'll do that." And so I wrote 'The Redd Foxx Show' for a year.  And even though he was writing the jokes and doing--he was telling the jokes, you still think, "Ah, he's not doing my joke right."  I said, "I'm gonna get back on stage and do my own jokes." So the next within a year I'm back on stage doing jokes.  So I made a decision at that time that I want to really learn how to become a comedian.  I don't want to necessarily do television right now.
Story_ID: 14744
Speaker 1: So The Comedy Store [comedy club, Los Angeles, California] is really hot though at that point.  Right?
Speaker 2: At that time the Comedy Store was very hot.  That's where Richard Pryor was working out.  And you'd get to go on the stage.  And you'd go like, "Oh my God! There's Richard Pryor on the stage." And at that time I was a young kid.  I had no fears whatsoever.  Richard Pryor go on stage--I was following Robin Williams almost every night.  And he was kicking ass.  It didn't bother me.  And I just had a good time too.  And one night Rodney Dangerfield went on before me.  And he kicked ass.  I said, "Rodney Dangerfield up there.  He must have been some nervous going on that stage before me." You know?  We just had fun like that.  And all the comedians used to love each other and just have fun.  And it would just be great.  Roseanne [Barr Arnold] was there and Jay Leno and, just all the new comedians you can think of.  We just all grew up together having a lot of fun.
Speaker 1: But was L.A. [Los Angeles]--L.A. wasn't as supportive as, as you had found in New York [New York].
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) No.  Because in L.A. you had to have a car.  It's still that widespread thing.  You had to have a car and drive everywhere.  Whereas in New York we all would get together and go to the diner.  Because you know, you live right in the--within five miles of each other in the city or in the boroughs.  But in L.A. you got in your car and you went back to the valley, or you went back to Santa Monica [California], like that.  But it still was a good place to grow and know your fellow comedian.  You know, like a David Letterman and everybody, you know.  Like I said Richard Pryor was a big thing.  He'd come in working on his album at The Comedy Store.  Just a good place to train.
Story_ID: 14745
Speaker 1: Now you worked you said on 'The Redd Foxx Show'.  On his which--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) 'The Redd Foxx Variety [sic, Comedy] Hour'.  This is after he left 'Sanford and Son'.
Speaker 1: And did--was there anything that you found disappointing about that experience? Or, you know, when you saw him up close and personal.  Did--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) No, no.  They did things that, you know.  There was a little drug scene going on there that I didn't approve of.  But that's, wasn't my drugs.  I had--I was working and I did it and I just wrote the jokes.  I had a good time meeting the people.  That's where I first met Muhammad Ali.  I thought that was great.  I walked in his dressing room.  And he just stood up and said, "I'll knock you out.  I'm the greatest of all time." And I said, "Come on sucker.  I'm the greatest." And you know we went back and forth.  And it was just like we became friends like that.  And still are friends today.
Speaker 1: So now what would you consider Redd Foxx's brilliance? Did you consider him as--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) What I consider brilliant about Redd Foxx is that he told jokes.  Nobody tell a joke as good as Redd Foxx.  And he didn't care whether you laughed or not.  He would curse you out.  He was just funny.  He was just a natural comedian.  (mimicks Redd Foxx) "Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah." And I just loved him.  Because he was one of the first people I ever knew to tell jokes.  He had a dirty album.  What we liked about Redd Foxx is the fact that he was dirty and your parents had those albums.  And you weren't supposed to listen to them.  When they went away, you sneaked.  That's what was so unique about Redd Foxx.  You sneaking and listening to their--listening to his album when the parents were gone.  And he said some dirty word and you'd just crack up, you know.  And especially coming out of the church. (laughs)  And Redd Foxx was definitely a funny man.
Speaker 1: And Richard Pryor? What about him? What are you--I mean--you s--What, what are you--I know he was hot then.  But I--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh, he was hot then.  He was the best.  I mean he would just come--He was really getting strong in like '77 [1977], '78 [1978] in that era there.  Oh he was kicking butt and was just doing it.  He was one of the new guys that would do--you know when you--When I was a kid, we were--Redd Foxx was telling jokes.  "And the lady said to the man and the bla-bla-bla-blah.  And you don't do this, and do that and zha-zha--," with a punch line.  Well, Richard Pryor was one of the first guys to come along and he may have been cursing and say, "Well why you kill everybody in the house? Well they was home." (chuckles).  He'd say little things like that.  Talking about Leon Spinks [boxer].  And then "Went over to Miss Rudolph's house. Not, not, not Miss Rudolph.  Yeah Miss Rudolph, that's her name."  And she (laughs), and he was talking with the voice.  And Mudbone, and Cockeyed Junior.  Richard Pryor was just great.  And then these two, two dudes now they were bragging about their things.  How big their thing was.  And they weren't no freaks or nothing like that.  And they didn't wanna--you know, they went up on the Golden Gate Bridge [San Francisco, California].  And one guy took his thing out and he said, "Hmmm! This water cold." Said, the other dude took his thing out and said, "Yeah.  It deep too ain't it?" (laughs)  So (unclear) Richard Pryor, (laughs) Pryor is the greatest.  No matter what he did.  I mean we would just repeat (claps) anything he did.  And it's just the point that was just knocking them out, man.  It was just great.  Making--So he was one of the conceptions of humor as far as blacks were concerned at that time.  And of course he was on the Redd, Redd--'The Ed Sullivan Show'.  And one of the first to do that.  And so he just--and he was good and he was dirty.  But he had a twist--a little message.  He was just not blue.  He wasn't just blue.  But he had a little message there.  And he was the first one to do it.  However, if he were to do today what he did then, we might consider him blue.
Story_ID: 14746
Speaker 1: What do you think, you start taking off at that point? I mean was it at The Comedy Store [comedy club, Los Angeles, California] when things started taking off for you? Or what would you--what was your--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I don't know what you mean by taking off.  Because I'm still having fun today.  Like I said, people said, "When did you get your big break?" My big break was--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) George, you're--
Speaker 2: My big break was--my big break was going on stage with the comedy--at The Comic Strip [comedy club, New York, New York] that first night.  One big break, I most--I always wanted to work Las Vegas [Nevada].  And the first year after I left '[The] Redd Foxx [Comedy Hour, television program]', I started working for George Benson [guitarist]--on the road for George Benson.  The next thing you know, I'm with Diana Ross.  I'm at Caesar's Palace, Las Vegas, Nevada.  You ever been to Caesar's Palace? This is the biggest you're ever gonna get as far as entertainment.  I walked off stage in front of Diana Ross and I got standing ovations.  I walked off stage one night and stood out in front of Caesar's Palace with the water fountains in the summer and just grinned.  I said, "You know what? This is all I ever wanted to do.  I should quit right now and go right back to advertising." 'Cause I enjoyed that advertising so much in New York City.  And in about thirty seconds, "Not!" (chuckles).  But it was just that much fun.  I had accomplished one real goal that I wanted to do, work Las Vegas.  And I didn't just work Las Vegas, I had a dressing room and the whole--whiskey in the bar and the security and everything at Caesar's Palace, with Diana Ross.  And that's about as big as you could ever get.  As far as I was concerned.  'Cause you know, it was a lot of money.  And I loved that.  And then I said, "Ah! Let me just continue doing this.  This is a real ride." And I've been doing it since then.  And that's when I wanted to learn how to become a comedian.  I was working with Diana Ross in Las Vegas.  The next thing you know I went to Tom Jones and Donna Summer and Smokey Robinson and Paul Anka.  And I worked for like twelve years just learning how to become a comedian.  I never want to be an overnight, what--television star or anything like that.  I always liked the career of Redd Foxx and Rodney Dangerfield.  They did it, they did it a little later in life.  See I think--life is backwards itself.  Just living is backwards.  We have a little thing in America they call Social Security.  You retire and they give you Social Security.  I think it's backwards.  I think it's wrong.  I think the government should give me all my money right now while I'm young.  When I get out--you know, so I can travel and go all over the world and do what I want to do.  When I turn sixty-five, work the hell out of me.  Let me make my own money at that time.  But in the mean time, give me my money so I can enjoy life right now.  When we turn sixty-five and retire, you hear people so often say, "I'm gonna travel." For what? "I'm going to Europe." What are you going to do, sleep? I mean you can't even enjoy it when you're sixty-five years old.  You just sleep.  You know, you're--you get over there--before you even get to Europe you're asleep.  Now when you're young--like I just did it right out of school.  Get on, get on a train and just travel.  Get on an airplane, get on the boats, get on the ship and just go all over and do everything.  Go to the nightclub.  Like in Spain I could wake up at three o'clock in the morning.  Right now and go out in Spain and that club is just now popping.  Six o'clock [A.M.] the Friar's Club is open, still popping.  Eight o'clock, nine o'clock [A.M.] the Super Club's open.  The sun's up.  I'm still popping.  And when you get old, you can't do any of that stuff.  You're just walking by going, "What are those crazy kids doing over there?" So you enjoy your life.  I think--I think life is backwards.  So I say, "Give me my Social Security money now and work the hell out of me later." Case in point: What I'm saying is that I enjoyed the career of Redd Foxx and Rodney Dangerfield.  And I'm successful right now.  But getting a TV show and becoming even more successful maybe in a later year, and I can work more.  It's kind of like my best friend [Jerry Seinfeld] is probably the most popular person in television and entertainment and in comedy today.  One of those people.  And sometimes I think when I'm with him, "You know the paparazzi are everywhere all over and things like that."  And I'm going, "Wait a minute.  I might just be in a great position right now.  I make enough money.  I can live the rest of my life doing what I want to do.  And just enough people satisfy my little ego." They go, "Hey! It's that comedian.  It's that guy, that funny guy!" Just like that.  But not being able to walk down the street by yourself without somebody clicking you and--you can't even go pee.  And somebody pulling on you going, "I know that guy." And you try to have dinner and there's somebody always coming to the table, "Excuse me, I never do this." And I'm going, "Well, why start with me?" (laughs), you know.  "Why start now? Why don't you just leave me alone?" But--and sometime I think about that.  And like I say, he's the greatest person, and my dearest friend.  But sometimes I think, I might be in a great position.  That I make enough money just to do what I enjoy doing. And I just love it.  But, there's not anno--people bothering you everywhere you go.
Story_ID: 14747
Speaker 1: You said that you took twelve years growing.  And you spent a lot of time learning how to do comedy.  And I'm wondering if you could just address what you meant--what you mean by that.
Speaker 2: What I meant by that, by learning how to do comedy.  That's the--a lot of people can't do comedy at any time, any place.  In learning to do comedy, we had a great example.  A good friend of mine [Jon Stewart] that hosts a TV show that hosted the, the, the Grammys a few months back--a few weeks back.  And as you see when you go out on the stage in front of 19,000, that's a different way to address an audience as it is a small theater of 3,000.  It wasn't good.  You have to know what to do in different venues.  If it's 19,000, your jokes--you can do the same jokes.  But they've got to be delivered differently.  In a different pattern and different timing.  Well, he hadn't done that.  I've done comedy in the round.  You've got 5,000 people around me.  You've got 20,000 around me.  I've done comedy on the racetrack.  Where you've got a stage here, you've got a lake there and a raceway there and the audience across the track.  I've done that.  I know how to do that.  I've been in the dinner theater.  A lot of comedians don't know about how to open up or--in Las Vegas [Nevada] years ago they used to have the dinner show.  Tingalingaling clink! Glasses breaking.  You have to learn how to do that and deal with that, and get over it.  And yet mentally so.  'Cause it's a big, big hurdle in learning how to become a comedian.  So in those twelve years, I'm one of the guys right now they say, "The guy can make any room roll over." So therefore it really doesn't matter to me what the situation is.  Be it 12,000, be it 60,000 at a stadium.  Let's go to work.  Let's do it.  And some people would say like, "You know, it's a little different." You gotta be--you gotta learn how to do that.  You gotta learn how--you know, I've been in situations where--in the rooms with other comedians.  And they'll come off.  And the comedian will say, "That's a terrible audience." That's all I need to know.  I'll go in and say, "Well all the other comedians say you guys are a terrible audience.  And I got some terrible jokes.  So this should just work out just fine." (laughs) And all of a sudden they're just starting to laugh, like that.  In certain times you been in different positions were you're working with different people.  Like I, I know I'm not the superstar.  But I've been on many a show with Robin Williams, Garry Shandling, and Rodney Dangerfield, at the time Sam Kinison.  All these people were much more well-known than I was.  But hey! When it's time to step up to the plate, then I want to be a big boy too.  And come out--like I said, I have no fear.  And I say, "Hey! Step up here and play." I'm playing the same game.  And, and sometimes you even look better than they do.  Because you know what you're doing.  I just had a show not too long ago down at the [John F.] Kennedy Center [Washington, D.C.] tribute to Carl Reiner, the Mark Twain Awards [sic, Prize for American Humor].  Guess who was on the show? [Jerry] Seinfeld opens the show.  Then walks out Richard Belzer from the TV show he did ['Homicide: Life on the Street'].  I forgot the name of it.  But in any case, on NBC [National Broadcasting Company] every week.  Walk out.  Who was after him? Mary Tyler Moore.  Who's after her? Dick Van Dyke.  Who's after him? Steve Martin.  Who's after Steve Martin? George Wallace.  Who the hell is George Wallace and all these people are there? But you know what? I'm in the big time.  Let's go out there and let me show them what I do.  This is what I do.  And I think I'm damn good at it.  And which is gonna set me apart from everybody that you've seen.  And when the show is over, who does everybody remember? And I enjoy that.  And I thank God every night that I'm able to do that.  And, you know, it's just like, "Okay, I'm up here."  Go out there where the big boys play.  So it's a lot of fun learning how to become a comedian.  And there's a lot of tricks in learning how to become a comedian.
Story_ID: 14748
Speaker 1: What about the business of, of, you know, of being an entertainer, comedian? How--what about that part?  Because that's equally as important.  People can have talent but they--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) A show and a business.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Well, you do have to learn how to do that too.  Because you've got people--All of us have lost money without accountants and people you trust with your money and things like that.  Bill Cosby lost millions.  And, and I lost--I had an accountant handling my money and, and--[Jerry] Seinfeld was there.  And Seinfeld even did a show on it.  And Ed McMahon.  We all had this guy.  And all of a sudden, you know, he was putting out money into a trust fund, we thought! The trust was going up his nose,. (laughs)  But we lost the money.  I sued him.  I got my money back! Can you believe that? I got my money back! And it was, I'm the only one that had sense enough to sue him.  And I was happy about that.  But there is a show and a business.  And you gotta, you gotta guide your career and different things like that.  Making sure you got the right people working for you, representing you, the right PR [public relations] firm, the right management, the right agency.  And you're always wondering what are they doing.  Even thou--no matter how good they are.  You're always wondering how good they are. What are they doing? And I think I hooked up with some very nice people.  But you're in the back of your head--You know, like I've been with my people for fifteen, twenty years.  And they're just good people.  So there is show and there is business.  And learning how much to charge people, learning what not to turn down.  There's good work ethics.  The greatest--we learned a lot from Jay Leno.  Jay Leno will work his butt off.  He'll take a gig.  You know, he makes a lot of money.  But if he's on his way home from somewhere and they don't have the money that he gets, he'll take that too.  On his way home.  He's not doing anything Tuesday night.  So he figures, let's say he gets so many thousands on his regular week.  And now he's home on a Monday.  Well his work ethics say, "Well, let me stop and pick up that little bit too."  Cause I have to--he's the greatest at that.  And we learned a lot from him about working.
Speaker 1: Now as a whole has the business of comedy changed though in this fifteen or twenty year period?
Speaker 2: Tremendously so.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Okay.
Speaker 2: It started off--when I first started off as a comedian, there was like five comedy rooms in all of America.  Comedy wasn't even hot then.  Per se, as comedy rooms and a lot of comedians.  So you had the Catch a Rising Star [comedy club] was here in New York [New York].  Improvisation was the first thing here in New York City.  Then the Catch a Rising Star, then the Comic Strip [comedy club].  Then they opened a room out in Los Angeles [California] , The Comedy Store [comedy club].  [The] Improv [comedy club] moved out there.  There's a room in Chicago [Illinois], I think at the time.  And--but that was it, for the country.  Then all of a sudden these little com-, comedy rooms got hot.  And then one opened in Atlanta [Georgia], and, and one opened in Minnesota, and then Miami [Florida].  The next thing you know, they're all over the world.  Next thing you know, they're all over the--at every exit.  So comedy became so popular that when the comedy club that every TV show every week had a comedy show and a 'Comic Strip Live', comic strip dead, the 'Comic View', everything.  Cable [television] came out.  Boom! Just everybody on--every comedian in the world was on, on television.  And each kid would come on there would have like three minutes.  That's all you saw on television.  And they'd open up a comedy store on every exit on the freeway.  And they put them in there.  When you went to the clubs, the three minutes you saw on television, that's all they had in the clubs.  And then after a few years that started deteriorate.  The television built us.  Television brought us down.  Because there was just too much.  It just became every night.  You could just (claps) see a different comedian on TV.  And it just killed us.  Right now it's starting to come back again.  A lot of clubs closed down and shut down.  Now it's starting to build back up again.  There were a few--the, the clubs that hired the A acts, they're still open.  They're still around.  But the little rinky-dink one--you know, there used to be Gladys' Poolroom Tuesday Night Comedy.  You know, John and Jerry's Funeral Home Wednesday Night Comedy.  They'd just open up a little room.  Anything, anywhere along side the street.  And people would come at that time.  Because it was new.  But it has changed in a lot of ways.  And it has changed in, in content as far as material is concerned.  It was really bad.  When I started, I was one of the lucky ones, with a college degree.  I could handle the white audiences.  The white people were going to the clubs.  So that's why if you had white clubs--white people going into the clubs, white owners didn't necessarily put--prefer a black act on stage.  Why? You had a white audience.  But I was one of the guys that could cross over.  So for the first ten years of comedy, it was very hard for black comedians to get on.  George Wallace and, and Franklin Ajaye and a few others, they can do it.  Okay.  'Cause there's always gotta be one or two.  You know.  But I wa--I adapted and I knew how to do that.  But then all of a sudden came along Def [Comedy] Jam.  And so the black kids had an outlet, which is wonderful.  And it happened that way.  And whatever way it is, may be blue humor.  But people are laughing.  There's a market for everything.  Maybe blue humor.  So--Andrew Dice Clay was blue and Sam Kinison also.  So--But it did give another avenue for black comedians to grow and aspire.  And so that changed.  And now we see that black comedy right now is still hot in the clubs and hot on the televisions shows and hot in the movies and, and to the TV shows.  And so it has changed tremendously.  And it will change again.
Story_ID: 14749
Speaker 1: Do you think--so there is such a thing as black comedy? Always has and always--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) And always will be.  Because these are black things that we relate to.  When I go to a club, I can do the same joke and just deliver it differently in a, in a club.  My audience is 50-50 usually.  50 percent white, 50 percent black.  In some 60 percent white, 40 percent black.  And some cases 80 percent black.  But I can deliver that show.  If--excuse me.  If it's an all black audience, I certainly can do some things there in front of the black audience, that I can't do in front of a, a white audience.  Such as going off on a funeral.  Black funerals or what happens in the black church, or growing up in the black home, or just simply going into ebonics.  You know, (chuckles) just simply going in to "Sho is" to "I know das right." "Frinley," you know.  Or make up our own words, you know, [chuckle].  And I get--and I teach a course in Ebonics on stage right now.  When I have a mixed audience, you know.  And I, I start with the letter A and go on down to wherever I wanna go.  And E is probably the funniest letter I get to.  E in Ebonics word would be "E'em."  Like, "Now you lookin' at me like you don't e'em know what I'm talkin' 'bout.  Alrigh'."  But you've got to be careful with the letter E when you get into ebonics.  Because sometimes--we all know it's a vowel and the letter can be silent.  And you get into a silent--you know, the E is silent and you get into words like "Lectricity," you know.  So it can be crazy when you get into Ebonics like that.  Or you ask a person where you live with that E.  And you know, I like in "Lizabeth, New Jersey."  You know, (chuckles).  Not "Elizabeth," but sometimes that E can be silent.  But Ebonics is a funny course to be--to teach.
Story_ID: 14750
Speaker 1: Where are you--where do you want to go? You've had a very successful career.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Even today.  Really.  I mean where, where does George Wallace wanna go from this point on?
Speaker 2: I think--for a few years I've been successful doing what I want to do.  And all I ever want to do is be--is to be able to do what I do right now the rest of my life.  And that's to go on stages.  I do corporate work, I do college gigs.  I have the greatest life.  I travel all over.  I can wake up in the morning on Thursday and say, "Let me go over to London and see what this Harrods sale is all about." And just jump a plane.  The next two hours I'm gone.  I do that all--I do that at least twenty times a year.  Just wake up and go to the airport and go.  What I like doing in traveling and making people happy.  As far as my career is concerned, I've had a little brea--I'm doing radio in the morning.  I love that, making people happy.  And what my ultimate goal is right now, I just--you always gotta have a goal in life.  So for a few years I think I was without a goal.  Here's a nice little goal I like to have, being here in New York [New York].  I'd like to head a variety show right now.  And just entertain and give exposure to new talent and old talent.  And just be a host like a new Ed Sullivan and have some fun.
Speaker 1: So is that in the works?
Speaker 2: Yes that's in the works.  And that's what I'd like to do.  And just have some fun doing that.  Because it's nothing for me to come out--I'm a great--They call me the 'Host of Life.  That's what Norman Lan--Jerry Sin--Jerry Seinfeld name that--named me that, the Host of Life.  I love to come out and just have fun and just be the host.  "Alright.  Let's bring on my next friend.  Let's do this.  Here's a guy.  Here's a young lady bla-bla-blah.  Let's just have some fun.  Let's enjoy them."  That's what I do on radio every morning here in New York City.  "Wake up everybody! It's time to have a good time.  Good morning! This can be a beautiful day.  I know it's snowing outside, but you can't do anything about that.  Can you? But you can do something about enjoying life.  If you, if you see somebody without a smile, give them yours.  Just have a good time.  Just, you know, I want you to express peace and joy.  Ha, I want you to experience peace, express love and enjoy happiness." Little messages like--That's all I want to do.  I'm about happy, I'm about love, and I'm about enjoying life while you're living.  'Cause when you're dead, you're dead a long time.  Did you know that?
Story_ID: 14751
Speaker 1: Isaac Hayes.  How did that come together? This show--you had already--you had been doing the Tom Joyner--
Speaker 2: I did the 'Tom Joyner Morning Show' for four years.  And I still love them.  And they still--Now I, I went to Chicago [Illinois].  And I--In Chicago, I don't know how this happened.  They hired me at WGCI [radio] in Chicago and I was on [W]GCI and V103 [WVAZ-FM, Chicago] at the same time.  Tom Joyner was on V103.  I'd do my little gig on the telephone and call him and run right back into the studio at GCI.  So in Chicago I was on two radio stations at the same time.  And then I got fired in Chicago because I was so hot.  That this guy Elroy Smith--that (chuckles) he didn't--nobody having more control than he.  He fired me when--the greatest numbers WGCI ever had, ever had was George Wallace.  Steve Harvey was there before me and I loved Steve Harvey.  He's good.  He's out in Los Angeles [California] doing radio right now.  His numbers were great, but mine were better.  And everybody went, "Oh! What happened?  He's got the greatest numbers in the city." But Elroy just say, "Well, we're gonna go in a different direction." And hired some guy who was his good friend.  Must have something on him.  I'll just. (laughs)  No I'm just,. (laughs)  But that's another story.  But doing radio and I had left GCI.  And I went to Washington D.C. and did a syndicated show with Les Brown ['Les Brown's Morning Show', WMMJ-FM].  And so we did that in Atlanta [Georgia].  And, and Washington D.C.  And one morning all of a sudden I just came in and just quit on the air.  Because I'm always about going to the better place.  Everybody wants to come to New York City [New York].  Everybody wants to be in New York. And I bought a place in New York.  And the next thing you know I just stopped by 'Isaac Hayes and Friends' [WRKS-FM] to say, "Good morning."  'Cause I was doing a little show here in the city.  And I said, "If anybody's ever out, I'll come in and sit in for you." And about three days later, he said, "Come in." And I've been there ever since.  It's a lot of fun in the morning with Isaac Hayes.
Speaker 1: Now how does that differ? Just real quickly, you know, being on air like that, when you can't see anyone? See remember how you were talking about--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yes.
Speaker 1: You had--what you liked was that feeling of the audience.
Speaker 2: Here with the audience.  Now here's, here's a different story.  A different twist in show biz [business].  I've gone from television to live audiences and touching people and people can see me on TV and I can see that audience.  Now I'm on radio.  Nothing but voice.  You still can see me.  I can see you.  "How you doing?" When I'm talking, doing radio, I'm talking to you.  That's how I perform on stage.  It can be 10,000 people.  I'm looking you in the eye.  Individually I'm talking to you.  That's how I do it on radio.  "How you doing this morning Brooklyn [New York]? How you doing Queens [New York]? How you doing in your car?  Some of you at the toll booth right now.  How you doing? I'm talking to you."  Directly.  You gotta have a theater of the mind.  I'm sitting here talking about what I'm wearing today.  And Isaac Hayes is laughing at my tie.  I make theater.  He's laughing at it.  "How you like the tie I got on today, Isaac?" "That's the ugliest tie I've ever seen in my life.  Bla-bla-blah." "Well, it's mine and I bought it and I like it.  And I'm gonna wear it today, whether you like it or not." We're laughing about it.  We create that image.  I could be wearing a t-shirt.  I just create that image.  The next thing you know, we got people calling.  "Good morning Isaac.  Good morning George.  I like that tie you got on George."  People are seeing through the radio all of a sudden.  Another person call in, "That is the ugliest I--." (laughs)  But you have to create this with your audience.  And make them believe in you.  That they're talking to you.  A radio is theater of the mind.  And you just have a lot of fun with it.
Speaker 1: It's the power of words.
Speaker 2: Yes it is.  Yeah.
Story_ID: 14752
Speaker 1: I just have a couple more questions.
Speaker 2: I should hope so.  'Cause you've been talking for the last thirty, forty minutes.  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: I haven't been talking, (chuckles).  You've been talking.  I've been getting you to talk.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Whatever. . (laughs)  One of us has been talking a long time.  (Simultaneously laughing).  I can tell you that.
Speaker 1: Now just a few more questions.  One is why--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) And I ain't getting paid even.  Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. (chuckles).  But this is your--You're giving back to society.
Speaker 2: Go ahead.  (Hearty laughter).  (chuckles) I can do that.  They wouldn't know the difference if I didn't do it. . (laughs)
Speaker 1: No.  But okay.  Is there any one of--who, who do you think has influenced you most in your life? Who do you think?
Speaker 2: In my life?  Ooh! A lot of people beside my parents.  We'll make them number one, okay.  George and Mary [Lou] Wallace.  Then we can move into--influenced me.  Red Skelton. All the people I'm gonna rename again.  Then we get into people like Oprah Winfrey.  Yeah, I like her.  Doing what she did and got all that money.  And I just think it's nice for somebody to be that successful, doing what they wanted to do.  I love what she does.  I think she's the greatest thing going.  Influenced me and my best friend [Jerry Seinfeld] influenced me a lot.  My minister, Dr. Charles E.  Blake, out of West Angeles Church of God and Christ in Los Angeles [California], my friends.  My family.  A lot of people influenced me.  Anybody doing anything good.  I can learn something from everybody.
Story_ID: 14753
Speaker 1: You are one of the few black comedians who have financial success.  I mean there--you know, ther--It, it hasn't --
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Been a--There was a lot of counter--a lot of people that preceded you.  You know.  You never saw.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Everybody.  A lot of people.  You know, Bill Cosby made a lot of money.  But it just--and Richard Pryor made a lot of money.  But he lost a lot of money.  Flip Wilson lost a lot of money.  I think he's all right now.  No Flip Wilson died.  What am I talkin' about here, (laughs)?  He would have laughed if I'd said that too.  Redd Foxx had tremendous problems with money.  And sometimes that's so often said, you know, with the successful thing with having the money in the bank.  And stuff like that. Then sometimes I think, "You know what, I wanna die like Redd Foxx and Sammy Davis Jr.  I wanna die owing everybody."  I think if you die owing people $500,000 or $600,000 you've, you've done pretty good.  Didn't you. . (laughs)  'Cause when you're dead, you're dead a long time.  I said that before.  And you don't have to worry about paying it back.  I'm gonna die owing about $500,000 or $600,000 to everybody.  Loan me a dollar.
Story_ID: 14754
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite joke that you like to tell? Of your jokes. Which one is it? What is
Speaker 2: I don't know.  My favorite jokes, I don't know.  I love to talk about the preacher telling a lie in the church saying, "I won't be long in the pulpit." I have a joke I've been doing for twenty years, and I won't throw it away.  I don't know why.  There's a joke I do about, "I don't understand why there's more than one dog food.  Who's gonna know?  And I'm sick and tired of the little dog on television always going, 'Kibbles 'n Bits! Kibbles 'n Bits! I'm gonna get me some Kibbles 'n Bits.' You gonna get what's on sale!" I always get a laugh with that joke.  "You know, I got these coupons here.  You gonna get what's on sale, that's what you're gonna get."  I always get a big laugh with that joke.  What joke do I like telling in my act? I don't--a favorite joke.  I'm so topical that my jokes do change.  Right now my favorite joke is about--and when I have an audience, I love to see young people in the audience, to tell them, "What are they teaching you young kids today?" Because this is true.  I go into the McDonald's.  I go into McDonalds and my total was $2.78 and I give the kid $3.03 and all hell breaks loose.  And the kid goes, "S-S-Sir what's your three pennies for? " And the manager comes over.  He's eighteen years old.  "Sir why did you give him three pennies?" They ring the silent alarm.  Police come and lock my ass up.  'Cause they think I got some kind of scheme going.  I'm in the Atlanta [Georgia] airport the other day.  This is a true story.  I'm in the Atlanta airport the other day.  I ordered some fast food.  My order was two dollars--was $4.38.  Ching, ching.  I'm getting ready to pay the girl.  And I give her ten dollars.  Oh, and I've got the thirty-eight cents.  She says, "But I already rang it up." I said, "Well what difference does it make?" "But it's--." She didn't know what to do.  I gave her the 38 cents.  I mean it just blew her mind to give me the whole dollar back.  "I already rung it up.  That's what it say--." So I love to do--talk about the things that the young kids are doing.  Their attire with the big jeans on.  The big baggy jeans walking around like they got a terminal case of diarrhea of the pants, hanging off their ass.
Story_ID: 14755
Speaker 1: Does a comedian have to be an observer by nature?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  What I do--see my job is to, to relate stories that--just to do stories that you can relate to.  So in order to relate to things, I've gotta observe what people do.  And I do the simple--most simple things in life that people go, "Yeah, yeah." This morning on the radio I was talking about thing you can expect to see when you go out to dinner with friends.  When you go out to dinner with friends you can always expect somebody putting the bar tab--wanting to put the bar tab on the table check.  So then therefore, I've got to split the drink--got to split the check and pay for his drinks.  And I don't even know who the hell he and his friend was.  It's always somebody adding that on to it.  You can expect to go to the table out for friends, always somebody's eyes get real big when they see the prices on the menu.  Little things people can relate to.  You know, you can expect always somebody'll say, "Oh, I be back.  I got to run to the machine, to the ATM [automatic teller machine]." And you get somebody else never wanna tip.  Always somebody--there's always somebody there will always wanna--always complaining.  Never fin--never find the food to be good.  Its so many things that people relate to in life.  And that's all my--that's all I do.  And there's--and, and, and give the stories back to you.  It's simple things like, I'm at the airport waiting for my luggage.  And a lady comes to me and says, "Mr. Wallace, you're mighty quiet today."  And I say, "Well hell, I'm standing here by myself." And these are just little simple things that are truthful.  You're on the airplane.  When the pilot says, "Well if there's anything we could do to make your trip more comfortable, please don't hesitate to ask." Well how about that first class seat up there ain't nobody sittin' in? Little simple things like that is--people can relate to.  I mentioned 7-Eleven [convenience store] had a, a pint of Haagen-Dazs ice cream, two bananas, Coca-Cola, a loaf of bread, Moon Pie, Honey Bun, RC Cola and a bag of skins [pork rinds].  And the cashier says something stupid like, "You want a bag?" People can relate to these little simple things like that.  You know? Just the doctor is making me sick.  Your doctor--you've got a ten o'clock [A.M.] appointment.  You don't see the doctor 'til 11:15, 11:45 [A.M.].  And the doctor has the audacity to ask you what's the problem.  "The problem! I been waiting on your ass an hour and a half." Little simple things like that that people can relate to.  You know, I'm in the bank.  How come I don't see bank robbers' pictures in the bank? They're all down at the post office.  They ain't robbing the post office. Little things like that.  You know, they don't rob the post office 'cause they know people at the post office shoot back.  But little simple things like that you notice.  Why aren't the bank robbers' picture in the bank? That's what they're robbing.  Stupid signs "Quiet Hospital Zone." You know, nothing making noise but the ambulance (makes siren sound), you know.  Simple things.  That's all I do is just relate stories that people can relate to.  President [William J.] Clinton living on 100th [Street] and having an office on 125th Street.  They should be just fired.  You know all that stuff they stole.  That's just thievery.  They stole from the White House [Washington, D.C.].  Well, they didn't get all that stuff on 125th Street [New York, New York].  They got the tables, they got the chairs.  They got the purses that, that Hillary [Rodham Clinton] had to send back.  And plus Chelsea [Clinton] can get her hair did.  So it's just little things like that you just have fun with.  You know, stories that they can relate to.  And he should be up there in Harlem [New York, New York].  He take the top floor and, you know, give [Rev.] Jesse Jackson the bottom floor, and then just move Family Services right there in those middle floors.  And, and, you know, that's all I do is just--you know, that's all I do .  You know people are thinking things like this all the time.  You, you just have fun with it.  Just have fun with life.  Life is so--it's the greatest thing in the world just mention--just thinking about life.  Will, just thinking about life it will just make you laugh all the time.  You know, ugly babies in the grocery store.  Anything like that.  I just talky--you know, I do some things that will touch you.  How come they got eighteen handicapped parking spaces at the Home Depot [home improvement store]? You're not supposed to talk about stuff like that.  But I will.  You know, my best friend in Los Angeles [California], he's in a wheelchair.  He's been pleading with me for years, "Talk about us.  We want to be included too." That's what he said.  "We can take a joke.  Don't feel sorry for us."  And they do feel that way.  And I tell him, "I'm glad you mentioned that.  'Cause I'm pissed off with the government for spending $100,000 for a bus that has a wider door and an elevator to lift their ass up on the bus.  How about a rope? I say give them a rope and hook their asses up to the bus.  When they get where they're going, just let go."  So no ground--I can touch everything.  Maybe his personality, and people don't mind.  And the room can be full of wheelchair people.  And they'll come up and say, "Thank you, thank you." People get--you know, people just love to have fun when they know you're not hostile or anything like that.  You're just having fun.  And everybody wants to be in on the joke.  Everybody wants to be in on the joke.  So I just have a good time in life and enjoy the whole spectrum of living.
Story_ID: 14756
Speaker 1: So what do they say about George Wallace?
Speaker 2: Oh they say when I die on my tombstone .  Basically a good guy, a loving guy and respectful.  And just love to have a good time.  And I think in life when you walk into a room, if you don't bring happiness in the room, then you shouldn't be coming in the room.  And my job is to give back.  Everybody's job is to give back.  Everybody is so blessed that you've got to give back, in some way, some how.  So, if I can give you a little happiness with a laugh, I think that's about the best think I could ever do.  I might give you some money.  It might not be enough money.  But if I can make you smile, that's the best you can feel at that time.
Speaker 1: And George, if you think your mother [Mary Lou Wallace] could see you, you know, now.  What do you think she would say?
Speaker 2: "Well you need to lose some weight". (laughs)  Oh boy! If my mother could see me now what would she say? I don't know.  You know, I have no idea.  I'm still a person, you know.  I'm, I'm--"You're a good boy." She'd be proud of me, I think.  I got my little bad habits too.  Everybody got some little bad habits too.
Speaker 1: I know.  But what did she say? She said when--she said, "I won't be back." What did she say?
Speaker 2: "Everything's gonna be all right in your life." If she were to come back and, hey, I'm not doing bad.  I'm enjoying life.  And if I die tomorrow, the world owes me nothing.  Understand what I'm saying?  So I've had a good life.  And I don't think it's how long you live.  It's how you live while you're living.
Story_ID: 14757
Speaker 1: Do with do you have concerns or hopes for the black people?  This is the last question.
Speaker 2: Do I have hopes and concerns for black people? Yes I do.  I think black people are gonna be just as happy as they want to be.  If you wanna do what you wanna do.  Anything you want to do, you can do it.  And it's not just black people.  It's anybody.  And those are my rules for anybody.  The recipe is out there.  You see how other people are successful.  And as long as you're climbing the mountain.  You may not get to the top of the mountain.  But as long as you're on you're way up the mountain, that's most important.  Just keep climbing up the mountain, no matter--. You can do, Reverend Ike--. There's a minister right in New York [New York] said it.  He said, "You can do what you want to do.  You can be what you want to be, and you can have what you want to have." And I think everybody can.  If you really want to work for it.  And there's a proven method that if you really want to work for something, you can get it.  I mean you might, you might--you might want a million dollars in life.  Let's say, you've only got $850,000.  It ain't that bad.  Is it? You're on your way.  You're on your way.  You know, so black people--I'm not--my--I'm not the black--I'm not the person that goes along with the black people.  I'm the person that goes along with all people.  I think everybody should get to a point together where we could even--I like the black title, but I could care less about it.  I don't care whether you're a Jew or black or Puerto Rican.  I'm not hung up on that thing.  That's not me.  That's not me.  But I am black.  And I'm happy to be black.  I'm happy to be who I am.  And I'm a real black. (laughs)  And there's absolutely nothing you can do about it.  And I say let's all get together, let's enjoy life and have a good time.  And let's just laugh.
