Story_ID: 25653
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm the interviewer today with the HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, can you please give us your full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: James Edward Maceo West. J-A-M-E-S, E-D-W-A-R-D, M-A-C-E-O, W-E-S-T.
Speaker 1: Alright. Is there a story behind your name?
Speaker 2: Sure. My first name is from my grandfather on my mother's side. Edward is my father's middle name. Maceo is my mother's, wow, brother-in-law's first name. And West is my family name.
Speaker 1: Alright, okay.
Speaker 2: I think I got that right.
Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: February 10, 1931, Farmville, Virginia, Prince Edward County.
Speaker 1: Okay. And Sir, what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: I'm a research professor at Johns Hopkins University [Maryland] in the departments of electrical and computer engineering and mechanical engineering.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is the Whiting School of Engineering.
Speaker 1: Alright. And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: What is today's date? Is it the--February 13th, 2013.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: In Barton Hall at Johns Hopkins University.
Story_ID: 25654
Speaker 1: Alright. Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we always ask, as kind of a warm-up. And they only require a short answer. The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: No, I eat everything.
Speaker 1: Okay. A favorite color?
Speaker 2: Well, most of my family said I don't pay any attention to any of them, because I just put on what comes out first in the morning. I've never considered, you know, there's no color that I say that "I must have that," in a car or anything else. I don't, it's maybe crazy, but things like that don't excite me very much.
Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I like all seasons. But I think if there is any preference, it would be fall and spring. Those are the two where nature's most dynamic, and I like it, the dynamic nature of what goes on.
Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I don't take vacations. But when I do, it's usually to either the water or the mountains.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Either extreme. When I could, when I was mobile, it was most often to the mountains. I did a lot of free climbing.
Speaker 1: Okay. The last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Speaker 2: (laughter) I have one, but I can't--
Speaker 1: What is it? (laughter).
Speaker 2: (laughter). No, no. I'm just being--my kids will tell you, I know how to swear quite well, so that would probably be the favorite phrase, if asked.
Story_ID: 25655
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Matilda Omega Miller West. Miller is her maiden name.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, is there a story behind her name? I mean the Omega part, especially.
Speaker 2: I think because she was the last of three.
Speaker 1: Okay. And what was her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I couldn't tell you. I could probably find it, but I don't know it offhand.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, do you know about what year she was born, you think?
Speaker 2: Well, the only thing I can do is--I was born in 1931, and I think she was roughly thirty or so when I was born, or maybe twenty five.
Speaker 1: Somewhere around 1900, 1905, something like that?
Speaker 2: 1900, right. Let's see, 19--, yeah, we're getting close, maybe 1903 or 1904.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Something like that, yeah.
Speaker 1: Alright. And where was she born?
Speaker 2: In Farmville, Virginia, as far as I know.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, how far back can you trace your ancestors on your mother's side? Are they basically from Farmville, as far back as you can trace them?
Speaker 2: Well, my grandfather, her father, died before I was born, just before I was born. And my grandmother raised me when I, you know, during my young years, because my mother had to go and fulfill the obligation of teaching on a Native-American reservation, because she went to Hampton [University]. This is a land grant college, and one of the requirements is to pay back for her education, so she had to teach at a Native American reservation in Pennsylvania. And she thought it was a little bit too depressing for me to be there, so I stayed with my grandmother.
Speaker 1: Do you know what reservation she taught at?
Speaker 2: No, I don't. I know it was near Carlisle, Pennsylvania, but I don't--
Speaker 1: I know they had the Carlisle Indian School in Carlisle, which was--
Speaker 2: That may have been it. I don't know for sure.
Speaker 1: That one is notable because it's where Jim Thorpe, the great athlete--
Speaker 2: I don't--yeah, that's where I remember him from, but I'm not sure if that was where my mom was. I just don't know.
Speaker 1: It would be quite a coincidence if it wasn't (laughter). Carlisle Indian School. Yeah, that's where Jim Thorpe went to school.
Speaker 2: Could have been.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 25656
Speaker 1: Are there any stories on your mother's [Matilda Omega Miller] side of the family about emancipation or Reconstruction?
Speaker 2: The story as I know it--and my brother and I always argue when this comes up, because I remember one thing and he remembers something totally different. But, I know my grandmother was born in slavery. And during emancipation, she was awarded some property along with some other members of my family. And they--my grandfather was a carpenter, and so he built the house that I was born in. And next to that house was my aunt's house, who was my mother's sister. And so, there were two families.  It was sort of a family commune, with these two houses together. And apparently, my grandfather was a pretty good carpenter. There's at least this one house still standing in Farmville, Virginia that he built.
Speaker 1: Okay. Is there a story about how your grandmother acquired the land?
Speaker 2: As near as I know, it was awarded to her at emancipation. I mean, here again, there are some things that they would talk about, and there were other things that they just wouldn't talk about. A very good example: I used to tell everybody my grandmother worked for the library in the small college that was right around the corner from me. And I'm thinking she's a librarian when I got to the school, and I almost wanted to decapitate someone who told me my grandmother was a janitor in the library. But when I lived with her, it was after the library had closed, and that was her library. I guess that's where I got introduced to books, too, on a large scale.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So, the origin of the land itself, it, I'm thinking that after the Civil War [1861-1865], white people owned the land.  So, there must have been some source, private source--or maybe--because I don't think the state of Virginia would give you land.
Speaker 2: Well, it's kind of interesting, because it wasn't the only family that had land in that little area that the state eventually took back, by the way, because it was right on the border of the campus of Longwood College, I believe, Longwood University. And they, I didn't, I wanted to fight the state on that, but I couldn't convince the rest of my family that we should not relinquish control of that land. But the state of Virginia is--what do they call them, a land grant state. Or, there's some word that describes it. It says even though you own it, the state can come and take it, if there are compelling reasons. That's one of the few states that still have that kind of law.
Speaker 1: Okay. Was that a commonwealth?
Speaker 2: Yes, it's a commonwealth. That's what makes the difference, right.
Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah, because Massachusetts is a commonwealth--
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So, do you think, are there any stories in the family that indicate that that might have been the land where your ancestors were slaves on?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Or part of that land?
Speaker 2: I don't really know. It could have been, but I don't know any of that.
Speaker 1: Alright. So, okay, so, at any rate, well--now, what were your grandparents' names?
Speaker 2: My grandfather's name was James Payton Miller. And my grandmother was Annie L., and I don't know what the L stood for. I've never known. And she was a butler.
Story_ID: 25657
Speaker 1: Now, did your mother [Matilda Omega Miller]--so, she had a chance to finish school and go on to Hampton Institute and become a teacher. Did she have any stories about it, growing up, going to school, that she shared with you?
Speaker 2: Yeah. I know she played field hockey, and well, she talked about [W.E.B.] DuBois, and I can't think of the other guy's name now--
Speaker 1: Booker T. Washington?
Speaker 2: Booker T. Washington, right, that had some conflicts. And Hampton was, I think DuBois went to Hampton, or he had some connection with Hampton. And so, most Hamptonians were components of DuBois, and not Booker T. Washington.
Speaker 1: I know he never went there. He might have taught or done something there.
Speaker 2: I think he taught there or something. I don't--
Speaker 1: Because he went to Fisk and then to Harvard University--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and the University of Berlin.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but he had some affiliation.
Speaker 1: So, they took DuBois's side, okay.
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Story_ID: 25658
Speaker 1: Give me your father's full name and spell it for us.
Speaker 2: Samuel Edward West, II.
Speaker 1: Okay. And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I have no idea.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 1917? No, I'd better not put any date down, because I really don't know.
Speaker 1: Was he younger than your mother [Matilda Omega Miller], or--
Speaker 2: No, he was older than my mother. And I'm sure he was older than my mother because he had two children from another marriage. So--
Speaker 1: So, do you think like, was he ten years older, you think, or--
Speaker 2: I don't know. It's hard for me to say. You're taxing me for stuff that's seventy five years old.
Speaker 1: I guess sometime in the late 19th century, he was born, I would guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  Maybe even 18-something. Again, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's what I thought, the late 19th century--1880's, 1890's.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So, was he born in the same area?
Speaker 2: Well, my grandfather and grandmother moved to Virginia from either-Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], I believe.
Speaker 1: Now, that's unusual in those days, to have a migration back to Virginia.
Speaker 2: Well, it was kind of unique. If I'm--and I don't know this for sure, but my brother and I have talked about it, and we think that my grandfather may have been Jewish. But, and my grandmother, Fannie West, which is kind of interesting, she--I believe, and I don't know this for sure--may have jumped ship from a reservation. Again, that's something I don't talk about an awful lot because of, I guess you could--it compares to the same problem that illegal immigrants have in this country today. Because the laws, as I understood them, were such that if someone was identified as having left a reservation, that's either prison--or certainly going back to the reservation would have been necessary.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, she may have been from an Indian reservation, you were saying.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, did you know your grandmother?
Speaker 2: Yes, I knew both my grandmother and my grandfather on that side.
Speaker 1: Did she look--I mean physically, did she look like she could have been an American Indian?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Alright. And what about your grandfather? Now, he's Samuel West, Sr., right?
Speaker 2: Samuel West, Sr., right. A farmer, preacher. He had about three churches.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what makes you suspect he might have been Jewish?
Speaker 2: Appearance, for one thing. And I think my brother's been playing around with the science of the family tree.
Speaker 1: He's been doing some genealogy?
Speaker 2: Yes, some genealogy. But I don't, here again, I'm not, I mean, whatever I say here is documented anyway. But as long as it's represented, then it's to the best of my knowledge.
Speaker 1: Well, we're just trying to get the story, so you don't have to be sure.
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: I mean, if it's a story that--it could be--that's fine, because it may provide a hint for somebody, you know, later on down the line.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: So, what we're saying is, the things that you're sure of, you say you're sure. And the things where you're not so sure, that's okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, that's interesting, okay. So, if that's the case, neither one of them would be African-American, right?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: If she--
Speaker 2: If that's the case, right, neither one of them would be African-American, that's true. And my grandfather on my mother's side is also a mixture of something. I have no idea what that mixture is.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now, was it, did they have to pass for African-American?
Speaker 2: They all passed. And in those cases, they were very definitely African-Americans, black people, by choice, you know, not by, no one had to twist their arms.
Speaker 1: Now, this is the interesting thing. I've heard these kinds of stories before. And there's a side of passing that people don't focus on, people who are not African-American, or we suspect were not, passing as African-Americans. Because I've heard these kinds of stories before, and it's really, you know--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: It's not as rare as people think.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And, you know, for whatever reason, there are people who did that.
Speaker 2: Right. And my grandfather even had white sharecroppers on the farm.
Speaker 1: Okay. (laughter).
Speaker 2: So, maybe that's why, you know, very frequently in discussions about my family, when they get into purity of race, I have to say I must have done something wrong, because my oldest daughter's married to a Greek from Thessaloniki. My next daughter is married to an Irishman. My son is married to a Bajan--Barbados--and my youngest daughter is now going out with a Russian. So, we cover the whole international gamut, from that standpoint. (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 25659
Speaker 1: Well, tell us your father's [Samuel Edward West] story. Now, what's his story, growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, he grew up on the farm and raised tobacco and corn, I know that.  And he left, and for a long time he worked for the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad on--what's the guy who started the union?
Speaker 1: A. Philip Randolph.
Speaker 2: A. Philip Randolph, right. My father always spoke very highly of him, and I know that they met on a number of times.
Speaker 1: Okay. He was a member of the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters?
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. And he had a small funeral home and a whole bunch of other entrepreneurial activities, I guess, including running numbers. So--
Speaker 1: He was--now, a funeral home director, in most black communities is one of the richest--other than the preacher--one of the richest people in town.
Speaker 2: Well, he didn't make--the competition was such that he didn't stay in that business. It was small, and so he sold it.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, he was running numbers, too, and a number of different things, income sources.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He made a living where he could.
Speaker 1: So, he didn't go to--finish--he didn't go to college?
Speaker 2: No. As a matter of fact, I don't know how far he went in school. And he may have graduated from high school, but I don't even know that for sure. But a very smart man, though.
Speaker 1: Okay. Sounds like he was involved in a lot of things, so you have to be smart to do all those.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 25660
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: I don't know it, if it does exist.
Speaker 1: Now, you say he had another family before he met your mother?
Speaker 2: That's right. His first wife was killed in a car accident.
Speaker 1: Okay. And he had a couple of children?
Speaker 2: Two.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, now, when you think about, I mean, did your parents--do you know about what year they met? I mean, did they meet shortly before you were born?
Speaker 2: I have--that's a good question. There were three of us. And the first died at birth, so, and then I came along. I'm not sure what the time span was between those two. Probably not long, considering the way things were done in those days.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so sometime in the '20's [1920s], I guess, the mid-'20's [1920s] maybe--
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: --when they got together?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now, when you think about their personalities and their dispositions, their sense of humor and what they were interested in, what they looked like, how they walked and talked and dealt with things--who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Well, I think my grandmother had more influence. My mother's mother had more influence over me than anyone else. And I think primarily because she was the one who came to my aid when I got into trouble. And I was always in trouble, mainly for doing things that I was told not to do, like open stuff up that was working, and all of the things that an imaginative mind could get into.
Story_ID: 25661
Speaker 1: Now, you sound like a typical engineer in a lot of ways. You say you would open up things to see how they worked?
Speaker 2: A screwdriver and a pair of pliers were very dangerous tools around me, if anything existed. I can tell you that my grandfather's pocket watch had 107 pieces in it, because I took it apart. I couldn't get it back together, but I did take it apart, and the punishment was rather severe for that. So, after that, I began breaking my toys, just so I could fix them.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, what kind of, let's see, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory. Yeah, I've got a lot of them: Being intrigued by the well that was detached from the house, but right near the back where the water came from before the plumbing, you know, the city water came through. And I used to get in a lot of trouble, because I always wanted to open that up and see what was down there, where the water was coming from. My grandmother was always concerned, because I liked to climb the apple tree. And she was always afraid I would fall out of it. I never did, but... I don't know. That doesn't sound very exciting, but--
Speaker 1: Well...
Speaker 2: I--nothing really--the only thing that really stands out was the World's Fair. My grandmother was going to take me to the World's Fair.  And I was so happy that she was going to do that, that I over-worked myself trying to help her with her little garden.  And I took the shovel up and came down across my foot, which didn't--I couldn't go to New York, because of my broken foot. But--
Speaker 1: How old were you then?
Speaker 2: Well, that was in 1939, and I was born in '31' [1931].
Speaker 1: Yeah, eight years old.
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Story_ID: 25662
Speaker 1: So, your household when you were growing up consisted of you and your brother, your mother [Matilda Omega Miller] and father [Samuel Edward West], and your grandmother? Is that--
Speaker 2: My grandmother, my uncle. And my uncle was a dentist in the community. And my dad was in and out. He didn't hang around that much.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We saw him about once a month.
Speaker 1: Was your mother there most of the time?
Speaker 2: Most of the time, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Except when she was in Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Now, what I've heard from the Pullman porters that we've interviewed, is that the hardest thing about that job--and they said "It's hard." And I said, "What's hard about making beds?" But they say being away, you know, these long stretches of time--
Speaker 2: Uh huh, uh huh.
Speaker 1: --because they kept, like, doing something all the time pretty much. And then the tight quarters, you know, made it a difficult job. And the abuse as well, you know, that they united against. So, did your father--like, so, this was basically when he was a Pullman porter that he was gone for a long period?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: So, did you--well, you said he knew A. Philip Randolph?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: And he would talk--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he talked a lot about Randolph.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, did you ever meet him as a child?
Speaker 2: That's a real good question. You know, I met a whole lot of people, because they used to--when I went with my father, you know, he'd introduce me to people, but names didn't mean that much to me at that point in life. And it's certainly possible that I could have met him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because we went to New York and to Washington and Chicago [Illinois], those were the main cities.  And I think Randolph was either in New York or Chicago, I don't remember which.
Speaker 1: In Chicago.
Speaker 2: Chicago, yeah. Well, he spent some time in New York. But he and his assistant, Chandler Owen--and that's the only two names I really know from the hierarchy of the union, you know, the Sleeping Car Porters.
Speaker 1: But, yeah, that's something. You probably did if he was in the big meetings.
Speaker 2: Yep, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, in the household--so, you said that your grandmother had the most influence on you, and--
Speaker 2: I think so. And as I said, because I always felt that she understood me better than anybody else in terms of my energy--my, you know--and the things that I liked and wanted to do. Everybody else tried to press me into a mold that I didn't fit.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you said she helped you when you got in trouble?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: You said for taking things apart.
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: Now, did she try to provide opportunities for you to do the things, I mean, to--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah, oh yeah. Great support for that. My mom did too, but when I say the influence of my grandmother, I think I see life in that form, because I was with her during that time where I was putting my own stake in the ground, I guess, is one way to put it. And she helped guide me from that perspective. There were some down sides to it, too.  She was terribly religious, and I'm not. Christianity, at least, I'm not. And, but, her main strength was a convincing, compelling reason for doing things a little bit differently from what I was doing, and punishment with her was more like talking to, than the switch. Mom was the opposite.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No tolerance for that kind of behavior. And you know, the two weren't, the two were very important. The regimented punishment was also positive, had a positive effect and influence on me. Would I have survived without it? Probably not. But one never knows how these things come together and, you know, to make a human being. If we knew how to do that, life would be different, wouldn't it?
Speaker 1: Yes sir.
Story_ID: 25663
Speaker 1: Can you describe where you grew up, and what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Yeah. As I mentioned earlier, my early years in Farmville, Virginia were sort of in a family commune, two houses with two separate families, but multiple generations were present.  And we were very poor people, but I thought we were extremely rich. And I thought we were extremely rich because of the love and guidance that I got from all of my relatives, including my grandparents on my father's side, who were on a farm that was about fifteen miles from the small town. And that was my summer camp, where I spent the summers sucking tobacco and picking corn, and whatever else that had to be done around the farm. But one of the very, one of the things I remember very well is that the street that we lived on, right across the street from there, was this wonderful elementary school. And when they were preparing me to go to school, I thought that was where I was going to go to school. But no, that's not the way it worked, because it was a white school. I had to go, gee, what is it, I don't know, probably fifteen city blocks would be a good estimate of how far away it was. And this was a shack compared to the school that I thought I was going to go to. And my two first cousins, female, and who grew up next door to me, Edwina and Edna, the bathroom was exposed. So, they had to learn to control their bodily waste mechanisms to not to have to use them during the school time, because of the inadequate things. I have more new books at home than I ever saw at school, because everything that I got in school was umpteen years and well- used by white people. But my first four or five years of school were all taught by either real relatives or people that I thought were my relatives. And some of them really were, but some of them weren't. But you know, we didn't distinguish between those two. And I learned there what it meant to be totally plugged in, because you couldn't get away with anything. So, you know, my mom knew what I'd done before I did sometimes, knew what I was going to do before I knew. There may be another way to put it, but, what else? I also remember the--and I couldn't understand it, the tremendous difference between how my family related to white people and how they related to black people. And I didn't know the word hypocritical, but I thought they were extremely hypocritical. Because it was, in their face was "Yes sir, boss. No sir, boss." And as soon as they got out of earshot, they had some other very nice words that they used to describe that person. (laughter). So, I had considerable confusion about what all of that meant. But it was the way of the land. I find it very interesting today that this kind of gun control is a very big issue, but when I grew up, everybody carried guns. And they did because that was their only protection, because police weren't protecting them. My father said, "If a policeman is on one side of the road and you cross, you just don't want it to come to that. They're not your friends, no matter what you read. They're your enemy." And so, that's how I grew up.
Story_ID: 25664
Speaker 1: Now, you mentioned church, and said that you kind of, you didn't really, at some point you didn't believe in--
Speaker 2: That too, is kind of the story, you know.  When I got home from school--they found out very early in my life that the best thing for me was to keep me busy. As long as I had something to do, I was less likely to get into trouble. Not to say that I couldn't get into trouble with whatever I had to do--but right from school--and then I had my chores around my uncle's office to do. And in the same building there was a general practitioner, Dr. Baker. And Dr. Baker made house calls. And so, I finished my work as quickly as I could so that I could go with him on his next house call, because he was out near Oakland, and that was much better for me. And Dr. Baker died. And this is a man that I saw take care of people for a dozen eggs, for a chicken, for whatever the people could give. My uncle did the same thing, in terms of dentistry. He fixed a lot of people for whatever they could pay.
Speaker 1: What was your uncle's name?
Speaker 2: Nathan Payton Miller.
Speaker 1: Okay. Was your brother named after your uncle?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did your--now, Dr. Baker, I assume, was a black dentist--doctor, right?
Speaker 2: Doctor.
Speaker 1: Do you know where they went to school, where your uncle went?
Speaker 2: Yeah. We all started at Hampton University. And he got, he finished dental school at Northwestern University.
Speaker 1: Okay. Do you know where Dr. Baker went to school?
Speaker 2: Meharry [Medical College].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, anyway, when Dr. Baker died, it just didn't compute for me, because why would 'J.C.' [Jesus Christ] take the life of a person that to me was the closest to a God, so to speak. I mean, you know, he did all of the things that Sunday School taught me, that a person ought to be able to be pious, alright? And the local minister, Baptist, nor my grandfather, nor anyone, could explain this to me, you know. Why would this happen, you know? All the people and all the bad people that I knew, white people, how come you take this guy who was really everything that--? When, he was a servant of the people; I guess that's the best way. And even the head guy from the Baptist church, who was stationed in Washington, tried to explain that to me, and he failed. And, so, from that time on, it was very hard for me to have any faith. In fact, as I developed and grew older, I began seeing religion as a control system instead of, you know, what's it's made out to be. It's really a method of controlling people. And that's the way I view it today.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, how old were you when you figured that out?
Speaker 2: About twelve. When I figured out the control thing, I know this evolved.
Speaker 1: Okay, but--
Speaker 2: But I was about twelve years old when Dr. Baker died.
Speaker 1: Okay. When Dr. Baker died, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, the equation didn't add up for someone who's trying to learn how things work. It didn't really add up.
Speaker 2: Right. And everything for me always had to be logical, which drove people crazy. If it wasn't logical, there was no way you could convince me that I was--
Story_ID: 25665
Speaker 1: Now, is there--now, what was the name of your school?
Speaker 2: The Robert R. Morton Elementary and High School.
Speaker 1: Robert R., is it Moten, M-O-T-E-N?
Speaker 2: It's either M-O-T-O-N or M-O-R-T-O-N. I don't, I think it's M-O-R-T-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay. The reason why I'm asking is because Robert Russa Moton was a successor of Booker T. Washington--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --a very famous figure.
Speaker 2: Yeah. I think that's who the school is named after.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: So, the way people might have pronounced it, you know, in Virginia it could have come out Morton or--(laughter), or any number of things.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: But that's, yeah, something to think about.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know this because I was invited to give the commencement address recently at the school, so I looked it up then.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, Robert Russa Moton. Now, when you were in school, was there any, did you, was there any teacher or any adult that had an influence on you, you think, in terms of logic and approach to problem-solving?
Speaker 2: Yeah. I think there were quite a few that had an influence there. As I said, the secret for me was to keep me busy, and people knew that if I got five minutes, my head was going to figure out something to do to disrupt somebody's life.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so, I got a chance to do a whole lot of extra work. And mathematics and the sciences were far more interesting to me than history and philosophy.
Speaker 1: Now, we were talking to a science educator yesterday, and she was here for science and activity in exploration, hands on exploration--being the key to science.
Speaker 2: Yes, uh huh.
Speaker 1: And you were doing that every time you could. (laughter).
Speaker 2: Sure, sure. I mean, this was not a part of my early life. I had a passion for fast cars, and I really wanted to race. And I came close to getting a car ready for the track. And my first wife will tell you that the whole house was just scattered with parts of my Porsche that I took apart and rebuilt. So, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's what you do. So--
Speaker 2: That's what I do, exactly.
Speaker 1: Alright, alright. So, I just wondered, if, she also--the lady yesterday also said that a lot of, especially in the early days, a lot of black schools didn't have the resources, laboratory resources, or the instruments like microscopes and even tools, or dissecting tools, to explore, you know, hands on exploration.
Speaker 2: We--my mother moved us to Hampton [Virginia], I guess when I was about fourteen. And I went to George P. Phoenix High School in Hampton, which was a teaching school for Hampton University. And there, it was, I mean the difference was like, the nearest comparison I could make was what I thought the school that was right across the street from me would look like on the inside, compared to the one that I attended. Phoenix was, you know, it had all those things that you just described: microscopes and labs and so forth, which, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, back at Robert Russa Moton, did you, were there any particular teachers and things that you, I mean, that you remember by name that had--
Speaker 2: Well, I can remember a lot of their names. Miss Enn, who was my first grade teacher--or let's see, Dorothy Warren, I'm not coming up with any other names right now. Some may creep in.
Speaker 1: Now, this is, you all had like a small, you said it looked like a small kind of a shack that the school was.
Speaker 2: The building was a brick building, it just didn't have anything in it. You know, even the bathrooms were outside. I think it was made of brick. Everything was made of brick in Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So, you were there until, did you go to school there until you moved to Hampton?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 25666
Speaker 1: Now, let me, before we take you to Hampton [Virginia], there was something that happened when you were eight years old. One thing was that you hit your foot with a shovel and it messed up your trip to the World's Fair. This was 1939?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: But the other thing that I read about, and correct me if I'm wrong, you almost electrocuted yourself, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did.
Speaker 1: Now, tell us about that. You were eight years old, and you were trying to take something loose.
Speaker 2: Well, this is one of those things--and somebody had thrown a radio away. And so, you know, I thought I had fixed it. And, you know, electricity was not as, I mean, outlets to plug things in were not in those old houses. The only outlet came from the light in the ceiling. And this was on a nice August day, and hot and humid, and it was a brass bed. So I climbed up on the flip board--well, both ends had these poles with rods going back and forth. And, I climbed up there to plug this thing in, and got stuck there. And--
Speaker 1: So, was the cord frayed or something, or was it just--
Speaker 2: It was just the fact that--I don't know what I did. You know, I grabbed the socket and I had the radio thing and was ready to plug it in. And all of a sudden, it was [buzzing sound], and you know, I was stuck there.
Speaker 1: Was the socket just hanging down on a wire?
Speaker 2: No, it was closed in, you know. There were no exposed wires. It's just that somehow I got connected there, probably through the frayed wire on the radio that I was plugging in. I was just glad that my brother knocked me off of the--
Speaker 1: Well, he knocked you off the bed?
Speaker 2: He knocked me down, yeah. That was my older brother that did that, my half brother.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, were you, did it knock you completely out, or was there any type of injuries?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, I never passed out. I was very conscious of the whole thing. But the one thing that it did, it said I had to understand electricity. And today, I can go in a socket and re-wire it without turning the main off, because I know how AC floats, and DC, for that matter.
Speaker 1: Now, you grew up in an age--I know my grandmother was born in 1901. And she was afraid of electricity, you know. But when I knew her, by the time I knew her, she was always around it. She didn't want us to touch the TV antenna, because she thought it might give us a big Afro or something, you know. So, you know, did you hear that kind of, you know, fear around electricity when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Obviously not, (laughter) but I, you know--
Speaker 1: But were adults kind of fearful of it, or--
Speaker 2: No, I wasn't. I mean, I didn't know it could hurt you, until I got shocked. And after that, my cousin, Edward Allen, we eventually--in fact I started working with him when I was about twelve years old, wiring rural houses, putting electricity in, in the rural area. And I was small enough to crawl under the crawl space in these houses, to carry the wire. That was one of my major jobs, but yeah. In fact, he says he knew then that I was headed for big things, because after one day on the job I began to think of better ways of doing it. Rather than having to crawl under there and, you know, like--why don't we get a dog, and train a dog to crawl? (laughter). In other words, I didn't, it wasn't that I didn't like the work, but I wanted someone else to do the dirty work. I didn't mind scraping the wires down and preparing them for the socket, but crawling under those dirty spaces was not that attractive.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, you could have been, I guess, turning away from electricity, by being shocked like that, but you went right back.
Speaker 2: I had to know. You know, it's--and I mean, the unfortunate experience is still alive, you know, and things that happened that I don't understand, I have to figure them out. I have to learn. And that's essentially what led to some of the discoveries that I made, you know, the curiosity. Well, why does nature behave in that way? You know, what are the compelling parameters around the way nature behaves? And how can I better understand the physical principles that I'm dealing with? You know, it's still a big part of my life.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Story_ID: 25667
Speaker 1: It seems like you were seeking out, like, mentors, like Dr. Baker--
Speaker 2: The best thing in my life have been mentors. There's absolutely no doubt about it, throughout. And it's one of the things that I stress in any talks to young people today--the importance of mentorship, mentoring and being mentored is vital to anyone's success.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, Dr. Baker--your cousin, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah, my uncle, my family. And, yeah, I would say that I've been very lucky, in that whatever--and I'm not sure what it was--but it was sort of a magnet for people, maybe it was the questions that I asked, because I always had loads of questions. You know, people, some people would see me coming and go in the other direction, because they didn't want to be tied up for half an hour answering my questions. And there were many people who took the time to deal with my questions, to help me out. Even--and not that I was not a--in many cases, all they would say is why don't you read this book? Had the internet existed, I probably would have been a very pleasant kid, because I wouldn't have bugged people as much as I did, and probably still do.
Speaker 1: And you said your grandmother got you in the library, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. She, you know, I went with her on some of her--her hours were not regular. Sometimes it was, you know, after ten o'clock. Sometimes it was early in the morning, you know, I think. Yeah, but a couple of times I did get the chance to go with her.
Speaker 1: Alright. Now, was this a segregated library?
Speaker 2: This is a white only library.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: This is at the college.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: This is at Longwood?
Speaker 2: Longwood College.
Speaker 1: Longwood College?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 25668
Speaker 1: So, how were your grades in school?
Speaker 2: How was what?
Speaker 1: How were your grades in elementary school?
Speaker 2: Initially, very good. I skipped some grades. It was possible in those days. Later on, good only in those subjects that I thought were important. If I didn't think it was important, I didn't spend much time on it.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So, any--how did it come that your mother moved to Hampton [Virginia]?
Speaker 2: Because of the condition of the public schools in Farmville [Virginia]. She wanted something better for us, and there's a history here, too. Because at about that time, this business of separate but equal was coming up. They, my uncle was on the school board, I remember that. And they tried to convince the county that they needed to do something to improve the schools, but apparently to no avail. And so, that was when my mother decided that we had to get out of there. I didn't like it very much, because it was a big change for me initially, but it grew on me.
Speaker 1: Okay. You say your uncle was on the school board in Prince Edward County?
Speaker 2: In Farmville, yeah.
Speaker 1: In Farmville?
Speaker 2: Uh huh, Prince Edward County. I think it was--I don't think it was the city, I always remember it as a county school. So, I could be wrong, but I know that he certainly served on the school board. But, whether it was the county school board or the city school board, I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: Okay. I think it was the county, but I don't--
Speaker 2: I think it's county, at that time, anyway.
Speaker 1: This your Uncle Nathaniel, right?
Speaker 2: Pardon?
Speaker 1: Your Uncle Nathaniel?
Speaker 2: Nathan.
Speaker 1: Nathan?
Speaker 2: Nathaniel, yeah, that's right.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright. He was on the school board. So, black people could serve on the school board?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess the answer is yes. But I think it's probably like the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], probably still is, in that the board of directors basically are white, with a few token black people there. And I just know it was very frustrating for him, because I don't think they were able to accomplish much, because I think the white people figured whatever niggers had, that was all they needed, and didn't want to give them anymore.
Speaker 1: So, this is a crisis. The schools were supposed to be by law, separate but equal. But they were not.
Speaker 2: They were separate and unequal for the most part, yeah.
Speaker 1: This is the issue that the NAACP and Thurgood Marshall and a whole law team was trying to fight.
Speaker 2: Yes. In fact, right, most of my relatives who were teachers in that community lost their jobs. What happened was when Prince Edward County decided to close all public schools, they created private schools for the white population and nothing for the black students.
Speaker 1: Now let's get a time fix on this thing. This isn't while you were a kid, right? This is a little bit later?
Speaker 2: But it all started--you see, this is sort of the genesis of it, the fact that the facilities were so bad that the black people in the community were trying to get at least modern books and some modern equipment in those schools. And this is when I think, and here again, I don't know for sure, because I was a little bit young. But the way I look at this in retrospect, my uncle and one other person, black person, were put on the board to try to fix this problem. But there was no fix that the black people on the board could perfect. I mean, you know, two votes out of ten or nine or how many members on the board. They just couldn't persuade the rest of the people that it was to the advantage of the world to be able to educate people, you know. We still don't get that, you know, to a large extent in this country. You know, it's hard for people to believe that the solution to clean and free energy could well be in the heads of one of these children right here in the city of Baltimore, which will never come out, unless we do something to provide that kid with the knowledge and the background and the opportunities that will allow he or she, for that matter, to develop those concepts.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 25669
Speaker 1: But Prince--I mean, the Moton School [Robert R. Moton Elementary School] was still open when you and your mother moved to--
Speaker 2: It was still open for a few years, even after we moved away. But the fire, you know, it was Reverend Johns, who was on the board of education with my uncle.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he's a very famous person from that era of civil rights.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Vernon Johns.
Speaker 2: Vernon Johns, exactly. Yeah, I grew up with his daughters who live right down here near [Washington] D.C. now.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, he was on the school board with your uncle?
Speaker 2: Yep, yep.
Speaker 1: And Vernon Johns was the pastor who preceded Martin Luther King in Montgomery, Alabama.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: He was really--there's been a movie made about him, and James Earl Jones--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: He's just a remarkable figure in history.
Speaker 2: Yeah. I knew him very well.
Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have any stories about him?
Speaker 2: Do I have any what?
Speaker 1: Any stories about him?
Speaker 2: Not really. Even thinking--I remember George Washington Carver--because the community in the south, there weren't many people who had an opportunity to even go to high school, for that matter, black people. And the community of those who did was kind of a tightly knit group of people. And they met frequently. I think probably it was the beginning of organizations like the Black Panther Party, SNCC [Student Non-violent Coordinating Committee]. They just didn't have names at that time. And in most cases, the work was done under the auspices of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. But even there, it was not, it was less than an ideal situation, because the NAACP--and I haven't followed it recently, so I don't know--but at that time, the organization promoted these little chapters, you know. If you lived in, belonged to the formal chapter, if a chapter exists, you didn't talk to the chapter in Petersburg [Virginia] or in Richmond [Virginia], which were, you know, these organizations were sort of pitted against each other, rather than working together. "Worry about your own community, and let the rest of it go", which is a defeatist attitude from the standpoint of making progress. I don't think that we, as a part of this country, really made any progress until we went beyond the standard organizations that really, really taught, "Know your place and stay in it."
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now, Reverend--just one thing about Reverend--one of the stories about Reverend Johns you kind of hear, is that he could quote these passages right out of Shakespeare and the Bible.
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely, absolutely. Yeah, he's, there was a commercial when--I don't remember, but something to do with Burma Shave (laughter). Sorry, I don't remember that, but we used to, that was our little tease on him. Because he always had a lot to talk about, and very interesting things to talk about. And so, he was a very easy person to listen to. I remember that much about him.
Speaker 1: Okay. I think it was his niece, I believe, that filed one of the first lawsuits, I guess, I think, against the county, or the state of Virginia.
Speaker 2: His daughter, I think it was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Enid, if I'm not mistaken, filed the first, was among the people, along with my cousins, were among the people that filed that first--there's a movie on that, too, that describes that whole series.
Speaker 1: Right.
Story_ID: 25670
Speaker 1: What was the name of the school, the high school?
Speaker 2: George P. Phoenix High School.
Speaker 1: Okay. Phoenix, like the bird?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Which no longer exists.
Speaker 1: Okay. And they had everything that you had dreamt of?
Speaker 2: No. (laughter). But they certainly, I mean, it was like moving from poverty to Fifth Avenue, from the standpoint of the quality of the school. The principal was white when I was there, Dr. Botts. I remember him because he had me in his office many, many times. In fact, he probably saved me, by assigning me to the, I hate to say it, chemistry department, because I didn't know any chemistry (laughter). But I had some jobs there that I could go to. You know, it's really interesting from--and I know I'm digressing here, but let me do it, because it may be somewhat important:  My wife's a special ed teacher. And in describing her--because I'll never forget. We were having dinner, and she had the newspaper in front of her. And she said, "You know, I have one kid that can't read unless it's upside down." And I said, "I can do that." And I just looked over and started reading the paper. And she said, "You can do that, too?" I said, "Yeah." I said, "All of the things that you talk about your kids, that was me." And if I had come along today, I probably would have been classified, put in the stupid class, with no opportunity to advance. Because my mother often says, you know, for me, eating was a problem, because I couldn't sit down long enough to finish the meals. So, I would just walk around the table and eat from everybody, because I had to be on the move. I had to--dyslexia--dyslexic, I am. But ADD [Attention Deficit Disorder], I probably am, too. (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. But they didn't give you any medications?
Speaker 2: Prozac and that stuff didn't exist in those days.
Speaker 1: You could manage it with parenting and--
Speaker 2: I managed it with work, which I think...  But the point is that--and I think this is really true--that we penalize creativity. And so, if you have someone who's the least bit creative, they get put off, and given drugs, to settle down and become more quote "normal." And what is--normality here is a hoax. It's a figment of someone's imagination, that this is the way people ought to behave. You know, this is the way kids ought to behave. And philosophically, I totally disagree with that. And even some very successful programs that I've worked on, demonstrate this as a norm. I was on, I served on the board of directors for the National Inventors Hall of Fame for ten years.  And part of that was because the director kept asking me what made me different when I was inducted into the Inventors Hall of Fame? And there was a disclaimer for me, because I'm normal and I like to think of myself as normal. But he kept at it, and he did this to all of the inductees to find out, what motivated you? What were the things that got you excited? And we started a school in Akron, Ohio--going on the fourth year right now--where it is very definitely hands-on. It's based on all of the things that he derived from famous people, people who have made a difference in the world, from the standpoint of technology. And he's integrated these principles into this school. And the students are selected by a lottery, and 42% are below the poverty level. It doesn't mean that this 42% is black. Ohio's got a lot of poor white people, too. And in the first year, the students in that school topped number three of all the schools, including private schools, in the city of Akron. There's a whole bunch of private schools in the city of Akron. I never taught to the test, but used methods that David Think extracted from inductees into the Inventors Hall of Fame.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Sorry for taking you off on that journey, but--
Speaker 1: Yeah, but that's something. So, this school started around 2008, I guess, four years ago?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay. Is there a word, is there a term for what they do? I mean--
Speaker 2: I don't know whether there's a term for it. It's a, I think it comes under the charter school.
Speaker 1: Do you know the name of it? Can you give us the name of it?
Speaker 2: I can find out for you.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Speaker 2: Go to this website, and it'll give you the name of it. It's Akron something, something, something. I just don't know what--
Speaker 1: What website is it?
Speaker 2: Akron, A-K-R-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's the School Center for Science and Technology Engineering and Mathematics Learning.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Now, that was well worth it, I think. Anybody watching this would want to know something about this school.
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Story_ID: 25671
Speaker 1: Okay. So, at [George P.] Phoenix High School. Now, did you have, what was your social life like at school? Did you have friends, and did you join clubs and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Not really. I'm not a joiner. And I had two buddies that I mainly hung out with. And we got into all sorts of trouble, like borrowing wire from the telephone lock and stringing our own telephones between our homes, because we weren't permitted to use the house phone. I mean, we could use it, but it had to be an emergency. And you may get one call a day, but we wanted to talk, and so--
Speaker 1: So, you knew how to tap into the phone system and everything?
Speaker 2: No, we strung our own wires.
Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah, but were you tapped into the regular phone system?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: (laughter). Not a good story to tell. The phone company may still want to come after me, for some of those things. (laughter). I don't know what my father did to get us out of that problem, trouble, but we did get into trouble with that. My father figured a way out.
Speaker 1: Was this one of your meetings with Dr. Botts?
Speaker 2: No, that wasn't. That was a meeting with my main mentor in high school, Reverend Dr. Gladden, who taught math at Phoenix. And we lived next door.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I, I always felt that he and my mother had some signals going. Because I could get home from school and do whatever chores I had to do, and homework, and then I'd have a little time to play. And as soon as I hit the back door, there was Dr. Gladden, scratching a little place in the sand. And we'd draw geometric figures and describe them. And he, he really was the first rapper, from my standpoint (laughter). Because he used to rap these axioms, you know, when he talked about the components of geometric shapes. And so, I guess I could do calculus before I knew what the word was.
Speaker 1: That's something, okay. Did they even teach calculus at Hampton High School? I mean, at the high school there, at Phoenix? Did they formally teach it, as such?
Speaker 2: I think the highest was--it wasn't called calculus. It was called analytical geometry. Yeah, I think analytical geometry was what it was called. But I could be wrong there. That kind of rings--
Speaker 1: But Dr. Gladden taught you calculus?
Speaker 2: Well, he didn't teach me. He didn't, you know, say I'm going to teach you calculus--but in determining area and other geometric shapes--so it's calculus. And I mean, we didn't write in the form of derivatives, but we were doing derivatives anyway. So--
Speaker 1: Okay. So, this is, so you were really getting prepared for your life's work in calculus.
Speaker 2: I guess to some extent that was the--I mean, it was the preparation. But it was good and it was bad, because at some point I figured out that I could learn much better on my own than anybody could teach me.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, so were you on the Honor Roll in high school?
Speaker 2: Sometimes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Sometimes, but it wasn't anything that I--you know... I even say to students here: "Look, my problems are the problems that I ask you to solve. I'm not asking you to solve them for a grade, because this would mean that there's a singleton answer to this problem, and it's not. It can be multiple correct answers to any problem. And the more important thing is not your grade, but what did you learn on the way, you know? Even if things don't work, you can still get a grade from me, because it's not what I'm after. What I'm after is, you know, what did you understand? What did you discover? What did you contribute to the solution to a particular problem?" But we don't teach that way in high school. Hopefully, one of these days we will. And I'm involved here in programs that are designed--where we're looking at how to teach them to start in the fifth grade. We just got NSF [National Science Foundation] funding, pretty sizeable funding, to begin to work with the public schools in Baltimore [Maryland], to see if we can improve the... I find it very interesting. And if you listen to President [Barack] Obama's speech, State of Union, one of the things that was said there is that we have to, you know, not only do they have to train our own, but we have to really lower the barriers of people who want to come to this country--immigrants, visas. We have to lower those boundaries. And, you know, I was thinking about that thing last night. Like, two years ago at Bell Labs, I imported people from Europe, with no trouble at all. Visas were like that. I mean, you know, they just happened. And so, what's the difference? Why have these laws changed? Why is it difficult now to get an H-1 visa, for example? And I'm forced to believe it's because of the color of the people that are asking to come to this country. So, that whole thing has completely flipped over, where it has--I mean, one short letter, and yes, I will pay this person to work for me for the next year. Boom, approved. And now, people are waiting ten, fifteen years to get to this country. I'm not talking about--I'm talking about educated people from Mexico, from South America, from Africa, from India. They can't get here.
Story_ID: 25672
Speaker 1: Did I come--I can't, you know, yeah, I spent quite of, a lot of time, still spend a lot of time trying to figure nature out. And asking, you know, why do I have nerve degeneration, which is my physical problem? And the mechanical part has been fixed. It's just that the growth of the nerves is very slow. It doesn't have to be that way, because if I had the money and trusted, I could go to another small country and get embryonic stem cell treatment. But why isn't it here, you know? Why can't I get it here, are questions that... And I'm not saying that some of the reasons for not being able to do this are not very valid, you know, but some of them are just, you know, it's thinking from two centuries ago, that's controlling this, you know. But, you know, everybody has to live and everybody has to survive, and we have to meet somewhere in the middle. And some of these cases, it's skewed too far to the right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I hope these policies can be, you know, worked out, where we have more people who can make a contribution coming in and add more access than we have today.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But I was thinking, I was wondering, if in high school, if you invented anything in high school?
Speaker 1: Not that I can think of, no.
Speaker 2: I know the phone thing is unusual. How many high school students tap into the phone line and you, know, do that?
Speaker 1: Well, yeah, but, we got, the three of us, got into a mindset that's really hard to describe. The only way I can do it is by example. Dick Tracey was a big drawing card. And we said, you know, after reading and looking at Dick Tracey, we figured out two things. Not only were the crooks stupid, but so was Dick Tracey. And so, we had a contest between the three of us, of who could get the most and the biggest thing out of the five and ten cents store without paying for it. (laughter). So, I was, this was at Hampton, you know, and I was a big time thief, in terms of you know, figuring ways to get stuff out of there, you know. Can I get out of there with a broom? You know, a thimble and the buttons and those small items were duck soup. They were not even challenging, you know. After a while, I learned how to, we learned how to hide those. So, I was storing my stuff in the loft above the garage, and my older brother found it and wanted to know what was going on. And he busted us, and blew the whole thing up before we really got caught. (laughter). And I've been lucky in that sense, that I got caught before things got to the point where there's no--well, I didn't get end up in jail, I guess is the best way to put it.
Speaker 2: Right, because you would have been on--that problem solving path might have, you might have ended up being the kind of genius that cracked safes and--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm sure that would have been--my favorite stuff now, to read, is things where people do the unordinary things to figure out how to break systems that are supposedly impermeable.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 25673
Speaker 1: So, now, when you were on the verge of graduating from Hampton [George P. Phoenix High School], what was, did you have counseling about, or did you have an idea about--were you set on going to college there, too, at Hampton?
Speaker 2: I had my office. My uncle built a clinic when I was about ten years old in Farmville [Virginia]. He built an office for my brother and for me. So, I was destined for med school before I got out of high school. And so--
Speaker 1: Pre-med was the--
Speaker 2: I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: Pre-med, I guess, was your college direction, that you took in college?
Speaker 2: Yeah, until I just knew that that wasn't what I wanted to do, and I switched to physics.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now did, you were drafted, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah. And that was because the only, my only competitive sport was swimming. And I wanted to, I'd been accepted to Wilberforce [University], which is on a quarterly system--because I was ROTC at Hampton. As soon as I dropped out that half semester, I got my call to duty.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It took them awhile to catch up with me, but--
Speaker 1: About what year is this? Is this 1950, or so?
Speaker 2: Yeah, somewhere around there.
Speaker 1: Okay. We have on our outline it's 1950, but I thought I'd ask.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's probably as close as you're going to get.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, you were going to Wilberforce to study pre-med?
Speaker 2: No, no. I wanted to, I wanted to get out of pre-med. I wanted to--and, you know, basically, my father in particular, told me that I was taking too long--to work in the post office or on the railroad with them. If that's what I wanted to do, why the hell bother going to school, because that's where I was going to end up, you know. You know, he taught me about physics and science because--and he introduced me to two black people with Ph.D.'s who were working in the post office, a Pullman on the railroad. And the reason is, they could have gotten high school--you know, they could teach in high school, but you couldn't support a family. I mean, those were much lower wages than they were making in the post office. But they could not, even Ph.D.'s, they could not get a job in what they had been trained for. And so, he thought I was going down that same path.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, when you're drafted in 1950, you are--well, were you taken by surprise when you were drafted?
Speaker 2: Yeah, of course, it was a surprise. I hadn't given it a thought, you know. It was not on my radar. But that's what happened.
Speaker 1: Well, where were you trained?
Speaker 2: I remember two places: Fort Meade, Maryland and Fort Knox, Kentucky. And then Korea. I don't think it was in that order. No, it was in that order. First to Fort Meade and then to Fort Knox and then from Fort Knox to Korea.
Story_ID: 25674
Speaker 1: Now, how did you like the Army? Here's someone, you've got, you're sort of ADD [Attention Deficit Disorder], you like to, you think kind of out of the box, and you're in the Army where you're regimented and you've got--how did you take to it?
Speaker 2: Very bad. I didn't like it. But I learned to, you know, it's kind of interesting. Indoctrination can change your mind, in terms of value of the human life, for sure. And, you know, I had my mind changed. The propaganda definitely worked. But I think deep down, I never totally bought into that. And I don't remember how long I was in the Army, but it was less than two years before I figured a way out. I didn't intend to get out that way, but I was plotting my way out from the time I got in.
Speaker 1: Now, you were wounded in Korea?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: I know when I saw a Purple Heart--and that means you were wounded.
Speaker 2: I've got two of those, if I'm not mistaken.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, was that, did the wounds have anything to do with you getting out?
Speaker 2: They did, yes. But it was not intentional. It was not something where I said I'm going to go and get shot in order to get out of here, although I know people who did.
Speaker 1: So, what happened? Tell us what happened.
Speaker 2: The first time, was a place called Christmas Hill. And this is on the 38th parallel. Was it above Solar Tucson? I don't remember the geography exactly, but I was on patrol, and someone tripped a mine that went off and I got hit on the side. And the guy who heard it, I didn't hear it bounce, but it did knock me down, which probably saved my life.
Speaker 1: So, you were knocked down by this--
Speaker 2: I was knocked down by the person who didn't make out too well. He got it worse than I did. That was kind of a strange situation, because I'm not sure how this happened, except they shaved me, my head, when they finally caught up with me. I didn't go voluntarily, although I was drafted. And I wouldn't answer any questions for them, you know. What wasn't on paper, didn't, they didn't get from me. And so, I was the only black person in my outfit. And I think they thought, they didn't think I was black or whatever, I just don't know. The circumstances--once I was in--the people that I was with knew, because they--it wasn't a pleasant environment there for a long time and--
Speaker 1: This is the first, the early integration of the Army, right? The Army was just integrated--
Speaker 2: I guess. I don't know.
Speaker 1: It was completely segregated before 1949, I think.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. But anyway, I was befriended by a white guy from Alabama. And, you know, some things that people say, never leave you. And so, and I don't know, he was from Mobile [Alabama], or some city in Alabama. And he told me once when we were shooting the bull, he said that--and I mean, there's a lot of things that brought about that, because war puts you in a position to have to trust people, and there were various ways of building trust and finding trust. And one of them was to fight each other. And this guy from Alabama said that if he saw me in his home town in Alabama, he said he would do the same thing he'd do right here in Korea. And he put his arms around me and hugged me and kissed me, because we were buddies. And he didn't care what racism said, that that was the way he felt. So, maybe I got a few converts along the way, to look at everybody as human beings and not as black and white. But, yeah, this one thing I remember, that comment. But that's part of my life I don't generally talk about. And I don't because it took me a long time to undo a lot of things that were done to me mentally in situations. And once you put those to bed, you don't want to wake them up.
Speaker 1: Yeah. I've met, all the Korean veterans I met growing up in life now had been wounded, first of all physically, and have other issues, too.
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: I mean, all the black veterans, I haven't met one who hasn't been wounded yet in Korea.
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: It was a bloody war, there's no doubt about it, on both sides. I've done some things that I'm not proud of, too.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, you were there less than two years, and came--
Speaker 2: I was in the Army less than two years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, well, not all those were spent in Korea, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, almost all of it was spent in Korea, because with ROTC I was--through whatever training--I had to do very quickly because I knew how to handle a gun, and a whole bunch of stuff that they, you know, that you learn in boot camp.
Story_ID: 25675
Speaker 1: So, when you came back from Korea, did you go to school right away?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, you went to Temple [University], in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, why Temple? Why not seek out Wilberforce [University], since you're--
Speaker 2: I think probably one reason is because for the first time in my life in the Army, I was not around relatives. And I missed that. I had relatives in Philadelphia that I could live with. And so, I took that route, because it was more comfortable to me than--
Speaker 1: Okay. So, Temple University?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: 1953, and you majored in solid state physics.
Speaker 2: Just physics. Take the solid state out.
Speaker 1: I'll scratch it out. Alright. So, physics. Well, who was your, did you have an advisor or mentors or teachers there?
Speaker 2: I only remember one, Dr. Mantle, M-A-N-T-L-E. He was the only one that I can remember from that. That wasn't the best experience in my life, either, because I always seemed to wind up being the only black person, you know, and that's still true today, which is really a sad story about technology. Black people are less than five percent of the science engineering and technical workforce in this country. So, that means that the collision frequency between black people is very rare. And so, in general, I mean right here, there are just two of us in the whole Whiting School of Engineering [Johns Hopkins University]. And the other one is not even a U.S. black. He's black, but he's not from this country. So, since I'm the only black person on the faculty in engineering--
Speaker 1: The only African-American, anyway, yeah.
Speaker 2: 2013, right. So, let's see. I've forgotten why I was going into that singleton thing. What was the question?
Speaker 1: I was asking you about teachers and--
Speaker 2: Right. And, you know, one thing that you learn very quickly in physics is that independent work is not the norm. The study groups--and you know, where people get together to jointly solve these problems. And it was really hard for me to get into a group of students, to get accepted into a group of students. And so, I didn't hang with them, you know, with the scientific people. I hung out with the political science people, but there were more black people in there.
Story_ID: 25676
Speaker 1: Now, you interned at Bell Labs during the summer breaks?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay. It seemed like a good place to go for the summer.
Speaker 2: Well, here again, somewhere along the line, I learned to read the bulletin board and apply for anything that I saw on the bulletin board. What I found out is that if you apply for one, you can apply for ten. It just costs you ten more stamps, because they all ask the same questions, they all want to know the same thing. So, you get a good resume and you put it together and then you just put it out there. And I answered an ad, and they said, "Why don't you come on up for a summer?" So, I did. What do you want to do?" "I don't know." "Well, why don't we put you in the acoustics research department?" I said, "Okay, that sounds as good as anything else." And more specifically, there's a group that's trying to determine the interaural time delay. And I didn't know what that was at the time, but it's the--if I give you a short pulse of sound, what is the separation between that pulse and a second pulse before you resolve two clicks? If it's too close to each other, you hear only one. And then if you move one out relative to the other, at some point you'll hear click, click instead of click, or however it may be distorted. It turns out what they were trying to do was figure out the integration time of the ear. It turns it to be about 15 milliseconds. And they were using condenser microphones as headphones. And only a finite number of people could hear those clicks, because this thing is one inch in diameter, so it couldn't generate much sound in the ear. And so, the people that they could test were very few. And they said, "What can you do to help this group to be able to measure more people's interaural time delay? And so, I said "Okay, that sounds like a good problem. I don't know anything about it, but I know where the library is." So, I went to the library, and I found a German paper, a paper from a group in Germany who had come up with these solid dielectric headphones, and you could make them almost any size you want it. And so, I read the first part of the paper and went to the machine shop and drew some stuff up, and had them build and put these headphones together. And I needed a 500-volt battery to make these things work. But they worked beautifully. And I got my gold star, you know, right away, which is always nice. I mean, you know, if people think you're smart, then you are smart. So, self-fulfilling prophesy. So, they thought that I was really a very bright person, because I came up with the solution and helped these people measure this important parameter.
Speaker 1: So, you're still a student at this point?
Speaker 2: I'm still a student, right.
Speaker 1: At Temple?
Speaker 2: Yeah. And so, I went back to school. And in November, I got a call and it said, "You know, the sensitivity of these devices has gone to near zero. We don't understand what's going on here." So, um. So, I went back and read the second half of the paper. And sure enough, Kuhl, Schodder and Schroeder say, "You know, these things work real well, but at some point you have to reverse the polarity of the battery in order for them to work." But that wasn't the solution to this problem, because they wanted the pulse with a certain vector, and if you reversed the polarity of the battery, the pulse will go in the opposite direction.  And so, they sent me a ticket. I said, "Well, I'll come and take a look at it." They sent me a ticket, and I went back up to Merry Hill. And I took the battery out, and I had an oscillating headphone. And the lead between the battery and the headphone--I mean between the headphone and the oscillator--connected, and the thing sang beautifully. So, I said, um, this is really very interesting--oh, it's the capacitor. So, I stored this charge, you know, short-circuited the thing, and plugged it back again across the oscillator. It still worked beautifully. Hmm, what's going on here? Kuhl, Schodder and Schroeder didn't talk about that in their paper, and this really intrigued me. You know, it goes back, again, to getting shocked by electricity. I had to understand why I got shocked. And the same thing happened here. I had to figure out--I couldn't do anything else until I figured out what the heck was going on in that piece of polymer. And there, I learned about electrets. And that, you know, started my collaboration with [Gerhard] Sessler, and we figured it out.
Story_ID: 25677
Speaker 1: So, now we have here that you graduated from Temple [University] in '57' [1957]?
Speaker 2: Something like that, if I graduated. (laughter). That is a big question. I'm a little deceptive as far as how I looked at school, how I treated school. And there's a very good reason. And that is because kids will think they can do the shortcut, too. I wasn't looking for a shortcut. That was not me, that was not what I was looking for. I didn't mind learning, I loved learning, still do. But I want to learn what I want to learn, not what you think I ought to know. And so, this put me in constant conflict with any educational system that you might imagine, you know. There's no such thing as normal education. You need all of these other things. Surely, you do, but it doesn't mean that I have to take a semester course in it to understand probability, right? Give me a book and let me get in that book and see if I can figure it out. Maybe I'll have to ask a few questions, but I'll learn that in a week, when you're going to take a whole semester to teach me.
Speaker 1: There are people that transcend formal education, and... (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, the Bell Labs, they were able to put you to work right away on these problems without having to worry about them.
Speaker 2: When I, when I really began to understand electrets and polarization--and most of the stuff at that time was solid state. It wasn't in amorphous state or polymer state. It was, you know, crystalline materials that reacted in this way. And all of the studies in polymers, with chart storage and transport, or in polarization, have one drawback. And that was the curie temperature, the temperature at which these molecules would relax and go back to some random state, was very low, like 60 to 80 degrees C, which means that you couldn't make a convenient device with, you know, for human beings at those temperatures, because we exist in a temperature range that's much broader than, much higher, than that. And so, my, the question, by the way, there were captured Japanese field equipment from World War II that had electret microphones in them. They didn't have, we didn't know how they worked. They didn't work when we got it, because the lifetime of those devices was something like six months, okay. And so, Sessler and I began to ask ourselves questions around this. Well, what's going on here? What is the relaxation phenomena? What's making this, you know, slight agitation with temperature, making these dipoles randomize again? And so, we took a totally different approach to that. Instead of looking at dipoles, we looked at polymers that had no dipole moment. And we looked at polymers that had loads and loads of traps at various levels. And we figured out how to, in some cases, open these traps, put an electron in, and then close that trap. And then that electron is trapped in that material. This is really what we contributed to the technology. Very interestingly, E. C. Winte invented the condenser microphone in 1917, to replace the carbon microphone, okay. And I don't know whether you know it or not, but the first microphone in the telephone is also attributed to a black inventor, Granville T. Woods. Granville T. Woods sold his patent on the carbon microphone to A.G. Bell, okay. And the carbon microphone was the microphone for telecommunications until Sessler and I. But it wasn't where Bell Labs stopped thinking. In 1917, E.C. Wente invented the condenser microphone to replace the carbon microphone. But the condenser microphone had the drawback in that you required a few hundred volts of bias on that microphone in order for it to be a linear translucent. And what Sessler and I did, was to figure out how to put enough charge, trap enough charge in a thin layer of polymer, so that the field emitted by these trapped electrons was equivalent to the 200 volt battery that was necessary to keep this condenser microphone in a linear form. So, we, by introducing electrets, stable electrets, into this technology, now microphones could be built any size, any shape, without worrying about having to have a high voltage to make them work. Why a condenser microphone? Because it is the only linear microphone available. All other microphones put some sort of distortion into what they're recording, low level distortion. But the condenser microphone is pure, in the sense that we can't measure distortion, that it may be generating.
Story_ID: 25678
Speaker 1: Okay. So, now, Bell Labs. We were just talking about the development of this microphone. But, Bell Labs is always, everybody that's been there talks about how supportive it was, in terms of whatever your work was, the freedom that you have at Bell Labs, to create. What was your impression of Bell Labs?
Speaker 2: It was like the biggest and best sandbox, with every damn toy that you could ever think of. (laughter). That's how I think of Bell Labs, including people to play with. It was an institution--and I'm sorry to say 'was', because it was a pure asset to humanity, when you think of all of the modern inventions that came out of Bell Labs--from the laser, the transistor, LED's, you name it. It's origin most likely came through Bell Labs. There's no place on earth that can rival what equaled Bell Labs. And all you have to do is look at the output, you know, because that's the measure of anything, you know. What was the output? And you taught about all of the major things, like LED's, the transistor and laser, and so forth and so on. The electret microphone, too.  These contributions to the advancement of society should have said to our managing people that, "Hey, regardless of what happens to AT&T, regardless of what happens to Lucent and other organizations that bought into Bell Labs, we need to keep this organization alive and going." But they did not. And we're losing. Fortunately, we have a president who gets it, who understands that it's not only important to have environments like Bell Laboratories for the advancement of science and technology, but more importantly, diversity is important. And Bell Labs was a diverse place. We had people from all over the world. I remember posing for a picture with one of the vice-presidents at that time. And in that picture was someone from India, someone from Switzerland, someone from Germany, someone from South Africa. It was an eclectic group of people. And he commented, he says, "We have the UN [United Nations] right here at Bell Labs." It was absolutely true. And were there difficulties? Yeah, I got asked to change light bulbs when I walked down the hall, by people who didn't know who I was, and thought because I had an Afro and probably dressed like I am now--because I never dressed any differently, that I may have been one of the...  But, you just learn to handle that stuff, you know: "I'll be back. Okay, just wait there, I'm doing something else right now." And you just hope the guy's still standing there waiting for you to come back. That's the only gratification I could have gotten from that. But we all experience that. And yes, racism was very alive and well at Bell Labs. But it didn't interfere with the work. And I'm not, certainly not saying that this guy in California, who just shot up a whole bunch of people because of mistreatment by the police department in Los Angeles [California]... The same thing could have happened at Bell Labs, beyond a doubt. I think it can happen in any institution, because everybody is not fair. Everybody is not open and above board. Everybody is not without prejudice. I mean, deep, serious prejudices that prevent, really, even prevent them from thinking straight. How can you think straight with that kind of hatred, with that kind of animosity for a group of people? So, well, I can soapbox you forever on topics like that.
Speaker 1: Though not ideal, I guess, in terms of--it did reflect American attitudes on some level. But it was a great place to create a--
Speaker 2: It didn't prevent you from doing your work, okay. And then it could have, as I said before. And it did, in some cases, because I know some people, some black scientists, who really had to leave Bell Labs because of the way they felt they were being treated. And no amount of talking--because, you know, you try to say--well, look, well, sure, there are things that happened. It didn't only happen to black people. It happened to Jewish people. I can remember at coffee, you know, we'd get together at ten o'clock for coffee. And I heard "DJB". So, I said, "What the hell are you talking about? What's a DJB?" And so, one guy had the nerve to tell me, "Dirty Jewish bastard." (laughter). And so, my next question to him was, "What's the phrase for me, so I'll know it when I hear it?" (laughter). And he was, he didn't tell me what that was, but I think we know what it was. Although they may have quoted that, too.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But no, it was there. There's absolutely no doubt about it. But it did not prevent this guy--and we had, Ed Davis was the director of that lab at that time. And these people did wonderful work for him, although they didn't like him. You know, they had this religious hang-up--
Speaker 1: Well, what was Ed Davis's religion?
Speaker 2: What was his position?
Speaker 1: No, you said they had a religious hang-up. Is that why they didn't like him? What was his--
Speaker 2: Oh, they didn't like Ed Davis because he was Jewish.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's who they were calling the DJB.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 25679
Speaker 1: Now, what about Mr. [Gerhard] Sessler? Tell us something about him. You worked very closely with him.
Speaker 2: My best friend. There's a book called "Clicking", I think is the name of it. But anyway, this is a book that describes special relationships.  And although we never, ever talked about how we felt about each other, being interviewed independently, it turned out that we both have the same very strong feelings for each other. We never, ever mentioned that. I mean, science in its true sense is an augmentative operation, you know. You have to, you have to be able to express yourself in the way that you're comfortable. And sometimes that means swearing, and sometimes it means a whole lot of different approaches, and ways to do this. And yeah, we fought. We had real battles over science. But when that discussion was over, all of whatever had built up during that discussion, just melted away. We were again friends. And I, you know, I used to spend the summers in Germany at the university, after he moved back to Germany. And we still continue our collaboration today.
Speaker 1: Now, he's a German, he was a German National?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes--
Speaker 1: Was he part of the German wave that came over before the war, or after the war, or during the war?
Speaker 2: No, it came after the war.
Speaker 1: After.
Speaker 2: Most of the ones at Bell Labs came after the war.
Speaker 1: Had he been part of Hitler's Germany?
Speaker 2: No, but my boss was. My boss served with Manford Schroeder. He served as a Gestapo, not in the--but in the German Youth Army.
Speaker 1: Uh huh. Okay. I know somebody I interviewed last week was talking about Dr. Wernher von Braun in Huntsville, Alabama.
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: I mean, there's a lot of, you know, Germans that came over. I think the Russians got some and the U.S. got some, and--
Speaker 2: That was the wave before. Sessler and Schroeder--Schroeder must have, Schroeder was at Bell Labs before I got there, so he came in the '50's [1950s].
Story_ID: 25680
Speaker 1: So, and--so, Sessler's boss, as well as yours, was Ed Davis, who was the head of the place?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah. Well, Ed Davis was there when I first got there, and he was replaced by Schroeder.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, it went from a Jewish director to a German director, which is kind of interesting. I hadn't thought of it from that standpoint.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Davis was in the Hitler Youth--or something?
Speaker 2: Yes, quite a transition. (laughter). But one of the very interesting things about that whole--what I learned from the two of them, is how easy it is to compromise your principles, okay. Because both of those-- I mean, Manford passed not too long ago, but both of them, from the standpoint of their principles, were solid. And so, you say, well, how could you be a part of a government that did what it did? And I think it's very easy. I think it's very easy. And I often look at this country and try to imagine what life would be like if the Tea Party really ruled this country. It could be very interesting. I don't think it would last very long, I think, before it blew up. But the transition would have been very, very interesting. And I often wonder where I'd come down. You know, it's kind of hard to try to figure out, well where will I be? Okay, economically, I'm middle class, or upper middle class--but I don't really want to that. So, by all rights, I ought to be with those people in my mental thinking. My posture ought to be more supportive of their ideas and their concepts than where my head really is. And I think that in talking to them, and especially about their experiences during that time, the formative years of life, it was very easy for them to indoctrinate people. In fact, I've often thought that, you know, the real thing to do is just go and take over the city of Baltimore [Maryland]. And now--do the same thing that Hitler did. But not in terms of hating a particular group of people, but in terms of regimenting and organizing people, and putting them in stalls where they belong. A bad system in many respects, but it's a whole lot better than what we have now, because nobody is getting through that filter. At least with a step system, some people would get through. And so, yeah, maybe under the Tea Party, that would be what we'd have. We'd have a different system, but the system would at least permit more people through the filter than what we have now.
Story_ID: 25681
Speaker 1: It was in 1962 that you and Mr. Sessler finished the electro-acoustic transducer final model, right?
Speaker 2: Let's put it this way. In, when we published in 1962, we were confident from the experiments we had done in the lab, that we had learned to trap charge in this material. And that the activation energy, how much energy you had to apply to that trap to open up, was very high, 150 degrees C, okay. Which meant that we could extrapolate the lifetime at room temperature, from what we call Arrhenius plots, that said that the lifetime at room temperature of that electret would be two, three, four hundred years. And so far, it's proven to be true.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so, at that point, it was clear that you could make a microphone using this technique that would not fail you.
Speaker 1: Unless you lived to be three hundred years old.
Speaker 2: Right. (laughter). I think even then it probably wouldn't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Alright, okay. What was it--I don't know if you said it. What was the name of the material?
Speaker 2: Teflon.
Speaker 1: Teflon, okay.
Speaker 2: Teflon PTFE--or FTP. Polytetrafluoroethylene, or something like that. I'm not a chemist, so--
Speaker 1: This is a version of the same material that they used to coat--
Speaker 2: Frying pans.
Speaker 1: Frying pans, okay.
Speaker 2: Invented by DuPont, and not too long before we learned to store a charge in them.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So, this microphone was patented in 1964, when you were 33 years old. You and Mr. Sessler received your patent number. And the number is here, and I'm not going to read it off. But it becomes the condenser microphone, the standard, I guess, in microphones, even to this date, I guess?
Speaker 2: You know, there are only a very few technologies that have a lifetime that the electret does. I mean, we started vacuum tubes. They had a finite lifetime, and they went away. The individual transistor, that had a finite lifetime, and that went away. Integrated circuits, and on. I mean, still with underlying principles there, the evolution. But the electret microphone stood alone for that forty years. The last survey we looked at, we did, was about five years ago now. And two billion electret microphones are made each year throughout the world, okay. And it's in just about everything that needs a microphone. You know, this thing that I'm talking on is one, I know. I don't have to look at it, I just know it is. Because there's nothing that can beat it. (laughter). And you see, there are two things that happen. A condenser microphone--before the electret, if you could buy one for 500 dollars, you were very lucky. You know what that costs now? Five cents. And their performance is exactly like the ones that you paid 500 dollars for. So, that was a contribution. Highest quality, lowest cost.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what you're saying is electret, right? Spell that for us?
Speaker 2: E-L-E-C-T-R-E-T.
Speaker 1: Okay. I have it here, but I wanted you to spell it, so the people watching this will know that you're not saying--
Speaker 2: "Electric." Yeah, I know. It gets very confusing. That whole history is really a very, very interesting one. It was--Japan and Russia were the main early countries that investigated these properties of carnauba and beeswax electrets. And their effort was to improve the lifetime, to increase the lifetime of these devices. But, and, I read in Faraday's notes, for example, that electrets are a very interesting phenomena, but unfortunately, their only use would be to teach electrostatics to students. And he was right for a long time.
Speaker 1: Michael Faraday?
Speaker 2: Michael Faraday.
Speaker 1: Going back to the 1850's, I think, right?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: He goes back to the 18--
Speaker 2: 1858, yeah, somewhere around that time, right.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: It's an old science. It's been around for awhile. It's just that it took us, to make it practical, and to break through its stubborn drawbacks.
Story_ID: 25682
Speaker 1: So, by 1968, your microphone is the industry standard. Well, that's what it says here.
Speaker 2: Well, not--the first commercial microphone was made by Sony in 1968. And, in fact, it's kind of interesting. I remember at a meeting in--I may have been in Austria, or--I'm not sure of the country. But it was somewhere in Europe. And Dr. Sennheiser, who's the owner of Sennheiser Microphones, told Sessler and I that we were going to put him out of business with the electret microphone. He thought that this was such an inexpensive device to make, that his whole business would be shot. But he made the right decision, and he integrated the electret microphone into his work. And yeah, you can pay a couple thousand dollars for an electret microphone, gold plated and... Well, I mean, that's not a fair... They do do things to it that add to the cost that improves--or that makes them usable in a variety of applications.
Speaker 1: Well, you've qualified it now. But you're really saying that you're buying the same thing if you, you know... I'm sure the one we have costs a lot of money because it--
Speaker 2: It's all in the--
Speaker 1: Professional television work, and--
Speaker 2: Yep, yep. Well, they do some things. I mean, if you go out and buy one for ten cents, it is going to work, beyond the doubt. But its noise level will be high. If you drop it, it may not recover. If you, you know, you can't mistreat those. Well, you can mistreat them, but in a telephone, the sensitivity of the microphone can vary over quite a large range before you notice it, right? I can change the power and the signal by a factor of two, and you won't even know that I've done it. That's not a big enough increment for you to be able to--most people--to be able to hear. But what makes the cost of the microphone go up, is that the sensitivity is constant over a very wide range of temperatures and operating conditions, right. You can spit on them, and they'll still work. If you spit on a ten-dollar one, all the aluminum will oxidize, (laughter) which changes the characteristic of the microphone. They earn their money, okay. And it's worth it. But, from the standpoint of the fundamental engineer, you're absolutely right.
Story_ID: 25683
Speaker 1: At the time, in the late sixties, was there any other application for your, your discovery?
Speaker 2: Yes.  In fact, filtration--filtering, was very much on the minds of people like Van Turnhout, from Holland.  If I have a filter, right, the pores in that filter have to be smaller than the particle that I want to trap, that I don't want to pass through and come out the other end, right?  But if I make the filter an electret, I can make a very porous large pore filter, and now--because all particles are either neutral, negatively or positively charged.  And so, now, when this particle starts to go through this filter, it'll see the field of that filter, and get trapped.  So, you can make filters that require a lot less density, yet trapping very tiny particles.  So, filtration is one of the areas where electrets are used.  In fact, very early in the game, we learned--I had collaboration at Brown University, where we demonstrated the growth of cells under the influence of these small fields from electrets.  And you can grow very normal cells, and that's a common practice these days.  My brother, who's an endodontist, we published a paper, where instead of using betta pultee (ph.) to keep the cavity open until it heals so that the infection wouldn't be there, he did some processes on dogs, where he used Teflon coated silver tips that worked much better than the betta pultee (ph.) did.  So, I have heard-- and of course, proof of products is sometimes very hard to get a hold of. But, we know from, not my work, but work of other scientists, that devices that are implanted in the body and covered with electret material are not rejected as frequently as if it were not there.  So, I wouldn't be at all surprised that pacemakers and other implantable devices do not also take advantage of what we taught.  Today, one of my projects is, essentially, where we've generated nanofiber.  I can put a hundred of them into a single strand of hair--of these very, very thin spider-like, web-like fibers that we generate.  And it's pole material.  And all the dipoles are marching in the same direction, right.  This could have tremendous implications in scaffolding, for example, for drug delivery, for energy harvesting, you know.  It's really a new process where--in fact, my student was coming--earned her Ph.D. on this work.  And it's still in the infant stage, but yes, it might be the next transducer to replace the electret, who knows.  But I'm always working, not necessarily to put the electret microphone out of business, but to better understand nature, and see what we can do to improve the quality of life for people.
Story_ID: 25684
Speaker 1: So, look, 1970, the Association of Black Laboratory Employees. And they have here that Dr. William Lincoln Hawkins was the first [African American] employee of Bell Labs.
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: But there wasn't another one for twenty years, right?
Speaker 2: That's quite possible, that there was that length of time between the two. The Association of Black Laboratories was formed out of the need to improve the quality of life of everybody, when you really get down to it. But more specifically, to improve the quality of life for the African-Americans who were employed there. The majority of them were custodial: chauffeurs, a few staff people, but very heavily loaded at that low end. When I got to Bell Labs, there were at least seven technical people, black, at Bell Labs, including Lincoln Hawkins, Ray Story, Charlie Miller, Bill North, a couple women and so on. But, you know, I could give you a long story. But let me give you a version of it that I think gets right to the point. Earlier we talked about the environment at Bell Laboratories, and how conducive it was to creativity, and that for the most part, I was not most of us didn't allow the prejudices of others to interfere with our work. But ABLE [Association of Black Laboratories Employees] was formed in order to create upward mobility for black people in Bell Labs, to open up areas in Bell Labs, and then AT&T, for that matter, that were closed to black people: administrative jobs, places where you can support a family with one person working. Most of our jobs were where two people had to work in order to maintain a family. And I think the, you know, there's a lot of history that gets us to this point. But the point I want to make, we petitioned the council of Bell Labs. And our reason for petitioning the council was to talk about upward mobility and why this didn't seem to be a part of anyone in the black community, either on the technical side or the staff side. And we used Dr. Lincoln Hawkins as an example. And Link Hawkins was a supervisor at that time, which was not the bottom of the barrel but, you know, there's a whole lot of levels above that. And we wanted to know why a person who had made perhaps among the greatest contributions to the advancement of science and to the advancement of communications.
Story_ID: 25685
Speaker 1: By that, I mean, prior to Link Hawkins's work, cables for both telephone and power, were sheathed with lead. We all know the dangers of lead, right? You know, well, if that had been still--if lead were still the sheathing for cables, everybody in the world would be suffering from the same diseases that poor black people suffer in the inner-city from lead-based paint. But what Lincoln Hawkins taught was how to cure polyethylene so that it would not degrade under the influence of IV-radiation from the sun. And this meant that lead could be replaced with a plastic. I have seen it written that Link Hawkins's intellectual property, his patents, were some of the most valuable patents in the world, in terms of the amount of money that it saved. Power companies, telephone companies--rather than having to use very dangerous lead to sheath cable--and squirrels loved it, so they used to chew holes in it all the time, which degraded the cables. And my question to the board of directors was, "How come this man is still a supervisor?" And I will never forget. Bill Baker, whom I really, really liked very much--we became very good friends. Bill Baker, I thought he was not paying attention to anything, because he was always busy doing something else while we were going through all these presentations. (laughter). But when we made that point, Bill Baker looked up, and he says--mind you, this is the president of Bell Labs--Link Hawkins and I were colleagues in the lab together. We both arrived at Bell Labs at the same time, 1940 or whatever. And he had been led to believe that Link Hawkins was exactly where he wanted to be, that management was not in his vernacular, you know, that this was not something Link Hawkins wanted to do, which completely blew up my purposes for being at that meeting (laughter), because I hadn't asked Link Hawkins ahead of time. Maybe I should have. I'm not, you know, I'm very immature sometimes at planning things like that. But a couple of months later, I got up enough nerve to go and say, "Hey, Link, I understand that Bill Baker and you are good friends." And he said, "Yeah, that's right, I know Bill." I said, "So, Bill Baker said that you were not interested in a promotion." I told him what we had done, to use him as an example of one person, and that there were a number of others that we could have pointed to at the same time, but we used him as an example because of his tremendous contributions to the advancement of science, right. And I said, "Link, is this true?" And he said, "Jim, let me tell you. My office is ten offices from my director's office. But if he had whispered a promotion for me, I would have been on it." Okay, so fine, alright. So, I got the story from that end. So, the next step was to go back to Bill Baker and say, "Hey Bill, you've been misinformed." Well, within a very short time, Link Hawkins was made director of chemistry at Bell Labs, right. And that sort of pushed the door open, you know. It sort of said to the top management that you may be, your head may be in the right position, in the right place from the standpoint of under-represented minorities, but that doesn't mean that people under you fit in that same category.
Story_ID: 25686
Speaker 1: Arno Penzias, when he was president of Bell Labs, we had--one of the programs that was really started by ABLE [Association of Black Laboratory Employees] was the Corporate Research Fellowship Program. And that program, and a similar one for women, graduated upwards of 500 black Ph.D.'s, paid for them, mentored them and got them through a terminal degree. The--I forgot the point. Where was I going? What was I saying before that? I do this when I get tired.
Speaker 2: You were talking about, well you mentioned Bill Baker and Penzias, and the--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: You were talking about ABLE and the--
Speaker 1: Right, but I wanted to make a point. Oh yeah, now I know. When I got to Arno Penzias and the Corporate Research Fellowship Program, one of the requirements of the Corporate Research Fellowship Program, was that each person accepted, had to have a mentor in Bell Labs, preferably a mentor who had been to the university that the student plans to attend. We were having a problem getting members of the technical staff to sign up to be mentors for the students. And so, a group of us went to talk to Arno Penzias and tell him that this was a problem. And it just goes to show you what can be done. He says, "Jim, you came here with a simple problem. I can fix that with one sentence." And he did. What he did was to put in--we had to write every year a "How Great I Am" statement, all of the things that I did in the past year, which says that not only should I be able to remain at Bell Labs, but I should get a raise and all of the nice things that should happen to me. And I mean, this is sometimes only numbers, how many memos did you write? How many papers did you get published? How many patents did you get issued, and so forth. It comes down to that kind of thing, basically. And what Arno did was to put a one-liner in that "How Great I Am" statement: "What have you contributed to diversity?" I had no problem after that. We had people knocking the door down, "Can I be a mentor, and do you have a student that I can mentor?" Because this gave them brownie points on their "How Great I Am" statement. And you know, I've always marveled about people in power. When you go to them and say "Hey, look, there's a problem here we need to fix." "Oh, I can't do anything about that", and blah, blah, blah." Well, Arno didn't take that position. He said let me fix it. And he did, which to me was the greatest demonstration of power that I've ever been a part of.
Story_ID: 25687
Speaker 1: So, did ABLE [Association of Black Laboratory Employees]--earlier, I guess, ABLE sued Bell Laboratories?  Or was it--
Speaker 2: We did a lot of things. It's hard to get a company like AT&T, and at that time it was AT&T, to listen to anything. And so, we played little dirty games. Okay, one thing that we threatened the system with was to have everybody overpay their telephone bill by one penny. And we knew that the company was obligated to return that money to the person who gave it to them, which would cost them roughly five dollars, to give you that penny back, in terms of all of the paperwork that they had to go through. We had a campaign to--because then, your telephone bill came in the form of an IBM card, right, a punched card, folder. It no longer works in the machine. So, we played a whole lot of little, I call them tricks, very smart things to do to get the system to listen to you. That's all we wanted, you know. We just want you to listen to our problems and help us solve them. And this got their, you know, it was things like that that got their attention. I mean, they weren't the only things that we did. There were many, many fronts of this attack. And we had validity. We had Lincoln Hawkins. We had Dr. Shirley Jackson. We had Dr. Earl Shaw. We had Jim Mitchell. We had, you know--and these are just people that I can name that were there with me on the technical side, that made these things happen, right. They weren't comfortable. We had to come--I know I can remember sitting down and saying, "We might all be fired over this. We know how to get along on welfare. We know how to do that, so it ain't no big problem, you know.  We'll survive." To having to assume that kind of posture, just to push through some of the concepts and things that we saw were necessary to do to the system in order to get them--you know, young women who would come in with no career ladder at all. They'd come in out of high school, and they're a gopher, and they never get out of that gopher trap, right. We created programs that provided a path for these people to get out of those ruts. We taught them how to use welfare to their advantage. We encouraged them to quit this two dollar an hour job, use welfare and go back to school and then come back. We had people who really did that, who came back into the system at very high levels. And I'm not only talking about--I'm talking about directors and executive directors, and so forth, people that came through that loop. But what made it all possible was attacking...  You see, the dissent decree was on our--yeah, the consent decree--AT&T was a monopoly. And it knew that we had the law on our side, but it still resisted. We still had to put some force and functions in, in order to get the system to understand that we were serious, and that we really meant business. And the summer programs, for example: as many as two thousand black kids throughout the country in technical summer jobs, the first time in the history of this country that anything like that had happened.
Speaker 1: This was all brought down by federal consent, decree, I mean as far as AT&T?
Speaker 2: That was there--no, the company, what made them do it was ABLE. The consent decree didn't, I mean, that was our tool. That was what we, you know, we knew that we could stretch this rubber band because of the laws that governed AT&T at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay. At some point, and I don't know where--if you know the year, you can tell me. The Alliance of Black Telecommunications Employees was created by a merging of ABLE with a committee of AT&T employees and an employee focus group of AT&T Communications.
Speaker 2: I, let me, here's another quirk in my personality. Once things are working, I go and do something else. So, I know very little about the workings of the--I mean, I knew that these things happened, but I can't tell you anything about them, because I had other responsibilities (laughter) ahead of that.
Speaker 1: That's true though, but you were really involved, you were involved in that initial formation of AT&T.
Speaker 2: The initial formation, yes. But its further development, no.
Story_ID: 25688
Speaker 1: 1981, an article on "High Resolution Laser Pulse"?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's me.
Speaker 1: That's you?
Speaker 2: The Lipp Method, L-I-P-P, Laser and Pressure Pulse. Yep.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: And that was, we created a tool, you see--when you have an amorphous mass. And so, I bombard this amorphous mass with electrons. And the electrons get stuck in there. The question is where are the traps? You know, are the traps at the surface? Is it in the bulk of the material? How far from the bulk of the material? And so the laser pressure pulse was a method to shock, excite the polymer. And now, we could determine where the charge lived in the polymer.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now in the '80's [1980s], sometime during the '80's [1980s], you used the electric transducer to read blood pressure, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You came up with a way to do that?
Speaker 2: Yeah. Believe it or not, that's still an active project. Right here, I have orbital spacecraft's, inherently very noisy. And the question that we're trying to help them, NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration], with this is how to measure blood pressure, lung sounds, heart sounds, in a noisy environment. Here again, my association with Bill Baker: Bill Baker had a cardiovascular problem, and had to wear a twenty-four hour monitor. And, you know, every half an hour, the cuff would inflate and take some numbers, and measure his blood pressure. And only about twenty percent of the data that they got on him for that twenty-four hour period was usable. And he correctly assumed that it couldn't be an electronics problem. The problem had to be with the transducer. And so, he asked me if I would take a look at that whole setup and see what was going on. And the transducer that they were using, it appears, was an electric device, but it was a device that's very much like a tennis racket. And if you've ever played tennis, if you hit the sweet spot, the ball flies. If you're slightly off, crazy things can happen. Well, the same thing was true with this transducer. One little point in the middle--which if you correctly place set the brachial artery, you get a signal. Well, you put your arm in this position and you put the transducer on, right.  And you take a measurement, and it's located in the right place, and now you just rotate your fist. And the skin and the brachial artery don't move together. And so, now, the brachial artery is displaced, which means that unless you put your hand down in the same way each time, you would get false readings. And what we did was to make a transducer. In fact, at that time Ilene Busch-Vishniac was a post-doc in my group. And she's now president of the university in Canada [McMaster University], just to show you how things go. And so, what we did was to use the electret principle to make a transducer that was uniformly sensitive over the whole area. So, it didn't matter which position your arm was in, in order to do that. It turns out that the technology, we were re-inventing that. Today, my students are--to try to help not only the NASA project, but I have funding through the Gates Foundation to study.... It turns out that the major cause of infant immortality, especially in the Third World, I think it's--maybe the causes may not be the same in this country, but I think there may be a relationship, due to lung disease and pneumonia. And they come about mainly because of the cooking methods. They don't have chimneys, you know. They just burn stuff. And now you've got these energetic particles that get inhaled, and they blow up while they're in the lungs. Like tobacco smoke, the same principle. And so, we're trying to make sensors and devices that will allow amateurs to be able to collect that kind of data. And one thing I like about this project is that if they find a diseased kid, they not only treat the kid, but they also treat the cause. They give them different cooking methods, improve their cooking methods, so that they don't continue to poison their children.
Story_ID: 25689
Speaker 1: Now in '89' [1989], you won the Lewis Howard Latimer Light Switch and Socket Award from the National Patent Law Association. Now, is that a black organization?
Speaker 2: That's a black--
Speaker 1: Yeah. The key is 'national' in that. When I saw the national, I knew it, you know--
Speaker 2: It's a black organization.
Speaker 1: Yeah. Was that for the microphone--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that, and also a lot of the community work. I'm not sure what that citation reads. But the interesting thing--well, I talk a lot about in my presentations about Lewis Latimer, who was a good friend of Granville T. Woods. In fact, Latimer worked for Edison and for Bell [Labs]. And he introduced Granville T. Woods to Bell. So, I kind of like that social connection, and I like to talk about that. And I talk about that because of how important it is. And this is something that black people suffer from. And that is privacy. You know, "I don't want anybody to know my business", when it should be just the opposite. Everybody ought to know your business (laughter). Because that's--if I know your business, then I can help you. If I don't know your business, there's nothing I can do for you. And so, I use this example of two very famous black inventors who helped each other.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, in 1993 you won the AT&T's George Stibitz Trophy?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, what is that? Is that the highest award there?
Speaker 2: That's one of--they have a whole string of prestigious awards that they hand out. And I think that may be among the highest. I think Shockley, Brattain and Bardeen have it. Harriet Smith for the LED's, and so forth. It was a great honor, beyond a doubt, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But mainly for my work on charge storage and transporting polymers.
Speaker 1: Were you the first African-American to win this?
Speaker 2: Probably.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know whether Link Hawkins [William Lincoln Hawkins] got it or not. He certainly should have. He may have.
Speaker 1: Okay. In 1994 you won the Bell Labs Fellow Award, right? Is that correct?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Alright. What was that?
Speaker 2: Well, unlike Hawkins, I know where my life was. My life was in the lab. It's where I'm happy. And every interview I went on for management, I turned down. And it turned out that I wasn't the only person who did that. There were a whole bunch of others. And so, what they did was to create a new position by a Fellow, which took all the limits off your salary. And that was the only limiting factor, you know. They had these bands. If you're a member of the technical staff, you could, you had to be within a band, and had to be at the top of that band in order to be promoted to management. And so, they created, this position was mainly created to give me an opportunity to supervise one or two or three people, depending on what I needed to get my work done, and not have to worry about twenty five or thirty people.
Story_ID: 25690
Speaker 1: Now in 1995, you won the Inventor of the Year Award, and was entered into the New Jersey Inventors Hall of Fame.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Now, was that specifically for the microphone?
Speaker 2: Yes. Most of my awards are--as with everybody--you get famous for one thing. I mean, you know, I hope I'll be famous for something else, too, maybe. And there's, you know, there are chances that you do. But then, you most always fall back on the initial work, but not just the initial work, it's how you advance that work, how you brought it to fruition, how you continue to refine the process, and so forth. But it's mainly around methods of injecting and putting charges in polymers, and getting that charge to stay there.
Story_ID: 25691
Speaker 1: Towards your last years at Bell Labs, what were you researching, and what was the significance of it?
Speaker 2: Okay. What was my direction later?  Well, certainly, the electret microphone was a liberating factor in many respects, as far as technology is concerned. The electret microphone is a liberating factor in many respects in acoustics. And the last part of my work was really taking advantage of what we had. Let me give you an example. If I take two sensors, right, that have some physical separation, right, I can make directional patterns. For example, if I take two with the same sensitivity and the same frequency characteristic and place them close together, right, and now if I subject these two, right, for a sound wave impinging from these directions, the sound arrives at the microphone at the same time, right. And so it cancels, right. The output from this cancels the output from this, right. But now, sound coming from these two directions will arrive at the microphones at a slightly different time. So there's a sensitivity at these two nodes and the anti-node in these two directions. Say, to make a figure of eight microphone, a microphone with a figure of eight characteristic, right. Well, I can go further, and now make an array of microphones, right, along a line, right. And now, I can make a pencil line, that I can aim and I can focus, and that can move around electronically, right, just by changing the delay between each microphone. One of my colleagues that I brought to Bell Labs, Gary Alco, made a two-dimensional array with 400 microphones in it, 400 microphones. Now, before the electret, if you wanted to do that, each one of those microphones was approximately a thousand dollars or more. And we were able to do it with one-dollar microphones, right, to make these arrays. And this is great fun and these, you know--to do that. And so, these directional microphones are some of things that I was working on over that period. You pick up that little green ball there. That thing is on my desk, not just because somebody gave it to me, but because I use that when I'm talking to students about the latest microphone array, the icon mic, that is that dimension, about the size of that sphere. I have one in the lab. And I can form--
Speaker 1: It's about the size of a, a little bit bigger than a baseball.
Speaker 2: Yeah. And I can form up to a third-order beam in any direction through the center of that sphere. I can aim it at you--well, you two are very close together, I can't make it that narrow. But we're working on even making it a narrower beam. So, basically what I've been doing is taking advantage of that. But since I know it better than anybody else, I can, I know how to treat the transducer in a way to get it to do what I want it to do. And so, a lot of my efforts have been in that direction.
Story_ID: 25692
Speaker 1: Now, you left Bell Labs in, was it 2002, or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, 2002, 2001, I'm not sure exactly what date.
Speaker 1: You retired from Bell Labs and came over to Johns Hopkins [University]. How did that, I mean, how did you decide to come to Johns Hopkins? Did they make you an offer? How did--
Speaker 2: Well, there are a couple of things. When it was kind of clear that Bell Labs was not going to continue to exist in the form that we all enjoyed--we were there during the, you know, I said I never wanted to do management. But guess what? I wound up managing 25 engineers in Indianapolis, no matter what, right. Trying to convert some of the technology that I knew into products. I wasn't very good at it, and I'm not at all embarrassed that it didn't work out. I told them going in. And it was not a self-fulfilling... I tried. (laughter). But my mind is just not tuned into the minute details that's necessary to make a product, right. But, and I, so, I knew two things. I knew, one, that since I don't have any hobbies--my work is my hobby--I've got to find someplace to work. So, I started around the country giving talks, getting invited and giving talks at universities, to just check them out and see what that university would be about. I knew a little bit from my brother and other people, that knew their way in academia. And I knew all the things that they complained about. And one of the major things that they complained about was that the technical universities organized in stovepipes. And Bell Labs was not. And my door always had to be open. You know, I don't lock my door here, for the same reason. It's always open. If you knock on my door, I may not be able to talk to you, but I'm going to at least acknowledge you and tell you when to come back, okay. We couldn't close our doors at Bell Laboratories. Johns Hopkins is more like Bell Laboratories than any of the other universities that I interviewed. I have collaborations in materials, material chemistry, material science, mechanical engineering, electrical engineering, and physics, okay. And this is the life for me. This is the kind of life, you know, I need. This is where I can thrive. And does that mean that I'm not diverse? No, it doesn't mean that I'm not diverse. It means that I can ask questions, I can learn and I can--in some of the work that I've done and doing--is appealing to these other disciplines.
Story_ID: 25693
Speaker 1: What has been the thrust of your research here at Johns Hopkins [University]?
Speaker 2: At Hopkins?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Multi-disciplinary. I talked about a few of them. The work with monitoring the sounds from the human body. I have probably somewhere around ten or fifteen publications on noise in hospitals.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It turns out that hospitals are extreme noisy environments and they are because they can't put carpets on the floor--and acoustic ceilings--because these materials harbor bacteria and they're hard to clean. And, but yet, convalescing in a hospital should be a pleasant environment. It should, you should be able to sleep, but you can't. And so, we made a rather extensive study of noise in hospitals, and we came up with some very simple cures for that. And one of them is kind of interesting. When we began to understand this problem--this is Ilene Busch-Vishniac. By the way, she hired me. She was dean of this school when I came here. And this is the same person that did a post-doc with me. She's now president of the university in Canada [McMaster University]. But anyway, we know that fiberglass is an extremely good sound absorber, but you can't just put fiberglass up, because it will shed, you know, it flakes off. And so, we were in the lab one day, and I said, "Wonder what will happen if we put fiberglass in a garbage bag? What will happen to it's absorption characteristics?" So, we kicked it around a little bit, and neither of us could figure out if this would work or not. So, I said, okay, it's simple enough. So, we went down in the basement and got a big garbage bag (laughter) and came back, stuffed it with these fiberglass sheets and measured it, and we couldn't see the plastic. In other words, the fiberglass worked just as well with the cover on, as it did without. Well, you can't do it with a garbage bag. Nobody's going to allow you to put a garbage bag up in the ceiling. You see, if you turn around, there's that square behind you there, right over my desk.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's Tyvek, a common building material made by DuPont, which works well because it's slightly porous. But the pores are such that they won't, you know, it's inert, so it doesn't harbor bacteria. And the pore size is right for acoustics, and bad for bacteria. And so, this is the solution that we've been using in hospitals here at Hopkins to quiet these wards down, so that people can rest. And there's an often lot of data that says that noise is a big, big problem in hospitals. Okay, there's noise in hospitals--the monitoring, we're all hooked up with medicine in some sort of way.
Story_ID: 25694
Speaker 1: One of my other projects is multi-media, which is very unfriendly to blind people. There's very little they can do with multi-media, they can't see. And my students doing this is at Northwestern [University], which is a common thing in universities, where you work with people of other universities. This happens to be my son-in-law that I'm working with, whose a professor at Northwestern University. And what we've done is to translate visual scenes into auditory stimuli, okay. You have a tablet. It has a square, circle and a triangle on there, right. And you pick your finger down on the tablet and--well, that's kind of hard to do. We're at that stage, but it's a little bit too complicated to explain in a simple manner. Let's say I have one object, and it's located somewhere on this tablet. And I put my finger down, right, and I have headphones on. And I use directional hearing. I put my finger down, and what I hear is that the object that I want is out in this direction somewhere. So, now, I can start moving my finger toward it, right. And just as in sonar, as you get closer to the object, the beep goes up, and so, bloop, bloop, bloop, bloop, bloop, bloop, bloop, bloop. And you get there, right. And so, now you know you're at the object, because the auditory signal tells you that. But now, what is the shape of that object? And so, now you sort of stop moving your finger around the object, and it tells you by what you hear, that you want to go in this direction. And you get to a transition point, and it tells you that you want to move in this direction. So, now you can actually--people can without seeing it, can say what that object is, right. And we're moving all the way to texture, to being able to touch something on a touch sensitive screen and tell whether it's a smooth surface, a rough surface, and so on, okay. So, that's another project. The real interesting, the real physics and the real science, is in generating these nanofibers where all of the dipoles are oriented in the same direction, making new tiers of electric materials, materials that can independently control the electronic properties and the mechanical properties. A student that was on the way here, a past student, that was the topic of her thesis.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: What else am I doing? There are probably a couple of others, but let's let it go at that. But, some of the other things that I'm doing is on committees, for the NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] funding, to improve stem education in the city of Baltimore.
Speaker 2: Okay. That's, okay, alright. And, so, are you in a project where you bring young people to campus or anything, in the summer?
Speaker 1: We will be doing that, yes. I always have students around me. Whenever they--especially African-American and Hispanics, they're always welcome in my lab.
Story_ID: 25695
Speaker 1: At any rate, in 2006, you were awarded the U.S. National Medal of Technology.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had to shake [George W.] Bush's hand. (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay. (laughter). Now, this medal was given to other recipients, including Steve Jobs, Bill Gates, and Steven Sasson, who invented the digital camera. So, this is, you know, a big deal.
Speaker 2: Moving up the food chain, no doubt about it, right.
Speaker 1: So, you're getting recognition, continued recognition. So, when you, and you're still not, do you have any plans to retire from Johns Hopkins anytime soon?
Speaker 2: I don't know what I would do if I retired, that's my problem. I mean, if you're going to set up a lab somewhere where I can do what I want, I might consider leaving here, but it's doubtful that anybody will do that, that can match what I get here. There are a couple of other, I think, noteworthy.... Being inducted into the National Inventors Hall of Fame is certainly one of my, you know, just simply because this is the smallest group that I've been... Maybe the national level of technology is also small, and the Franklin, Ben Franklin Award--
Speaker 1: Franklin Institute, yeah.
Speaker 2: Those are also good. But I'm also proud of my honorary degrees--one from New Jersey Institute of Technology; Michigan State University; and I received one in May from the University of Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, you're going to work until you just--
Speaker 2: Until I can't. Why would I do anything else? I enjoy what I'm doing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 25696
Speaker 1: I was asking you about your legacy.
Speaker 2: What is my legacy? Well, I kind of think there are two of them. And one, of course, is my scientific contributions. I think it's definitely made the world a better place. You know, what's the difference between revolutions today and revolutions fifty years ago? Communications. I mean, stuff didn't happen in Egypt--couldn't have happened without communications. The stuff that's going on in Syria today, cannot happen without communications. And so, being a small part of mass communications, I think, is one legacy.
Speaker 1: Well, one of the things we didn't really point out that much during the interview, was not only did you come up with this new mic, but you made it smaller and smaller and smaller, right?
Speaker 2: Yep, yep. Well, other people made it smaller and smaller.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Speaker 2: Yeah. Really, I had very little to do with the reduction. It's very clear to me that you could make them smaller, as they do, but that was mainly done by Panasonic and Sony, and a couple of others.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My second legacy--well, up to the second legacy is my contributions to encouraging and developing programs that promoted stem, not only among underrepresented minorities and women, but among everybody. You know, I think it's--this country once led the world, from the standpoint of technology and the advancement of technology. I don't think it does anymore. But I think there's the possibility of getting back to that point.
Story_ID: 25697
Speaker 1: And here again, I relate this by experience. I had a grand tour of China, and part of that included an audience with the minister of technology for the city of Shenzhen. And he, during my audience with him, he talked about Silicon Valley [California], and his experience in having visited Silicon Valley. He said, "I understand why Silicon Valley is so productive. It's so productive because I can stand on a street corner and see the world go by. People from every part of the world is in silicon Valley." He said, "I can't do that in China. The best I can do is make sure every province of China is represented in the city of Shenzhen." It's a very interesting city. If you go there, visit the huge park that they have, that have conclaves. Each province of China from, you know, through their development, especially their ancient culture--and the differences in cultures are very well... China is a very diverse culture in that sense. But this is his best attempt at achieving diversity in the city of Shenzhen, which he hopes to become the technology center of China, okay. We have that diversity built into this country, but a great deal of the population is not taking advantage of that. And I think the President [Barack Obama], in his State of the Union, made this point very clear. That in order for us to regain leadership and to continue to lead the world, we have to make sure that every person who has an inkling to make the contribution--or have the background and the training that would be necessary, be he white, black, green, purple or yellow, it doesn't matter--because we're way beyond that, in terms of the need for diversity in this country. A long time ago, I served on a Committee for the National Academy of Engineering, where CEO's from companies came to talk about the importance of diversity. And just as an example, one of the CEO's of Ford talked about the mini-van that Ford designed, that was designed by an all-white team. And he noted that most of the ones that he saw on the road were driven by women, and the ergonomics was totally not for a woman driver. And he put together a diverse team, both racially and have women on that team, and they designed the bestselling mini-van in the world. And so, he used that as an example. Many companies really fully understand that the majority of people on this earth are brown people, not white people. And so, they want people who can relate to the countries where they plan to sell their goods, or to advertise their goods, not only to represent the company, but to design those products. One thing that has always disturbed me--and I used to--they used to knock the hell out of me. Because we'd sit down on a brainstorming situation, and there's the big crust over there, and there's me over here. But guess where the solution is, okay. And, you know, "Why are you always this way?" But I don't do it on purpose, it's just the way I think. And the way I think and the way I do things is not a product of what I learned in school. Yes, it is, but not totally. It's a product of my total life, a product of my total upbringing. Every decision that I make, every thought that I have, encompasses all of that. And I know that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And so, those things that I have shifted--well and good. Some of them worked, and some of them didn't work. But to encourage and to make pathways for others to join the technology workforce, is what I'm all about. Two years ago, a year ago--two years ago now, Hopkins [Johns Hopkins University] had a symposium in my honor. And it was mainly around products of the Corporate Research Fellowship Program and mentors of students in the Corporate Research Fellowship Program. And we had Nobel Laureates that came here to the program, who were mentors of women and minority students through the Bell Labs program.
Story_ID: 25698
Speaker 1: Is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could go back and change something?
Speaker 2: Hell yeah, everything. Hindsight is the best sight in the world. I never do things the same way that I did them the first time. Knowing what I know now, it would be crazy to do that. Anybody would be crazy to do that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (laughter). I know that's not what you were hoping for.
Speaker 1: That's not what I always hear.
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: That's not what I usually hear, but that's--
Speaker 2: Right. No, I know, right.
Story_ID: 25699
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: Now, that's a provocative question. There is a strange dichotomy. Some of the most ambitious parents that I've ever met have been parents of--right here in the city of Baltimore [Maryland]; Plainville [Connecticut]; Newark [New Jersey]--no matter where I am, who want better things for their children, genuinely want that, more than any affluent person that I know. They don't want their children to have to go through the same thing stuff that they did. And they're doing what they have been told is the right thing to do. This is what you do: you send your kids to school. Why? You can really ask that question, because the schools don't give them anything, right, to advance that, or to change that. I want the parents' wish to come true. I want their children to have a better opportunity at life than they do. And I happen to think that one of the best places to do that, is not philosophy, but science. Because this is where the real jobs are, where the real jobs will be in the future. And where, if life is going to be improved, it's going to be improved through STEM. There's no other way.
Story_ID: 25700
Speaker 1: Alright. Sir, tell us something about your family.
Speaker 2: I have four children, six grandchildren. My oldest daughter did a double major in engineering and music, and went on be a recording artist. And she mastered a lot of Sade's work and did some stuff for Madonna, and then quit that when she had a kid. And now she has a small multi-media company, and she works together with my middle daughter, Laurie, who is the artist, who comes up with all sorts of nice stuff that people seem to enjoy. Each of them have two kids, a boy and a girl. And then my son, who's an engineer, he works for Sikorsky. They don't call it Sikorsky, they call it Breeze, I think, is the name of the company. But it's a branch of Sikorsky Helicopter. And he's, he manages a group that puts together these hoists that they use on helicopters, to extract people from the water, you know, drop the cable down and hook them up. And he knows everything there is to know about those systems. And he has two boys. And my youngest daughter, who's twenty four, is not too long, a couple years, out of UMBC [University of Maryland, Baltimore County]. And she's getting ready, or talking about, doing the LCAPS [sic, LSATS]. I don't know if she'll go through with that or not, for law school, but that's one of the things she's considering and talking about. So, she's sort of in this in-between stage, of not knowing what she wants to be when she grows up. And we'll see how it works. I'll support her no matter which way it goes.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And are you still married?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah. Legally, I'm still married. My wife lives in New Jersey and I live here, okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And make whatever you want out of that (laughter).
Speaker 1: Alright. I forgot to ask you about it earlier.
Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, put me down as married, for now.
Story_ID: 25701
Speaker 1: Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I don't know how to answer that any different than I did the legacy issue. Except, I think I'm a pretty good person. I think the people whose lives have come into contact with mine, for the most part, has been positive. I am--I think that's about all I can do with that one. I can't think of anything else that I'd like to be remembered for.
