Story_ID: 20358
Speaker 1: Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Oh, my name is Ernest Withers.  W-I-T-H-E-R-S.  And, of course, I'm Ernest C. Withers, Sr., E-R-N-E-S-T.  Senior because I had a son that preceded this day in death.  But he was my oldest son of seven boys and one girl.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: August 7th, 1922 in Memphis, Shelby County, right here in this county.
Speaker 1: Okay, and sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Well, my occupation has been a photographer for a period above sixty-two years and better--.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But professionally, I'm that much.  And back to the training, which came in, sixty-odd years ago in the military.
Speaker 1: And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is 28th of April--I mean of, of June, the 6th month, 28th day.
Speaker 1: Okay, two thousand and--.
Speaker 2: 2003.
Speaker 1: All right.  And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in my studio room at 333 Beale Street in Memphis [Tennessee].
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: This building is, coincidentally, it's named after me.  I don't know whether you knew that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, there's a plaque on the building outside--.
Speaker 2: Well, that's right.  It's named after me.  It's an honorary, you know, attainment, you know.  There's two building on Beale Street named after people.  One, this building is named after me, and the other building is named after the banker of the First National Bank down the street.  After they named the building after me, he asked the Beale Street developers why name a street after-- the building after me on a street that he did the financing and endorsed the financing.  So, secondly, they just named it--of course, it was no anger.  It was just a, a humanic joke.  And, well he got his point over.
Story_ID: 20359
Speaker 1: Sir, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Well, my favorite food is ordinary food, what my wife cook better than in restaurants.  I'm not caught up in special restaurant food.  I'm caught up in basic American, African American, soul-type food.  But I have a sense of concern for the health value of the food, you know.  I'm not a--I'm not caught up in--well, I eat salads and whatever the proper diet of living each day is about, you know.  I don't have no special--you know, what American soul food that is predominantly eaten by the ethnic that I was raised in, which is African American.  But, you know, it's not--I don't go around saying, "I want some African American food."  I just want some food.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Morning, I eat breakfast, which is generally eggs, rice, sausage, ham, eggs, rice, you know, polish--you know, just a common--.
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Well, sir, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Oh, my favorite color would be the colors of my high school that I went for more than twelve years and is witness, which was blue and gold.  But it--.
Speaker 1: Okay, and that's the colors for which high school?
Speaker 2: Manassas High School in Memphis [Tennessee] is the school that I went, and my career as a photographer started as a teenager in the eighth grade.  I went to Manassas High School for--from the first grade to the twelfth grade.  It was an [at that time] elementary and high school [established by and for African Americans in ca. 1899].
Speaker 1: All right.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: No, all seasons.  I'm not, I'm not hung up on, you know, I just like weather.  I mean I'm acceptable to all weather.  I would rather it be more autumn or more cool than hot out.  I'm not hung up with hotness and I'm not--I don't love a lot of snow and ice and a lot of zero degrees.  But I love ordinary weather.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, ordinary weather,
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Pleasancy, which I don't have to wear an excessive amount of clothing and underwear and so on.
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: But I'm not against it.  I, I live to the seasons of the world.
Speaker 1: Sir, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No, I'm not a vacationer.  I've gone so many places.  I've traveled thirty-eight countries throughout Africa.  I've traveled Europe, London, England; Brussels [Belgium], and I've gone to some thirty-eight countries in Africa.  I was at the World--the Pan African Conference in 1983 in Libreville in Gabon.  I've been to South Africa--.
Speaker 1: So you don't have a favorite?
Speaker 2: No, not any favorite.  My favorite is my home, where I live every day, where I've lived--my favorite is my home, neighborhood and the church that I attend on the property where I was born.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The property where my father [Earl Withers] and mother [Pearl Davis] gave birth to me is now the parking lot of the church that I attend, and I've attended all my life.  And I was born five doors from the church.  And right now, the church parking lot is part of the land that my father's four-room house sat on.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: No, I don't have--"Is it true?  Does it hurt?  What good does it do?" is a basic slogan or basic theory of living.  I, I photograph as a photographer, based on the true theory.  "Is it true?  Does it hurt?  And what good does it do?"  It's not a physical hurt to me, but I don't go around making pictures that is aching and annoying to the life of anybody.  I don't enjoy, you know, that kind of picture.  But I'm a news photographer, and if someone is part of a damage, automobile damage, well, that's a different thing.  But I'm talking about just in common life, I don't try to make pictures to desolate their character.
Story_ID: 20360
Speaker 1: Can you tell me about your family history?  How far can you trace your family back?
Speaker 2: Oh, my family go all the way back to Silas Withers, my great, great grandfather that was born in Mississippi, went off with [Ulysses S.] Grant when he came through Marshall County to take Vicksburg [Mississippi, in the U.S. Civil War].  And as results of Silas's going, after his--General Grant took Vicksburg, and they receded, the Union Army left and went out of Mississippi.  Silas, according to the story of my father [Earl Withers], came back to the slave herd and went--was suggested that he would not go to the, up around the big house where the slave owners would know that he was back.  But then when he did go back, they resented his having gone with Grant and the Union army as a slave.  And the slave owners loaned him to other slave owners in the vicinity to bring--to drive them to Memphis [Tennessee] from Holly Springs, Marshall County [Mississippi] by way of Pigeon Roost Bottom [valley in Mississippi].  And the family legacy is that he, his--scatters of his body and clothing were found in the Pigeon Roost Bottom, which is the signal body at--from Holly Springs up [U.S.] Highway 78 to Memphis.  That's, that's, you know, historically marked as Pigeon Roost Bottom.
Speaker 1: So are you saying that they killed him on the way or what, or he died on the way?  What happened?
Speaker 2: Oh, they killed him.  They don't know--my father, nobody knew.  My father was a young kid.  And I was not even born.  I'm named after my father, grandfather and my father's brother, who were descendants of Silas Withers.  But the entire Withers family, when Silas Withers was found lynched, they scattered out of Mississippi.  They went all the way through Arkansas, settled--my father and his sisters and brothers settled in Brinkley, Arkansas later, and going to school in west Tennessee.  But there were other Withers that went as far north as Detroit [Michigan], as Toledo, Ohio, as St. Louis [Missouri], as far west as Denver [Colorado].  And Silas Withers--a descendant of Silas Withers--Silas Withers, who was my father's cousin, died in Denver years later, but was a senior man, the same as my father.  But my father told us this story.  But he didn't tell us this story to--for no hate legacy.  My family was never taught and never taught racial hate, based on Silas Withers being killed or anything.  My father did have a strong appeal for liberty and justice and the decency of living as an American because later in life, he went off to the military.  And as a result of--not only that, I have, I had four sons that went to the military, one--two sons that were officers.  And so, I mean we have no problems.  I mean, I am totally an American, and it didn't come from, what was that, the September 11th [2001 terrorist attacks in New York and Washington].  It came from the beginning of my basic legacy of living, you know, my career as a photographer.  I was trained in the military to be a photographer.  But I don't label that as no heavy labor of love.  It was--I served my country honestly.  And I was honestly and honorably discharged after three years in the military.
Story_ID: 20361
Speaker 1: Your father's name was Ernest Withers too?
Speaker 2: No, no, my father's name was Earl Withers.  And my father, first and foremost and for most memorable, my father worked during the [Great] Depression, had two jobs.  And, you know, he was never a leaner on charity or on any type of federal subsidy for living.  He supported his family, my brothers, my sisters.  He educated my oldest brother to the School of Pharmacy at Howard University [Washington, D.C.], graduating in '41 [1941].
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Sir, can you tell us his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: No, I can't remember that.  I'd have to have that document--.
Speaker 1: It doesn't have to be exact, but what do you think?
Speaker 2: No, I don't know.  If my father was living now, he would probably a 100--between 105 and 108.  My father died in 1969 after the death of [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] at the age of 79.  So you can calibrate it.  If he died in 1969, a year after the death of Martin, and he was--you know, I have a, we have an obituary somewhere, but we don't just look at it.
Speaker 1: Sure, I just--.
Speaker 2: I haven't looked at my father's obituary in a number of years.
Story_ID: 20362
Speaker 1: Can you tell us about your mother?  What was her full name? And where was she--?
Speaker 2: My mother was--was Pearl Davis.  But my mother died when I was seven.  So I was seven years old when my mother died, and then I was raised by my stepmother, Minnie.  My mother, birth mother was Pearl Davis.
Speaker 1: Do you remember her?
Speaker 2: Yes, I remember her.  I was a child when she would sit us in her lap on the floor.  But it's not a massive amount of memory from seven years back, because I don't know where the memory cycle of--I just remembered my mother being a sweet mama.  And I remember being at her funeral, and I remember the minister preaching her funeral.  And I remember my mother's best friend, Mrs. Weaver.  And I see images of her sons, who were baseball fans in my baseball legacy pictures.  Mrs. Weaver, we were--my mother was funeralized in Gospel Temple Baptist Church [Memphis, Tennessee] which is the church that I attend, five doors from our house.  My mother died on the--on the 19th of December, on a Thursday.  Her wake was on a Saturday night in our house at 1060--at that time, it was 1062--it was, and it's still I guess, throughout the 1062, which was five doors from the church, on a Saturday night.  And those people, old people in that community stayed up all night in the old-fashioned family wake, you know, where they drink coffee and talked and went on.  I remember waking up the morning of my mother's death and saw the undertakers in the house, heard 'em, beating the--the bed, you know, taking the bed down.  In the old days, if a person died, they were, they--when the undertaker came, if they died in the house of an illness, they tore the bed down and carried the mattress and quilts and everything outdoors, hung 'em up and sprayed the house.  But what they sprayed it with, I was not old enough to analyze, but I remember these people doing it.  And I know that my brother and I were in the bed.  And we were--we had wet all over the bed, over both of each of us, you know, slept all night, but we--as they say, as a kid, we peed in the bed because we, we were not that--in the period that I come up, we had a outdoor toilet, you know.  But I don't know whether that had anything to do.  I mean it's just that I had lived down the street with a neighbor who was is in a nursing home now and slept at night with him.  He was an older boy than we, than I was.  And we would stay all night and sleep with him, and even pee in the bed at night with him.  It just was not--just, that was just the matter of the old-fashioned--you know, it wasn't any bladder problem.  It was just, sleep and sound sleep and you wet the bed.
Story_ID: 20363
Speaker 1: Can you tell me about your neighborhood when you were growing up, and maybe what some of the sights and sounds and smells were in the neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Well, I lived--I come up in a, in a middle grade, North Memphis, upgrade community where my father [Earl Withers] lived where people--during the [Great] Depression, although it was a poor time, I didn't--I was not deeply in the ghetto of life because there were people three blocks, four blocks north of us--and even in other blocks in other areas--but where I lived and where my father and where all the children that I belong, and what we used to call it the three streets, Manassas [Street], Woodlawn [Street], Leath Street, were good and decent living people.  Their fathers and mothers worked.  Further north of us--well, it wasn't no heavy level of welfare at that time.  I don't know what the level, but these people were not as economically strong as maybe my father and the neighbors, because my father worked for the United States Post Office as a motor vehicle truck driver.  And, of course, most people in the neighborhood that I lived, their parents worked in the wood mills or [General Motors] Fisher [automobile] Body Plant, Murray [automobile] Body Plant, Bruce [lumber company], North Memphis [Tennessee] Hardwood Flooring Company, all of those wood products companies in the north Thomas Street area.  And even after I was married, my wife's father wanted me to work for Anderson and Tully's, which was a wood mill, as an off bearer.  And that was below my feeling and the danger of--so many people in that area that worked in those plants had fingers cut off, arms cut off.  Usually, it was just a common thing to see a number of people.
Speaker 1: And they didn't have any workmen's compensation or anything, did they?
Speaker 2: Oh, it wasn't no, no, workmen's compensation.  That wasn't, that wasn't even--
Speaker 1: So, if you just lose a finger--.
Speaker 2: It wasn't no--welfare, no, no.  I guess if you lose a finger, they--you went to the doctor, sponsored by the mill.  But you, it wasn't--I couldn't analyze that, I know that I saw 'em--they went, most of the people went to the Memphis General Hospital, which was John Gaston [Hospital] later.
Story_ID: 20364
Speaker 1: It was the Memphis General Hospital.  It was John Gaston [Hospital] in, in the year that we're here in now.  It is the city Memphis [Tennessee]  hospital known as 'the Med'.  Black people did not go to the Baptist Hospital [Baptist Memorial Hospital]  the Methodist [University] Hospital, or the Catholic hospital [St. Joseph's Hospital].  The only hospital that black people went to in the period that I come up was the Memphis General Hospital.  You know, they didn't go to--they did not go to other hospitals.  My aunt, who helped my mother to raise us after my--my stepmother [Minnie] to raise us, worked for the Methodist hospital and caught a very devastating disease and later died from it.  But possibly, it was always believed that if she could have been treated at the hospital where she worked and seen and analyzed by the doctors and nurses and people that she worked for, that she might have been saved in life.  That was always my father's theory.  But in the John Gaston Hospital of old, there was a colored waiting room and white waiting room.  There was colored emergency room and a white emergency room.  It was just two-sided, separate citizenry.  They went in the same back door, but when they come in, the receiving ward was black and white.  Even up to 1948 when I went on the police force, it still was a segregated two-sided hospital because I remember as a policemen, a white prisoner, a white man was violent in the white waiting room, and they called, made what was known as a mayday call, emergency call to the police department.  And as a result of that call, the white police was summoned, but we were, as black police, was in the black emergency ward dealing with a black client that had been stabbed or cut.  I don't remember the particular incident, but when they hollered and was scared, we went into the white receiving ward, grabbed the white man and he just stopped.  He froze and didn't do anything.  But when the white police came, then he got up and got violent again.  It was just a difference in his fear and respect for us as colored police.
Story_ID: 20365
Speaker 1: What kind of little boy were you?  I mean what did you like to do and what were you like?  What kind of personality did you have?
Speaker 2: I mean, I was an ordinary kid.  My brother and all the children, we played ball.  We played basketball, we played football, we played baseball, softball during the summer.  And I was a participant.  I wasn't a--I wasn't no leader of the--we--wasn't no gang life.  In them days, we just had individuality.  It wasn't, we didn't live by gang or gang activity.  We just lived as a community.  And we, we had a park and a swimming pool that was some eight or ten blocks from our house to the west.  But then there was the school campus, Manassas High School [Memphis, Tennessee] campus, and even before we got to Manassas, there was a great big field known as the headin' factory, where we played ball, you know, and played and went unsupervised.  But later, there was Park Commission of Memphis, had park supervisors during the summer, but not during the winter.
Story_ID: 20366
Speaker 1: Where did you go to grade school?
Speaker 2: I went all twelve years at Manassas High School [Memphis, Tennessee], from the first grade to the twelfth grade.
Speaker 1: So Manassas took care of all the grades, all twelve grades?  There was no--.
Speaker 2: Manassas was a grammar school, a mid, mid-level, what they call middle school now, and high school, twelve years.  [The former 'Manassas School' founded by the African-American community in Memphis later became the four-year 'Manassas High School'.] Ninety-five percent of its students.  But Manassas was a [Shelby] county school, where Booker [T.] Washington, the other school in south Memphis was a city school.  But Manassas was in the county, which was governed by the county board of education and later become a city school, but it, physically, it was the same school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, of course, as a child, I watched my mother [Minnie] and my--which was my stepmother and women of that community organize a PTA and all of that which was Parent Teachers Association to make and orientate life and communication between the teachers, principal and the parents, you know. There was a Parent Teachers Association.
Story_ID: 20367
Speaker 1: My [step]mother [Minnie] was active and my father [Earl Withers] was active in Republican politics all of my life.  The first--we, in our neighborhood, my father was what was known as a ward healer.  I don't what ward healer--he just a man that was respected as a leader in the ward.  And the voter polls all over Memphis [Tennessee] was, was organized and different people worked at, when elections came, whether it was Republican primary or Democratic primary.  My family, my father, as an image, was an image of the, of a Republican until the life and time of [U.S. President] John Fitzgerald Kennedy when he shifted from being a Republican to a Democrat.  But then my wife's father was never, never did transfer from the Republican party.
Speaker 2: Now, why were most black people Republicans in those days?
Speaker 1: Because the Republican Party had an agenda that was toward the more liberal living, you know, literary living.  And it was just, it was the--in Memphis, there was two, two Republican parties.  There was a black and tan, which was colored and white.  And there was a lily white.  And they had two philosophies.  But I, being a kid, I just know that by name.  Having grown later in politics, I know that it meant that there were two organizations that, that housed black and white people that ran the party.
Story_ID: 20368
Speaker 1: How did you like school?
Speaker 2: Well, I had no problem going.  My father [Earl Withers] required us to go to school and we went to school.  I didn't know anything about playing hooky until I got about the ninth grade or something.
Speaker 1: Now, were you a good student in school?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I was pushed along free because my brothers and sisters before me were scholarly, and the teachers didn't really lend a sense of pressure on me as a student like they might have done other children.  And as a result, I felt that I was crippled for being in a good family and being young.  So they took for granted that I had learned, you know.  But as I look back on it and as I--I wasn't creditable at that time, but as I look back on it, I know that my--my impetitiveness [sic], my inability--inabilities in reading was substantively, not as good as it should have been because they did not nurture me and require me--and the vowels and all these steps of being a scholarly person.  My sisters and my brothers were A, B and top students.  I was an average student.
Story_ID: 20369
Speaker 1: How many brothers and sisters do you have?
Speaker 2: Well, I had four--it was, in my father's [Earl Withers] family, there was six children, four boys and two girls.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where do you--
Speaker 2: And two--I was next to the baby, which was a boy.  And I was younger than the two sisters. I had two older brothers.  My brother, James, and my brother, Earl, were the oldest.  The next was my sister, Alice.  The next was my sister, Vivian, and the next was me and then my brother, Jay, made six of us.
Story_ID: 20370
Speaker 1: When you were in school, did you have any inspiring teachers that you remember that were particularly important?
Speaker 2: Oh, all the teachers [at Manassas School, Memphis, Tennessee]--I mean I had, I can take icons of memory of teachers, but it wasn't because they 'petted' me.  They were just good role models and lecturers and--I mean in the old school that I come up in, you knew teachers and teachers knew you.  And they watched you, and they were--there were some men that were good for counseling and some men that did and some men that didn't.  I remember my, one of my favorite teachers just died, less than a month ago at the age of 90-something, late, in his late 90's in Texas.  And I just happened to see the death notice in the paper.  And his daughter brought him through here, and when he, went up to Jackson, Tennessee where he was born and buried him up there.  It was a graveside service, but nothing was actually said (unclear) about it.  The principal of our school, when I come up in elementary school, we had an elementary principal, a lady.  And we had a high school principal, a man.  But before I got to high school, there was a lady principal, Mrs. Cora P. Taylor was a great icon in the memory of Manassas students.
Story_ID: 20371
Speaker 1: So when you were in school, did you have a vocation you were fixed on at a--
Speaker 2: No, I just thought that when my, according to my yearbook horoscope, I just said, "I wanted to be a pilot." because I had learned and heard of the earlier Tuskegee Airmen [African American military pilots in World War One].  And I had heard the story of [Charles] Lindbergh and things like that, that was just an aspiration.  But I fell far short of being a pilot.  I just--I don't know.  My sister brought a camera for her boyfriend when I was in the eighth grade.  And I went to school and while there, Marva Trotter Louis, the wife of Joe Louis, the World Heavyweight Champion, visited our school and was in the assembly.  And the yearbook photographers that were making pictures were up there, and making pictures.  And I, as a little boy, went up there with a little camera and took pictures.  The children laughed me out of the school, but it was just a symbol of what I might be and was identified from that day forward.
Story_ID: 20372
Speaker 1: Did you think about being a photographer when you were a kid?
Speaker 2: Well, no, only when I was, when I--when the peak point, you know, when I had a camera, when I was producing pictures.  Well, yeah, but I never thought that I was gonna grow to be a photographer until I went into the military.  And there was an economic side because I was on Saipan [Northern Mariana Islands, Pacific Ocean].  And the [U.S.] Army cut the engineer, general service regiment.  They, they took photography out of the requirement.  But the Army supply officer wanted to use a camera and equipment, so he kept it.  And we couldn't buy no supplies, but we got an average of six cans of beer a week--on the weekend on Saipan there was no commercial area.  It wasn't no residential or other--we, our mix and mingle was with soldiers.  And when we got the beer, we couldn't buy, you couldn't order nothing from nowhere from nobody, no drugstore, no supply place or nothing.  The only supplies in photography came from the Army [U.S.] Air Force photographic lab.  And my knowledge of photography had been extended to know the people who were photographers in the lab.  And we bartered by giving them as many cans of beer as we could get from people.  There were a number of soldiers that, though they were issued beer or given beer, it wasn't no issue.  It was just something to eulogize or to energize you on a weekend that you were off for the weekend.  And a result of being off, we had six cans of beer that was granted.  I don't, I don't even know the strength of the beer or nothing.  I don't even know the label.  I can't remember none of that because I took my beer, and as many cans of beer as I could trade a picture or two for, and took the beer and gave it--bartered it off with men in the Air Force to get photographic supplies.
Speaker 1: All right, now, I don't want to get too far ahead of ourselves.  But that's a good--now, we know how you got supplies, but, now, when did you graduate from high school [Manassas High School, Memphis, Tennessee], in what year?
Speaker 2: I graduated from high school before I went to the Army in 1941.
Speaker 1: '41 [1941], okay, now, when you graduated, had you already started taking pictures?
Speaker 2: No no, I'd took pictures as a kid, yeah.
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) But not--
Speaker 2: But I mean I was not interested in the up and the down the street.  I became a professional photographer, 1946, five years later when I came out of the Army where I had been making money taking pictures.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, I see. Now--.
Speaker 2: But I was no photographer until I came out of the Army.  And when I came back, there was another photographer that was in the [U.S.] Navy that was a good photographer.  And we--.
Speaker 1: Another black photographer?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Earl Williams, and we paralleled to the Hooks Brothers [photography studio begun by Henry A. Hooks Sr. and his brother Robert B. Hooks in 1907], who was the number one [African American] photographers in Memphis.  There was two or three little arcade-type studios that drew people, the Blue Light [Studio] and--.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, wait, wait, let me kind of put it in perspective cause you're going so fast that we're losing track of where we are.  But in the Army, you learned how to shoot, okay.  And did you have assignments in the Army?
Speaker 2: No, I mean there wasn't assignment when we had photography.  The assignment was to make field marches or to shoot pictures of engineer projects.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they--.
Speaker 2: But when they, when they cancelled out the need for photographers [in engineer, general service regiments] well, we were expected to work and dig gravel and lay--and help to lay cement, I mean asphalt and topplings.  My outfit laid the topplings--we weren't the only outfit.  There were numbers of outfits.  I can't even charter them because I have no, no way of knowing, but we laid the toppling on--on Saipan that the B-29s [airplanes] landed on and took off to Hiroshima [Japan] to drop the atomic bomb. [sic., the airplanes with atomic bombs took off from nearby Tinian island, where construction had been done by Seabees, not Army engineers.] But it wasn't no teaching.  We wasn't saying, "These planes are going to drop the atomic bomb." Because the atomic bomb was as much a surprise to us, according to the little news source. Every now and then we got to hear a news radio, and very little, if any, newspapers.  It wasn't no papers.  It wasn't no public existence other than, you know, air--people watch and listen to the radio at night.
Story_ID: 20373
Speaker 1: What happened next after you got out of the service?  What happened?
Speaker 2: Oh, when I come out of the service, my brother came out of the service.  And I, knowing that I had made money as a picture taker in the [U.S.] Army, and I thought that I had enough skills, that I could open up a studio in our neighborhood.  And we got the GI Bill of Right[s] and a government loan, and we bought a double-tenant house, we two brothers.  He had one side.  I had the other.  And we put a photographic studio in my neighborhood [north Memphis, Tennessee].  And the Negro newspapers needed and did not get the use of wire services, and when you knew anything the [U.S.] Supreme Court--see, I came out in '46 [1946].  And then in 1954, and even before that, there were, there were lynchings and things that were happening throughout the South.  There were a lot of philanthropic newspaper.  There was, see the 'Chicago Defender' [newspaper] was noted as the' Defender.'  What was it the defender of?  The defender of Negro rights, which is 'Chicago Defender.'  Before the 'Chicago Defender'--which I didn't work for nobody but the 'Chicago Defender' and the 'Memphis World.' --they were two newspapers that needed pictures to go in their newspaper.  And myself and Earl Williams and--it wasn't nobody buying cameras like they do now.  You look at the paper every week in the Negro newspaper, they got a courtesy picture that somebody took a--bought a camera, a little paper camera from Walgreen's or from the drugstores and took pictures at a church and carried and give it, and it's an interesting picture, and it becomes--but back in that time, the white newspapers had the service of UPI [United Press International], AP [the Associated Press] and a number of wire services that was processing pictures and getting them to them, where Negro newspapers didn't have a source of, of news pictures unless they had their own photographer.  And myself and Earl Williams, there was--like I said, in Memphis, you had older men that didn't go to the Army that worked for the older photographers of Memphis.  There was a Clarence Blakely who worked for Poland Photographers [studio in Memphis].  There was a [Robert 'R.A.'] Coleman who worked for Jaffe [Studio].  There was a John Nevels who worked for [John Calvin 'J.C.'] Coovert, a very outstanding photographer.  And--.
Speaker 1: You said the Hooks family--.
Speaker 2: Well they [Hooks Brothers Photography] were the, the multiple greatest [African American] photographic business [in Memphis].  Like in every principal city, there were top Negro photographers.  Okay, and--. There was a family in Washington, D.C., I can't think of it, you know, the thirst for knowledge, but the Hooks Brothers had a slogan that "Beauty we take it, no beauty we make it."  But in the early legacy of the Hooks family, in the early legacy of the Hooks family, Robert Hooks and Henry Hooks were two brothers.  And they opened up a photographic studio.  And all of this is history.  And after a given amount of years and their children grew up, the Hooks Brothers divided.  And Henry Hooks of the-- of Henry Hook, Sr., had his own studio and [Charles] Charlie Hooks and, and the other Hooks brother had work with their father and had their separate studio.
Story_ID: 20374
Speaker 1: We were talking about your camera.  So that's the kind of camera you used for, you started out with, right?
Speaker 2: Four by five camera.  It wasn't no thirty-five millimeter.  You had what they called Brownie cameras, which was a little wind camera, but they were not considered professional photographers' camera, you know.  But later, 120 cameras came, and we moved from four by five down, but even that, with the four by five, that was a two and a quarter, three and a quarter that's on the same format.  But four by five was just the more practical or more, more specifically used camera.
Story_ID: 20375
Speaker 1: Briefly tell us about the Emmett Till trial.
Speaker 2: Well, the Emmett Till trial was--.
Speaker 1: About your shooting it, rather, not just about the (unclear)--.
Speaker 2: Well, preamble to me shooting, Emmett Till was a kid that went to Mississippi to visit his uncle, [Moses] Mose Wright, in a little town known as Money, Mississippi, in Tallahatchie County.  Emmett Till, being from Chicago [Illinois] was very flagrant and very, you know, energetic, until when he saw Mr. [Roy] Bryant's wife [Carolyn Bryant] at the single general store i[Bryant Grocery and Meat Market] in Money, Mississippi, this little small village, he was flirting with her, whistling, that wolf whistle and all of that, you know, just trying to get her to listen and, and be attracted by him.  But she was more insulted, and she told her husband, Roy Bryant, when he came home from work that afternoon [sic., Roy Bryant was out of town at the time and did not return for several more days] that "Uncle Mose Wright has got a little nigger boy here from Chicago, and he come down here whistling at me and flirting at me" and blah, blah, blah, whatever she said.  But Mr. Bryant told--then called his brother-in-law [sic., half brother], [John William] J. W. Milam and they just said, "We need to go down there and teach that little so and so a lesson."  So apparently, they went down there in a very angry and frustrated manner, to Uncle Mose's house at midnight and knocked on the door--well, I don't know, nobody knew exact what time it was.  It could have been earlier than midnight.  I don't know.  Even in the trial, the facts never came out, whether it was nine o'clock [PM] or whether it was midnight or, you know, it was just, he was in the bed when they went to Uncle Mose's house.  It wasn't no electric lights.  All lamp chambers, and they had a flashlight, and they were flashing it up in the ceiling and knocked on the door--according to testimony later in the trial.  But, they got him out.  They took him to a barn on Mr. Milam's farm [sic., the Sheridan Plantation, managed by  J.W. Milam's brother Leslie Milam] .  And they whipped him all night.  And early in the morning, there was four or five black land--tenant farmers that heard this boy hollering in there, something going in there was unusual.  And Mr. [J.W.] Milam came out of the barn to get some water from the pump, and after he did that, they went back, trailed him, knowing where he was going, and, and peeped in the thing and saw them beating him and flogging him, and later dumped him, and tied him on a [cotton] gin fan and dropped him in the [Tallahatchie] river.  Well, all of this never came out until the, the prosecution.  But what happened is, his uncle, through some means and with communication, told his mother about him missing.  And he was a very cute little boy and very affectionately to his mother.  And his uncle, his mother's [Mamie Till Bradley, later Mamie Till Mobley] uncle [sic., cousin by marriage], Rayfield Mooty [a labor activist]--who even today, they don't--you know, people take the fancy end of everything and don't get the intergals, but Rayfield Mooty told the Progressive Party [of 1948-1961], which was considered communistic in Chicago, what--that this boy's body--this boy, as a person was missing and possibly lynched because of the fact that Milam and Bryant had beat him to death in the barn.  Nobody knew, Willis [Willie] Reed  [a witness at the Sheridan plantation] and Mrs. Mandy [Mary Amanda] Bradley [another witness who heard the beating] and all those witnesses that came forward were never solidified, and never came forward until the trial.  But Milam and Bryant, having done that, the Progressive Party, which was interested in Chicago of drawing--even they were organizing the labor union as it was an organizing effort of a labor union for the packing house workers who had moved to Chicago.  And they couldn't get confidence in high volume, you know, even when they--even till today, when they organize a labor union, and you don't get people just rain--the majority of people don't go in for it until later after they're sold on the idea.  But it being sold, after they began to plunder it and made a news story about him missing, and the story about these white men coming to Mr. Mose Wright's house, being all that Mrs. [Mamie Till] Bradley knew, all that, that Rayfield Mooty knew--and Rayfield Mooty was pumping it to the party, and they started pumping it and making a news story out of it in the newspaper.  And in the Negro newspapers, it was a beautiful little boy missing, And they put his picture in all the Negro papers across the country.  And finally, you know, the--the body came loose in the Tallahatchie River.  And the muds come to the top.  And the undertaker was summoned and took him back to another little town, south of Clarksdale [Mississippi] and south of--of Tallahatchie County, and [his uncle Moses Wright] identified him subsequently as Emmett Till and notified his mother and family, and shipped his body to Chicago, where A. R. Leaks [sic., A.A. Rayner] Funeral Home got the body.  And when they looked at it, it was such a gruesome image.  Then the Progressive Party got Rayfield Mooty to persuade his mother--Rayfield Mooty was the mother of--Mrs. Mandy [sic., Mamie Till] Bradley's--uncle [sic., cousin]--persuade her, in order to make a massive collection of anger.  Because if they just buried him, and didn't show the body, nobody would be angry.  But when they did show the body and the funeral went on [at Roberts Temple Church of God in Christ] and they had the casket open and all of that.  The white daily papers--you know, newspapers operate on community interests.  But black papers were operating on the total black interests of equal treatment and what have you.
Speaker 1: Now--.
Speaker 2: They, they, the wire services and all of the white newspapers thought about the calamity of it, and summons the state of Mississippi to prosecute these two men.  And they were arrested and prosecuted.  They were set for trial at Sumner, Mississippi, which was county seat of, of that county, of Tallahatchie County where Money, Mississippi was there in the county.  But Money, Mississippi was not the, the courthouse.
Story_ID: 20376
Speaker 1: Did you photograph the funeral [of murder victim Emmett Till]?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't photograph the funeral.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I photographed the trial.
Speaker 1: The trial.
Speaker 2: When [J. W.] Milam and [Roy] Bryant was brought to trial--.
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) What happened then?
Speaker 2: I was in the first, in the group reporters--Simeon Booker [reporter from 'Jet' magazine], myself, David Jackson, a photographer from 'Ebony' [magazine] and L. Alex Wilson [editor of the Tri-State Defender, the Memphis branch of the Chicago Defender].  We were the first four to arrive there [at the courthouse in Sumner, Mississippi].  But there was thirty coming that day.  But when the [Tallahatchie County] sheriff [Henry Clarence 'H.C.' Strider] assembled the court to call it some sense or order, he said, "We've got twenty-two seat over here for you white boys.  And we've got four seats over here for you colored boys.  We don't mix 'em down here.  We ain't gone mix 'em, and we don't intend to.  And ain't nobody gonna be armed down here but me and my deputies."  And that was the solemn factuality.  But then we went out, and they searched us.  And--but even when we went out, there were more black photographers from the 'St. Louis Argus' [newspaper] and the Jackson newspaper that, that arrived and even more white photographers that arrived on that time.  And so I just stayed there the whole trial, photographing the trial for the 'Chicago Defender'.  No other Negro newspaper out of the ten or twelve black newspapers--the 'Cleveland Call [and] Post' [newspaper], the 'New York Amsterdam News', 'Pittsburgh Courier', the 'Pittsburgh  [sic., Philadelphia] Tribune', the 'St. Louis Argus,' the 'Memphis World' or the 'Atlanta Daily World'  or, or the 'Louisville Defender' --none of these papers--they all were depending on the pictures that I made.  After the 'Defender' got their four or five, and I'd been down there a week and made so many--up to about thirty and no more than forty pictures, if any--I can't go back retroactively, but I know we shipped them to the different newspapers all over the country.  And--
Speaker 1: Now, how much did the 'Defender' pay you for that?
Speaker 2: Paid thirty-five dollars for one week's work.  For six days, we went down there on Sunday night and went into Money [sic., Sumner], Mississippi on Monday.  Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday--five days.  And at the end of the five days, and the trial was over and the two men were pronounced as not guilty.  Then it come time to go home, and Mr. Wilson said, "John Sengstacke [publisher of the 'Defender'] gave it to me, paid thirty-five dollars for your time."
Story_ID: 20377
Speaker 1: Now, you covered also the Montgomery Bus Boycott, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, when the [U.S.] Supreme Court decision [November 13, 1956, declaring segregation on buses unconstitutional; its implementation on December 21 would mark the end of the boycott]  was coming to Montgomery [Alabama], the night that it arrived in Montgomery, I was there for the ['Chicago] Defender' [newspaper] with L. Alex Wilson [editor of the 'Defender's Memphis paper, the Tri-State Defender], and we got up the next morning and got on the first bus that came out of the bus station in Montgomery, L. Alex Wilson and myself, two hours before [Dr.] Martin [Luther] King [Jr.] got up and got on the bus.  But we were not, you know, celebrities or nothing.  They wasn't interested in reporters. They were interested in Martin Luther King [Jr.].  And in fact, on that, in that period, that day, I never saw Rosa Parks (laughs).  You know, just authentically, I didn't, she wasn't, she didn't ride the bus the first day.
Story_ID: 20378
Speaker 1: What about now--all during the time that SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] was registering voters in Mississippi, did you go down there into Mississippi and shoot?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but you, you way up the line.  You done dropped a whole--.
Speaker 1: Oh, what did I drop now?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, well, you talking about SNCC--SNCC and them come way in, from 1954--SNCC and them didn't start emerging until '60 [1960], '61 [1961].
Speaker 1: '61, yeah, right.
Speaker 2: I mean we're talking about '55 [1955], '56 [1956], '57 [1957], '58 [1958], '59 [1959], '60 [1960], and there were so many other things, Mack Parker and other lynchings that occurred.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the Mack [Charles] Parker lynching [Poplarville, Mississippi, 1959] that was--I remember that, Lu [Lutrelle] Palmer, who is now in Chicago [Illinois] was working I think for the 'Tri-State Defender' [Memphis newspaper] then.
Speaker 2: But I was still a photographer, and I worked Mack Parker, but I worked--the Mack Parker trial, I mean the Mack Parker lynching with Simeon Booker for 'Jet' magazine.  But I was still shooting.
Story_ID: 20379
Speaker 1: Never had no Social Security or nothing from no colored [news]paper.  And even today--well, I'd rather not go into that--it's too critical, too criticism of--.
Speaker 2: Well, what, what you're saying is--.
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) No, no, but I mean one, working for a black newspaper today ain't nothing, ain't no money.  I get more money from the ['Memphis] Commercial Appeal', the daily paper, now, for pictures than I get, you know, in one week or one--than I get a whole month if I made pictures for the--you know, it's just, no, it's not a--it's not an equal employment situation.  But I don't want to get into that.  They do not pay adequately 'til today.  And if they're really looking for the defense of people, you know, you pay fair and receive fair.  But it's never been that, and I don't want to be the indicter of papers.
Speaker 2: But they operate on a much smaller budget--.
Speaker 1: No, no, ain't no smaller budget.  They, they have millionaires, the Johnson Publishing [Company] is rich as anybody in the world, but they don't pay no money.  The--all the Negro newspapers have lived and died and have dynasties of the Murphys and all of the great newspaper owners have lived wealthy.  The Sengstackes have been in a lawsuit for a number of years, but it wasn't because they were paying folks.  They were housing that money for themselves, you know.  You know, just to be frank about it.  It's never been--and they were not concerned about anybody but themselves.
Story_ID: 20380
Speaker 1: If there were things that you--I mean, were there things that impressed you or things that you saw that, that you felt really privileged to see at the time because of your status as a photographer, being on the scene?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean there was courage by me and by Mr. [L. Alex] Wilson [editor of Tri-State Defender, Memphis, Tennessee] and by writers.  And I was the one--two person when James Meredith went to school at Ole Miss [University of Mississippi, Oxford, Mississippi. This was one of several unsuccessful attempts in which Meredith and attorneys with a small group of federal marshals were turned away by Mississippi state troopers.].  Well, James Meredith was represented by attorney [Archie Walter]  A. W. Willis in Memphis, but when he came to town, Larry Steele and myself got him, and took care of him and socialized with him the night before he was to be admitted at Ole Miss. The next--we dropped him off at his cousin's house in Cascilla [Mississippi] and picked him up the next morning and delivered him to A. W. Willis's house where Marshal [James] McShane and a force of United States marshals picked him up and drove him down to the University of Mississippi. Larry Steele and myself followed the marshals, but when we got to Highway 6, it turn off of Highway 51 going east, McShane or someone must have told the Mississippi Highway Patrol that we were following them.  And so they come out and told us, "Don't be following, just stop and don't follow us."  So when they loaded up again at the Highway 6 and 51 from the Highway Patrol station to be escorted to the front of Ole Miss where he was first denied--you know, we followed--after they pulled off again.  We wasn't--we had a right to go up the highway, and that's what we did.  But when we got up to the college, they didn't let us in.  So we couldn't get in by no credentials.  But then when they did not admit him, they shipped his body--I mean (laughs), not his body, but they sent him back to Memphis [Tennessee].  And they took him to Millington [Tennessee] where we learned through communication with him where he was, and we went to Millington.  And then we went down, came to Memphis and was journeying to Mississippi when all the gunfire was--that took place when he was [air] lifted into Ole Miss early in the morning [of September 30, 1962], late at night.  And then the next morning, we were in the Lyceum [administration] building when all of that shooting went on down there.  And they confiscated hundreds of rifles, but nobody was killed [although many were wounded, including twenty-eight marshals who were shot]. It was just a lot of gunfire and fearless tactics.
Story_ID: 20381
Speaker 1: Have you ever been in a situation where you really felt like you might be hurt or--.
Speaker 2: Oh, at the Medgar Evers funeral, during the missing civil rights workers, when we were riding around in the dark at night, a lot of places.  When we went to the courthouse [in Poplarville, Mississippi] when Mack [Charles] Parker was lynched, we, we had fear.  But you had--somebody had to go forward and ask a question.  And it was our duty to be forward as people of the press.  The freedom of the press give us that right, you know.  I mean when--there were hundreds of black men lynched and never anything ever done about it.  There were never any stories--but whatever little picture story that ran in the paper, but it wasn't nothing--it wasn't any big, big--just--the Emmett Till [murder] case was made so big because of the white influence in it, in the Progressive Party.  It wasn't because it was--or even James Meredith, because the white papers began to look at it.  But it wasn't because of any special--.
Speaker 1: It wasn't new. It wasn't new.
Speaker 2: No, but what I'm saying, there was no real effort on the part of anybody to make these publications be concerned.  I mean Hoxie, Arkansas [In 1955, the small town was one of the earliest to implement integration, but the most intensel battle with segregationists was stirred up the following year ], when we went to--. Clinton, Tennessee--when we went and [Tennessee Governor] Frank Clement sent the [U.S.] National Guard to Clinton, Tennessee, and they were up there to maintain law and order [when a white mob rioted on the weekend of September 1, 1956], . Because there was a man named [John] Kasper [segregationist and self-styled "rabble rouser"] that was going across the state of Tennessee creating havoc and trying to build up riots.  And when Frank Clement sent the National Guard up there, he got up, and the National Guard got up there that night, on Sunday night before the Monday morning, and got up there just in time and maybe saved our lives, because we were in the filling station and the whole imposition is very dangerous. There's a good possibility that if the National Guard had not come, they probably would have killed any strange Negroes that was there.  And we were--it was four of us there.  And we were at this filling station. (Pause.) There were a number of, you know--places, but there wasn't no special guard for Negro reporters.  And even the police in the town was against you being there, the law enforcement.  Or even at the trial of Medgar Evers [sic, trial of Byron de la Beckwith, Mississippi, 1964], the vigilantes, which were local citizens, pointed me out, (points finger) taking pictures, and then they know that here's a--.
Speaker 1: What did you do to protect yourself?  Did you--?
Speaker 2: Well, you can't protect, you can't pull no gun.  You can't have no knife against no police.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but did you have anything with you?
Speaker 2: No, no, we didn't carry no knife. No, lordy. (laughs)
Speaker 1: Like try to make sure that the community knew you were there?
Speaker 2: No no, no, we couldn't do that.  The community, anybody in the community would call and notify the white folks that we were there.  I mean, when we showed up in one little village [Poplarville, Mississippi] down there during the Mack Parker thing, the lady said, "Oh, oh, they're from Chicago [Illinois]!"  We wasn't from Chicago. I was from Memphis [Tennessee]--and--we were both from the 'Chicago Defender' [newspaper] but--you know, the people, when they said that--and they'd tell their--I mean it just--but it wasn't--it was just that we were isolated because we did not live in that community, but we were there with a camera and pencil and pen.
Speaker 1: Did they ever try to take your camera or take your film?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they took the film at the Emmett--at the, at the Medgar Evers, and they tore my film up and took the film out and locked me up four hours and all that.  And I had some film that I had taken and when they put me in the truck to take me to the fairground where they locked us up, or they just kept us in secure--we was not, we weren't locked up, but more isolated.  And the man saw me through the rearview mirror of truck and told the officers that, that I had given the film to this girl.  And some twenty-odd years later, more or less, I was getting a, an award from the Afro American newspaper for the journalism award.  And this girl showed up, and that was the first time I had seen her since that day.  She was probably--and I believe she was part of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] or some of those voice--you know, groups.  I mean even the Freedom Rides, I assisted Freedom Riders when they got back to Memphis, but we didn't go down there photographing the Freedom Riders because they wanted to be unescorted and unidentified by the press, by the black press, because this would draw more attention for us to be there taking they picture.
Story_ID: 20382
Speaker 1: Tell me about photographing the musicians, the blues musicians.  What musicians have photographed?
Speaker 2: [William] Count Basie, [William Henry] Chick Webb, you know, the musicians--well, the early avalance of B. B. King, of Junior Parker and Bobby Bland and any musicians--see, musicians travel--black musicians traveled on what was known as the chitlin circuit.  That would mean that they were going where 'niggers' were.  And that's all we went.  If they came here [Memphis, Tennessee], they was at Church's [sic., Church] Park Auditorium or they were at the Flamingo Club or they were at Club Handy or they were at Ellis Auditorium downtown or they were at the--the [Mid-South] Coliseum as later life and volume crowds.  But it was no problem in that.  That was just picture taking, from Count Basie to Lloyd Price and Elvis Presley, B. B. King, Bobby Bland, Johnny Ace, the whole--I'd have to get a catalogue to really--I don't--.
Speaker 1: Now, you've got a book for that--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I couldn't just come out of my mind and start to talk about people--
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) What's the name of your book?
Speaker 2: Oh, the music book is 'Four Decades of the Blues in Memphis,' [sic., 'The Memphis Blues Again: Six Decades of Memphis Music Photographs'], you know--.
Speaker 1: There's a famous photograph you shot of Elvis Presley and B. B. King.
Speaker 2: That was shot at the Ellis Auditorium two years in a row [1956 and 1957], you know, when Elvis, where Elvis and Brook Benton in this week's 'Tri-State Defender' was shot one year.  And Elvis and B. B. the same day or same night, but then the picture that is more manifest and is a better posed picture made a year later.
Story_ID: 20383
Speaker 1: Tell me about 1968 here in Memphis [Tennessee] when Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was killed.  Where were you when Dr. King was killed?
Speaker 2: Oh, I had--I was here in my studio which was two doors down, next to the theater.  We were in this--where we are now, we're one door East of the Old Daisy.  In 1968, we were one door West at 327 Beale when Martin King was, when Martin King was--well, I had met him at the airport on the 3rd, went to the Minister's Conference.
Story_ID: 20384
Speaker 1: [The] preamble to [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.]'s assassination was the last march of Martin or the last speech before the last March on the 28th of March [1968].  What happens is that the polarization, the polarization of the sanitation [workers] strike had grown, and the summons of Martin coming to lead a march was scheduled for the 22nd of March.  And Memphis [Tennessee] had never had a snow before that and even after that, that was that deep, on the 22nd.  And the day before the march, the night before the march was cancelled the next morning, Grover Brown did the 'I'm a Man' ['I AM a Man' posters], printed them up in the [Clayborn Temple African Methodist Episcopal Church, Hernando Street, Memphis] Minimum Salary Building.
Speaker 2: Those posters, "I am a Man?"
Speaker 1: "I'm a Man," was printed in the back of the building where my office was.  I was in the front in the Minimum--the AME [African Methodist Episcopal] Church Minimum Salary Building.  And Grover Brown and I were schoolmates.  And he asked me to go with him to rent a saw to cut the sticks.  They had ordered a lot of one by two sticks that were in--about ten foot, you know, length.  But they were gonna cut them and nail these signs, the "I'm a Man" signs on 'em for the next morning.  And that's--but when we, we went and down on Elvis Presley [Boulevard] and rented the saw from a rental agent.  The next morning the snow was so deep, the march was cancelled.  And Martin was summoned to come back in for the 28th.  He came in and made the speech.  And, of course, it was so solidified by the daily paper and the daily newspaper and the daily news media of Memphis, until it just had polarized into a real heated moment.  And when he launched the march, it was just highly unruly at Hernando and Linden [Avenue], you know, with the narrow--Thomas [Street]--so even the street's been cut off--it don't go through, across that park back there no more, where they're building the arena [FedEx Forum] now.  But it goes over to Clayborn Temple.  And Clayborn Temple is the building--I don't know whether you've seen Clayborn Temple, but Clayborn Temple--have you all seen Mason Tem ple [Mason Street, Memphis] where Martin King's last speech was?  You've been over there.  But the speech was there, but the headquarters of the sanitation workers was in the [Clayborn Temple] Minimum Salary Building, and the rallying point was at Clayborn Temple for people to come together.  That's when the "I'm a Man" people lined up the next morning after the preamble of the march was set over a week [sic.] following the 22nd, [when there was] the ice and the big snowstorm.  And then when Martin came and joined the march at Hernando and Linden, and it was unruly, and as it proceeded to Beale Street and up Beale Street, to Main [Street] and Beale, it just broke a loose, and the violence broke loose at--right--less than a half a block north of Beale Street.
Speaker 2: Now, what caused the violence to break loose?  What was the provocation?  What was going on?
Speaker 1: Well, crowd and a crowd of people.  A crowd of people, crowd of young Negroes, you know, just, just crowd, just excitement.
Speaker 2: No, I mean--.
Speaker 1: It wasn't nobody--the police was, just wanted to suppress them, meaning, they just wanted to suppress Martin's being here and, and it just made it an unruly march.
Speaker 2: So the police kind of provoked the crowd, or did the crowd provoke the police?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Well, it was a collection of both police and people.  I mean, it wasn't no--I mean one writer would have verbalized it that the police did it, another writer would have verbalize it that the Invaders [group of young militant African Americans, which was also infiltrated by government agents who may have been responsible for some of the violence], which was the 'Young Turks'.  But it was just an emotional moment when so many people in Memphis had been drawn to be in the march in behalf of the Sanitation Workers because, you know, the, Martin King's speech and the eulogization [sic.] of, of it being what it was, you know.
Speaker 2: Okay, so on the--well, is there some more of this before we get to the [April] 4th?  What happened?
Speaker 1: Well, then the march was broken up, up the street, and we come back and folks was beaten and their heads whipped by police and locked up.  And then Martin King came back [to Memphis], but when he came back, the  Attorney General [sic., U.S. Attorney Thomas Robinson] summons him to court.  And he was tired and did not go to court.  He came in on the [April] 3rd to go to, before the--when he came on the 3rd, they issued the summons to court for the 4th at the Lorraine Hotel [sic., Motel] in the alley between the office and the part of the hotel where he was living, where Marshal [Willie] Durham and the Federal Marshal [Cato Ellis]--as well as I know his name, it escapes me now--you know, issued this court order that he come to [federal] court the next morning.  But Andy [Andrew] Young and Jim [Rev. James] Lawson went to court.  And I went to court as a part of the press, taking pictures of what went on.  And then after the court was settled that evening, Andy Young came and, he and Jim Lawson came out of the court, Jim Lawson asked me could I ride Andy Young from the federal courthouse back to the Lorraine Hotel to report to Martin King what had went down.  So he reported to Martin King, and, of course, I dropped him at the hotel and came back and was sitting in my office down there with my feet propped up in the chair 'cause I was just, you know, drug and tired from being in the court all day long, listening to all of the arbitration by the court.  And the, the phone rang, and it was my partner's wife.  She said, "Turn the radio on.  Martin Luther King been shot."
Story_ID: 20385
Speaker 1: [Upon hearing news of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr's assassination at the Lorraine Motel in Memphis, Tennessee,] Richard [Henry] Jones and myself grabbed our cameras and dashed toward the Lorraine Hotel [sic., Motel].  When we got over there, we were blocked out, but in that twenty or thirty minutes, before they felt that they could not block the press--it wasn't just Negro press, it was other elements of the press that was there. They had to let us in. Of course, Joe Louw and the other boy, [William] Bill Mahoney--Bill Mahoney shot pictures, but he gave his film to a local person whose brother was a photographer, and he didn't know how to develop a roll of film.  And he just blocked it up.  But, you know, you--roll film was, thirty-five millimeter film was fine-grain developer, D-76, and I knew exactly what to do.  But Joe Louw wouldn't have known.  He wouldn't, he--he was just wanting to develop it, but the theory of him wanting to and the noise that he was making in the dark room--I just told him to put film in a, in the paper box, and went in and then loaded the two rolls of, developed the, the two rolls of film, perfect development. Hah, you know, you're putting me to sleep.
Speaker 2: Well, so, you shot the next--.
Speaker 1: No, I came in with the common press.  Joe Louw came to me and asked me.  But then [Robert] Bob Williams from the ['Memphis] Commercial Appeal' was up in the, in the flophouse and he saw me bring Joe Louw away and bring him here to my office.  And [William] Bill Burk was a reporter for the ['Memphis] Press-Scimitar', but he was also a major colonel in the Tennessee National Guard.  And because he knew me and knew that I was legitimate, he let me stay in my office and in my lab because he knew that I was, you know, working for--as a press, you know, worker.
Speaker 2: This is while the riots were going on?
Speaker 1: Nah, nah, this is while Martin was killed.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Just after he was killed--.
Speaker 1: I mean, it wasn't no riots.  Everybody was home.  Ain't nobody come down here to riot.  After he was killed, every riot and any buildings--the first place to be set afire was Wilson Drugstore, at 4th [Street] and Beale [Street], down here, but it wasn't no other buildings down here to set afire, wasn't no buildings downtown.  There were neighborhood buildings where people had anger for merchants in their neighborhood, but Memphis [Tennessee] didn't have the massive burning that they might have had in other cities.  But, but the--'cause the National Guard was here and there was a curfew was put into effect.  And everybody had to stay home and couldn't be out.
Speaker 2: But you had a--you had access because they knew you?
Speaker 1: No, well because Colonel Bill Burk was in charge of the Tennessee National Guard who guarding Beale Street to prevent violence.  And it wasn't no, wasn't no perpetrators down here.  There was nobody but Richard Jones, myself, Joe Louw and Carter--a man named Carter, who was a deputy sheriff, who didn't report for work, he was just hanging with me, well, to be close to the excitement.  And when Joe Louw talked with his agent, or whomever he talked with in New York [New York], he told him, asked him who was there?  He says, "Richard Jones, a photographer is with us, myself and a deputy sheriff named Carter."  And he told him to hire that deputy sheriff to be your bodyguard and tell him we'll pay him.  And so we did, until we developed the film and took it back--took him to the airport and he lifted off to New York.  In the meantime, Bob Williams had seen me with him and seen him with me and had visualized what he may have had and asked for permission to buy a picture from him.  But he--when he called his agent, he decided that you shouldn't do that.
Story_ID: 20386
Speaker 1: Following Joe Louw [black South African photographer working for the Public Broadcast Laboratory] going to the airport, and my having been a policeman [in the 1950s], we came back to R. S.--well, we went back to the Lorraine Hotel [sic., Motel], where [Rev. Ralph] Abernathy and the committee, the pictures that we had in that room, was making arrangement to get [Dr.] Martin's [Luther King, Jr.] body shipped back to Atlanta [Georgia].  He had talked with the Kennedys and [U.S. Senator] Robert [F.] Kennedy chartered an American Airline[s] airplane to come over here.  And he was scheduled to pick it up the next morning ten or eleven o'clock.  Then we went, all the delegation of Martin, Abernathy, [William 'Bill'] Mahoney, [Rev. Benjamin] Ben Hooks, Reverend [Harold] Middlebrook and three or four of us, they came to  Lewis's [R.S. Lewis and Sons] Funeral Home to pick a shipping case to ship his body back to Atlanta.  And the picture of him in that casket that I shot was not the picture that he was buried in, in the casket.  He was buried in a glass-covered casket.  But in between--and it's non-published, it's just factuality--having been a policeman and having knowing, known the layer of the Lewis's Funeral Home, I went down in the basement level to morgue and went in there where Martin King's body lay.  And his skull was on the side, where they'd cut his head open and they left his skull there, you know, I don't know how it was, but I put his skull back in his head.  And his head was full of paper.  You know a few months later, the pathology department at Memphis State--I mean the University of Memphis [Memphis, Tennessee] was stopped by the Congressman [Harold E.] Ford, showing his--all of that material in a, in a oral class over there.  But I put his--his skull back in his head and brushed his, you know, and just put him perfectionately, but I didn't take any pictures until Mr. Lewis got him dressed because I thought ethically, I had no business totally in there, and so I wouldn't embarrass the undertaker by taking pictures within his private morgue room.  And so we went back to the hotel.  They chatted some down there.  Then we came back here--Richard [Henry] Jones and myself and went to sleep and got up for another couple of hours, and went down where they brought the body down outside in the, the viewing area.  And the radio and different folks were mentioning where his body was.  And they, people came by volumes to view the body before they shipped it to Atlanta.  It was an unusual occasion, but it wasn't published or planned.  It was just word of mouth and some, I guess, maybe, I don't how, the public was highly informed.  But there was a number of people that went through Lewis' Funeral Home to see the body.  And then they brought it out.  I had pictures when they brought it out, took it home too.
Story_ID: 20387
Speaker 1: We were talking about Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.], the assassination.  I was asking you about how you developed the--.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Oh!  No, I developed the film, but then the origination of the idea--he having been assassinated in front of [Room] 306 [Lorraine Motel, Memphis, Tennessee] and he having lived in that room, you know, the night before he was assassinated, I suggested to Mr.[Walter] Bailey that I had some pictures in and around civil rights--.
Speaker 1: Now, who is Mr. Bailey?
Speaker 2: Mr. Bailey is the man that owned the Lorraine Hotel [sic., Motel]  In fact, the biggest lie that's out now is that D'Army Bailey started the, the Museum.  I started the [National] Civil Rights Museum [at the former Lorraine Motel], you know.  And these people over there that run it don't even realize--I seeded the--I made the idea of putting pictures in the room.  And, you know, just making it presentable for visitors, and people began to visit in style.  And then, of course, locally, the union and people got interested in getting financing, and making it a National Civil Rights Museum.  It's come a long way, but the seed is what makes the tree grow--that one seed.  And I was that seed.
Speaker 1: So the Bailey family is the same family that D'Army Bailey--
Speaker 2: No, no, he's not a part--.
Speaker 1: He's not part of that family?
Speaker 2: He's not a part--Mr. Bailey is dead.  His brother is dead.  His wife [Lorraine Bailey] died two weeks less--the week after Martin was assassinated, Mrs. Bailey died.  I've got a program of her, when her funeral was.  And then Mr. Bailey--you know, Lorraine Bailey and Walter Bailey--Mr. Bailey, who had been a Pullman porter in early life--and were the owners of the hotel.  And she is a person that was so upset because she appointed Martin King, really not so designatedly, but she's housed, put people in the rooms.  But, you know, people have suspicious feeling, but I don't think she had any plan.  It was just that there was--all of the rooms faced, faced the street anyway.  So it wasn't no problem for that.
Story_ID: 20388
Speaker 1: Well in 1946, Jackie Robinson [baseball player] went to the Major League [Baseball].  In 1947, early, the Memphis [Tennessee] Police Department had a call out in Binghamton [Memphis, Tennessee] of a lunacy.  A man was mentally off, and when the police got there, he came down the hill running towards them.  And the man drew the gun and killed him.  And it became the, the town became in an uproar.  The Memphis city had been once before in an uproar of the death of George Brooks, a letter carrier, years ago was killed at Main and Iowa by a Memphis policeman, A. O. Clark.  And A. Philip Randolph came to the Beale Street Baptist Church, which is the church right next door [to Withers's studio] here, and spoke against the will of the--of the city leaders.  And after he spoke and stirred the community up, [Memphis political boss] E. H. [Edward Hull] Crump and the powers that be decided that because Reverend [George A.] Long let this preacher--let A. [Asa] Philip Randolph, head of the [Brotherhood of] Sleeping Car Porters [labor union] speak, and draw this horrendous crowds of protesters--and that was in the early, early or late, late '30s [1930s], you know, mid-'30s [sic., March 30, 1944]  I, we'd have to check the calendar--but they condemned the Beale Street Baptist Church, and it was to be torn down.  But political whites and blacks came together and got that pulled away, and the church is still in existence.  But right now [2003] the church is summoned not to open because the Central Baptist Church at Mississippi [Street] and Austin [Street] fell in three--two or three months ago, killed a mother and two children.  And so they don't want--they've inspected Clayborn Temple [African Methodist Episcopal Church] where the sanitation strike and [Martin Luther King, Jr.'s] last march began.  And Beale Street Baptist Church, and George [sic., Larry] Potter [Environmental Court judge] has declared them inadequate for housing of the membership.  And so in the last week or two--last week, there has been a committee in Memphis that is planning to provide money to restore the church to the level of safety.
Story_ID: 20389
Speaker 1: But then when the man was killed--Bailey was killed on--it's a funny thing, his name was Bailey and that man at the hotel [Walter Bailey, owner of Lorraine Motel, Memphis, Tennessee], but they're no kin and no even connection--was killed, the community, the black community got in this same uproar following George Brooks' death.  And Mr. [Edward Hull]  Crump being still in control of a five man city government--I guess Russell Sugarmon told you about the volunteer ticket and all of that--but the five man city government was a city commission form of government.  And because of--there was no black interests whatsoever, he called the black ministers and leaders to the city hall for a night--private meeting in the high echelon and suggested that he would build more programs for swimming and parks and all of that.  But there was an old lady, Mrs. King, got up and said, "These children don't need no more place to play.  What we need is some colored police."  And the idea of Atlanta having hired [African American] police [in 1948] and Jackie Robinson being inducted into the Major League [Baseball] in 1947, '46 [1946], '47 [1947], '48 [1948].  Mr. Crump thought it was a good idea.  And he commissioned [Lt. William] Bill Rainey, who was a training, who was a policeman and detective for a number of years with the Memphis Police Department [and had established the Police Academy in 1937], but had been a training officer in the military, training black and white police.  And Bill Rainey was famous for having captured Machine Gun Kelly, which was one of the early gangsters of America.  And [George] 'Machine Gun' Kelly was captured here by Bill Rainey.  So Bill Rainey convinced the teachers and black leaders that--they were suggesting that they take some--some young teachers that had been hired to teach school.  But Mr. Rainey said, "These are not police.  To be a policemen, we'll have to screen and pick the qualified people."  Edmund Orgill [Memphis civil leader and future Mayor, 1956-59] and--and [Edward J.] Meeman of, editors [sic., Orgill was not an editor] of the ['Memphis] Commercial Appeal' and ['Memphis] Press-Scimitar' put together an editorial and really summons the right for black people to support and police their own.  And, and so the thing grew and they decided to put applications for black police.  There was 165 applicants who applied to become black police, but there were only sixteen of us that passed.  I happened to have passed, I think, basically because my father [Earl Withers] had paid a lady to train me, my brother and a few of us to pass the civil service examination.  Maybe I might have been--might have been lacking the academics, but it was just a stroke in life that I had been boned up to pass the civil service examination to be on the post office and had refused my father's wish for me to go to work at the post office.  But then I was one of the original nine of the fourteen of us that went to police academy, hired and five days later I was fired because a man--they (unclear) my car because my car note was behind.  I'd been in the police academy and didn't have a car note--I hadn't been working.  We then--my daddy borrowed the money from a friend of ours, a night club owner, Clifford Miller.  We went to this salvage lot on Cleveland [Street] to pick the car up, and I was looking at the car before I picked it up, and I asked the man about my jack and about my spare tire and a number of little penny-ante things that had been taken out, ornamental.  He said, "If you don't get this car out of here, nigger, I'm gonna carry you--your black ass, I'm gonna call the police."  So my daddy said, "You don't need to call the police.  He's the police."  Then he grabbed my daddy in the collar and went to shaking my daddy.  And my only thought was, as a policemen, not to pull the gun, but to show him my gun.  So I pulled my coat back to show him my gun, and he, he knew that I had the gun, and he fell out.  But then it was five, four thirty, a quarter--near five o'clock, before six o'clock in the evening.  When I went home, the call came from the police department for me not to come to work at that night.  We were working six to two, but report to the commissioner's office the next morning.  When we reported to the commissioner's office and the old man said the idea of Mr. Joe, an old nigger talking back to a white man.  And this boy showed me his gun.  So he said, "Okay, we'll dismiss you.  We want your badge and (unclear) go home."  An undertaker lady, Mrs. Qualls was in the powerful political force.  She called me and said, "Don't talk to nobody."  They didn't want to make a lot of rattlin', and five days later, they hired me back.  And I maintained my job as a policeman.
Speaker 2: So now, why did you leave the police department?
Speaker 1: Well, the police--there was a mean lieutenant and they were busy trying to--you know, catch negro bootleggers on the weekend.  See, it wasn't no--wasn't no--you had to buy whiskey from a liquor store, and they was bootlegging whiskey.  And so we--they couldn't catch nobody, and every time I went out on a Sunday trying to buy whiskey, they knew I was a policeman.  And so they got the flavor and that got around, and so they decided they needed to fire me.  So they fired me, and you know, it didn't--wasn't no real courses, just a fact.
Speaker 2: So how long were you on the police force?
Speaker 1: Three years, right at three years.
Story_ID: 20390
Speaker 1: When you look over all the things you've done, and you've been--you published like four books, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, four books, 'Reflection in the History,' 'Let Us March On,' 'Pictures Tell a Story,' and, 'The Memphis Blues Again,' it's the last one.
Speaker 1: And it's one you published yourself called 'The Complete Photo Story of the Till Murder Case,' right?
Speaker 2: Oh, that was just a little small book, and it was in that 'Let Us March On,' the original book.  We did that because Johnny Arnold, a public relations man was traveling around with the committee that was rallying the Emmett Till verdict.  And it was just some information, she didn't--he was making money.  He was--I didn't make no money.  I got a little money because it was in my name, and folks was mailing in for orders.  And I would go down there to the print office, Hubbard's Print Shop, and get as many as I wanted because I was who I was, go to the post office, rob the mailbox and fill the orders and send 'em back, but--Johnny Arnold never knew that (laughs).  The group that was doing and whoever was making the money off of my name and my publishing.  But it ends up, it's all mine and all, what have you.
Speaker 1: Well, you're starting to recoup a little bit of money for some of your--.
Speaker 2: Oh, I would think that if I made thirty-five dollars--I sell one poster print now for forty dollars--that's five dollars more than I made a week.  And then to travel--in October, I'm going to Europe to five countries, to Berlin in Germany, to Greece, to Italy, and to France and Austria.  There's an Austrian lab museum that is sponsoring my wife and I, that is being put together, I just put together this week.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're finally getting recognition for your work.
Speaker 2: Oh, I think recognition has come, not just this, but it's come over the last ten year period--eight to ten year period.  But then again, it's just, you know, a matter of giving thanks and being able to have shot pictures with your own film and they're owned by me.  And so I have a right to, to publish them, you know.
Story_ID: 20391
Speaker 1: What would you consider right now as your legacy?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, my legacy has been the Civil Rights Movement and recording the images of the Civil Rights Movement.  You know, you can't think of the hundreds and thousands of minutes and the images that were recorded.  And we talk about a few, but there were a number of other things that are not exciting stories.  But they still was a part of the vast movement of the Civil Rights Movement, the--even the Memphis [Tennessee] bus strike and all of that, you know, a lot of other things that happened in the growth of the--Russell Sugarmon [Memphis judge and civil rights attorney] and other people that you [The HistoryMakers] have recruited, the fact that we, I having been a policemen, gave birth to some four, near five police directors.  It was my son, Dedrick [Withers] that was the theorist for electing the current city mayor [Dr.] W. W. [Willie] Herenton--the architect--and I organized a people's convention that eliminated--so it wouldn't have been a big black fight, but it was a single candidate that ran for the mayor of Memphis.  But even the volunteer ticket as I know Russell Sugarmon told you, changed the city government from a five-headed government and everybody elected to public office at large, to a by district.  And even the legislators and all of that has amounted as a result of that growth.
Story_ID: 20392
Speaker 1: Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Oh, I'll be remembered as a father, as a husband, most of all a husband with one wife [Dorothy Withers], the father of seven boys and one girl.  All of my children went to college.  All of them got a degree and none of them had vast police records or any kind of police records other than being participants in the sit-in movement.  And, you know, it's just a--it's a private thank you for even the influence on me as a father of children and my brothers' families are good as well.  But I had boys and I spent my entire life career in Memphis [Tennessee] while my brothers migrated to Washington, D.C. and became pharmacists, [U.S.] Navy, technical, high-tech Negro, my brother, Earl [Withers]. And my brother Jake [Withers] was a United States Marshal in Washington, D.C.--a Deputy Marshal, it wasn't no--it wasn't a Marshal, (unclear) but he had a career as a--as a retired United States Marshal, Deputy Marshal.  And, of course, I had the challenges of, of being and living here and I think my appreciation to--well, I don't do too much merry hoping about what's gonna happen.  I want to try to live as long as I can (laughs).  But to answer that question, I would think that the goodness of life and the contribution that I have been, you know, appointed as a person that gave birth to some views, to so much civil rights and as a result of the imagery, that I had the courage--based on having been a policeman, you develop some courage, based on going through the Army infiltration course, you get an unusual and excessive amount of courage.  But all of that was just poured in the right jar at the right time.  And the strength of my--but, you know, having the moral training that my father [Earl Withers] he would instill in us by being true, law-abiding citizens and Christians, you know, nobody will have to tell any, a lot of falses.  I ain't been no angel, far from having been an angel, but I have--the biggest mark is the mark of decency that I've tried to live.
Story_ID: 20393
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's just my son Clarence Earl and [U.S. President] Jimmy Carter.  And Jimmy Carter was supported by my son, Ernest, Jr.
Speaker 2: [Ernest Withers's son, Clarence Earl (right), with U.S. President Jimmy [James Earl] Carter (left), ca. 1977-1981. From the collection of Ernest Withers]
Story_ID: 20394
Speaker 1: That's my family, my entire family.  If you've got a little pointer, I can point that the oldest young lady on the front row is my sister and my oldest brother--no, that's my mother.
Speaker 2: Let's go from left to right, your mother--
Speaker 1: That's my mother, Minnie Withers, my father, Arthur Earl Withers, Sr., my brother, James Withers, my oldest brother, died a pharmacist, my sister, Alice of California--these are just--and my brother, Jake and my sister, Vivian and then myself on the end.
Speaker 2: [Ernest Withers with his family; (front row, from left to right): mother, Minnie Withers; father, Arthur Earl Withers, Sr.; brother, James Withers; sister, Alice Withers; (back row, from left to right): Ernest Withers; sister, Vivian; brother, Jake Withers, n.d. From the collection of Ernest Withers]
Story_ID: 20395
Speaker 1: That's B.B. King and Sunbeam Mitchell which was a man that delivered him into the growth that he finally grew into be the star.
Speaker 2: [Ernest Withers's photograph of B.B. King (left) and Sunbeam Mitchell (right), ca. 1950s. From the collection of Ernest Withers]
Story_ID: 20396
Speaker 1: That's Elvis Presley and B.B. King, nineteen--what, 1956 at the Goodwill Revue for the WDIA [Memphis, Tennessee radio station].
Speaker 2: [Ernest Withers's photograph of Elvis Presley (left) and B.B. King (right) at the Goodwill Revue, WDIA, Memphis radio station event, 1956. From the collection of Ernest Withers]
Story_ID: 20397
Speaker 1: That's myself and four by five camera, the camera that I used in the Emmett Till trial and all the early Mississippi incidents.
Speaker 2: Is that the camera you used in the service also?
Speaker 1: Yeah, four by five camera.  And that camera on the bottom is symbolic of the first camera I had, that little Brownie there.
Speaker 2: [Ernest Withers with his cameras, ca. 1955-1965. From the collection of Ernest Withers]
Story_ID: 20398
Speaker 1: That's my wife [Dorothy Withers] and my daughter in a--with Reverend James Lawson in a protest march downtown Memphis, during the Sanitation Strike.
Speaker 2: [Ernest Withers's wife Dorothy Withers(center) and daughter (right) with James Lawson (left) at a sanitation workers' strike in Memphis, Tennessee, 1968. From the collection of Ernest Withers]
Story_ID: 20399
Speaker 1: That's my entire family, Rosalind, Andrew, Darryl, Dedrick Teddy Withers, Wendell Jacob, my first boy to die, the tallest boy is Clarence Earl.  The next boy is Perry O'Neal.  The oldest boy is Ernest Withers, Jr., my wife [Dorothy Withers] and myself in front of the house that I lived in then and I live in today.
Speaker 2: [Ernest Withers with his family outside of their Memphis, Tennessee home; (from left to right):  Rosalind, Andrew, Darryl, Dedrick Teddy, Wendell Jacob, Clarence Earl, Perry O'Neal, Ernest Withers, Jr., wife Dorothy Withers and Ernest Withers, ca. 1970s. From the collection of Ernest Withers]
Story_ID: 20400
Speaker 1: Picture in Washington, D.C., James [Withers], Earl Withers, Sr., my father, Jake Withers, my youngest brother, Ernest Withers, myself, and Earl Withers.  All have passed away but me.
Speaker 2: [Ernest Withers with his brothers and their father (from left to right: brother, James Withers; father, Earl Withers, Sr.; brother, Jake Withers; Ernest Withers; and brother, Earl Withers), Washington, D.C., n.d. From the collection of Ernest Withers]
Story_ID: 20401
Speaker 1: This is my wife and I.  Man, I'd rather have more pictures of my wife than that, but--.
Speaker 2: When was this one taken, sir?
Speaker 1: Which one, of me and my wife?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That was made at a--that's my anniversary, my fifthy-ninth anniversary and the next year was my sixtieth anniversary of my wife and I, Dorothy.  We're the parents of seven boys and one girl.
Speaker 2: [Ernest Withers with his wife Dorothy at their fifty-ninth anniversary, ca. 1990s. From the collection of Ernest Withers]
Story_ID: 20402
Speaker 1: That's my second and third son, Clarence Earl [Withers] and Perry O'Neal [Withers] with the late Elvis Presley.
Speaker 2: [Ernest Withers's sons with Elvis Presley, ca. 1955-1960. From the collection of Ernest Withers]
Story_ID: 20403
Speaker 1: This is a picture of myself.  That's Ernest Withers in the earlies, late--early '60's when I had hair on my head.
Speaker 2: [Ernest Withers in the early 1960s. From the collection of Ernest Withers]
Story_ID: 20404
Speaker 1: And the next is myself with a Hasselblad camera. And of course this is--I don't know, this is news outlet.
Speaker 2: [Ernest Withers with a Hasselblad camera, ca. 1960s From the collection of Ernest Withers]
Story_ID: 20405
Speaker 1: Son, Darryl [Withers] at the grave...
Speaker 2: [Ernest Withers's son, Darryl Withers, at a grave site, n.d. From the collection of Ernest Withers]
Story_ID: 20406
Speaker 1: Is this in Chicago [Illinois] at Northern Trust Bank.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that is not at the bank, but they--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is recently, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, I do the Northern Trust Bank every, I be in California four days.
Speaker 1: [Ernest Withers (right) with an unidentified men (left) at a Northern Trust Bank event, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 2000. From the collection of Ernest Withers]
Story_ID: 20407
Speaker 1: That's in Chicago too [Illinois], right?
Speaker 2: Family, but you're winding up right?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: That's it.
Speaker 1: [Ernest Withers speaks at a jazz event, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1990s. From the collection of Ernest Withers]
