Story_ID: 14758
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm an interviewer today for the HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns--
Speaker 2: No, it's Matthew Hickey.
Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sorry.  It sure is, Matthew Hickey, I'm sorry.  Correction, Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is Ronald Walters, and it's regular spelling Ronald, R-O-N-A-L-D, Walters is W-A-L-T-E-R-S.
Speaker 1: Do you have a middle name?
Speaker 2: William.  But I don't use it.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  What is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My date of birth is 7/20/38 [1938], and I'm sixty-four.  And my place of birth is Wichita, Kansas.
Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a professor.
Speaker 1: And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is June the 5th, 19--2003.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at my home, and that's 609 Mission Hills Court in Silver Spring, Maryland.
Story_ID: 14759
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five short 'People' magazine-ish-type questions we are compelled to ask.  And the first one is--they just require a short answer.  The first one is, sir, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is soul food (laughs) which involves a lot of food.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: No, I don't have a favorite color, but I'm, I'm partial to blacks and browns.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: No, I don't have a favorite time of the year, but I'm more often attentive to the fall, primarily because I think for me that's when school starts and there's a lot of activity.  But normally, I'm--every time of the year is interesting to me.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I don't.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I don't.
Story_ID: 14760
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your family history.  How far back can you trace your family?
Speaker 2: I've been able to trace my family back to the late 19th century, and to a little place called Grandberry, Texas, where the Walters family first was formed.
Speaker 1: Okay, late 19th century, we talking about the 18--,
Speaker 2: 1870s.
Speaker 1: Seventies [1870s], okay.
Speaker 2: 1870s.
Speaker 1: All right, now, are there any stories from your family about what your family was doing during slavery or during Reconstruction?
Speaker 2: Well, my---the patriarch of our family was partial to education.  And he understood very clearly that if he was going to care for his large family, that he had to, to do something in that field.  And so he became a teacher and then a preacher.  And then he went to Prairie View College [Prairie View Agricultural and Mechanical University, Prairie View, Texas], and he came--brought the family on up from Texas to Oklahoma and finally into Wichita, Kansas.  But it's, it was clear that he had his eye on education as a primary way of, of making sure that the family was taken care of, huge family, was taken care of.
Speaker 1: Now, is this the person that was living in the 1870s or--?
Speaker 2: That's right.  He was born in the 1870s, and grew up in Grandberry [Texas], and got married in Grandberry [Texas] to my great-grandmother. And that's where the Walters family started.  And they had seven children, and that became really the backbone of our family because those seven people all had trades.  And so when they came, landed  in Wichita, the fact that they had skills meant that they could support an even larger family.  And so my family on the Walters side is about two hundred or so.
Speaker 1: All right.  Well, did you know your grandparents?
Speaker 2: Yes, I knew my--I did not know my grandmother.  I knew my grandfather.  I knew my great grandmother.  My great grandfather was--died just shortly after I was born.  My grandmother died in childbirth with my father [Gilmore Walters].  And so we've been trying to trace the lineage of her family and find out who she was.  So that in that sense, my, my great-grandmother was really the matriarch of our entire family.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And what was her name?
Speaker 2: Julia Walters.  She was a Rucker in Grandberry, Texas.  And so the Rucker is another branch of our family.
Story_ID: 14761
Speaker 1: Tell me about your father.  Can you give us his full name and spell it for us and his date and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Yes, his name was Gilmore Walters.  And he's G-I-L-M-O-R-E, L. Walters, Lewis Walters.  And he was born in Wichita, Kansas in 1921.  He's now deceased.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what was he like and what did he do?
Speaker 2: Well, Dad [Gilmore Walters] was--well, first of all started out to be a military man.  He was--came up during the second World War, and before that, of course, he had taken some musical training.  He was a high school graduate.  And for a lot of those years, he was--he played music.  And he--when he got out of the Army in the 19--in about 1948, he became a, a civilian, working in the military, based there at McConnell Air Force Base in Wichita, Kansas and as a supply clerk.  And so he held down that job, and he also had himself an orchestra.  He started out, as I said, after high school with an orchestra called the Syncopators.  And that group dissipated, some of them went out to California.  But after he got out of the Army in '48 [1948], he, he got himself another band.  And that played in Wichita [Kansas] on the weekends, and I--influenced me because I became a musician.  And so he was quite a jovial guy.  He was short, kind of pear-shaped, dark, had very deep dimples, hell of a personality, always smiling.  And he worked very hard.
Speaker 1: Now what--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) He was a good musician and had very short fingers, but he was an amazing pianist.  So he played the piano.  He played trombone and he played the--ended his musical career playing the bass.
Speaker 1: Okay, he sounds like a talented man.
Speaker 2: Yeah, very talented.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, tell us about your mother.  What was her full name and could you spell her name for us and what (unclear) (simultaneous) --
Speaker 2: Yes, her name's Maxine Walters.  Maxine Claudia Walters.  Actually, she was born Claudia Maxine Walters, but she didn't like the Claudia.  And so she changed it.  And she was quite a woman herself.  She was someone who raised a family during the Second World War when Dad [Gilmore Walters] was gone, and always very tough.  She worked like many women did during the Second World War.  And she matured as a mother who was head of a large family.  I'm the first of seven children.  And so she had her work cut out for her.  She was someone who was very strict in terms of her, her personal habits and in terms of her expectations for her children.  She wanted us to speak good English and to read.  And she bought books and she did the things that that kind of a person does.  She was Episcopalian.  She was a very dignified woman.  Yet she was, with her friends, she was just Maxine.  And so, in that sense, she had one sort of face to world and another for her friends and family.  And, and, of course, as I say, most of, most of her, her, her associates were not--didn't belong to her church.  But she was able to manage that successfully.  She was a, a very strong civil rights worker in her later years.  And she is memorialized at Wichita State University [Wichita, Kansas] as one of the heroines in that city.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, when was she born again, did you say?
Speaker 2: She was born in 1920, in Wichita, Kansas.
Speaker 1: Okay, and how did your parents meet?  Is there a story about how they met?
Speaker 2: They met in high school, and they were in the same circle of friends.  And so that was one of those natural kind of things where, you know, boy meets girl, boy fell in love with girl and then so forth, one thing led to another, very, very commonplace (laughs).
Speaker 1: Okay, it happens all the time, right.
Speaker 2: (Laughs) Yep.
Story_ID: 14762
Speaker 1: Give us a sense of what it was like growing up in Wichita [Kansas]?  What neighborhood did you live in?
Speaker 2: Well, I lived in the black community.  Most blacks lived--that I knew, in the black community.  It was tightly segregated during those days.  And there were boundaries.
Speaker 1: And you didn't go outside those boundaries?
Speaker 2: Did it have a name?
Speaker 1: What?
Speaker 2: The black community in Wichita [Kansas]?
Speaker 1: No.  The black community didn't have a name.
Speaker 2: So it was a certain side of town or something?
Speaker 1: It was a certain area of town, northeast part of the city.  Remember, early Wichita [Kansas], early Wichita [Kansas] was located down on Main Street, and it moved around the railroad tracks and then began to spread out.  And so when I came along, we were, we were living in, in the 9th Street area of Wichita , which was heavily black.  And then we moved out to a little better housing on New York Avenue, 13th [Street].  And then further out on 17th [Street].  And so we sort of moved with the, the rest of the population seeking better housing and, and better schools.  But that was within the framework though, of a black community that expanded within given boundaries.  And so it was tightly segregated.  It was also segregated in terms of public accommodations.  And one of the things that we did in the city, of course, when I was growing up was to try to help break that up.  I was head of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] Youth Movement, launched sit-in demonstrations in 1958.  Now, that's interesting because most people think sit-ins started in '60 [1960], but that's not true.  NAACP Youth Chapters in both Wichita [Kansas] and Oklahoma City [Oklahoma]started those.  And so we started, I think, the first of the modern sit-ins in Wichita [Kansas] and desegregated the Dacom drugstore.  This is something now that the city has taken up to its heart.  There was a musical about it.  And there is a little park in downtown Wichita [Kansas] with a fountain.  And so that sit-in movement in the summer of 1958 has been put into the cultural history of the city of Wichita [Kansas].
Story_ID: 14763
Speaker 1: What was life like when you were a little kid, when you were growing up?  What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, I was--I grew up, you know, a fairly normal kid except that Dad [Gilmore Walters] was not there.  He was in the Army and so I was an Army brat.  And we would, we would connect with him every now and then when he got back from, from Europe in places like Fort Riley, Kansas and in some other places, Lockbourne Air Force Base in, in Columbus, Ohio.  So I was part of that, that group that sort of lived the Army life during the military years in the Second World War.  That ended in the late 1940s.  Dad came home for good and took a job.  And, and we were--I was faced, of course, for the first time with someone who was in the home who was a man.  And a lot of, again, a lot of kids had to--especially boys had to go through that.  All of a sudden Dad [Gilmore Walters] comes home, and there's an authority figure who was a man in the house.  That caused a little bit of adjustment, but one adjusted.  One had to, given my Dad.
Speaker 1: You were the oldest.
Speaker 2: I was the oldest, yeah.  And so I--and mother [Maxine Walters] depended on me for a lot of things, you know.  And I felt I was the man, you know.
Story_ID: 14764
Speaker 1: That was an interesting time, and I was able to see the evolution of the Civil Rights Movement because of dramatic events like what happened in, in Little Rock [Arkansas] which is right next door.  Those sorts of things, you know, came crashing home to me.  It was a high school--I had went to high school in a number of places because of our travel.  And--but the most memorable trip to me was when I went to Washington, D.C. as a representative of [American Legion] Boys Nation from Kansas with a friend of mine, Pat Little, who was the, who was the head of my class at East High School.  So I graduated in the top 15 percent in  that high school of 3,000 students, predominantly white.  And, but I had a sense of wanting to achieve.  And so I went into Boys Nation at the invitation of one of my mentors 'Slim'--we called him 'Slim,' Slim Sexton, who's Ed Sexton, who was a Republican.  And they had a normally a veterans, Black Veterans Association there in Wichita [Kansas].  And they liked to sponsor kids to do positive things.  And so he wanted me to, to think about this.  And I, I got involved in it, and it became something that really affected my life because I was elected to go to Washington [D.C.] as one of two delegates from Boys Nation.  And Boys Nation, you know, we had three or four days.  The thing was there was about 150 boys from all over the state.  And they would come together, and they would run the state, play like they were running the state for three to, three or four days.  And then they would have elections.  And they would elect two delegates to National Boys Nation.  And so I was able to be one of those.  And I remember I gave this fire and brimstone speech about the necessity to, to have a Kansas that was racially integrated and forward-looking and included all people.  And, and so that, that got me elected.  And I went to Washington, D.C.  And so they did the same thing.  National representatives pretended as though they were running the nation for four days.  And they had elections and they did a lot of things.  I was able to meet President [Dwight D.] Eisenhower on that occasion.  That was quite a shock because he asked for the boys from Kansas to step out of line and, and come on over.  And so we went over and he shook our hand and talked to us and patted us on the back and told us, you know, always remember that we, we represented Kansas, and we should achieve and so forth.  But I understood then what Washington, D.C. was all about.  And I understood it was the center of the political universe when I left.  And I made up my mind that I wanted to come back.  So it was a very, very important trip for me.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, you were a senior?
Speaker 1: I was a senior, yes.  And then after I graduated, another thing that helped sort of give me a more cosmopolitan outlook was that I had joined the military reserves.  And my dad [Gilmore Walters] said that there was this program, and I should get in it and get my military service over.  And so I went into basic training, and I was in Fort Jackson [South Carolina]--well, I started out in Fort Chaffee, Arkansas with Basic Training.  And then I went to Fort Jackson, South Carolina.  And, and then back to Wichita [Kansas].
Speaker 2: Now, when you were in high school, were you involved in any other activities other than political activities?  Were you involved in social stuff or sports or anything like that?
Speaker 1: I was, I was obviously involved in music.  I played everything back in the percussion section, tympanies.  I played in the symphony, everything.  I also played in the band, the marching band.  I played snare drum and so forth, so--.  I was pretty accomplished with respect to all the percussion instruments.  And, and I went on the trip, obviously, with the band and the, and the teams and so forth.  I was on the debate team.  I was fairly active in, in sports and things like that around, doing various kinds of things.  So, no, it wasn't just political.  I had a fairly wide ranging set of interests when I was in high school.  But the main thing, of course, was that I was, I was determined to do well academically.  And my mother [Maxine Walters] was on my back.
Speaker 2: So did you consider yourself a serious youth, (unclear)?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was very serious.  Yeah.  Always have been.
Story_ID: 14765
Speaker 1: Just revisit the sit-in movement, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] sit-in movement in Wichita [Kansas].  Now, you were in high school when that was taking place or was that a little later?
Speaker 2: I--it was a little later.  I was, at that time, in my first year in Wichita State University [Wichita, Kansas].  It wasn't called Wichita State then.  It was just Wichita University [Wichita, Kansas].  It was a private institution.
Speaker 1: So when you were a senior, you were--were you sure about what you wanted to--where you wanted to go to school and what you wanted to be?
Speaker 2: I very much wanted to be a lawyer.  I had met Delano Lewis in [American Legion] Boys Nation.  And Delano wanted to be a lawyer.  And this in some ways affected me.  And I, I ran into him a little later, and he was, he was going up to work on the railroads in Minneapolis [Minnesota] the Great Northern Railroad, to earn money during the summertime.  You know, he would work on the railroads, waiting tables and so forth.  And in the summertime, the students made pretty good money.  And so he said he would use that money to enroll in Washburn Law School [Washburn University School of Law, Topeka, Kansas].  And so--and I wanted very much to do the same thing, primarily because we were affected during that time through the sit-ins and other kinds of things.  We had a fairly strong sense of being, wanting to be active in the Civil Rights Movement.  So I wanted to be a civil rights lawyer.  And I, I went up to Minneapolis, but I couldn't catch on to the railroad, and it's funny because Delano [Lewis] became a very outstanding lawyer, a U.S. Ambassador to South Africa most recently and very accomplished.  And I went--because I couldn't get the money get the money to go to law school--another route, I went down to Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee] and then up through, to get a PhD. eventually at American University [Washington, D.C.].  So we're still good friends, but I often wonder what would have happened if I had certainly been able to get on the Northern, Great Northern Railroad and get into Washburn Law School [Washburn University School of Law, Topeka, Kansas] and so forth.  I think I probably would have become a lawyer by now.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what was the Wichita University [Wichita State University, Wichita, Kansas] like or Wichita State.
Speaker 2: Wichita University at that time was just beginning to get used to the idea of having a significant number of black students.  And I left Wichita University, primarily because of a racial incident.
Speaker 1: Is this about 1956?
Speaker 2: This is 19, this is 1957.  I, I wrote a paper for a history class.  I think it was a history class.  It might have been a literature class.  In any case, I had--I spent a lot of time writing this paper.  I must have had about fifteen to twenty references and turned it in.  And I got a grade back, and the grade written in red on the paper was F, and then there was a note which said, "I don't believe you wrote a word of this."  That really brought me up short.  And so I went back to the library, checked out--rechecked out all the books that I had done the paper, took them into the teacher's office and laid them down on his desk and let him know that I knew these references and that I did the work and samples of my writing and so forth.  He re-did my grade, and the grade was a C (laughs).  And so I said, "Well, if it was so good that you didn't think that I wrote it, why a C?"  It was then I began, you know, to understand what I was up against.  And I said, well, I was done really at this institution before I started, you know.  And so I really should leave.  And so I left and went down to Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee] in Nashville [Tennessee] and I'm really happy that I made that decision.  Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] was an outstanding place.
Speaker 1: --and I don't think we talked about the name of the high school you went to in Wichita?
Speaker 2: East High [Wichita, Kansas].
Speaker 1: East High [Wichita, Kansas]?
Speaker 2: Wichita East High School [Wichita, Kansas].
Speaker 1: All right, and you came out of there in '56 [1956]?
Speaker 2: Fifty-five.
Speaker 1: Fifty-five.
Story_ID: 14766
Speaker 1: What did you think of Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee]?  I mean, well, you say you liked it, but who are the teachers and administrators and personalities at Fisk that made it a good place to be?
Speaker 2: Well, as a result of having participated in the, in the sit-ins in my home state, I got a fellowship to go down to Fisk University's  Race Relations Institute in the summer of 1959.  And that was something that they did every summer.  It was started by the venerable black sociologist, Charles Johnson and his son kept it up for a while.  And so that was my introduction to Fisk .  Then I decided to go back--so I went back in 1960.  And it was an interesting place because, first of all, I had never seen so, so many black kids together in one place, one institution.  That was new.  I arrived at Fisk at the height of the beginning of the Civil Rights Movement. The Nashville Student Movement was just pushing off.  And I discovered that this Fisk University  was a venerable institution in the black community, nationally and internationally.  And so I had, I had arrived at a place, almost accidentally, that had this tremendous reputation and a tremendous group of students and teachers.  And so I became a major in history and government.  My major professor was a man by the name of Professor Theodore Courier.  He was John Hope Franklin's professor and, and a number of other distinguished scholars, professors, who came through Fisk University .  But I had a number of others in terms of--the persons who was the chaplain of the--I can't quite remember everybody, but everybody from the chaplain to the dean of men to--all of these people.  Professor [Vivian Wilson] Henderson who was an economist and who made it possible for me to stay there, gave me an academic fellowship and others.  Just a tremendous group of caring people.  And I became a Jubilee Singer because--primarily because of my musical bent and traveled with the Jubilee Singers and just enjoyed, you know, being at the institution during that particular period of history.  John Lewis was one of my classmates and there were several others from the, the Civil Rights Movement.
Speaker 1: James Bevel--.
Speaker 2: James--all, James Bevel actually wasn't a student, but Diane Nash was there.  And she had dropped out to be in the Movement.  But James Bevel used to come because of Diane Nash.
Speaker 1: That's right.  Bevel was a student at the [American Baptist Theological] Seminary [Nashville, Tennessee].
Speaker 2: That's right.  And--but there were a whole group of them who used to come and, and be there.  I was president of the Kappas [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity, Incorporated] for a good part of the time I was there.  I had been made at Wichita University [later Wichita State University, Wichita, Kansas].  And so when I arrived on campus, I was already a member of that fraternity.  And the fraternity had not before sort of partnered with people in the Civil Rights Movement, but that was something that I did because I had been involved in the Civil Rights Movement before I got on campus.  And so, it was an interesting and really, really beneficial period.  I left on a kind of a low note in one way--I should say, low note because I won a number of awards.  And I got a graduate fellowship and so forth.  So in that sense, it wasn't low, but one of the things I really wanted was Phi Beta Kappa [honors fraternity].  And Professor [Theodore] Courier kept me out of Phi Beta Kappa, I think primarily because I wanted to write my senior honors thesis on African history.  And I'll never forget when I said that to him, he looked at me and he said, "I wasn't aware Africa had a history." (phone ringing) And, yeah, he was, he was something.  But he was, he was also head of Phi Beta Kappa.  He was a white--I want to say, scion of the Courier and Ives family from Massachusetts.  Now, this is very, very interesting because he, he fell in love with a black woman, stayed there--.
Speaker 1: Okay, wait a minute.  Let's go over this on tape.  Are we rolling?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, we have to kind of--we were talking while the phone was ringing.  Yeah, I stopped it there (unclear) --
Speaker 2: Yeah, but we didn't start up again officially.  I'll make sure we're coherent here.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: From the, when the phone stopped ringing, we were talking about the students at Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] and who was there--.
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.
Speaker 2: And the sit-in movement.  I didn't want to get that, let that slip past us before we talked about something else.  But you were talking about your senior thesis and Professor [Theodore] Courier--,
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --Not believing there was any history in Africa.
Speaker 1: That's right.  And I wrote my, I went ahead and wrote it, my senior honors thesis on Africa. Because this was 1963--this was the spring of 1963.  And John F. Kennedy was president.  And one of the things he had done in the three years that he was--or two years that he was President, is that he wanted to stake out a new direction for Africa, but not just John F. Kennedy.  In those two years, Africa, countries had become independent.  At the time, I think there were some thirteen countries that had become independent, beginning with Ghana in 1957.  And so there was this excitement about the, the reckoning and the, the reawakening of Africa during this period.  And so I said, "Well, I would love to become an African ambassador."  And so the summer of '62 [1962], I was selected as a part of a national competition to be one of twenty-six students to go to Washington, D.C..  And we were farmed out in the various federal agencies.  And I happened to have been farmed out to the Department of State.
Story_ID: 14767
Speaker 1: So you were talking about--we were talking about, you were assigned to the Department of State with this (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, I was assigned to the Department of State with this program, and what happened was that I was supposed to have been interning in the Department of State and working with their special outreach program.  And so that I was, I met a lot of very important people.  I was supposed to be socialized to the point where I would want to come and work in the Department of State.  We also had a very interesting meeting with the President every couple of weeks over in the White House Executive Building, with John F. Kennedy.  And this was really very interesting and very motivating.  And so that's the way the summer went.  And I met a number of people in the summer and again, I was in Washington, D.C. and learning, you know, about the government and how it worked.  So I went back to Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] that senior year.  And one of the people who came to campus that year was Jay Rockefeller [John D. Rockefeller, IV].  And, now, Jay Rockefeller was a young guy, joined the Kennedy group.  And he was pushing the Peace Corps.  And so he came to the Fisk University's [Nashville, Tennessee] campus, wanting to, for people to join the Peace Corps.  And I was assigned as his host.  So I got a chance to meet him, and to become enthused about the Peace Corps.  And so this was something that, that also interested me.  And so when I graduated, I, I thought about, you know, joining the Peace Corps.  Eventually, I never did, but I certainly thought about it, primarily because a couple of the people who became involved in the Peace Corps was Delano Lewis, who by that time had come to Washington, D.C.  And he was working with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission [EEOC] in the very early stages of its coming together.  The guy who was, was head of it at that time was [Samuel] Sam Jackson, and who was a venerable lawyer in the black community and sort of a distant cousin of mine.  But Delano [Lewis] joined the Peace Corps.  And I'm trying to think of a guy who was, who became head of the Africa Division of the Peace Corps.  And his name was Frank [Franklin H. Williams], oh, I can't think of his name.  He was the first African American Ambassador to Ghana.  And he came under a lot of suspicion about the coup with [Kwame] Nkrumah.  But, and I hope I can come back to him, but in any case, he had been the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of the Colored People] attorney for the West Coast.  He had been in Wichita [Kansas] when we were the Young NAACP Chapter planning the sit-ins in 1958.  And he was one of those who actually motivated us to do that.  And so I had known him.  And so he, at that time, was the, had moved to Washington [D.C.] as well from his task on the West Coast.  He was in LA.  And he was recruiting people to come into the Peace Corps.  Well, we thought about it, and we, we finally didn't.  (Distraction off-camera)  That's my wife.
Speaker 1: Maybe we should pause a second.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, where were we?
Speaker 2: We (laughs) were talking, talking about the Peace Corps.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the Peace Corps, right.
Speaker 2: And so--
Speaker 1: The man who, Frank, someone who--(Tape Pause)
Speaker 2: Okay, and so you almost joined the Peace Corps?
Speaker 1: I almost joined the Peace Corps.  My wife [Patricia Walters] and I thought about it and talked to him, and we decided not to.  But it was, it was a very interesting period with John F. Kennedy, starting not only the Peace Corps, but the Alliance for Progress and putting ambassadors on the African continent, who were for the first time, not derelicts or drunks or people who were put out to pasture, but really wanting some development on the continent.  And so it was an interesting period to want to be associated with African, and not the least of which, of course, is that the Civil Rights Movement sparked in, in some of us, some beginning to move much closer to our roots and much closer to questions about identity.  And these would come full flower in the mid-1960's.
Story_ID: 14768
Speaker 1: You all had a sit-in '58 [1958] in Wichita [Kansas].  Did you--was it similar in planning to the ones, the ones in Nashville [Tennessee] in the sense that, did you have like non-violent direct action training?  Or what did you, I mean, how did you all prepare for those in Wichita [Kansas], and what did you all do?  I mean because I know a sit-in, you know, is a delicate operation.
Speaker 2: Well, we, we had training, yes.  We had training sessions in a place called the St. Peter Claver Catholic Church [Wichita, Kansas].  My cousin who was very much my partner in this and whose mother was the secretary of a local NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of the Colored People], they were Catholic.  And they belonged to this church.  And so we were able to use the church basement as a place where we practiced sitting on these stools.  And we practiced what would happen.  And we, we had an--a manual that had been prepared as a result of--
Speaker 1: So--where was I?  Oh, we were, yeah, we were preparing for the sit-in.  And we used a manual that had been prepared by Martin Luther King, Jr. and the Southern Christian Leadership Council, Conference [SCLC].
Speaker 2: Now, this is in Nashville [Tennessee]?
Speaker 1: No, no.
Speaker 2: Wichita [Kansas].
Speaker 1: In Wichita [Kansas].
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.  So, all right, yeah, right.  All right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and so--
Speaker 2: This is 1958 they used it for the Montgomery Bus Boycott [Montgomery, Alabama, 1955].
Speaker 1: That's right.  And they were, and they actually put out a, a manual on non-violence and non-violent resistance and how to use it and sort of what to expect and so forth.  And this manual really went all over the country.  And I think we probably were the first to use it, you know, to actually conduct a sit-in.  And so we did.  And we, we thought about what would happen, you know, if people tried to, to attack us and so forth.  And we, we adopted a posture of non-violence, but we were not a heavily religious group at all.  We thought this, in terms of this manual, and the tactics and strategy of it, that it would be best to do that.  And so that's, that's what we did.  Now, the point I want to make is that this sit-in was followed two months later in Oklahoma City [Oklahoma].  The Oklahoma City [Oklahoma] kids were also part of the National NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] Youth Movement.  So we're, we're beginning it.  We're part of the NAACP Youth Movement.  It goes to Oklahoma City [Oklahoma].  They use it, sit-ins to desegregate the Katz Drugs stores in Oklahoma City [Oklahoma].  Their sit-ins take place in 1959 all year long, all the whole year.  It, then it goes to Greensboro, North Carolina [1960], where these kids--these are, again, these kids are part of the NAACP Youth Movement.  They use it there.  Now, the difference is, that for the media, it begins in North Carolina because North Carolina is the deep South.  And so the media trains, you know, the cameras on North Carolina as though that were the beginning of it.  But it wasn't.  It was--this was a NAACP Youth Movement project from the very beginning.  And all you have to do is look at the documents of the NAACP, the awards that were given to the students during this period between '58 [1958] and, and '60 [1960], and the speeches that were made in the NAACP about the, the sit-ins being started in Kansas and so forth.  And the records are all there.
Speaker 2: Okay, well, that's interesting cause that's something that--the media always says that they started in North Carolina, in Greensboro.
Speaker 1: Well, there is now a good book on that done by a young woman, professor, who got her PhD at the University of Kansas [Lawrence, Kansas], Department of History.  And, and she has done a, a study of the Civil Rights Movement in, in Wichita [Kansas].  That was her doctorate dissertation, and she documents all of this.  And there, there is, I think, pretty solid evidence from other sources, from newspaper sources and television sources and so forth that this was the case.
Speaker 2: Sure, I believe you (laughs).  But who ran it?  Who was the leader?
Speaker 1: I did.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  I was the head of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] Youth Group there.  And as I said, my partner was, was my cousin.  Her name is Carol Parks.  And--
Speaker 2: Is that the same Carol Parks that became an editor from Black World later on?
Speaker 1: No, no. un-un.  No, un-un.  I know that Carol Parks too.  But, and so when I, I left in 1960, then Carol became the head of it.  But we had, we had done this primarily in 19--the summer of 1958.
Speaker 2: Well, were there adults that were responsible for your youth group or, I mean, who served as a mentor or some sort of advisory to your youth group during that--
Speaker 1: No, by accident, I mean there, there were people who were very important in stimulating us.  And I've already mentioned one of them, and I can't think of his last name, Frank [Franklin H. Williams], who was the LA [Los Angeles, California] attorney.  But also the guy in Wichita [Kansas] who was the closest thing to a mentor of ours was Chester [I.] Lewis.  Now, Chester Lewis was the head of the local NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] branch.  And he was a lawyer.  And he stayed a good friend of mine for many years after that.  The problem the NAACP had was that the adult NAACP, the National NAACP did not back direct action.  That's one of the reasons why they didn't back SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] because it was a direct-action organization.  And I remember when I got down to Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] in the summer of '59 [1959], there was Thurgood Marshall. And he came down to speak.  And I said, oh, boy, you know, I know that Thurgood [Marshall] is, you know, gonna think highly of me because he, I know he knows about our sit-in.  And I'm a part of his group.  And I went up to him, I'll never forget it, and I said, you know, Mr. [Thurgood] Marshall, I said, "I'm Ron [Ronald] Walters, and, you know, leader of the Wichita [Kansas] sit-in."  And he says, "Yes, son, said, I know who you are." And he says, "I'm a tell you." And he says, "The NAACP has a record in getting people out of jail, not in putting them in."  And (laughs), and I was crushed because, you know, I thought I was gonna be hero to Thurgood Marshall at our meeting.  But that wasn't the case.  He did let me take a picture with him.  And that was, that was basically, my first meeting with him and only meeting with Thurgood Marshall.  But when this, when the students, the young people in Oklahoma City [Oklahoma] also pushed off their movement, there was, again, some lack of support, initially, from the adult chapter.  But the adult chapter then began to come around and support them because it was more of a state-wide movement, branched out.  And so in a way, they were defying the national office in supporting the sit-in movement, as it moved into Oklahoma City [Oklahoma].  Oklahoma City [Oklahoma] was interesting because the woman there who was the mentor, real mentor to their students was a woman by the name of Clara Luper.  And Clara Luper has written a book about her experience as the mentor for the student movement called 'Behold These Walls.'  And there was a very courageous young woman who was head of the Student NAACP Youth group in Oklahoma, who led a lot of these movements and, and sit-ins.  So, and the point I think I want to make is that the sit-in movement really, in a way, was a Midwestern phenomenon before it was Southern phenomenon.  But it was part of the NAACP.  And, and yet, to some extent, it was thrust upon the NAACP National office because young people started out without permission and without support.  When it came to 1960, the National Conference was lauding the students.  It began then to give support to the student--legal supports to the students who were put in jail, financial support to the students to come to the convention and get their awards and so forth.  But it took, it took two years for that to happen.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, your sit-in, I assume it ended in victory, right?
Speaker 1: It did.
Speaker 2: In Wichita [Kansas] and Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: With the integration of the Dockum Drugstore [Wichita, Kansas]--
Speaker 2: How did it take place?  I mean what was the moment--did the druggist just make an announcement to the press and say, hey, I give up?
Speaker 1: Yes, ironically, I was not there.  I had taken that weekend off to go to Denver, Colorado to participate in--I was in the Army Reserves.  And, we, we had our meeting in Denver, Colorado that weekend.  But I was called.  And what happened was that Carol Parks was there, sitting on the stool.  The owner came in and asked to speak to her and said that he wanted to, to make a statement about equal treatment.  She then calls Chester Lewis who was an attorney and the head of the, the local branch.  He came down to the drugstore and negotiated this moment, negotiated the statement.  And so the statement was that the Dockum Drug store, which was really part of the Rexall Drugs store chain, would henceforth serve everyone without regard to race.  It was a very simple statement.  And then they began to do it.  So it was a victory.  And we moved on from, from that point to, to try to desegregate other restaurants and things like that in the city.  And we had some success.
Story_ID: 14769
Speaker 1: In Nashville [Tennessee], were you called upon to lend your expertise or experience to the sit-in movement there cause I know James Lawson, whose--they always say he's a--you know.
Speaker 2: That's right.  Jim [James] Lawson was, was extraordinary.  And I had one meeting with Jim Lawson, but the thing that had always plagued me, of course, was that unless you were part of the religious part of the [Civil Rights] Movement, then it was very difficult to become one with the rest of the Movement.  And so I, I encountered this, of course, with people like John Lewis, and who, whose whole demeanor was that he was very much a part of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference [SCLC].  And the whole concept of the "beloved community" had to be one that you accepted and approved of and so forth.  So there was an entry barrier to some of us, especially, I noticed though, there were some of us from the North who, who were not sort of attuned to a lot of things that were sort of passing for southern culture or the very religious aspect of it.  And--
Speaker 1: Yeah, Jim [James] Bevel was quite intense.
Speaker 2: He was very, he was very intense, but James Bevel had, had captured sort of a lot of the religious aspect of the Movement.  And the inner core of, of the student movement were all sort of supporters of the religious aspect of it.  Religion is very important to it because they use it as a strength.  They use it as a ritual in the Movement and so forth.  So I came down there really not having been a part of any, you know, church.  I had grown up in the Church of God in Christ.  I had left the Church of God in Christ and had become a Methodist, AME [African Methodist Episcopal], and got thrown out of there.  And then wanted to take instructions in my mother's [Maxine Walters] religion, asked so many questions--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) Episcopalian.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I asked so many questions in instruction, they threw me out of there.  So I wasn't really able to, to hook on, I think, anywhere.  And as a part, as, as a result of that, you know, it, it was not, it was not accepted, you know, to be, still be a questioner or still be searching and, and to be close to--at that time, these were leaders of the movement in Nashville [Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Okay, was that, was it tough on you to not be--I mean to have that barrier?
Speaker 2: No, because it, in many ways, I had already gone through an experience with the Civil Rights Movement when I got down there. So that a lot of this wasn't new to me.  And so I wasn't getting baptized for the first time.
Story_ID: 14770
Speaker 1: And the other thing was that, Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] and what it had to offer and what many of the other students had to offer, were so attractive to me, that what I wanted to do down there was to become a serious student.  And, and to, and to immerse myself in the culture of the African American experience for the first time as fully as I could.  And so that was as much of, if not greater than, motivation to me.  I remember the first time I walked into the Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] Chapel, and I saw the Jubilee Singers pictured there.  Then, that whole picture was in the chapel.  Today it's in Jubilee Hall.  But I'll never forget that moment and the impact that that made on me because we didn't have much African American history and culture, you know, out there where I was.  I mean we, sure, we lived in a very tightly enclosed black community, but in terms of exposure to sort of the national and international aspect of our history and culture, we didn't have a lot of that.  And so Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] was a place where I really very much wanted to immerse myself in that.  And I did.  Yeah, I, I worked in the, the library.  Arna Bontemps was head of the library, and I worked with him, and he, he assigned me to a number of very important tasks.  There was somebody in Los Angeles [California] who was systematically collecting and packaging up all of the writings of W.B. [W.E.B.] Du Bois.  And I was the one who would take those boxes and open those boxes and catalog these [W.E.B.] Du Bois papers.  And if you can imagine reading through all of these works of W.B. [W.E.B.] Du Bois, sometimes in the original or, or copies of the original documents.  To me, that was just incredible.  To have famous artists, you know, Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee] is just a stone's throw away.  [Aaron] Douglas was working in a house--
Speaker 2: Aaron Douglas?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, was working in a house about fifty yards from the library.  And I could see him every now and then in there.  I didn't even know what he was doing, but I, everybody knew it was somebody real famous in there who was painting.  And people like that, and then the poet who became the Poet Laureate of the United States was on the faculty.  And I, I can't think of his name, but we used to, we used to have sessions at his house.  He was, he was Ba'ha'i and he taught about the Ba'ha'i religion, and we would argue philosophy into the, into the night.
Speaker 2: Was this a black man?
Speaker 1: Yeah, oh, yes.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) Adams, was it--
Speaker 1: [Bob] Hayden, Bob Hayden.  And, and so there were people like that, you know, that really were, were just incredible to somebody who had come out of my experience that I wanted to, to take full advantage of.  And I did.  And then Arna Bontemps was one of those, of course, who knew all about the, the Harlem [New York] Renaissance and, and just steeped in the history and culture of black people and who knew things about that library that you know--because he helped to put it together in a very real sense.  So to be around people like that was important to my own, sort of formative growth during that period.  So the movement was important, but the movement was not run on campus.  What would happen is that John Lewis, and, and sometimes you could see him, he would lead a group off-campus, a line of students.  So they'd be going downtown to demonstrate.  Or you could see some of the members of the Student Non-Violent Coordinating Committee [SNCC] going to meetings.  But except for that, it was not really a dominant presence on the campus.  On the campus, you had other things going on.  So unless you were in the Movement, you could be there and not really know, you know, that a lot was going on because so much of it happened off the campus.
Story_ID: 14771
Speaker 1: When you left Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee], you were talking about going to law school, but you didn't go, right, and--
Speaker 2: Well, when I left my high school.
Speaker 1: High school, oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, high school.  When I left Fisk, I got, I got a scholarship to--I got one to Columbia [University, New York, New York] on law, and I got one to American University [Washington, D.C.].  And the one to American University was very attractive to me because it was about studying Africa.  And that's the one I accepted and that one brought me to Washington, D.C.  And that was attractive.  So I took that one, and I came to Washington [D.C.] to study at American University.  And by that time I was married, to my wife, Patricia, whom I met on a fluke (laughs) in 1959--and I say it's on a fluke because I was sent to a conference at the University of Illinois [Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois] by the National Office of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  They had understood that we had done this sit-in, and that I was the head of it.  So they were gonna use me to push civil rights all over the country.  And I would go to these conferences, and I would speak up for civil rights.  And so this one, at the University of Illinois in Champaign-Urbana, this was a National YM-YW [Young Men's/Young Women's] conference.  And I was there to seize my moment to speak.  And who should come sit down beside me but this, this lady and who I subsequently married, who was the most beautiful thing I'd ever seen, still is.  And it's interesting because I took the microphone--I'll never forget this, I set out to speak to this thousands of kids in this place, in this hall, and who should come into the, onto the stage?  I think it was Mamie [Geneva Doud] Eisenhower.  And everybody erupted in applause, and there I was at this microphone.  So I had to wait, I'll never forget until everybody piped down, until I then reclaimed the floor and began my speech.  But that's how I met my wife, and where I met her in 1959.  And so we were married in 1963, and so there we were in Washington, D.C.  I was going to graduate school, studying for a Masters in Africa Studies, working part time at the Department of State.  They had put together a program to bring minorities into the Department of State to be trained for diplomatic work.  And the idea was that you would rotate.  You would do, you know, a little while in this bureau and a little while in this bureau and so forth.  Then you, then they would assign you overseas.  Well, that, that was a Junior Officer program.  And it was run by, the guy who now is head of the Joint Center for Political Studies, Political Economic Studies, Eddie [N.] Williams.  And so Eddie Williams ran that program.  And I was one of the first people in it.  And so that's what I was doing then, you know, preparing for this diplomatic career, getting a graduate degree.  And eventually what happened was that the Department of State, I found out, was not an hospitable place for black people.  There was a lot of questioning of your competence and your intelligence.  And the Department of State in those days was pretty much an upper-class, eastern old boy's network.  That's essentially what it was.
Speaker 1: Who was the Secretary?  Was it Dean Rusk?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.  And, and so that's sort of how it operated, and very much an inside, you know, the ball park thing in terms of appointments and in terms of things that I got to know.  And so I got enough questions about wouldn't I--you know, what was I gonna do?  Wouldn't I want to do something else, that I began to get the message about the fact that I wasn't gonna go very far in the Department of State.
Story_ID: 14772
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you're in this program in the State Department, and--
Speaker 2: Yes, and I think the, the other contradiction with me was that the Civil Rights Movement, the Civil Rights Movement was beginning to grow.  And there was an increasing contradiction between the black view of the world, I'll just say it like that, and the State Department view of the world, with respect to Africa.  And I could see myself actually going out as a, as a diplomat representing the country, and having to represent a perspective on Africa that wasn't shared very often by black people.  And so I said, no, I don't want to do this.  Let me go on and finish this Master's and get in the Ph.D. program.  And I did.  The problem with American University [Washington, D.C.] during those days was that they didn't have any courses in Africa.  And in a way, it was a ruse to even offer an African Studies Master's Fellowship because they only had two courses.  So what I did was to, to go over to Howard University [Washington D.C.], which had the courses.  Howard had the courses at the graduate level in African Studies, and in a number of different fields.  They have, they had them in economics.  They had them history.  They had them in political science, and so I took the courses at Howard.  So I was a student both at Howard and at American University at the same time.  And that was good because that put me in touch, not only with Howard and those courses and that perspective, which was playing against the State Department perspective, but also it put me in touch with what was going on in terms of the [Civil Rights] Movement at that time because a lot of it was focused, beginning to germinate around Howard University and especially the activists student population there.  And so for me, it was God-send to, to be in that town, to be at Howard University during this particular period and to see what was, to be a part of what was going on.  So this was my second experience in being at a university that was a focal point for social movement.
Story_ID: 14773
Speaker 1: Now, who was at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] at that time in African Studies and African American Studies?
Speaker 2: Well, I took--I'll never forget Chancellor Williams.  I took a course from Chancellor Williams.  The way I got to take this course from Chancellor Williams is that I signed up for a course for Professor Rayford Logan who was a very distinguished African American Historian.  And he was excited because he had just gotten back from Brazil.  And so the second day of class, he announced that the President had asked him to drop the course because he wanted him to finish this history of Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  So he left the course, and it was taken up by Professor--Chancellor Williams.  It was a course in African History.  And so I was (unclear) back to Williams.  Harold [Golden] Marcus was, was a white professor.  He was an expert in Ethiopian History.  And he was, he had, he had a hell of a reputation, and he was there on, on the faculty.  There was Brian Weinstein who was a Political Scientist, who--again, white professor who had gotten his degree from Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts], a group of very extraordinary people.  Over at the Department of Economics--I can't think of the Professor's name who was over there--[Alexander] Mieklejohn, I think.  He was also white.  He was, he was trained in Europe in economics.  And he taught the courses in economics of Africa.  So in the Department of African Studies, my professor was Scoton, Gene Scoton, who was a linguist, white.  Professor (unclear) and so here you have at Howard a group of really outstanding scholars who come out of the finest universities and who were the core of Howard's African Studies curriculum.  Now, they didn't, they didn't begin it because, you know, you have to go way back in Howard's history.  Howard had courses on Africa, you know, beginning at the turn of the century.  And so in a real sense, when you think about that legacy, Howard actually began African Studies, even though Northwestern [University, Chicago, Illinois] is, is given credit or it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, yeah, William Leo Hansberry.
Speaker 2: William Leo Hansberry's writings during that period, and the fact that he, for example, couldn't even get his Ph.D. from Harvard because there was nobody to, to give him his examinations, was really the lynchpin of that.  And the person who has done the work on actually looking at what he did, is a very distinguished professor at Howard University who just retired, and that's Dr. Joseph Harris, who himself, is a world-renowned Africanist scholar.  So Howard has had this position of leadership intellectually in this field for a long time.  And this particular period, I, I'm--there's another person that I, whose name escapes me again, but who was also in political science who was from South Africa.  And he was a lawyer, and he had come to the United States because he, he wanted to escape the apartheid system.  But when he was in South Africa, he had represented black people in the South African Parliament.  And so he was, he was a fascinating person to just know, you know, during this period.  So here are all of these people at Howard University.
Speaker 1: That's fascinating.  So you get your background in African Studies and African American Studies and I guess, at Howard, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, actually--well, African American Studies not so much because I was taking courses essentially on Africa.  And most of what (noise distraction)--most of what came to me in terms of African American Studies, I had to pretty much learn on my own.  And that happened with my first job..
Story_ID: 14774
Speaker 1: When I got out of American University [Washington, D.C.], my first job was at Syracuse University [Syracuse, New York] in the Maxwell School.  And it was in East African History, the East Africans--I'm sorry, the East African Studies Division in the Department of Political Science.  I first started to offer courses on African American politics there.  The following year I was made the head of the African and African American Studies program at Brandeis [University, Waltham, Massachusetts].  And this was interesting because I was the founding chair of that program and instituted the courses in African and African American Studies.  Then I began to teach the courses, both in African politics and in African American politics.  And I have pretty much carried those two fields my entire career.  But, so that was a lot of on-the-job training, just learning about African politics.  But as my background, my Master's had been African Studies.  My Ph.D. was International Studies, with a focus on Africa.  So my African American politics specialty was one that I crafted and actually teaching students and having to be involved in African American--those days were, were heady days for the beginning of African American Studies in the United States.
Speaker 2: And we're talking about what time period?
Speaker 1: We're talking about the late 1960's.
Speaker 2: So you started teaching at Syracuse and--
Speaker 1: In 1968, the fall of 1968.  And then the fall of 1969, I was at Brandeis [University, Waltham, Massachusetts] for two years.  And so this was the formative period of African American Studies.  And, so in very real sense, there was a shortage of personnel all across the country.  I mean nobody was trained to teach African American politics during those, during this time.  So a lot of us simply, who were already on the faculties, had to pick it up and simply do it because the students you know were demanding it.  Opening up all of these African American Studies Departments all over the country.  Students were sitting in on campuses, all over the country and demanding this.  And so those of us who were around then, you know, simply had to deliver.
Speaker 2: Okay, well, were you part of the creation of a department at Brandeis [University, Waltham, Massachusetts] when you went there?
Speaker 1: Yes, uh-huh.  I was the founding chair of the department.  It was one department, but it also it taught both African and African American Studies courses.
Speaker 2: Okay, and how many people did you have in the department staff (unclear)
Speaker 1: We hired four--there were only four people initially to teach the course.  And a couple of those were regular faculty, and a couple of the others were graduate students, at the Heller School [for Social Policy and Management].  One of them was, oh, I'm trying to think--boy, going back, these names escape me, everybody's name.  I'm trying to think of the name of these two graduate students who, in particular, were really very good, who stuck with the program.  Actually, there was a third, Hussein Adam--now, Hussein Adam, of course, was from Somalia.  And he was very good.  He was a graduate student at the university.  But there were two other graduate students who were very good as well, African American students, who taught in the program.  And then we had one Ph.D., a woman who was a Ph.D.  So there were two of us, PhD's and the others.
Speaker 2: Grad students (unclear)?
Speaker 1: Yes, grad students.
Speaker 2: All right.  Now, how were the courses received by the students?
Speaker 1: They were very well received by the students, and it was no time at all before our classes were overflowing.  We had a very difficult time with the university because we wanted to increase the courses.  We wanted to hire more faculty.  We wanted to hire faculty with PhD's and so forth.  We wanted to expand the offerings, but we couldn't do it, primarily because the, the dean was, was not that sympathetic.  His, his name was, I remember his name was Dean Medopolous [ph].  He was Greek, and the emergence of African American Studies at Brandeis was very contentious because they shut down, actually, Ford Hall.  Ford Hall was the administrative center of the university, barricaded themselves in Ford Hall until the university met their demand for this department.  So at the time, I was over at Syracuse University, and there were people who--at Brandeis who knew me and asked me to come over and interview for the job.  But I interviewed for the job and part of the students were still locked up in Ford Hall.  So the Dean never, I think, forgave the circumstances under which this came into existence and, and didn't want to, to give it, you know, very much support financially.  And because of that I eventually left Brandeis and, and went to Howard University [Washington, D.C.] to chair its Political Science Department in 1971.
Speaker 2: Okay, so now, you're sort of back at home, I guess?
Speaker 1: That's right, back in Washington, D.C.  That's right, yeah.
Story_ID: 14775
Speaker 1: Very much enjoying the thought of being in Washington [D.C.] and getting to get settled, beginning to get an association with the budding Congressional Black Caucus.  It was calling on us to begin to do things.  This was very, a very important period, primarily because the students in Howard University [Washington, D.C.] when I got there were so politicized and so activist.  And they were going, getting on buses and, and going down to Alabama and Mississippi to do voter registration, and just a tremendous atmosphere greeted me when I came to Howard University.  And we started something in 1972 called Operation Black Vote.  Operation Black Vote was successful.  We, we registered something like thirty-five thousand student--I'm sorry, thirty-five thousand people in the city of Washington [D.C.] in 1972.  This is students at Howard.  I had been given responsibility for the program by the president of the University.  And so Operation Black Vote eventually was picked up by the Joint Center for Political [and Economic] Studies and had become Operation Big Vote.  (laughs) and so, Operation Big Vote continued on at the Joint Center for many years under that name, but most people don't know how it got started.  That's how it got started.  But it was a really, very heady place to be.  1972 was the year of the, the National Black Political Convention.  And I served as a, as part of the planning committee.  I let the Congressional Black Caucus have our offices at Howard University to plan it.  Served on the committee that actually wrote the black political agenda, and then became part of the group that did the follow on, making this as the National Black Political Assembly after that.  We began to, we had a meeting at Little Rock, Arkansas, began to receive people all over the country who were interested in campaigns and elections and things like that.  And so this was--the period in the early 1970s was the beginning of the growth of black institutional political power and were playing a role in helping to, to put that together in a number of ways.  That's when I met a brother that I'm still close to, it's Ron Daniels.  And a lot of people mistake the two of us, and so we laugh a lot about that.  But we met each other as a part of the Gary [National Black Assembly] convention process and the Black Political Assembly.  And in 1980 we formed the first black political party, except that it didn't have an electoral manifestation in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  And so a number of things.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) Independent Black Political Party.
Speaker 1: That's right.  The National [Black] Independent [Political Party]--that's right.  NBIPP.  And I was the chair of NBIPP Charter Commission, and he was the general chair.  And so we worked together in that, and, and history would really, I think, have been different if we had been allowed in 1980, after 1980, to actually form a Black Political Party which had some connection to elections in the United States. But there was a lot of ideological contention inside the party, and what happened was that the Socialist Workers Party got inside and, and actually eliminated from the charter that section of it that I wrote, having to with how, NBIPP would relate to elections.  And so when I saw that, I said, well, I think this is not going to work.  And I began to, at that time, pull away from it.  But this was, this was a time, a general time of ideological conflict in the black community.
Story_ID: 14776
Speaker 1: I had worked in 1974 with the, a black liberation organization, devoted to Africa, and--
Speaker 2: The African Liberation Support Committee?
Speaker 1: The African Liberation Support Committee.  And the head of it at that time was a brother by the name of Howard Fuller.  And we called him Owusu Sadaukai.  He had adopted that African name.  And the African Liberation Support Committee had ties to African liberation movements all over the continent.  And we [the United States government] weren't supporting the struggle.  They had asked if we would do one thing, at least one thing, and that was help to memorialize African Liberation day on May the 25th.  And so that, and the first couple commemorations were really astounding because they drew thousands of people to Washington, D.C.  And by 1973, we had a, a huge demonstration at the State Department, and then, of course, moved on over to the Mall.  And one could see the Congressman from Detroit [Michigan], Charlie [Charles] Diggs, sitting on the stage in a dashiki, not in a shirt and tie (laughs) but in a dashiki.  And I've always thought that that was symbolic because Charlie Diggs, you know, was very straight-laced.  But he understood the power of the African Movement, of the Pan-African Movement, and he wanted to, to maintain links to it, and in some sense, even to utilize it for what he was doing because at that time, he had become Mr. Africa, as far as the legislature is concerned.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he hired an African specialist that I know quite well, Dr. Yvonne Chappelle.
Speaker 1: Sure.  (Unclear) Yvonne worked for him.  He was, at that time, he was chair of the, the House Africa Subcommittee; had come through Boston [Massachusetts] in 1970 and met with myself and Dr. Willard [R.] Johnson, who is a black political scientist at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  Willard and I told him that, what he could do when he went back, because he had just taken over chairmanship, would be to have hearings on Africa in the '70s [1970s].  And sure enough, he, he did it.  But when I came back, I then began to work with Charlie Diggs on Africa policy, and then began to know Chappelle.  And Goler [Teal] Butcher, who was a Professor of Law at Howard University [Washington, D.C.], who was a staff director.  And I'm trying to think of the person who followed Goler Butcher and I'll think of it in a second.  Anyway, the important thing about his operation, and especially his, the Subcommittee on Africa, was that he used the Subcommittee in order to educate the black community about what was going on, on the continent.  And, and this was just, this was an amazing thing, for a member of Congress to use a Committee of the Congress actually to perform that particular function.  But people like Randall Robinson worked for Charlie Diggs and others.  I'm trying to think of a woman who actually was, was very important, who, and also was chair of his Subcommittee and who, who made a lot of speeches on his behalf and just, just went all over the place for him.  Well, here are a number of people like that go through his office and perform a service.  And so here in the, in this period, the African Liberation Support Committee--I'm involved in the activist side of this, a very important group, and I'm involved in the policy side of it with Charlie Diggs and his people.  And basically my role was to try to get one side of the Movement to talk to the other.  I'll never forget in 1973, Charlie Diggs had a big conference on Africa at Howard University, which we helped put together.  And my argument to him then was that now this, as a matter of fact, my argument to Owusu Sadaukai and to him, was that neither side of this movement toward Africa would succeed unless they were able to work together.  So I think illustrative of, of what, what I did many times, was that I brought both them into my office at Howard University and to try to get them to talk to each other.  So here, sitting in one seat, is Owusu Sadaukai.  And here sitting in the other seat is Charles Diggs (laughs), and I'm trying to get, you know, them to make common cause as brothers about the African condition.  Needless to say that they, they looked at each other and they fumbled around, but they didn't quite hit it off.  But it became sort of a metaphor for my own role in the movement because I have not been as hard partisan on either side of it because I've never felt that we could be successful if we were, gave into the extremes on either side, but that some, somebody had to, some group had to play the role of making sure that the bridges were there.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and that was a tense time, a lot of meetings, a lot of conferences all over the country--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: People trying to unravel some of the mysteries of African politics--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --and U.S. politics towards Africa.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was not easy.
Speaker 1: Herschelle [Sullivan] Challenor is the name that I'm trying to remember of the person who was director of Diggs' committee.  And she's still around, still very much involved in African affairs.
Speaker 2: I remember during the time period, even JET Magazine, devoted more time to African politics in (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Yes, and, we, we--there was a magazine that many scholars wrote in and activists too, called The Black Scholar.  And the other one, was Black World, which was sponsored by Ebony Magazine.  And Black World was a little journal, and it was really very important in allowing us to, to stretch out a little, with longer articles and write about the movement.  Ebony finally eliminated Black World Magazine because extensively, it wasn't giving it the profit that it wanted.  And, of course, a very important door then closed for a lot of people.  But the Black Scholar is still publishing today, still around, and it's the one publications whose roots go all the way back to that particular period.
Speaker 2: I know the Black Books Bulletin was around in those days--
Speaker 1: Black Books Bulletin, that's right.  It was a whole bevy of publications just springing up to meet the need, that are now no longer in existence.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: The same thing with organizations.  I mean organizations sprang up like rain, that are now no longer in existence.
Speaker 2: The African Liberation Support Committee is now basically defunct.
Speaker 1: It has been for along time.
Story_ID: 14777
Speaker 1: I mentioned it actually talking about the ideological conflicts that were around in the 1970s.  And what happened there was that there was a meeting in 1974 of the executive committee in Frogmore, South Carolina.  I wasn't able to be at that meeting, but Gerald McWorter, Professor of Sociology, well-known Marxist was, was there.  And he played a very critical role in having the [A]LSC [African Liberation Support Committee] adopt a Marxist position.  At that time, Owuso Sadaukai [Howard Fuller]  was trending toward adopting a Marxist philosophy.  At the same time, Amiri Baraka had adopted, what he called a Revolutionary Communist position, which is essentially a Trotskyite Leninist position.  This was very troubling to a lot of us. And so I disaffiliated with the African Liberation Support Committee.  So did a whole series of other groups and individuals disaffiliated.  And that caused a huge split in the movement.  So this was something that, now we have a bevy of young scholars who are studying this period, and I've given all these interviews.  And we, and they're fascinated by this split and what caused this split and so forth.  Well, it was very simple.  We attempted I think, mistakenly, to tie the American movement very closely to the African movement.  The revolutionaries on the African continent were very strongly dominated by Marxist philosophy.  So the people here, leading the movement, the support movements, thought they should adopt a Marxist philosophy in order to be in sync with them.  As I write in my book, 'Pan Africanism In the African Diaspora,' that was a mistake because if it were going to be supportive from this perspective, then what we had to do was to be very mindful of this context, this context, not one on the African content, continent, but this one.  And so that split the movement apart and people like Haki [R.] Madhabuti who was the head of Black Books Bulletin and eventually, Third World Press, attacked it and so did other people.  So the LSC by the end of the 1970s was defunct.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I remember African Devotion Day in '74 [1974], Howard University [Washington, D.C.] in the Auditorium, basically, Gerald McWorter and Kwame Ture [Stokely Carmichael]--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --squared off with their supporters on either side, and they cheering back and forth (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.  But we had--the idea for this came through LSC.  And--because we said, look, you've adopted, you've run off and adopted this position that Marxism would govern the executive committee.  We want to debate this.  And so we went, we got Kwame Ture from Africa as, as really the strongest adherent of Pan Africanism because the rest, their dichotomy was Marxism or Pan Africanism.  And so he came, he didn't do as a good a job as we thought that he was gonna do.  But you're right.  It was like, it was like a big sports contest with one side cheering.
Story_ID: 14778
Speaker 1: Then there was the demise of Congressman [Charlie] Diggs himself, which kind of--I think that kind of pulled the rug out from under some things, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, it did.  And I think that what happened, of course, because I was very close to that.  I, Congressman Diggs in the late 1970s, of course, was indicted for a kickback scheme, well giving his staff money and then expecting them to pay off some of his bills.  I wrote about that at the time primarily because it happened--there was too much of a coincidence between his appearance at an OAU [Organization of African Unity] meeting, his attacking Henry Kissinger--he called a press conference actually to attack Henry Kissinger at the OAU meeting because the, the problem had to do with which representative of Angola would actually take a seat in the OAU.  And Henry Kissinger was, was leading the anti-Communist forces and opposing MPLA [Movimento Popular de Libertao de Angola] Government taking that seat.  They were the legitimate government of the, of Angola.
Speaker 1: He was supporting UNEDA [United Nations Economic Development Administration].
Speaker 2: He was supporting Holden Roberto, at least not so much the UNEDA, but yes, they were on that side of the fence.  And so Charlie Diggs said this is really unconscionable in principle for him to take this position, to levy this kind of a power of the United States government on Angola in the heart of Africa in its own organization, the OAU.  Right after that, a Republican in the Justice Department was the one who actually indicted him, actually led the indictment, put the indictment together and indicted him.  No question about the fact that he gave them the resources to do it by having done this, but I must tell you.  I went up there to work for him one summer, after this happened because he was having trouble getting staff.  One of the first things, as a Senior Staffer, you can look at, is a big book.  And this is the House Journal.  And the House Journal has a record of all of the expenditures in it of members of Congress and their staffs.  And when I looked at the House Journal, you could read, you could put two and two together on any number of members of the House and reach the same conclusion because members of the House at that time had a certain allocation for staff expenditure.  And, and yet some of these members of the House were doing all kinds of things because at that time, it wasn't quite legal to use the money that you had, you know, earned in your election to do all this stuff.  So you had to conclude that a lot of people were using their House allotment expenditure to do this stuff.  Charlie [Diggs] probably thought--and there isn't any probably in my mind, that since everybody else was doing it, he could do it.  And, of course, he couldn't because he was black, and, and he was in a very politically sensitive position.  He's chairman of the Africa Subcommittee.  Henry Kissinger is the most powerful foreign affairs person in the Congress at that time.  And they just brought him down as far as I'm concerned.
Speaker 1: Political betrayal (unclear).
Speaker 2: There isn't a question in my mind that it was political.  And it was too much of a coincidence between what happened at the OAU meeting and this indictment by a Republican in the Department of Justice.
Story_ID: 14779
Speaker 1: Maybe I should ask you about the 6th Pan-African Congress in '76 or so--did you (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Well, the 6th PAC--yes, it was in 1976, I believe [sic, 1974] .  I didn't attend 6th PAC.  I prob--I didn't attend 6th PAC.  I was actually a part of the planning mechanism for 6th PAC.  And the person that I think did a lot of work on 6th PAC during that time was Jimmy Garrett, and then--I'm trying to think of the person who actually lead the whole committee in putting it together, who was a part of SNCC [Student Non-Violent Coordinating Committee], but I can't think of his name right now.  But in any case, it was put together by a committee in Washington, D.C.  The problem with 6th PAC, and, and there was a lot of people that didn't know that putting it together required a lot of negotiating with the Caribbean countries who were sending delegations and going to help fund some of the delegates, the Tanzanian government and so forth and so on.  So here you had a group of activists who didn't have any governmental portfolio, who were essentially negotiating with people who were heads of state and who had their own politics, who didn't, for example, want the dissidents in their country to go, and therefore, wouldn't fund them.  So it was C. L. R. [Cyril Lionel Robert] James, the venerable, you know, Pan Africanist, who then I think, first, C. L. R. James was in this country.  And he was teaching at the University of District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.], who raised the claim, as part of this mechanism, who raised the question about how free and open this would be if people like [Linden] Forbes [Sampson] Burnham, would decide not to, not to fund the dissidents in his own country to go to be delegates.  And then, of course, when you get over to Tanzania, the communication between these heads of states took precedence over anything you said.  So then the question is, well, what is ultimately going to be the shape of this thing?  And so there were so many questions around it at the time, that I decided it was going to be a debacle.  As it turned out, it was precisely that.  Now, on the one hand, the people who went over to Uganda and got blessed by Idi Amin.  In one sense, that was positive because Idi Amin wasn't as crazy as Americans thought he was.  But he gave some of the African Americans who went over there a Ugandan passport.  I mean his whole question of the principle of dual citizenship, that's what he was trying to push.  And, but the other thing had to do with this fight that broke out on the one hand, within the 6th PAC, between, again, Marxists, like Amiri Baraka and some of the others and Nationalists like Haki Madhubuti and some of that group and the heads of state.  The head--I'm thinking now particularly about the, the delegation from Senegal.  That was very strongly a Pan Africanist delegation and followed African Nationalism and African culture, as opposed to the more Marxist delegation headed by Guinea and [Ahmed] Skou Tour  So here was this fight on the continent having to do with ideology that was mirrored by black people in the United States.  And so that split this meeting, and, and as a result (unclear) whatever became of it.  And it's a shame because there was a delegation that went there from Howard University [Washington, D.C.] of professors in the sciences.  And they had put together quite a project, a scientific project, that they wanted to get legitimized at 6th PAC.  And they were engineers, they were biologists and, you know, they were serious people.  And they got there, and this thing was turned down, and a sight unseen.  And so it was that kind of treatment, you know, that led me to believe that this was really a debacle.  I mean well meaning meeting, but still at the end of the day, too heavy laden still with the ideological currents that were, that were conflicting both sides during this period.  Well, and they've had a couple of manifestations after that, the 7th Pan African Congress [1994] was held in Uganda.  I didn't go to that one either.  But I was head of the American delegation to the [First Pan African] Conference on Reparations [1993] that was sponsored by the OAU [Organization of African Unity] in Abuja [Nigeria] in the, in the mid-1990's.  And so I write about this, these--the essential things that actually tore the Pan African movement apart.  And, as I said, one of them was this question of ideological differences and the other was this question of the, the difference between those of us in the diaspora--and I'm, I want to go all the way over to Brazil and Australia and places like that, which have sent black delegations to these Pan African meetings, so that you have a lot of non-governmental people on the one hand and the people who are running governments on the other hand, whose politics involves, to a considerable extent, their being able to, and being influenced by, Western governments.  So under those circumstances, it's very, very difficult for us to have any sort of pure notion of Pan Africanism in, in those sort of conference formats.
Story_ID: 14780
Speaker 1: Prior to the new African states emerging, there were very few, you know, they're--prior to the late '50's [1950], early '60's [1960], there were very few African states and so everybody in the Pan African Congress was a, maybe some kind of a troublemaker or somebody trying to put together (unclear) (simultaneous)--you know, the--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) that's right.  You're talking in the '50s [1950] and the early 1960s about the fact that a lot of those people were involved in the revolutionary movements.  And some of the people who came over here, who we knew in the African Liberation Support Committee, people like Eduardo Mondlane.  Now, I knew Eduardo Mondlane because he was very close to the guy who gave me the fellowship to go to American University [Washington, D.C.].  He, Eduardo was involved in the Methodist church.  He married a white woman who was in, very close to the Methodist movement in the United States.  For all practical purposes, Eduardo Mondlane was an American Methodist, but when [1962] he became head of the movement in Mozambique, I remember him coming to the United States and saying to us one day, "I'm gonna go and talk to the Secretary of State.  And I want to see if I can't get some support for our movement."  And he, he went.  And he talked to the Secretary of State.  They turned him down.  And he came back to us, he said, "Look," he said, "I struck out."  He said, "I'm gonna have to go to the East," he said "because I'm, I've just been elected head of our movement."  And he said, "I've got to have some support if I'm going to deal with Portuguese."  Well, sure.  The same thing with Amilcar Cabral.  Amilcar Cabral is fighting a revolution in Guinea-Bissau at Cape Verde [1963-1973].  He comes over here and we meet with him.  I mean, I could go on from one leader to the other.  These are revolutionaries involved in the struggle which the European countries are involved in, but the United States is a part of the European complex.  And so the United States, in effect, takes their side in these situations.  So it was, it was a very, it was a very complex, frustrating and in some cases, a dangerous period to be part of these organizations that were in effect fighting against American foreign policy in Africa.  And that's one of the reasons why in 1976, we founded TransAfrica.  Now, this had been a dream of Charlie Diggs.  He was the one who said we need a lobby, an African American lobby on Africa because he understood how politics worked.  Randall Robinson was his administrative aide.  So when he got in all that trouble, Randy left his office.  And he said, okay.  Well, what happened was that Charlie [Diggs] called a National Black Leadership Summit in 1976.  It was in response to what happened in South Africa when they--remember they had the '76 [1976] struggle and then locked up a good part of the leadership.  Well, Charlie Diggs called a National African American Summit and denounced the South African government, demanded that the United States lean on the South Africans to let them out of jail.  And, and then again, called for the formation of this, of this lobby.  Well, Randy left his office and then went to put it together.  So there were, there were four of us who put this lobby together, Randy Robinson, Herschelle [Sullivan] Challenor, who had worked for Diggs, Willard Johnson and myself.  And these, these were the people who sort of did the leg--we did the leg work.  Randall put it together.  Anything that he wanted us to do, you know, we did it.  I formed the first Board of Directors of TransAfrica.  The person--he asked me who should head it.  I told him that I thought that Richard [G.] Hatcher should head it .  Richard did play the central role in the 1972 convention, was at that time, one of the key black politicians in the country.  The strategy was to move the African agenda to the center of the black community, not to the sides, but to the center.  And, and Richard agreed that he would be the, the chairman of the board, and a board was put together.  And then we, we put together later on, TransAfrica forum.  I wrote the first proposal.  With the money coming in, we had Annual Africa Policy Conferences with that money and so forth.  And so that's how TransAfrica Forum got started.  I switched over and became part of that board.  So TransAfrica in that period was a very important organization because it--then, in the early 1980s we started to lead the movement against the apartheid system.  It had already been doing some things, you know, in Southern Africa because in, in the 1970s, it was more Southern African than South Africa.  It was Zimbabwe.  It was Mozambique.  It was Angola.  It was, it was Zambia--Zambia and so forth.  So southern Africa in the 1970s, but South Africa in the 1980s.  And TransAfrica played a very strong role in both of those eras.
Story_ID: 14781
Speaker 1: What about the Jesse Jackson campaign in '84 [1984]?
Speaker 2: Well, in 1983, there was a question as to what strategy in the black community would be for 1984.  And Richard Hatcher and a number of other people involved in the National Black Leadership Roundtable, the Black Leadership Forum, twenty-six of them actually met and, and had two meeting and approved of having a black presidential politics for 1984.  They didn't say who would actually be a candidate, but they thought that this would a powerful way of countering the [Ronald] Reagan Administration, which by that time had shown people in the black community that it was really anti-interest to the black community and vicious in some ways.  And so we were reaching for the most powerful strategy.  I attended the meeting in Chicago [Illinois] that approved of the national strategy.  I was a member of the National Black Leadership Roundtable, and I presented a report of--I had made a survey of our group of national black leaders and whether or not there ought to be a black presidential strategy for 1984.  And they approved it, and so I was giving that report.  And so they approved it.  So after that meeting, Reverend [Jesse] Jackson asked if I would accompany him back to Washington, D.C.  And we flew back together.  And that was my first real meeting with him, a meeting of the minds.  I had not liked him very much, and it, you know, I didn't--his educat--primarily, because of his educational program.  I didn't know whether, where he tested the ideas that were involved in it, and what legitimacy it had and so forth.  And, and this was the Excel Program.  And, and so I was very suspicious of it.  But in any case, we met.  And then along toward the end of the year, I walked into a meeting that was put together by [Roger] Wilkins.  Brother Wilkins--
Speaker 1: Roger Wilkins?
Speaker 2: Roger, Rogers, yeah, Roger was at that time beginning to look at the fact that Jesse was gonna run.  And a 'kitchen cabinet' just formed around him.  And so Wilk--Roger said, "Well, you're elected."  This was, this meeting was at the old Howard University Hotel [Washington, D.C.].  I said, "Elected to do what?"  He said, "Elected to be one of the people to begin to brief Jesse Jackson on public policy."  And apparently they had had some sort of meeting.  The other person was Henry Richardson who was, who was a lawyer and Temple University Law School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  And, so the two of us had a lot of meetings with him, and--policy meetings, and then in January, when he put together the campaign, he asked if I would direct the Issues Operation.  And I said, "Yes."  Now, I'm at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] working full time, and I agree to do this, not really knowing what I'm doing.  But, and I did it for nothing.  When you get involved in a presidential campaign, what it meant that I was, I was--I had, we had twenty-six Issue desks inside the Jackson campaign.  It meant that I had some control over those Issue desks.  It meant that we had press conferences.  It meant that I had to deal with the policy having to do with press conferences.  It meant that he was on the road talking.  It meant that I had to go out on the road, fly out there, and be with him.  So it meant that, and I was flying back in to do classes and so forth.  So it was a exhausting experience, but it was an hilarious experience and exhilarating.  And I enjoyed it.  And made, I think, some contribution to his campaign in 1984 as the deputy director for Issues and contributed to a political strategy.  South Africa was very important because of one of the things that we did was, in the debates--and I had something to do with arranging the debates and the strategy for that and the issues around that, was that we said that you're gonna talk about South Africa.  And he very much wanted to do that because it hadn't had an airing.  And he was able to put his, everybody on the panel on the defensive by talking about, why hadn't they spoke out on South Africa.  So his popularization of that idea in the '84 [1984] campaign was extremely important in getting it to the American people, and then finally impacting on the passage of the 1986 anti-apartheid law.  Now--so that the Jackson campaign was, was extremely important.  Now, the thing that was important about the Jackson--I called a campaign movement, because he was using his campaign to do all sorts of other things.  When we found ourselves in, in southwest Texas, marching with 3,000 Hispanics, who didn't have healthcare coverage and who didn't have sanitary work conditions and so forth.  And I, I remember saying to him, you know, Jesse, you know, there's not a vote (laughter) anywhere within miles of this.  He says, "Yep," he said, "But we're on the right, we're on the right road."  I thought that was impressive because it, it said to me that this was not just a normal campaign.  We moved out of the hotels, and we put him in people's houses.  And so he was, he was dealing with Hispanic, he was dealing with women's issues.  He was dealing with all sort of issues.  He was dealing with farmers' issues up in the northern part of the country and all sorts of issues.  And so I had to, you know, help as much as possible to balance those, keep those in the air, keep those before people.  The Middle East issue.  For the first time in history, the Middle East issue was debated within the Democratic Party on the floor of the Convention Committee.  The Arabs came into our coalition as a result of that and [James] Jim Zogby, of course, was the one who, was the strategist behind that, of the--today he heads the, what is the Arab American Institute.  And, but that was the first time that had been done.  So there were a number of things to just to--the Middle East issue was important because Andy [Andrew] Young was fired from his job as Ambassador to the United Nations in 1979.  I was, it was that summer that I was working for Charlie Diggs.  He turned to me, and he said, "You know," he said, "I want you to put together the documentation and papers and stuff like on, on the Middle East.  We're gonna have this big meeting in New York [New York], Black Leadership Meeting.  We're going to denounce the United States for doing this to him.  And we're gonna assert our right to speak on this issue of the Middle East."  And they did.  They had a big meeting.  Julian Bond was there, there was a whole lot of people who were there.  Two delegations went off into, one, to, headed by Jesse, went off to Egypt.  The other one SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] delegation headed by Walter Fauntroy and [Joseph] Joe Lowery went off to Lebanon.  And they asked me to come with them to be the policy director of that meeting.  And, and so I went off with them.  And we went to Lebanon.  And we met with, tried to meet with all sides to the, the dispute there.  We met with the Christian Falange [party].  We met with Yassir Arafat.  We met with everybody we could meet with and had talks with them, informing ourselves, and putting together the report that Walter [Fauntroy]  delivered on the floor of the Congress about the Middle East, (unclear) and he was a member of Congress.  So that was really very heady--and very important because I think in that, in that context, it meant that we had a role in American foreign policy which would stretch all the way back but was highlighted by these events.  And so the Middle East in 1984 becomes a very natural part of the Jackson campaign because he leads a delegation, and then he ends up, you know, doing shuttle diplomacy on that, on that trip.  By 1988, in 1984, of course, he has 500 delegates to the Democratic Convention, which is modest, but very important.  By '88 [1988], he has 1,200 delegates to the Democratic Convention, and he is--he scares the hell out of a lot of people because he almost, you know, looked as though he was gonna win the nomination when he won Michigan.  Our politics was the most powerful at that moment than they'd ever been in the history of this country because he was able to have an influence on not only the agenda of the Party but also the personnel of the Party.  So many of the people who went into the Democratic National Committee and so forth were people who were Jackson delegates and people who had been a part of our campaign.  And he--even now, [Robert] Bob Borosage was, he was Issues Director in the 1988 campaign.  White, he is the head of, of the group inside the Democratic Party, called Campaigning for America's Future, which is really the antithesis of the Democratic Leadership Council.  So even he came, comes out of the Jackson experience.  And I don't think history is going--has not yet, you know, been kind to the tremendous number of black operatives, campaign operatives that have come out of those two campaigns and the impact that they made on the Party since then.  Well, we (unclear) do we go after that.  It's your lead.
Story_ID: 14782
Speaker 1: What do you think about the Reparations Movement?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm, I've been involved and I was an initial founder of the Reparations Movement in 1986 in NCOBRA, The National Coalition for Blacks and Reparations [in America].  And we labored a long time and didn't get anywhere trying to put this issue before the American people.  Randall [Robinson] really played a tremendous role in this when his book 'The Debt' hit a couple of years ago.  He put together a group of people that really wished to have an impact--except that particular group wasn't--he put together a group of lawyers, and he brought to the table Jewish lawyers, people that had been involved in the Japanese Reparations suit and so forth, really a fascinating group of people.  We had a meeting at TransAfrica.  I gave the keynote address in that case.  And then after that occurred, this working group was permanent.  He then expanded it by bringing in [Charles] Ogletree.  Now Ogletree then was the key to deciding that there would be a suit against the United States.  Ogletree brings in Johnnie Cochran and Willie Gary and a whole group of very distinguished multi-million dollar black lawyers, who literally arrived at the reparations meeting in their private jets.  Now, this is the Reparations Coordinating Council [RCC].  So the RCC still exists.  They have just agreed now to take on the Tulsa [Oklahoma] suit [reparations for survivors of a 1921 race riot in Tulsa's "black Wall Street"].  And we are still on the path toward this other suit.
Story_ID: 14783
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for the HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Observing is Jonas Littlejohn (ph).  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is , and it's spelled R-O-N-A-L-D, W-A-L-T-E-R-S.
Speaker 1: And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Now, now today's date is July the 15th, 2003, Wednesday.
Speaker 1: And where are at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are sitting in the library of the [James MacGregor Burns] Academy of Leadership on the first floor in Taliaferro [Hall] on the campus of the University of Maryland, College Park [Maryland].
Speaker 1: All right, and this is a follow up of an interview that we began about two months ago
Story_ID: 14784
Speaker 1: Can you talk about your involvement with the Million Man March [1995] and--
Speaker 2: Yes, the Million Man March was a very important mobilization as most all of us know right now.  And I was not involved in the, the planning of the Million Man March.  That was a committee that was put together by Minister Louis Farrakhan, but it had a number of people in it who are, are friends of mine, Maulana Karenga, Conrad Worrill and many others who were part of that.  And basically, what they were attempting to do in the planning was to develop a, a very strong, substantive policy rationale for the March.  And I was distantly connected with some of that.  I think that, when the March occurred, I, of course, I was there.  I went as an individual, and, of course, my wife went too as, as an individual.  They didn't know whether or not women ought to go, and she subsequently went because we had relatives visiting us.  And they had a very great time as I was led to understand.  I also met Reverend [Jesse] Jackson there at the March.  And it was interesting because we were on the stage, and he had his speech with him.  And he asked me to, to look at his speech, review it.  And the only place I could find some quiet was underneath the stage or behind it.  And so I was underneath and behind the stage actually reviewing his, his speech before he actually went on.  And so I would, some of my friends would see me, and I would wave them off or they would wonder, what's he doing there, you know.  (Laughter) and so it was a very unusual thing that I was doing for most of the time that I actually was on, in and around the stage.  But it was an extraordinary view from the stage.  You could see--as far as you could see, was a humanity of black males.
Speaker 1: Now, the stage was set up on the Capitol steps, or near the steps of the Capitol [Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Yes, near the steps of the Capitol.  And as you looked out, you could see the sea of faces.  And even if you looked to the left or to your right, you could see--even, people were in the trees.  And there were so many people that, it was just an amazing sight from that vantage point.  And so when there was this discussion about, where the park service about how many people actually showed up and they gave the bogus number of around, you know, four hundred thousand or something like that, people went off.  I did because actually, I could, you know, I could see that it was far more than that.  It was a very spiritual experience to be off the stage and in the crowd and running into people you knew and, and looking at the behavior of people who came with such tremendous expectations.  At the time, I was chairman of the political science department at Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  And my faculty did a survey.  It was participated in by Dr. Joseph McCormick, Dr. Lorenzo Morris.  They took the lead on developing this survey of, of the men who were there.  And they found some very interesting things.  They found that most of the men there were registered to vote.  Most of them had college education.  An extraordinary number of them had advanced degrees and made about fifty thousand dollars annually in terms of income.  So this was, this was on whole a fairly sensitive, professional, well-heeled crowd who was coming to this march, not because Louis Farrakhan asked them to come, but they were coming essentially, and they said as much, for their own reasons.  If you could roll it up into one concept, it would be a redemptive motive, to redeem the image of black males and to send a signal to America that black men were about something in this country; that they did have achievement; that they did have a vision, that they did exercise so-called personal responsibility.  But something more important than that we found on the surveys, and that this was a very strong, if for want of another word, nationalist crowd, which is to say they also believed very strongly in the destiny of black people.  And they also wanted to, to make sure that people understood that they were the leaders of the community.  And they believed that it had a purpose.  So that was a very interesting experiment, and I was very happy that they did it because it brought, I think, more meaning to the, to the Million Man March.  After the march, there was a question of what would happen.  I joined the Implementation committee, and it was headed by [Benjamin] Ben Muhammad [formerly Benjamin Chavis].  And our task was to take what had come out of the march and to begin to try to operationalize it.  There were things, for example, like voter registration, where Howard would then plan a National Voter Registration campaign.  Howard would raise money.  Howard would do many of the things that came out of the, of the march.  I invited the, the conference--and there was a conference afterward to take place at Howard University.  And this was a conference, it was a Leadership Summit.  And so there were many organizational representatives who came to, to Howard University to discuss this question of what would be the follow-up mechanism of the Million Man March.  And so that took place in the succeeding months.  And it was interesting because a year later I was doing a lot of political analysis in the media because it was interesting, in knowing what had transpired in the interim.  And one did find that in a lot of the communities around the nation, there were workshops on male-female relationships and voter registration campaigns and seminars about parenting responsibilities and increases in meetings and so forth, so that it was, it was clear that in that year, that the Million Man March had had a very favorable impact.  The biggest impact many people looking at the 1996 election was that when you looked at the increase in voter performance in the black community, and a survey done by the Joint Center for Political Economic Studies, said that it could find no other cause for this rise in voter participation than the Million Man March.  So the Million Man March in 1995, 1996 Presidential elections. Million Man March had a tremendous impact.
Story_ID: 14785
Speaker 1: Washington, D.C. was the center for a lot of organizing for the Million Man March.  I know that Bob Brown from this town was involved deeply in the organizing of the March.  And are there other people involved here that stand out.  This was the center of it, and, you know, this is home of operations pretty much.
Speaker 2: Well, Bob Brown was, was involved, but some of the people whose names stand out, for example, Matsimela Mapfumo, many people know as Mark Thompson.  Mark is a local activist, organizing.  He works with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  He is a journalist, talk show host on WL Radio.  And so he had a very important role in helping to mobilize for the march as, as well.  It's also interesting that the press was interested in this march because it caught them off guard.  There was not a lot of noise in the press about this, that this was gonna happen.  A lot of the, the information about the March went out on what we call, the drum, on the internet, word of mouth.  But there was this discussion in the press about the fact that Minister [Louis ] Farrakhan was leading it because of the fact that the press seems to have some sort of angst about him and his leadership.  And I remember writing an op-ed [opinion-editorial] piece in the Washington Post, saying essentially that this march was, although it was called by Minister [Louis] Farrakhan, was not about him; that the, when you looked at the people who were beginning to say that they were associated with it, and they were coming, it was clear that this was a very broad response nationally to a good idea.  It was an idea whose time has come.  And the problem with that is that there was some organizational leaders, like Julian Bond and some of those in the NAACP, saying that they would not be associated with the march because it had been called by Minister [Louis] Farrakhan.  And so there was this issue in the center of black leadership about the legitimacy and credibility of the march.  And there were some of us who wanted very much to, for the march to occur because we thought that a social movement would be very important to opposing the manifestation of the right wing.  In 1994, you would just have this upsurge of a conservative movement in the Congress.  Newt Gingrich came to power.  There were very strong sort of, underlying sort of racial subtext on public policy.  And we thought that this mobilization would be a way to counter that.  And as it turned out, it did perform a tremendous service.
Speaker 1: Why do you think it was so significant as a men, man march as, in terms of the men, black men getting together as opposed to say, a men and women march or black and white together march or any different other kinds of combinations?  I mean why was it so significant that black men got together at that point?
Speaker 2: Well, black men have been the most vilified sector of American society.  And I've always felt that if you want to continue to keep a people weakened, then what you do is you, you discipline and you repress the strongest sector, which is the male.  That was what was happening in this country.  And so when you look at the, the condition of the black male and people use terms like 'endangered species' and when you look, for example, at high school drop-out rates or college-going rates or health rate or employment statistics, what you find is that the black male really is on the edge.  And so that for a black male, and whose image, of course, had always been in this country one of the most dangerous and so forth, violent, to say that, well, we're not all that.  I mean we're also on the other side of that, have contributed toward building this country and there wouldn't be as many, you know, viable black families if we hadn't been there and so forth.  For them to come and make that statement, I think, was very important, as the most vulnerable sector of American society.  So that was the feeling that was at the base of a lot of this which sort of drove people at the last minute, you know, to get up out of their beds and to, and to get out on the roads and thumb and travel buses, trains, planes, cars to get here any way they could.  That, that very deep sort of feeling propelled a lot of people simply to get up and come.  The problem, of course, we saw with it as it, as it got here was that so much of it was left at the level of sort of spiritual manifestation, which as I said, in itself was important.  But some of this, and I think that speaks to the people who were, formed the committee to try to plan this, were actually trying to get something beyond that.  We would--they were trying to get something institutional, something lasting.
Story_ID: 14786
Speaker 1: There were questions about what happened to the money and so forth.  I mean when you have a million and a half, two million anything, you know, get together, that's an opportunity to, to raise a considerable amount of money.  So--
Speaker 2: And there was a box passed, there were boxes passed in the audience--
Speaker 1: All over the place
Speaker 2: --collecting everything from a dollar to $10.00 to checks.
Speaker 1: That's right.  That's right.  And you multiple any of that by a million, you--
Speaker 2: That's right.  And the organizers said, in effect, that that money was used actually to defray the expenses of the march.  Well, okay, I mean that's, we have to take them at their word.  But there are many of us who thought that, you know, if you could have raised ten, fifteen, $20 million, you know, at this March, that that could have been, you know, the kind of fund that could have done a lot of good in the black community.
Speaker 1: Now, the money was collected basically by the Nation of Islam, am I correct?
Speaker 2: That's true, yeah.
Story_ID: 14787
Speaker 1: I think at one time, correct me if I'm wrong, [Robert] Bob Starks, from Northeastern [Illinois University] in Chicago [Illinois], from the Task Force for Black Political Empowerment in Chicago, that's his community base, he was given the task of writing a statement, a march statement, a purpose.  And he started--he drafted one, and then later Maulana drafted, Maulana Karenga drafted one, which was also--which was actually published, I think, because I don't think--I don't think Dr., I mean Professor Starks' was ready at the time, but Dr. Maulana Karenga's was.  It was published, but it was not distributed at the march, which some of us who knew it was available, were surprised that it wasn't being distributed.
Speaker 2: Well, actually, and what happened eventually I think was that they, they tried to meld those statements into, into one.  And Bob Starks became a member of the committee.  And, and at the march Maulana Karenga actually read the statement to everyone.  So it became then the statement of purpose for the march.  But it didn't have much force because--
Speaker 1: He didn't read the whole thing because (unclear)--
Speaker 2: It was, it was a long statement.  And so he read a lot of it at the march, and, but it couldn't, it  couldn't, I think, make the impact that it wanted to make because people were looking for the impact really in the speeches of the, the famous people who were there and the leaders that everybody knew.  So they were looking to Reverend [Jesse] Jackson's speech, and they were looking to Minister [Louis] Farrakhan's speech, in particular.  And they were looking to these speeches for the real leadership.  And so, even though this statement of purpose was read, it was, it was really pretty much ignored by everybody.
Speaker 1: I think it was right--it was a portion of it read, and the, as I recall, Reverend Jackson's speech, was save the children, I am somebody, you know, very--you know, it was a combination of a lot of things he's been saying all along, which is good, you know, good stuff.  But it's a combination of a lot of things we've heard, like his greatest hits almost, you know.
Speaker 2: Well, no, because I, I read it and contributed a little bit to it.  I wanted, and he had done a little bit more than that, but I thought that it was important for him to speak to the moment.  And, and the moment of where we were had to do with this building behind us, and what was going on in the building.  But he has a way of speaking to public policy concerns that's more analytical and sometimes more dramatic than anybody else.  So he wanted to come there to speak to public policy.  And I felt that some of the other speeches really didn't address that.  Here we were, from the standpoint of political strategy, in the heart of the most political spot on the globe.  We a million and a half or two million black men assembled, and yet there was not a focus on power and politics and policy.  So I was very concerned that Reverend Jackson's statement make that, make it.  And he did.  So it wasn't just his hits, he did--yes, he did have a lot of the things that people knew in it, but he also was speaking to what was going on in the building from the standpoint of the public policy issues that were up for discussion the Congress.
Speaker 1: Okay, and he cut the issues that (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, delivered a speech that deals with the, the public policy issues.
Speaker 1: Okay, with Minister Farrakhan's presentation, if I recall correct, it was--correct me if I'm wrong, it was about atonement, you know--
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: --and do you think that the majority of black men were there to atone for something?
Speaker 2: No.  And that's another reason why we--we asked that question on the survey, at least the faculty members who did it, asked.  And, and so they thought it was a good thing, but they were not there for that.  Primarily because many people were conflicted about atonement.  Some people thought that atonement meant apologizing for something.  And some, some people who were there didn't quite get it in terms of its spiritual sense.  And so there was no unanimity on the issue of atonement.  They thought it was a good, sort of way of bringing some unity to the reason why people were there in terms of some sort of spiritual concept.  But it was not one that was very deeply understood. Minister Farrakhan's speech was, I think, (unclear) better than standard for him or two.  It was too long (laughter).  It was long, too long.  But I think it had some very good things in it from the standpoint of what black men ought to be doing with their lives.  And I think people paid a lot of attention to that.  I think the high point had to do with the commitment that he asked people to make.  And that was very, very, very dramatic because that spoke to the reason why a lot of black men had come in the first place.  And so I think that that was, that was what a lot of people came to hear.  The rest of the speech I think could have pretty much gone by the wayside, and did, from the standpoint of people actually remembering what he said.  But for those high points, he was the preacher.  He was the minister.  He was the moral voice.  His was the most important statement.  And I think it, it captured the points, but, but again, I think it was, it was too long.  And most people felt that--I was out at that time, down from the stage on the ground and watching people's sort of reaction to it, doing some analysis for television.  And it was clear just looking at people that they were, they were--he was losing them.  But people didn't forget what he said, which I think was the most important point.
Story_ID: 14788
Speaker 1: Do you have any comments about the Million Women March in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania, 1997] and the Million Youth March, I think that occurred a little later?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I was asked to come to the Million Women's March in Philadelphia, and I couldn't.  I was asked to come speak, and I had a tremendous conflict.  And I just simply couldn't make it.  But I was a supporter of it.  And I felt that this was an opportunity for, for women, in the same way that men got together, for women, black women to get together and to make their manifestation.  And I was interest--the interesting thing about that was that the, the women who put that march together were not the well-known names.  This was a group of profess--of, of progressive professional women in the city of Philadelphia, but community activists and people who had been sort of working in the community for years.  I liked that profile of people who were putting it together.  But there was some question about well, who was this doing this, you know?  And so for me, that was an irrelevant consideration.  And I, I liked the way it turned out.  Again, it didn't have the developmental punch that we thought it would.  They had a hundred, over a hundred thousand women there.  And, again, we would have thought that something institutional could have come out of that, but we didn't see the long-term effect of that.  And it didn't have the impact on the community that the Million Man March had.  But it was also a very good manifestation.  The, the Million Youth March, and there were actually two of them.  I was at the one in Atlanta [Georgia] because I had been invited there by the leadership of that.  There was another one in New York [New York]  headed by Khalid [Abdul] Muhammed, who had been exiled from, recently exiled from the Nation of Islam by Minister [Louis] Farrakhan.  That one drew some violence and lots of controversy.  The one in Atlanta went off fairly well.  I mean it was attended by the civil rights organizations and their leadership groups, a tremendous group of young people there from the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] Youth groups around the country.  Kwesi Mfume himself came down and, to be with the youth groups.  And they had a very tough time raising money, nonetheless.  And some of the money was raised by civil rights organizations at the last minute because the young people didn't have it.  But they were courageous.  They stuck with it.  They had very good forums, and, and as I spoke at the forum as an elder--I was on a panel with young people, and they had a pretty good sense of what it is they want to, to do with their lives and some of the problems that we faced.  And, and I left there very optimistic about the future of the black community with young people like that, you know, in charge.  I had the same feeling about a number of those young people also in New York.  I felt that, and to some extent, they had, they had been overshadowed.  New York's always been a place where you've got progressive young people in, in my experience with them.  And so I understood exactly where they were going because I'd been connected to that scene for such a long time.  But I do feel that Khalid Muhammad and the whole dynamics around him overshadowed a lot of what the young people attempting were to achieve in New York.  But on the whole, I think it was a, also a good experience.
Story_ID: 14789
Speaker 1: One of the factors that seems to cloud a lot of Black Movement activities are a lack of resources, and this leads me to the question of reparations, which is not, it's not a new issue is it?
Speaker 2: No.  No, I mentioned, I mentioned New York [New York], and one of the people who I've met early in my young adulthood was Queen Mother [Audley E.] Moore.  And Queen Mother Moore was a reparations activist before any of us were.  And I didn't, I used to think that she had a lost cause because there was very few people, even in, in Harlem [New York] at the time, who actually, who were behind her.  But she would show up regularly at the meetings that I attended, because in that time, I was part of the African Heritage Studies Association.  A lot of the people who were in that organization were in New York City.  Our patron saint, and one of my mentors, was John Henry [b. Henrik] Clark, and, and I could read through the list, Charshee McIntyre, James Turner, Leonard Jeffries, a whole--Barbara Wheeler, a whole series of people, academics in and around New York City, who had those ties were a part of this group of Afrocentric Scholars.  And we used to have a lot of meeting in New York City.  And Queen Mother Moore would almost always come.  And so I got a chance to meet her.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us a little bit, for those who watch this in this future, can you tell us who was Queen Mother Moore?  Can you describe her?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't have a, a good picture of, of all of her, her background, but she grew up in the South.  It's interesting, very much like John Henry Clark did, grew up in Georgia.  But she grew up in the South, and she came to Harlem like so many people did.  She was a patron of the Marcus Garvey Movement.  And she understood the redemptive aspect of Garvey.
Story_ID: 14790
Speaker 1: Queen Mother Audley Moore was, you know, one of the sort of original movement ladies in Harlem [New York], just in terms of her, the impact of the [Marcus] Garvey Movement and the Black Arts Movement and all of those cultural influences that came about during the Harlem Renaissance.  And she came out of that.  And she was leafleting and doing things about reparations before it was popular in the 1920s and '30s [1930s]. [sic, Queen Mother Moore was an activist against racial injustice in the 1920s-1930s but began fighting for reparations in the 1950s and was especially active on that issue in the 1960s-1970s.] And she continued.  And so that was, that was an issue that she was associated with.  And she would get up in our meetings, and she would talk about the fact that if we didn't do Reparations, then we weren't doing nothing because of the resources that we were owed and the fact that we needed those resources and, and so forth.  And so I would, I was always respectful of her, and, and she came to be an icon of the Nationalist part of the Black Movement.  And so I think that it was, it was strange if she wasn't around talking about the reparations question after a while.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, reparations is a national issue basically in the black community.  What is a--when we say someone is a Nationalist in the black community today, what are they really talking about?
Speaker 1: Well, we're really talking about a movement that started in, basically, with Stokely Carmichael in 1966.  I mean I'll, I'll say it that crassly because I think people need to have that kind of a, a benchmark.  But the Nationalist Movement goes all the way back to the 19th and 18th century in the African American history.  There was a strain of, of ideology in our community which has always said things like, we are a people.  We have a common destiny in the world.  We have a core value of the unity of our people.  There was something about the dignity of our culture.  There, there's a concept of people-hood which has always been very important to the Nationalist.  And so when you think about it that way, you come to the conclusion that most black people have some Nationalism in them.  They don't call themselves that, but to the extent that they believe they are a people, then they have parts of that ideology.  The counter to that, of course, has been in previous centuries, of course, even the 20th century, the integrationist, that is to say, people who felt that their destiny and identity was tied up, you know, we as Americans, particularly, white Americans.  But the, the difficulty, of that of course, have been the rejection of blacks by whites and the fact that even those who were the strongest integrationist also manifested, you could clearly see the (unclear) a Nationalism.  If you look, for example, at the, at the Board of Directors in organizations like the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], you saw the predominantly black Board of Directors.  And so that for there to be any hint that whites would actually take an organization over and run it, would have run into the feeling in part of people in an organization like that, that black people ought to, you know, lead their destiny.  So--
Speaker 2: What (unclear) you've a person like James Weldon Johnson, who, you know, executive secretary of the NAACP, who wrote the Negro National Anthem--
Speaker 1: Yes, that's right, that's right.  That's the reason why I see this sort of comes naturally out of our history.  And what happened though in the 1960s was that Nationalism became a threat, primarily, because it became part of a movement that in some ways was a direct threat to the United States.  And there was violence associated with Nationalism, even though it was not, never had been necessary for that to occur.  A lot of people associated it with it.  And so Nationalism became something special in the 1960s.  But as I say, and then that flash point shouldn't take away from the fact that it's had a history going all the way back to the time we've been here.  The people who have been the most fervent practitioners of Nationalism had been people who have, had very special associations  in relationship with not only community issues and grassroots organizing, but also Africa and, in terms of their agenda.  And so they had been a special people in, in that sense of, of being identified with those issues, many times, of course, wearing African clothes or speaking African languages and trying to emulate aspects of African culture, having Afrocentric schools and, and sort of operating, you know, out of that particular base of American society.  And that's important because they have, they have been a touchtone for that ideology; a place where, in its purest form, that ideology exists.  And so even though most blacks don't, are not a part of this group, it's important for them to be, to be able to hear it and to see it because it also reinforces their identity, who they are, what they're doing, who they should be.
Speaker 2: Without that type of expression, I mean where would be in your estimation?
Speaker 1: My estimation is that we would, we would still have an ideology because it is not simply a, a question of the rejection of blacks by whites that actually informs that ideology.  It's a question of the fact we are a people because coming to the United States as we did, being enslaved as we were, being oppressed.  I mean at the time that people were let out of slavery, 90 percent of the people, of the group of people who were African in this country, were in that condition.  So a common condition was the thing that has made us a people.  It's not just rejection.  So that if you look at our culture from one coast to the other, there are elements of that culture that are easily identified with us as a people.  So it is that people-hood that is important.  And Nationalism simply expresses it, I think, and expresses it the strongest.  It's actually done one other thing that Professor James Turner talked about in his sort of a list of what comprises Nationalism.  It's been the strongest voice against racism.  It's been the strongest voice against racism.  And I think when we look at some of the other approaches, the civil rights organization in particular, there was a difference of opinion.  And Malcolm X on the one hand had the strongest voice.  But he's criticized by the Civil Rights Movement because the Civil Rights Movement had the most powerful action.  So here is this tension in our community, which I think is healthy between on the one hand, people who understand the Nationalist ethos and that ideology, but also believe that they have to continually interact with the dominant culture in ways which make it possible for us as a people to survive and to thrive in that culture.  So both of these as I, I see it, have been important to the historical development of our people in this country.
Speaker 2: It has been said that if you have a Frederick Douglass, you got to have a Martin Delaney or if you have [W.E.B.] DuBois, you're gonna have a [Marcus] Garvey and it doesn't benefit the country to listen to Dr. [Martin Luther] King without a Malcolm X.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Story_ID: 14791
Speaker 1: Reparations.  What are we owed?  Are we owed something by the United States or by the--are we owed by the individuals or the government?  Or who owes us?
Speaker 2: Well, let me say, say it like this.  I was part of the National Coalition of Blacks for Reparations, the forum in 1986, the original Board of Directors.  And I joined NCOBRA [National Coalition of Blacks for Reparations in America] at that point because, not only did I believe in the truth of what Queen Mother Moore was saying, but she wasn't the only person saying it.  I mean that John Henry [formerly Henrik] Clark, other people understood that there was such a thing as the need for reparations.
Speaker 1: And NCOBRA is?
Speaker 2: As I said, the National Coalition of Blacks for Reparations in America [NCOBRA].  And so I, I've believed that for a long time.  The--in the 19-, the mid-19--let's see, '90s [1990] there was a conference in Abuja, Nigeria that was put together by the Organization of African Unity [OAU].  And I became the chair of the American delegation to that meeting.  And that, there were about five hundred delegates to that meeting from really all over the world.  The, most of them came from the continent of Africa.  And this was unique.  The OAU [Organization of African Unity] put together a, what they called an Eminent Persons Committee to chair this conference.  And the chair of that group was Chief Abiola--Arella [sic], who--Abiola was a very powerful businessman in Nigeria who was running for President.  And I said "Arella [ph]"--that's somebody else.  But this is Chief Abiola, Moshood [Kashimawo Olawale] Abiola. And he was thrown in jail by the regime after 1996 and subsequently he died in prison.
Speaker 1: It was the Sani Abacha--
Speaker 2: The Sani Abacha [regime] did this, and [General] Sani Abacha, of course, was fearful of the fact that here was somebody who actually had won an election.  And he was going to have leave power.  And so rather than do that, he declared the election null and void.  And he put Abiola in jail.  And so this was, this was, this meeting in Abuja happened before all of that.  And, as a matter of fact, at the time, he was campaigning.  And he asked if I would campaign with him in northern Nigeria--that's where Abuja is.  And so after the meeting there, he wanted us to go and, and campaign throughout northern Nigeria.  I couldn't do that, but I could see how powerful and popular he was in northern Nigeria.  And I felt then that he was going to win the election.  That meeting was important in the sense that it discussed the African side of the reparations question, talked about in broad terms, about the fact that Africans had been, not only enslaved, because we tend to focus on slavery outside of Africa, but the spoilage of the African continent in terms of its resources and its society and so forth, I mean that aspect of it, people don't focus in on.  The whole process of world imperialism and colonialism as part of what happened to Africa, slavery was a part of that, was a part of that.  So we discussed a lot of things having to do with the question of, you know, who was owed an apology and whether or not Africans ought to apologize to African Americans for their role in slavery.  And we discussed a lot of these things.  And what form would reparations take and, and who should be held accountable, France and, and Britain and so forth, even Germany for their roll in southwest Africa and so forth.
Speaker 1: Can you take some parts of that and examine them in a way?
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: This is something, there's a lot of general talk in the community about these things.  And there's not a lot of, there's still not a lot of information out here by which people can really make a clear decision about things sometimes.  I mean it exists, but you don't find it, you know, in the minds of most people.  But, for instance, the case that Africans owe us an apology, as if we were already African Americans and they sold--you know, when people were sold or something or that they had a, set up a market basically to sell certain people to Europe or something.  I mean are these valid (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I don't think they're valid arguments primarily because you, if you, all you have to do is look at the comparison between Eastern slavery, which existed for centuries, and Western slavery.  Western slavery, chattel slavery made a human being into a thing, a piece of merchandise.  That would have happened if you had not had the intervention of Europeans into the slave system.  It would not have happened if they had not fueled it with money and weapons and rum and the sort of things that were used to actually get people fighting so that they could then deliver human beings to a system and carry them away.  So when you think about an apology, you have to put it on a scale.  And you have to ask yourself, well, well, who owes the greatest apology.  I would accept, and, and some of the African leaders have apologized, Bennein, for example, Senegal, some of the heads of some of the others have apologized, Uganda in the 1970s.  But these are, are feeble things from my standpoint.  When you look at the massive, massive global involvement of Europeans in the system of slavery and what it wrought.
Speaker 1: But wouldn't there have been an international slave trade without European involvement?
Speaker 2: That's what I mean by massive.  The Portuguese for example.  I've been to Brazil many times.  When you look at Brazil and the fact that there are three times as many Africans transported to Brazil than there was through the United States, you get a sense of the massiveness of this enterprise participated in by Europeans.  And so to me, it's, it's ridiculous to think about Africans sort of owing a great debt when the continent itself was so destroyed by this process, by European imperialism.  And, of course, Africans have not been able to raise themselves up even today to the point where, even if they did apologize, one couldn't expect reasonably anything from them because they have still, they are still under the yoke of a lot of the control and direction of their economies from Europe, even this minute.
Speaker 1: Okay, let see, now, then, like who then would owe reparations?
Speaker 2: Well, I think it's obviously the European countries.  I mean when one looks at the nature of the poverty in Africa, as I said, you can't expect anything there.  I think that it's the people who in the United States, who benefited from the slave trade and who were the merchants of the cotton and the iron ore and the turpentine and the steel and many of the things where the slave, slavery was used.  It is also not just the material question as far as I'm concerned--I'm writing a book right now called 'The Politics of Black Memory' in which I'm, I'm looking at the myth of Mount Rushmore [South Dakota] and the fact that in the minds of many people, that's how America was built, that Africans are not up there, Native Americans, Hispanics are not up there on Mount Rushmore [South Dakota].  So there is not a sense that these people also contributed greatly to the making of America.  So a lot of what reparations is about to me, is not just a question of the demand for resources, it's a question of the rehabilitation of the self, the rehabilitation of the nation, the reworking and remaking of history, of the history of the Nation so that people get a realistic view of how America was constructed.  I think if that happens, you know, it would give people a sense of humility, rather than arrogance about race, about this country, about the inclusionary concept of Democracy and so forth and so on.  So there's some stakes here, it seems to me, that are extremely important in terms of reparations which don't just redound to black people in that respect.
Speaker 1: Now, well, individual--individuals have argued and surprisingly, black and white, that how can you make, you know, White people pay for slavery, this happened so long ago, you know.  And is that the goal, to make white people pay for slavery?
Speaker 2: Well, I belong to the Reparations Coordinating Committee [RCC], which is a group that was founded by Randall Robinson and whose head of TransAfrica around 1997.  And it is the view of this group that, that the individual American citizen is not culpable in that sense.  And the reason for that is that, slavery at every step of its evolution in this country, was authorized by word of law.  Whether we're talking about colonial aspects of slavery before the making of America or we're talking about colonial law, that involved the British, or if you're talking about the constitution of the United or anything that happened after that.  You're talking about the fact that the government was intimately involved in legitimizing this practice.  So if, we feel that is primarily an issue of, of governmental responsibility.  Some of the groups have taken out after corporations because they profited handsomely, from insuring slaves and so forth and so on.  And so I think that that's a proper thing to do as well, but in terms of the, of the basic responsibility, I think the basic responsibility is one of the government.
Story_ID: 14792
Speaker 1: Would reparations simply be for slavery or will they be for some of the subsequent injustices that occurred after chattel slavery was supposedly ended, like some of the injustices during Reconstruction or before the Civil Rights Movement or even some of the injustice--racial injustice that occurs today that's actually, can be seen as being part of public policy?
Speaker 2: Well, our view is that--and I say we don't have a set of collective views.  But what I know of the individual views of the members of the RCC [Reparations Coordinating Committee] and even NCOBRA [National Coalition of Blacks for Reparations in America], who I'm (unclear) minutely involved, that people are, are clear that reparations are not just for slavery.  They're for slavery and post-slavery racism, and which means that the clock ticks right up to this very minute.  And the reason for that is the, the, the disparities in the socio-economic status between blacks and the rest of society today, and particularly, whites.  That disparity exists.  It is measurable in almost every field of human endeavor.  And so to the extent that it hasn't been fixed, we feel that reparations is one of the huge reasons why the disparities exist today.  So that there is a straight line between what happened to us in slavery, perpetuated by post-slavery racism to the point where we exist in that situation today.  One other thing I'll say about this, I am, I'm not hospitable to the idea that slavery ended in 1865.  And the reason I'm not is that in 1866, there were slave markets in Alexandria, Virginia still operating.  When you look at, in the 20th Century, at the evidence, you find that blacks were in a slavery-like situation in many places in the South in the 20th century.  The records of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] up to the Second World War indicate there're a lot of people writing them saying they were still in a situation that is like slavery.  Some people saying, worse than slavery.  These are, are letters coming to the NAACP.  When you look at the Justice Department files in the 20th century, these files are labeled slavery/peonage in the 20th century, Justice Department files.  Some of the cases that they prosecuted of slavery in the 20th century--Americans don't know about because of this huge myth that historians have helped to create that somehow we can take a 244 year old institution and you can stop it on a dime.  You can't do that, and it didn't happen.  So I, I know that there were people who were certainly relatively free.  They could move around this country and many did.  I know that you had a robust migration from the South to the North.  I know these things.  But I also know that in some pockets of the South that they were still in a slavery-like condition up until the very beginning of the Civil Rights Movement.  Now, we don't have that history, which is to say that for some people, the Civil Rights Movement broke the last vestiges of chattel slavery.  We don't, we don't have that in our history, but we ought to because in some places that was exactly what happened.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and certainly it's not an interpretation that you usually hear, but, yeah, it makes you wonder, you know, if you can't vote, you can't testify against white people in a court of law, you can't do--I mean are you free? --or you can't leave land.  Are you free or are you a slave?
Speaker 2: No it doesn't make you wonder (laughs).  I mean what we ought to stop doing is wondering about it, and we ought to say what it really was.
Speaker 1: As an interviewer, it makes me wonder--
Speaker 2: I understand that (laughs).  I understand, but I just don't believe in wondering too long.  And we ought to, I mean part of this movement about reparations, the fascinating thing about it has been digging up a new history of America, not just of black people, but digging up a new history of America and, and presenting that to people.  The history that, in many cases, they've never heard before.  So that the reparations perspective on a lot of this is extremely important.
Story_ID: 14793
Speaker 1: Now there was an attempt in 2001 to take this reparations case to the world stage basically, and there was a United Nations Conference [World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia, and Related Intolerance] in Durban, South Africa in August or September, I guess of 2001, which focused on racism and--racism and, what do they call it when you're afraid of somebody from another--
Speaker 2: Xenophobia.
Speaker 1: Xenophobia, right.  And you were part--you attended that conference.
Speaker 2: I did, and that was a very interesting meeting.  I attended as part of the, the African American Leadership Group.  And also I was, attended as a delegate to a, an organization on the African--in, in Cape Town [South Africa] actually, that was sponsoring a symposium.  And so I was a Symposium Delegate for that organization.  It's called CASAS [Center for Advanced Studies of African Society].  And we were able to, to go to Durban and, and witness a very amazing experience.  First of all, this tortuous dance of the American government about whether or not to go and be there and a significant, at a significant level of representation, meant that they went.  And they finally left, leaving only a low-level emissary behind.  So the United States was not there in any substantial voice.  They were there before the Durban Conference in order to try to negotiate out of the consideration of the Conference, language dealing with, with Israel and whether or not Zionism was racism and so forth.  They could not do that, and so they left.  There was also opposition to reparations in the final document of the Declaration, and that stayed in.  It's interesting because the--slavery as a crime against humanity was in the final Declaration.  That was also something that was opposed.  Interesting because [President] George [W.] Bush went to Africa 19--in 2003, in June of 2003 and yet when he was standing there at Goree Island [Senegal], near The Door of No Return, he said that slavery was a crime.  I found that striking because they were afraid that slavery was going to be declared a crime against humanity at the Durban Conference.  And yet it was.  And the reason they were afraid of it because if the United States had legitimized that language, that language could have found itself in court in the middle of this reparations suits.
Story_ID: 14794
Speaker 1: We're talking about the case coming up in court, repar--the United States being afraid of the case coming through a court of law.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes, uh-huh.  Okay.  Deadra Famer Pellman has instituted a number of suits.  This is a young woman who was not long out of law school, but who ran across some documents in her own family that led her to believe that major corporations were very deeply involved in insuring slaves.  And she has been a catalyst for a number of recent suits.  At the very moment that we're speaking, there are suits from at least five different states that have been rolled into one omnibus suit.  And there have been some complainants found who were sons and daughters of people who were slaves.  And this to show that it is true that there was an impact of slavery and, and those who oppose it often say that, well, you know, there's nobody living today, you know, who were slaves or impacted by slavery.  And, of course, that's far from, certainly far from the truth.  And again, it speaks to the ignorance that we have about American history.  But it also speaks to the psychology that we have about how long slavery did exist in this country.  And these suits have been amazing.  They, we have had now a number of city council resolutions.  We have had at least one resolution by the state of California saying that the insurance companies that do business with the states have to disclose whether or not they have insured slaves.  I think that there's another state going to probably follow that lead.  There was a suit now that the Reparations Coordinating Committee [RCC] is in court with in terms of the, the 1921 Tulsa [Oklahoma] Riot, so that there's a number of things that have burst out all of a sudden in terms of legal activity and conferences taking place and discussion in black churches in the middle of the night about this phenomenon of reparations.  It's, it's a very timely issue.  HR-40, which is a bill that Congressman John Conyers has put in to the Congress, going all the way back to the mid-1980s has never seen the light of day, to say, it's never been assigned to a committee.  There are members of the Congressional Black Caucus that are still not even signed on to it.  But I spoke at a session just the other day at the Raven House Office Building, where people came in from a number of places--this was sponsored by NCOBRA [National Coalition of Blacks for Reparations in America].  And they were, they were trying to press members, black members of Congress to sign on.  It was a hundred percent campaign.  So John Conyers has, has held onto this thing for many years, and all of a sudden now, there's a lot of lobbying, a lot of activity trying to get HR-40 passed.
Speaker 1: Okay, what do the prospects look like?
Speaker 2: Well, the prospects I think are pretty good that one could come close to 100 percent of support for HR-40 by members of the Congressional Black Caucus.
Speaker 1: Who would be in opposition for that?
Speaker 2: Well, there, there are people, for example, like Congressman Harold Ford of Tennessee who is clearly--I think people have their eyes on him in the state of Tennessee.  And he has his eyes on higher office.  And, and I'm sure that his handlers feel that that would be a liability if he were to, to sign on to a Reparations Bill.  But he's not the only one.  I'm sure there're others who are looking at their prospects of running for different offices, who feel that to have signed on to this probably would be a liability.
Speaker 1: On July the 21st, this coming Monday in Federal Court in Chicago [Illinois], a suit is gonna be, I mean it's gonna be filed.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And can you tell us about that?
Speaker 2: Well, this is the omnibus suit that's going to be filed in Chicago.  And it's gonna be important because this is a suit against corporations that are at the focus of this; insurance companies, banks and this suit is going to be very important in terms of setting a precedent for the, how the Court might look at some of these other suits.  For example, if the Reparations Coordinating Committee [RCC] goes into court against the government, it can expect that some of the same legal precedence and, and legal concepts that are used in this suit, they may have also to face.  One of the most important of these is the statute of limitations, the fact that some of the judges have felt that the clock has run out on the possibility of such a suit.  And this is another part of that notion that something happened in the 19th century that has no relevance to today.  But they're using the statute of limitations as an impediment.  So the difficulty of getting around the statute of limitations and some of the other legal problems means that reparations has to be more than simply a legal fight.  It has to be one having to do with education, as I talked about the re-correction of American history.  It has to be one where, you know, people look at something like affirmative action.  And they say, well, wait a minute.  Affirmative action was a relatively narrow public policy for a relatively narrow reason, and that was to effect workplace equality or educational equality, higher education, relatively narrow.  The Civil Rights Movement and therefore, affirmative action, never asked the question of what is the full bill owed to blacks.  It never asked that question.  So reparations is beyond affirmative action in a sense that it calls into question the entire damage done to blacks and the entire bill of restitution and whether or not this society is ready to make that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it's cut in that issue for people.  I mean that's basically what it amounts to, the education and the activity around reparations is cut in that issue that slavery was not over in 1865 and that you really don't have freedom yet.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Story_ID: 14795
Speaker 1: Freedom for African Americans has been long-term proposition that has not been achieved.  And even though it may look like people like me who have a PhD., who work in a well-heeled university, who make a decent salary are quote, free, unquote, the connection is that I'm first-generation college educated.  The connection is that I'm tied to an extended family who doesn't look like me, didn't have my opportunities, connection to a people who are still, in terms of disparities, are stark in many respects.  So I'm not out here by myself, you see.  That's the problem.  So you can't use the individual, you see, as an example because the individual is connected to a whole in terms of the American experience.  So the fact that we are still here in 2003 in July talking about freedom is, it must be a strange discussion to a lot of people in this country who have been arguing--and this is the lightweight intellectuals, that we are already free, the [Abigail and Stephen] Thernstroms at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]  have written a book which essentially says, you're okay, Jack.  And when you look at the strides that blacks have made in America, you don't have, you don't need any of these things like affirmative action or any of this stuff.  You're okay.  And so they have labored to try to create the fiction that, that nothing is needed.  So if a, if reparations are, are ever granted, one of the arguments that we are making is that the Johnnie Cochrans don't need them, the Willie Garys, the Ron [Ronald] Walters, they don't need the reparations; that the people who need them are the people who are still on the bottom of American society.  And it doesn't look to us as though there's anything in public policy on the table at this moment in history, anything that's envisioned in public policy, that's going to do for those people at the bottom of American society, what reparations could do.
Speaker 2: For an example, say maybe the worst case scenario, Mississippi, for example.  If black people had been able to--if there was clearly an even playing field in say Mississippi from 1865 on, you know, would we own more land, do you think in Mississippi?  Would we have prosperous businesses in Mississippi?  If we could vote or take white people to court and sue them and do all the other things that people to protect their gains, and I mean, do you think that we would be better off in Mississippi than we are today?
Speaker 1: Well, that's true.  And it's not just Mississippi.  In the 2002 State of Black America Magazine, which is put out by the National Urban League, there was a striking speech by Frank Raines, who was the head of Fannie Mae.  Now, this speech was taken from his speech to the Urban League Convention.  And he goes through an amazing list which says that if blacks had been equal, this is where they would be today, heads of fifty-six major corporations, and CEOs of Fortune 500 corporations, presidents of major colleges, income, another $100billion more in income and so forth and so on.  So he goes through this list in order to give people a sense of what life for African Americans would look like, you know, if we had been able to take advantage of the opportunities way back then.
Speaker 2: If homes were not burnt and people were not lynched and (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: All of that stuff.  All of that stuff.  All of that, all of that stuff.  The amazing thing to me, and I'm, I'm sure to others, is that there are people who think, that really believe that these disparities are the normal condition that we are to accept.  That's, that's the amazing thing to me, that we really shouldn't, you know, agitate, as Frederick Douglass said, for a situation where we can reclaim, not just the money, but in reclaiming the resources, reclaim the dignity of our community because you can't live in a society like the United States, a second-class citizen and have, have your dignity.  You can't do it.  I don't how many--much money you make, how many jets you have.  If your people are not equal, then it seems to me your dignity suffers as well.  And so that's what ultimately we're talking about.  But, but the amazing thing is people don't get it.  There are people who think that we are satisfied being second-class citizens, that we ought to accept it, and we should not raise these questions.
Story_ID: 14796
Speaker 1: Let's talk about the political situation in West Africa.  This past week George [W.] Bush was in, was talking about Liberia and U.S. involvement in trying to bring peace to Liberia.  I mean what are your thoughts on the Liberian Civil War and the war in Sierra Leone and some of the other upheavals on the continent today?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that the, the African continent is going to be in a state of perpetual civil conflict.  And the reason for that, of course, is the rank poverty that exists in the continent.  Because you have this rank poverty, you're always going to have a group of people who are ripe to challenge the existing regime.  All you have to do is pay them.  Now, the payment comes in the form of African raw materials and mineral resources, diamonds.  In West Africa, that's the big one.  And this is what Charles Taylor used when in 1987, he began the civil war [in Liberia] and got access to the diamonds, got access to a way to pay his army.  He's not unusual in that respect.  When you look at many of the insurgent armies across the African continent.  If you can pay people, you can get their allegiance, and you can use them against the existing regime.  So as far as I'm concerned, the root cause of this is the impoverishment, the rank impoverishment of the continent.  And you can always have a ready force.  West Africa today, therefore, the people are seeking simply a temporary solution to the civil war, and I say temporary because that's all it's going to be unless the United States and the international community goes beyond simply dealing with the civil conflict.  Sergeant [Samuel] Doe, in the '80s [1980s], gained power from the American Liberians and started Liberia on a downhill slide that pretty much destroyed the economy of a country that was semi-prosperous in West Africa.  The same thing happened in Sierra Leone.  And so now you have two of the countries that were most associated with the West, in a state of misery and chaos.  I think that President Bush's trip to Africa was no more than a grand photo op [opportunity].  He made a pledge to deliver $15 billion in funds for HIV/AIDS.  Now, that was a tremendous pledge as far as I'm concerned, but while he was over there getting his photo op, his party was back in the Congress cutting that money.  No one knows how much money will be left.  In addition to that, I've talked to some people who were a part of the Administration's so-called "faith-based programs."  They're lining up to get that money.  So one doesn't know whether or not this is a political boondoggle or something that's actually serious, where most of the resources will be spent in Africa, fighting AIDS and the other problems that African people face.  So I think that what happened was that the President ran out of compassion room here in the United States.  You have a war in Iraq, which is going sour with the American people.  You have an economy that's in the toilet.  Recently announced $450 billion deficit.  There's not much room in a situation like that to gin up a compassioned agenda to run on in 2004.  So what do you do?  You go to Africa.  You take your $15 billion pledge and you go to Africa, and you get some photographs that you can use on the campaign trail, which defines your compassionate agenda.  So I think a lot of this, and I can hear a Karl Rove right now, his political strategist, you know, saying that, you know, we need to get these shots, you know.  And we need to use them in the 2004 campaign.  I, I just don't think--the contradiction is too great of, of a President who would stand in, at the Door of No Return [Goree Island, Senegal] and look plaintively, you know, at the sea and at the same, denounce reparations, would say on the birthday of Martin Luther King, Jr., that he is opposed to affirmative action, a President who has not met with black leadership; a President who won't go and speak before the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  I mean to me this is a grand contradiction to do this on the one hand and, and not dignify the Africans in this country.  So that's why I reached the conclusion that this was, this was giant photo op and that it was designed to be used in the 2004 campaign.
Story_ID: 14797
Speaker 1: What about African Americans' relationship to Africans.  I mean what--where does the Pan African project stand today?
Speaker 2: Well, I wrote a book, as you know, on 'Pan Africanism in the African Diaspora.'  I was trying to in part, get at this issue in the last chapter, where I've talked about Pan Africanism in one country, inside of one country, suggesting that if you look in any of the, in the states in the West, you have an African orient, origin population.  African Americans, black Brits, people from the Caribbean, people from the African continent.  And the question is how do they, how do they live together, how do they get along?  Is this so-called unity that we talk about real?  And if it is not, then how can it be made real.  Ron Daniels, who is a long-time activists and head of the Center for Constitutional Rights, had a conference this past year on the state of black America.  Well, he designed a panel discussion on this question of how do we operationalize this Pan Africanism in one state.  It's, it's difficult because we have been part of so much socialization against one another.  Europeans in Africa say that the black people in America and the, and the black people in Britain and the people in the Caribbean are gangsters and thugs.  And so when they come here and, and when they, when they bring the images that they saw on television, that's, that's the image that they have of people here, people that they don't really want to associate with.  And, and so in this country, we've been asked, you know, well, do we have tails and a whole series of things that have socialized us to be ashamed of an identity with the people from the African continent.  So this, this cross mode of socialization that we've both been a part of, has made it very difficult for us to come together as brothers and sisters in the spirit of Pan African unity.  That has been the struggle of Pan Africanists, to try to effectuate that, to try to get that done.  It's been difficult, but now, it's almost imperative because when you look at the rate of immigration in many of these places, the African population in the United States is a significant part of what we call the black community.  There are two million from the Caribbean in the United States that are part of the black community.  And so the question of whether or not we are, we're going to, to live together with some semblance of Pan African unity, is an urgent and becoming a more and more urgent necessity every day.  So there are discussions going on about that.  There's some strong feelings about that, but I think eventually, it's something that we will, we will have to confront far more vigorously than we are right now.  Now, the thing is that this is discussion going on at the fringes of the black community.  This is, this is not a discussion that's been seized by the major civil rights organizations and, and the major economic and social organizations and the churches and the major institutions in the civil society, that need to be a part of that dialogue.
Story_ID: 14798
Speaker 1: You're noted in this country primarily for your contributions to the analysis of African American politics in newspapers and journals and so forth.  What are some of your hopes or concerns for the black community in regards to our internal politics in this country?
Speaker 2: Well, it was, there was an irony here that I think we're living out right now, in that so much of the hope of the Civil Rights Movement and mobilization of that Movement was designed to thrust us into the American political system and its institutions, its processes.  A lot of that has happened.  We are now concerned about running for office, and we're concerned about voter mobilization and, and so forth.  To the extent that we, we are though a part of these institutions and processes, the irony is that our power has been locked up in them.  And we, the power we thought we were going to be able to exercise as a part of them has not materialized, primarily because of their nature.  Blacks--I'll give you an example, are predominantly part of the Democratic Party.  We have 39 members of the House of Representatives.  But in order for them to use that power--
Speaker 1: That's out of 400 and--
Speaker 2: Four hundred and thirty four.  In order for them to use that power, the Democrats have to be in charge of that body.  If they're not in charge of that body, we don't get to use that power.
Speaker 1: Which is the case today as we speak--
Speaker 2: As we speak, as we speak, as we speak.  And so we're excluded from power, from decision making.  And yet we are, are vigorous about turning out to vote so that we can make a difference and eventually have some say, some influence on the process.  What that says to me, not--is not that we have to withdraw from that politics, but what it says to me is that a lot of the assumptions we have about its efficaciousness were misplaced, because what happened was that a lot of people then withdrew from the movement of politics and went home, sat down and, and waited for the millennium to come through public policy.  We need both movements.  We need the movements as some called it, in, in the suites, and we need the movement in the streets.  If we have one without the other, we are not as effective overall.  We're in a period now where we haven't had social movement, and because we haven't had social movement, our politics in the suites hasn't been that effective.  So I would hope that for the future, in terms of the younger generation--I mean we, I could tell you now a lot about the arcane aspects of electoral politics.  We could go into those discussions.  That's fine, but in terms of a general theory and, and comment, it seems to me that our younger generation has to understand that that stuff that we did in the 1960s wasn't just [Dr.] Martin Luther King's [Jr.] stuff.  That wasn't, that wasn't part of a staged theory, where you do that in the '60s [1960].  In the, in the '80s [1980] and '90s [1990] and in 2000, you wear your briefcase and then beyond that, you know, you're free.  In order to get free, we have to continue both kinds of politics at the same time.  So younger people have to understand that if they want freedom, yes, they're gonna have to continue to strive to be senators and bank executives and whatever have you, but they jolly well also better put some resources in the social movement because that's the thing that moves institutions to change far quicker, far more powerfully than anything else.  And so that, they have to decide whether or not they want that change.  They have to decide whether or not they want it more urgently than we did.  They have to decide the magnitude of the change they want.  And if they want it, then they have to operationalize with politics to get it.  That's why I was so, so proud of the kids that went out in front of the Supreme Court and made a manifestation having to do with affirmative action in the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] case because they got it, they got it.  They understood that this was their struggle.  And I'm so proud of the fact that they, they got a victory from that.  They, now they understand that mobilization works, that, that they may have, they may have said something to the court that no legal brief, nothing else, could have said.
Speaker 1: Now, do--here's a question.  Do powers ever concede anything without a demand?
Speaker 2: Never, never.  And yet, somehow, we think now that if we simply abide by the institutional rules in the political institutions of which we are a part, it will come..
Story_ID: 14799
Speaker 1: We're talking about the scholarship that's trying to re-evaluate or to take another look at our history and to some extent, rewrite it.  And do you have any thoughts about that?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that that's, that's true.  And the surprise for me has come from some of our distinguished African and Africanist scholars, people like [Valentin Y.] Mudimbe and [Kwame Anthony] Apiah, who is at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] now Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey] and so forth.  And some of them have written as thought--and in fact, I think Apiah, himself, says this, that, that concerning, with Pan Africanism, if it is not all-inclusive, is a racist idea, which almost suggests that if we believe that there is some integrity to the people who, the people of African descent, and we theorize on that basis, that that is a racist proposition, which goes along with a line of theorizing by conservatives in the United States, which suggests that any racial selectivity for any purpose, regardless of the purpose, whether it's to seek justice or whatever, is ipso facto, racist.  Now, that can't be supported of course historically.  But that is a new theory that has been foisted upon the landscape and has had tremendous influence with the courts.  And this was one of the reasons why the courts have narrowed the extent to which you can use race in things like the drawing of district boundaries and, even entering higher education and so forth because of this cockeyed theory that any kind of racist selectivity on its face is suspect.  And therefore, what you do is you equalize people's history; you equalize their pain; you equalize their suffering and you make no distinction with respect to the use of power by one group against the other.
Story_ID: 14800
Speaker 1: At this stage of your life, and, you are still relatively young in this field, what would you consider as your legacy?
Speaker 2: Well, I am, I'm not that young.  And I'm actually beginning to think about my legacy (laughter), not, not consumed by it, but it--every now and then it crosses my mind because I'm, at this point, I'm--in a few days I'll be sixty-five and beginning to think about a sunset on this career.  And I think that, if anything, I've tried to stay true to the tradition that was established of the activist scholar.  I mean this was a [W.E.B.] DuBoisan tradition.  And it is a tradition that many of the academics in our community have, have tried to, to stay true to.  One, because we as a people, who have not been able to afford to, to educate a class of people who would stay in a library and not call on their resources to help us on the path toward our liberation.  And the other because those people themselves sought the truth.  And as far as I'm concerned, only one way of knowing is to get it from books.  And the profound way of knowing is to look at the integration between intellectual life and experience.  And so I'm confident that what I know about certain things, I know it deeply from the level of not only being able to intellectualize about it, but from a place where it actually happens.  That is was what I've been able to try to, to write.  That's what I've been able to try to bring to the classroom.  And those are the kinds of things I bring to sort of a public calling in the media.  And I think that if there's anything that I've tried to, to do, I've to do it with a sense of integrity.
Story_ID: 14801
Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: --Well, I'd like to be remembered as someone who gave his life and his resources to the idea of the dignity of the African person, the unity of people of African descent and the contribution that that idea could make to human civilization.
Speaker 1: And will those powers that hinder black people ever concede anything without a demand?
Speaker 2: They never have.  And they never will.
Story_ID: 14802
Speaker 1: Well, I'm in the photo and that is the cover the magazine Black Issues in Higher Education.  And this was the, it was taken as a result of the Presidential election in 1992.  This was the election of [William] Bill Clinton, and I was being asked by the magazine to, to assess what the Presidential election of [William] Bill Clinton actually meant to the African American community.  And, of course, this is the tradition of a lot of what I do and have done in terms of trying to make some sense out of the nonsense of American politics.
Speaker 2: [Ronald Walters on the cover of 'Black Issues in Higher Education,' 1992. From the collection of Ronald Walters.]
Story_ID: 14803
Speaker 1: This is my staff, my initial staff of the African American Leadership Institute.  And this was not long after I came from Howard University [Washington, D.C.] to the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland] in its [James MacGregor Burns] Academy of Leadership.  And in this picture we were having a program during what was called then,  Global Leadership Week.  And so we had asked Congressman Walter Fauntroy whose in the bright tie and the black suit, to come and, and speak about his experiences.  And we had asked Bernie Grant who was the gentleman with the beard next to the lady in the light dress.  He is, was a member of Parliament, Chairman of the British Reparations Committee and an activist.  We had asked him to come.  He made an amazing speech about black politics in Britain and in Europe.  And, of course, I'm, I'm next to Bernie.  He had been an old friend.  So this was a very interesting program, and we were delighted to have had our staff put that together and to be represented in this way.
Speaker 2: Did you give us the year, please?
Speaker 1: This was 19--I came to the University in 1997, '98 [1998], this--yeah, this was 1998.
Speaker 2: [Ronald Walters with Walter Fauntroy (fourth from left) and Bernie Grant (third from right), and the staff of the African American Leadership Institute, College Park, Maryland, 1998.]
Story_ID: 14804
Speaker 1: This was my meeting at Chief [Moshood] Abiola, who was the head of the Eminent Persons Committee [sic, Group] of the Organization of African Unity [OAU] that sponsored the, the Global Conference on Reparations in Abuja, Nigeria in 1993.  I had know him for several years and respected him as a Pan Africanist, and he is greeting me as, as I'm coming from the United States into the Conference.
Speaker 2: [Ronald Walters greets Chief Moshood Abiola, Abuja, Nigeria, 1993.  From the collection of Ronald Walters.]
Story_ID: 14805
Speaker 1: This is a picture at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] in the President's office.  And that is President Franklin Jenifer, and President Jenifer is conversing with Reverend Jesse Jackson.  This was not long after the, the 1988 Presidential campaign.  And Reverend Jackson had come to Howard University at my invitation to be a distinguished Professor of American Politics.  And he gave a series of lectures to students in the Political Science Department.  And I chose that opportunity to, to introduce him to Franklin Jenifer who had never met him.
Speaker 2: [Ronald Walters with Franklin Jenifer and Jesse Jackson, Howard University, Washington, D.C., ca. 1988.  From the collection of Ronald Walters.]
Story_ID: 14806
Speaker 1: Well, this was taken in February of 2003, and it was a part of a promotion of a speech that I did at the General Accounting Office.  This is symptomatic of what I've done for so many years during Black History Month in February and that was to give speeches, not only in Washington at various federal agencies, but throughout the United States.
Speaker 2: [Ronald Walters promotional poster, February 2003.  From the collection of Ronald Walters.]
Story_ID: 14807
Speaker 1: Well, this is a group of researchers that I was able to assemble as a part of a project on the Devolution initiative that was sponsored by the W. K. [Will Keith] Kellogg Foundation.  The foundation was very interested in looking at the new Welfare Reform Act that was passed in 1996 called TANF, which is Temporary Assistance to Needy Families.  And it sponsored projects in five states to try to make the TANF law far more reasonable to respect to its, its ability to, to be effective with low-income families.  That meant that advocacy groups in those 5 states had to propose changes in the law.  These researchers, in five states that we managed from the African American Leadership Institute, were the ones who developed information and research for the advocacy groups.  And so we're very proud of this, this collection of individuals who did a tremendous job in helping advocacy organizations to make life better for low-income families.
Speaker 2: [Ronald Walters with a group of welfare reform researchers.  From the collection of Ronald Walters.]
