Story_ID: 633642
Speaker 1: My name is Jacques Lesure and I'm the interviewer today and Neculai Burghelea is the videographer.  Sir, could you please state your whole name and spell it for us, please.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) [HistoryMaker] Malcolm-Jamal Warner, M-A-L-C-O-L-M, hyphen J-A-M-A-L, W-A-R-N-E-R.
Speaker 1: And your place of birth and date of birth.
Speaker 2: Jersey City, New Jersey, August 18th, 1970.
Speaker 1: And today's date.
Speaker 2: Today's date is Tuesday, April, Wednesday, April 2nd, Wednesday, April 2nd, 2008 (laughter).
Speaker 1: And our loc- our current location.
Speaker 2: Sherman Oaks, California [Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 1: And your current occupation.
Speaker 2: My current occupation is actor, poet, musician.
Story_ID: 633643
Speaker 1: Now, we have some other questions that we like to ask that we call our get to know you deeper questions and they're very simple, kind of People magazine type questions.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Your favorite food?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) My favorite food is a toss up between pizza and my mother's [Pamela Warner] tacos.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year.
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination.
Speaker 2: My favorite destination vacation would be Jamaica.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color.
Speaker 2: Favorite color is blue.
Speaker 1: And is there a phrase or a saying that you use or you go by that's very important to you that you could share with us?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my word is my bond.
Speaker 1: My word is my bond.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay we want to go forward.  We want to get into your history.
Speaker 2: Oh, my other one. Let me go back.
Speaker 1: Okay, sure.
Speaker 2: My other one, my other one--the second one is integrity is all you have.
Speaker 1: Those two are closely related.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 633644
Speaker 1: We want to go into your early years, starting with your mother.  Could you tell us, tell us her name, please?
Speaker 2: My mother is Pamela Warner.
Speaker 1: And where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Los Angeles, California.
Speaker 1: And do you know much about her childhood, growing up?  Did she share any stories with you about her childhood growing up?
Speaker 2: She was very, had a very close relationship with her mother [Thelma Brown McGee].  And her mother passed when she was thirteen, that was a very significant turning point in her life.
Speaker 1: From that age, particular stories, anything particular she shared with you about her childhood?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but probably nothing I could really talk about on camera without having discussing with her first.
Speaker 1: Now how would you describe your mother?
Speaker 2: My mother is what we call the bomb (laughter).  That's B-O-M-B.  That's a very good thing.  My mother is, I mean, she is great.  She is, she's very compassionate, she's very, very smart, very driven, protective.  And I think a lot of what I get from her is you know, always considering other people.  She's a hell of a cook.
Speaker 1: Anymore you want to add to that?
Speaker 2: She just taught me a lot.  She's, like I said, she's very smart, she's very intuitive.  I hope I get some of that from her.  And she's just, you know, she's a lot of who I am is because of the values and things that she's instilled in me.  And we've always had a wonderfully close relationship, even during the, you know, teenage times, they're always kind of rough for a parent and son.  We had those times as well.  But the foundation that we've had has always been strong.
Story_ID: 633645
Speaker 1: How about your father?  What can you tell us about him?  Where--what was his name?
Speaker 2: My father is Robert Warner, Jr.  He was born and raised in Chicago, Illinois, still there.  He is, you know, another big reason I am the man I am today because of the values and morals that he instilled in me as a young kid.  He was the one who named me Malcolm-Jamal [HistoryMaker Malcolm-Jamal Warner] after Malcolm X and Ahmad Jamal.  My dad is again, very bright, very, very compassionate, very driven like my mother [Pamela Warner].  He was, you know, very active in the '60s [1960s] Civil Rights Movement.  He's, you know, largely responsible for the connection that I have with, you know, my history and where we've come from as a people.  And he's a jazz aficionado and loves the fact that his son is a bass player (laughter).
Speaker 1: So did he share any stories about his childhood coming up, growing up in Chicago?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  There're, you know, there're definitely, you know, a lot of good, personal stories there.  But again, you know, those things I really don't like to talk about without their approval (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Consent.
Speaker 2: Consent, yeah.
Story_ID: 633646
Speaker 1: Now, your grandparents.  You, now you mentioned your maternal grandmother.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What was her name?  Or--?
Speaker 2: Her name was Thelma Brown [Thelma Brown McGee].
Speaker 1: And do you know anything much about her that your mother [Pamela Warner] shared with you?
Speaker 2: Just that, you know again, another kind, compassionate person, human being.  The thing I remember my mother talking about her the most is that as a parent, she always talked to my mother, you know, when she was a kid.  And all she needed to do was talk.  She didn't really have to spank her.  All she had to do was really talk to her.  Yeah, and I always thought that was a very, very cool thing.  'Cause the talking didn't--the just talking didn't always work with me as a kid (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now how about your grandfathers on either side?  Were you privy to know any of them?
Speaker 2: Yeah, actually I knew, I knew both of my grandfathers [James McGee and Robert Warner, Sr.], and I also knew my paternal grandmother.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell us about her first.
Speaker 2: Alpha Kate Warner [Alpha Milton Warner].  She passed when I was seven, so, you know, my early childhood memories of her was, you know, she spoiled me to death, which was always a big surprise because she never spoiled my father [Robert Warner, Jr.] when he was a kid, so (laughter).  She spoiled me to death.  But I think what I remember the most about her was, in the backyard, there was an apple tree.  And we used to always go out and pick the apples and she'd make apple, the best apple pie.  And one of the biggest lessons I learned from her was a lot of times we'd be picking apples and I would see apples that were bruised or just you know, they weren't good apples.  And she would take those apples and she would, you know, she would cut around them and you know, she'd make the applesauce and make the apple pie.  And you know, I guess it was a really early message to me that you know, even if things don't look perfect, you can still make them out to be something.
Speaker 1: Very good analogy.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now was this in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Chicago, yes.
Speaker 1: Apple trees in the backyard.
Speaker 2: There you go (laughter).
Story_ID: 633647
Speaker 1: You were going into your grandfathers.  Let's start with her [Warner's paternal grandmother, Alpha Milton Warner] husband.
Speaker 2: Okay, Robert Warner, Sr., my father's [Robert Warner, Jr.] father.  We were pretty close.  We used to, used to watch baseball together, my grandfather and my father both loved baseball.  And I loved baseball because I got to watch it with my grandfather.
Speaker 1: Cubs [Chicago Cubs] or White, White Sox [Chicago White Sox]?
Speaker 2: They were Cubs.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were Cubs.  And I loved baseball.  I loved watching it with my grandfather until my father became a Little League coach.  And when your dad is Little League coach, you have to play baseball.  And baseball really wasn't my game.  But because my dad was the coach, we had to play.  My stepbrother and I had to play.  And ever since then, I've never liked baseball (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, and okay.  Continue now with the grandfather, your, I think it's your maternal grandfather.
Speaker 2: That's my, that's my father's.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's my paternal grandfather.
Speaker 1: Right, now your maternal grandfather.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I mean now who was he?
Speaker 2: James McGee.  Didn't really know too much about him.  I know he was a disciplinarian and we were not very close when I was a kid 'cause, you know, being a kid, just felt like he hated kids (laughter).  So we never really had too much of a close relationship.  And I know he was there and he was around, but then as I got older, he was affected with Alzheimer's.  So for a lot of my, you know, my teenage, by the time I was a teenager, he was, you know he was full blown with Alzheimer's.
Speaker 1: If I'm, if this serves me correctly, he was--Thelma [Thelma Brown McGee] had died at thirteen.
Speaker 2: When my mother [Pamela Warner] was thirteen (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When your mom was thirteen, so she'd been gone quite a while by the time you came along.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Story_ID: 633648
Speaker 1: You were born in Jersey City [New Jersey].  But now how did you, how were you in Chicago [Illinois] at this time?
Speaker 2: My parents [Pamela Warner and Robert Warner, Jr.] actually met in Chicago and when, just before they had me, they moved from Chicago to New Jersey.
Speaker 1: How did they meet?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I don't know specifically how they met, but their parents were friends, like my dad's, my dad's mother knew my [maternal] grandfather's sister.  They were like, you know real tight in Chicago.
Speaker 1: So Kate [Alpha Milton Warner] knew James' [James McGee] sister?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: If I follow the line right.
Speaker 2: Yes. Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Kate and James' sister, my Aunt Mary [ph.].  They were all part of a, of a clique.  So my dad and my mother had really known each other somewhat kind of growing up.
Story_ID: 633649
Speaker 1: Let's talk about those other siblings, your uncles and aunts.  Are there any that stand out or you'd like to mention on both sides of your family?  Let's start with mom [Pamela Warner] first.
Speaker 2: The two aunts on my mother's side, my Aunt Alma who was, if I get this right, she was James McGee's [Warner's maternal grandfather] cousin, but I always referred to her as my Aunt Alma.  And she was--turn my phone off. I didn't turn my blackberry off.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah, let's--
Speaker 2: Okay.  So let's continue.  The meeting of your parents and your uncles and aunts.
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: You were telling us about your aunts.
Speaker 1: My Aunt Alma, Juanita Cousaline Alma Topps [ph.], and I actually have one of my upright basses I've named Juanita Cousaline after my Aunt Alma.  My Aunt Alma was really--I think I probably remember her the most, you know, from my childhood, growing up in L.A. [Los Angeles, California].  She babysat me a lot.  And she was into the horse races, I remember that.
Speaker 2: What was her birth order in comparison to your mother, in regards to your mother?
Speaker 1: I can't, I don't know.
Speaker 2: Like who was the oldest?
Speaker 1: I think she was, again, I think Aunt Alma was really a cousin, one of my mother's cousins.
Speaker 2: Okay. Okay.
Speaker 1: But I just always referred to her as my aunt.  And then there's also my Aunt Millian [ph.].  I cannot tell you what the real--I need my mother to explain that relation again. I don't remember.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And then in New York there's my Aunt Cleo [Cleo Hayes] who was Thelma's [Warner's maternal grandmother, Thelma Brown McGee] half sister.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And my Aunt Cleo used to be a Harlem dancer, so she danced at the Apollo [Apollo Theater, New York, New York], the Cotton Club [New York, New York], you know, she's toured the world.  And still alive in Harlem, New York [New York].  And most recently was involved in a dance troupe called the Silver Belles, which were you know, women, you know, comprised of women who were Harlem dancers and they were--their range was eighty-six to ninety-four.
Speaker 2: We interviewed a few of those, [HistoryMaker] Alice Key being one of the Harlem dancers (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Yeah.
Speaker 2: So I'm sure they're in the same circle.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yes.
Speaker 2: We could talk to her also possibly.
Speaker 1: Yeah, man, yeah.
Speaker 2: Now on your father's [Robert Warner, Jr.] side.
Speaker 1: On my father's side-
Speaker 2: Siblings.
Speaker 1: No sibling.  My father was an only child.  I remember my Aunt Louise [Louise Milton] who was Alpha Kate's [Alpha Milton Warner] sister.  And you know once again my Aunt Mary [ph.], who lived in Chicago [Illinois].  But she was related to James McGee.  But my Aunt Mary went to church.  I remember my Aunt Mary went to church every night of the week (laughter), and twice on Sunday.  And my stepbrother and I used to hate going over there because it meant we were, you know, without a doubt going to church at night.
Story_ID: 633650
Speaker 1: Let's talk about the early years.  What's the earliest memory that you can recall as a young, as a child?  That you can recall.  The first thing that you, comes to mind.
Speaker 2: (Pause) The--one of earliest memories I have is looking in the refrigerator and seeing this thing, I didn't know what it was, and come to find out there was a surprise birthday party for me, and it was my birthday cake.  And I think I was about two years old.
Speaker 1: You remember seeing this thing in the refrigerator.
Speaker 2: Yeah and then I saw it was a birthday cake, I was like I should have known that.  I was like, wow, looked right at it and didn't know what it was.  I think I was two.
Speaker 1: So what was some of the--that was a memory.  Now what was life like in your home at this point?  Where would you have been living then?
Speaker 2: Jersey City [New Jersey].  My parents [Pamela Warner and Robert Warner, Jr.] and I were--my parents were separated.  I don't--actually, I don't ever--
Speaker 1: Now your parents had moved to New Jersey.  Do you know why this had occurred?
Speaker 2: No I don't.  I don't know what prompted them to move to Jersey.  But I don't, I don't ever recall my parents being together physically.  They were--they've been separated for as long as I can remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But ironically enough, have been best friends my entire life (laughter).
Speaker 1: So you're in Jersey, you saw the birthday cake.  So at this point it was just you and your mother at this point.
Speaker 2: Yeah, my father was still in Jersey.  But I would kind of go back and forth between the two.  We--I don't remember us all being in the same, in the same house.
Story_ID: 633651
Speaker 1: So, you had two neighborhoods.  You lived in Jersey [Jersey City, New Jersey] in his neighborhood and you had her neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Can you recall the differences, or were they pretty much similar.  Or, can you recall the like the sights, sounds and smells of either one?
Speaker 2: I remember Jersey, we lived on Jersey Ave [Avenue].  We lived in a yellow brick apartment building, and I remember on one floor there was a woman I called Aunt Mercedes [ph.].  I don't know if we were ever related, but she babysat me a lot.  And I remember being that young back when I was eating pork, she used to make--my favorite food was the bacon with the rinds (laughter).  I used to love that.  I would eat that all day long at Aunt Mercedes' house.  And I remember having a friend down the hall, they were, they were Spanish speaking and he and I were around the same age.  So we used to play a lot.
Speaker 1: How old would you have been would you say (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Again we're talking, you know, from two to five age range.
Speaker 1: Now this yellow brick building was your mother's [Pamela Warner].
Speaker 2: That's where I lived with my mother, yes.
Speaker 1: How about your father [Robert Warner, Jr.]?
Speaker 2: My dad--I just remember we were living, he living in Elizabeth, New Jersey, he lived in Rochelle, New Jersey [Rochelle Park, New Jersey], and I remember--I remember he played a lot of Stevie Wonder, a lot of Gil Scott-Heron, a lot of Last Poets [The Last Poets].  I remember--my favorite thing with my dad was to eat pizza on the living room floor.  We'd sit on the living room floor and we'd eat pizza over newspaper because the pizza was always really greasy.  And you know, let the grease drip on the newspaper, and it would be at night and the lights would be off but the TV would be on.  And I remember getting a big kick out of that.
Story_ID: 633652
Speaker 1: You're growing up and you're, you're in your early years.  The neighborhood is--now how was Jersey [Jersey City, New Jersey] during that time?  Was it an area where you could go out and play in the streets?  Could you experience things? Or what did you--?
Speaker 2: I don't remember being out in the street playing much when I was in Jersey.  Just don't, don't recall.
Speaker 1: Okay so you're in Jersey, and did you go to--was your kindergarten experience in Jersey?  Was your first elementary school in Jersey?
Speaker 2: I think my first elementary school was in Los Angeles [California].  We left Jersey when I was about five.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We left Jersey in, I want to say, I don't know why I want to say December '75 [1975].
Speaker 1: Okay now so you would, you would be about five years old.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you'd hear this talk of your mom [Pamela Warner] saying she's moving to Los Angeles.  Did you know why, what caused the move?
Speaker 2: I just remember being in Los Angeles.  I don't remember the preparation, don't even remember coming.  I just remember my next recollection is being in Los Angeles and it was December '75 [1975], and we came to stay with my mother's father [James McGee] over on 54th [Street] and 4h Avenue.
Speaker 1: So he was living here at that time (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was living here, yes.  And I remember we had come just before Christmas and one of my favorite Christmas stories was being five years old, going to the store.  My mother said I could only, we could only afford to get two presents.  I could only afford to get two presents for Christmas.  But that didn't bother me.  The fact that I got to pick out my Christmas presents was the big thing.  So I got this big kick of being able to pick out my presents.  I got a View-Master and I got a J.J. windup doll [Talking J.J.].  And you pull the string, he'd say, "Hello, welcome to the ghetto."  Or he'd say, "Dy-no-mite." But at five years old, I was just so charged with having the power to pick out my own Christmas gifts.
Story_ID: 633653
Speaker 1: You were living in the Crenshaw era, area [Los Angeles, California] or Leimert Park area [Los Angeles, California]?
Speaker 2: It was a little bit, little deeper than Leimert Park.
Speaker 1: 54th [Street] and 4th [Avenue] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 54th and 4th.  Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So now this is a new experience for you because you've come from some predominantly industrial looking, cold--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It's snow in the winter time.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Things of that nature.  Now you're in L.A. [Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 2: We have grass.
Speaker 1: And it's December.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And I'm sure it had a little different temperature.  Tell me about how you felt about that.
Speaker 2: The only thing I remember about it being winter was Christmas.  Like I don't remember it being cold.  I don't know if I even remember so much being able to distinguish the difference between snow on the East Coast and no snow in the winter in the West Coast.  I don't, I don't, I don't recall when I figured the difference out.
Speaker 1: So now you're living with your [maternal] grandfather [James McGee].  What was life like in the house?  Were you the only child in the home at that time?
Speaker 2: I was the only child, yeah.  We lived above my grandfather, so we lived, we lived upstairs.  We lived almost like in a back house.  There was a babysitter across the street, Miss Jamerson [ph.], and she babysat a lot of the kids in the neighborhood.  So I know I spent a lot of my time there.  She had a son, Harrison Jamerson [ph.], who used to always scare me with these rubber spiders and rubber snakes.  And I liked going over there because he was a little older than me, he was almost like a bigger brother.  But he tormented, tormented me like crazy.
Story_ID: 633654
Speaker 1: What was your mom's [Pamela Warner] occupation at this time, do you recall what she was doing?
Speaker 2: I don't recall, no.
Speaker 1: So you're five years old.  It's getting ready to be time for kindergarten.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Do you recall your first school?
Speaker 2: Angeles Mesa Elementary School [Los Angeles, California], which is right there on 54th [sic. 52nd Street].
Speaker 1: So that would have been about 1976.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Somewhere there about.
Speaker 2: Seventy-five [1975], '76 [1976], yeah.
Speaker 1: So tell us about your--do you recall your first day there and going to school?
Speaker 2: No (laughter).  No, I can't.  I remember having a teacher, kindergarten teacher named Miss Allegra [ph.], but that's all I can really remember.
Speaker 1: Was there anything special about Miss Allegra that causes you to remember her?
Speaker 2: I think she might have been pretty.
Speaker 1: So you can't (laughter)--that's a good reason.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think that was the reason.
Speaker 1: So you stayed at Angeles Mesa for how long?
Speaker 2: I think until second grade.
Story_ID: 633655
Speaker 1: Up to that point, what was life like in your house?  You know, with your [maternal] grandfather [James McGee] in the front and your mom [Pamela Warner].  What was life like for you at that point?
Speaker 2: I don't remember a lot.  I just, I remember, you know, again, I remember my grandfather, thinking my grandfather was mean, or thinking my grandfather didn't like me.  I remember--wow, I remember being on the block and I remember just the different kinds of families that were on the block.  I remember there was, you know, in the front house just to the right there was this family with like three brothers.  And the youngest brother--no, there were three brothers.  I don't remember what their deal was, but then in the other house to the left there were two sisters and a young brother.  The brother and I were around the same age, so we used to play a lot.  But I spent most of my time playing across the street.  But then I remember further down the street there were like kids who were just like bad kids.  One of--the oldest of them might have been in a gang.  And then I remember, you know, down the street across the street there was this house, and there must have been like six or seven kids who lived in this house and they always smelled bad.  And you know, if you went to the house, the house always smelled bad.  So we always called that the pee house cause it always smelled like urine.  And then on this side across the street there was a little handicapped girl.  So I just remember being on this block and just, you know, all of these different ways of life and all of these different worlds going on on this same block.
Story_ID: 633656
Speaker 1: You stayed at Angeles Mesa [Angeles Mesa Elementary School, Los Angeles, California] for two years.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Second grade.  Then what happened?  What school did you go to then?
Speaker 2: We moved to over to--we moved to the Jungle [Baldwin Village, Los Angeles, California], so we lived on Hillcrest [Drive] and I went to--
Speaker 1: For those who don't know what that is in California, that's between (pronunciation) Rodeo, Rodeo [Drive], Rodeo and-
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, it's Rodeo down there (laughter).
Speaker 1: Rodeo and--
Speaker 2: It was back when King Boulevard [Martin Luther King, Jr. Boulevard] was Santa Barbara Boulevard.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I lived on Hillcrest Drive, which was between what's now King Boulevard and Hill--no, and Coliseum [Street].
Speaker 1: And Coliseum?
Speaker 2: No, Santa Rosalia Drive.
Speaker 1: At that point it was called the Jungle because of the, of the foliage?
Speaker 2: Yeah I think it had been called the jungle--some time before that was kind of an affluent neighborhood.  And then, you know, the white people moved out and then, you know, the blacks and Hispanics moved in.  But I think it had always been the Jungle because of the foliage there.  But by the time we lived there, it was heavy Blood [Bloods] gang neighborhood.
Speaker 1: So same word, different meaning.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, exactly.  But I remember I spent the first couple of, maybe weeks or months at Hillcrest elementary school [Hillcrest Drive Elementary School, Los Angeles, California].  And living right there on Hillcrest Drive.  And I remember my mother [Pamela Warner] not liking the little kid I was trying to become.  So she quickly took me out of Hillcrest and put me in Coliseum Street school [Coliseum Street Elementary School, Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 1: Do you recall any of the students at Hillcrest or any of the teachers at Hillcrest?
Speaker 2: No, no.  But I just remember trying to be a bad ass and my mother [Pamela Warner], you know, she didn't like that at all so she moved me to a different kind of--
Speaker 1: To Coliseum.
Speaker 2: To Coliseum Street school (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So what grade was this, about second grade?
Speaker 2: Second grade.
Speaker 1: Second grade. So now you're at Coliseum.  What's going on at that school?
Speaker 2: I think that was a, that was a--I'm sure that school was better for me.  Again, I don't remember the chief difference.  I just remember there being more, I remember being exposed to more, different types of people at Coliseum Street school.  Not that Hillcrest maybe might not have had that diversity, but that diversity definitely stood out at Coliseum.  There were blacks, there were Hispanics, there were, you know, Asian as well.
Story_ID: 633657
Speaker 1: Were there any teachers that stood out at that point for you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  Wow, I cannot remember my second grade teacher.  I can't remember.  But I spent my, you know, from second grade to sixth grade at Coliseum.  So, you know third grade there was Ms. Lawson [ph.], fourth grade was Miss Herada [ph.], fifth grade was Miss Lester [ph.], Miss Lesman [ph.], and sixth grade was probably one of my favorite teachers, Miss Dixon [ph.].  She was just very--I can remember her just being very involved in my learning and I remember you know, her and my mother having conversations.  So she was probably my favorite teacher because she seemed to be the most interested.  Not that the other aforementioned teachers were not, because they obviously stood out.  But one of the things that was interesting about Coliseum [Coliseum Street Elementary School, Los Angeles, California] was by fifth grade they had this program with Marquez Street school [Marquez Avenue Elementary School; Marquez Charter Elementary School], which is a school out in the Pacific Palisades [Los Angeles, California], which is, you know, predominantly white, over by the beach.  And what they did, there was this busing program.  So for the first semester they took half of the kids from Coliseum Street school and bused them out to Marquez Street school.  But the great thing was they took half of those white kids from Marquez and bused them to the hood (laughter).
Story_ID: 633658
Speaker 1: You had several teachers that were prominent for you.  Miss Lester being one in sixth grade you said?
Speaker 2: Sixth grade. Miss Lesman [ph.].
Speaker 1: Miss Lesman.
Speaker 2: Fifth grade. Miss Lesman was fifth grade, Miss Dixon [ph.] was sixth grade.
Speaker 1: Miss Dixon was sixth grade.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And by you being in this program, with you being, there was some busing to a school that would be somewhat called affluent-
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and the school that was in the urban environment.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What was that experience like?
Speaker 2: I think, I think it was great for both the inner city kids and the other kids out in Palisades [Pacific Palisades, Los Angeles, California], the white kids, because it immediately gave us a different kind of exposure that a lot of our parents were not necessarily used to.  So I think it was a great, you know, education for all of us, you know, to really have to intermingle and it wasn't until then where you--in some cases you saw a little bit of racist attitudes that these kids clearly got from their parents.  But then there were a lot of cases where you know, kids didn't--it was a lot of kids' first, you know, time even encountering, you know, any kind of racism, even on that level.  So it was a big--I think it was a big, a big educational ground for all of us.
Speaker 1: Now were you part of the group that went to Pacific Palisades or did you stay and intermingle with the kids?
Speaker 2: We did both.  So what happened was the first semester they would take half of the kids from Coliseum [Coliseum Street Elementary School, Los Angeles, California], bus them to Marquez [Marquez Avenue Elementary School; Marquez Charter Elementary School, Los Angeles, California] and half the kids from Marquez and bus them to Coliseum.  Then the next semester, they took the other half that didn't go.  So you, it was, ended up going, in the school year you ended up spending one semester at either school.
Speaker 1: So you were pretty much in an urban environment you said up to this point.  Now you go to Pacific Palisades school out there.  How-
Speaker 2: True.
Speaker 1: So what did you experience personally at that point?  What did you see?
Speaker 2: I saw a little bit of--I think I was probably predisposed to seeing racist attitudes.  Because from six years old literally, my father [Robert Warner, Jr.] during my summer vacations when I would go to Chicago [Illinois], would make me read books on Malcolm X, on Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], on Langston Hughes, on Richard Wright on Mary McCleod Bethune, Marian Anderson, and write book reports.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: So I spent, a lot of my reading was about, you know, the '20s [1920s], '30s [1930s], '40s [1940s], '50s [1950s], '60s [1960s].  So I was very in tuned with how white America saw black people.  So for me going out to the Palisades to this white school, I was already kind of riled up and kind of (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Ready for it (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was ready for it.  And I might have been a little too militant than what the, what the situation, you know, warranted, but I was on point (laughter).  So I definitely encountered, I definitely encountered some, you know, low level racist attitudes.  But in a lot of cases I encountered, you know, kids who weren't even, you know, wasn't even a second thought on the difference between the whites and blacks.  So it was interesting to see that as well.
Speaker 1: So did this exchange go on for the whole rest of your school term at that school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it went, you know, that was--Coliseum and Marquez went up to sixth grade, and then for junior high school, I went to Paul Revere Junior High School [Paul Revere Junior High School; Paul Revere Charter Middle School and Magnet Center], which was also out in, out in Brentwood [Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Out in that area.
Speaker 1: So this point now you've got a good dose of that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So your mama [Pamela Warner] decided, decided to send you to Paul Revere?
Speaker 2: Yeah for junior high it was either Paul Revere or Audubon Junior High School [Audubon Middle School, Los Angeles, California].  And Audubon was, you know, in the, in the hood, but there's always stories about, you know, you go to Audubon you getting beat up.  Audubon's a rough school.  So I certainly didn't want to go to the rough school and given our experience at Hillcrest elementary school [Hillcrest Drive Elementary School, Los Angeles, California], my mother wasn't trying to have me be caught up in that environment again.  So she had me bused out to the Palisades.
Story_ID: 633659
Speaker 1: Aside for the times when you were trying to, we'll say assimilate in the hood, what was the young Malcolm [HistoryMaker Malcolm-Jamal Warner] like?  What were you like as a student and as a child at that point?
Speaker 2: I was always a good student.  I was always a good kid for the most part because I feared getting whoopings by my mother [Pamela Warner].  So I was always--I always wanted to be on the straight and narrow.  But as a young kid, you're easily influenced.  So provided, you know, provided I was in the right environment until I got to a point where I could hold my own, it was important for me to be in a, you know, certain environment so I could have the positive influences.  And in fourth, I guess fourth grade, around nine years old, my mother had always been looking for things for me to do, aside from just go to school, come home and hang out.  Again, looking for positive influences.  So at one point she had me playing basketball at Baldwin Hills [Los Angeles, California], you know, in their basketball league.  You know, one year basketball season was over, so my mother's friend suggested an acting workshop down in Inglewood [California], in the middle of Centinela Park [Inglewood, California], Inglewood Playhouse.  I was about nine years old, went down, auditioned for the workshop and got in.  And, you know, my mother loved it because again it was something for me to do, to channel my energy into.
Speaker 1: Now were you truly into it or were you just doing it because, "Okay mom, I'll come down here and do this because I got to do it"?
Speaker 2: No, it was--she suggested, oh, that might be fun.  So I went down, auditioned and got in.  So that was, I was like okay, cool.  Especially when you're that, you're that young and you can, you know, I mean auditioning for an acting workshop and you get in, it's like acceptance, achieving some kind of success.  You went out for something and you tried out for something and you got it.  So I dug that whole, you know, that whole thing.
Speaker 1: Had you had any ideas prior to that you might want to be an actor, or did you just--I mean was television an important part of your life at this point and did you have any aspirations for a career, or what you wanted to be when you grow up?
Speaker 2: I had never--it's interesting because though I never really prior to that was thinking about pursuing acting.  I remember in Jersey City [New Jersey] my father [Robert Warner, Jr.]--this community center my father was involved with, did theater.  So at that age I was around some theater.  My mother had done a little bit of dabbling in theater.  So at, you know, three, four, five, you know, I was exposed to the theater.  And interestingly enough when I was seven, I told my mother I was--I declared when I grew up I'm going to either be a famous basketball player, a famous poet or a famous actor (laughter).
Speaker 1: Seven years old you said that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, seven years old I said that, yeah.
Speaker 1: Just put it out there.
Speaker 2: I put it out there, yeah and I guess I was--I must have been about twenty-seven, twenty-eight when I made that realization that I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That you had said that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  So two out of three ain't bad.
Story_ID: 633660
Speaker 1: You're in elementary school [Coliseum Street Elementary School, Los Angeles, California], you're in junior high now, so. Well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Fourth grade, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, fourth grade, you're starting, you're starting to be in a acting workshop.  So do you, do you recall what the workshop was about, and was anybody else that we might know, or even in any of your schools, anybody that might be of note that you want to share, who was in class with you either in school or at this workshop?
Speaker 2: Well in this workshop, this workshop was run, was run by an actor by the name of Gary Veney who was part of, you know, Al Fann was an acting teacher, a lot of actors studied under.  So my acting teacher, Gary, studied under Al Fann, Chip Fields studied under Al Fann.  So Gary and Chip both taught acting classes, you know, in the same, you know, under the same umbrella.  So I knew Kim, you know [HistoryMaker] Kim Fields was like my big sister.
Speaker 1: She was in the, in the program?
Speaker 2: She was--yeah, she was, you know, in Chip's program.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, though we were not actually in class together, we were very, you know, we were, we were in each other's presence a lot.  Yeah, and to this day Kim is still like my, like my big sister.  We've been very close growing up.  The very first play we did, and again the play was in the, in the Inglewood Playhouse, situated right in the middle of Centinela Park [Inglewood, California].
Speaker 1: Is it still there now, the Playhouse still there (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think it's still there, I think it's still there, yeah.  The first play we did was called 'Alice Is That You?'  And it was based on 'The Wiz,' but Alice goes to, you know Dorothy [Dorothy Gale] goes to Oz and everybody thinks she's Alice from 'Alice in Wonderland' ['Alice's Adventures in Wonderland,' Lewis Carroll].  And I played the Tin Man.  And my mother [Pamela Warner] made my costume and everything.  And I remember opening night, you know do, we do the play and when the play is over, you know, coming out and taking bows.  And coming out and these people are standing up and clapping and, you know, they liked what I did, I did my little dance.  That, I think that's what really hooked me at nine years old, a little Leo kid who loved attention, to come out in this ninety-nine seat theater and people just applaud and sing your praises, for me was like nirvana (laughter).
Speaker 1: That was the hook right there.
Speaker 2: That was the hook.
Speaker 1: So you're in this play and now prior to the play being performed there on opening night, there was a lot of rehearsal and things that went on with that.  How was that experience of your lines and things of that nature?
Speaker 2: I don't recall.  I mean it was, you know, you know, the saying, you take to something like a duck to water?  That was just it for me.  I so immediately just fell into it.  I don't necessarily remember the whole rehearsal experience.  But I remember--I just remember from that point on, you know, always having significant roles in all the plays that we did.  And when I, you know, when I look back as an adult, a lot of times when I go to see children's theater, and there's always, you know there's always one or two, maybe three kids who stand out.
Speaker 1: They have something different.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they have that--whatever that it is, they've got that.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And in retrospect I was one of those kids.  I mean clearly, and that's how I got an agent because an agent had come to the play.  And interestingly enough, the first time, the first year I did the workshop an agent came who wanted to sign me.  My mother had gone back to school and you know, really didn't have the time to take me on auditions or any of that.  So she said to the agent thank you, but no thank you.  The following year we did another play, same agent came back and she said, talked to my mother, "Okay well you know, you got your degree, you're out of school, so now what's your excuse?  I want to sign him up."
Speaker 1: Just put her to it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, my mother was like, "Okay, well we'll see."  So again for us it was just something to channel my energy into.  It wasn't the focus of, I'm going to be you know, on television, I'm going to be an actor.  It was theater, it was this workshop, it was this thing that I was enjoying.  You know, I was learning a certain amount of discipline, self discipline in this workshop.  And because I--it was something I really enjoyed, it was also the thing that my mother used to, you know, to keep me in line.  It's like okay well, you know, your grades have to be this.  You've got to have your chores done or you can't go to the theater.  So, you know, early on it was, it was very clear that that was something that I really--that acting was something I was really passionate about.
Story_ID: 633661
Speaker 1: How were you juggling school and that, and that passion at the same time?  Were you doing well in school at this--?
Speaker 2: I was doing well, I had to.  Because I knew if I wasn't doing well in school (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Couldn't go.
Speaker 2: --that I wasn't going to be able to do theater.
Speaker 1: So you go through junior high and you went to Brentwood [Los Angeles, California], to a school in Brentwood for junior high, Paul Revere [Paul Revere Junior High School; Paul Revere Charter Middle School and Magnet Center, Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 2: Paul Revere.
Speaker 1: Then what high school did you go to?
Speaker 2: I went to, I went to high school in New York.  Because by high school, I got 'Cosby' ['The Cosby Show'].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When I was at Paul Revere, seventh grade, I got sent out on my very first audition, which was--
Speaker 1: Who was your agent at that time?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Who was your first agent?
Speaker 2: My first agent was Miriam Balm.
Speaker 1: This is the one who told you, who came to you two years in a row.
Speaker 2: Miriam Balm was the one that came to me, she was the woman that found me or discovered me, if you will.  Very first audition she sent me on was 'Matt Houston,' and I booked it.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the--
Speaker 2: 'Matt Houston' was the name of the show.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And even Miriam as my agent, would not send me out, would not let me go out for like, you know, little small roles.  She would not let me do any extra work.  She was very clear on how she wanted to position me and was very clear on whatever that it factor that she saw (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She saw it.
Speaker 2: Yeah. So, you know, by junior high school now--
Speaker 1: Eighty-two [1982].
Speaker 2: By '82 [1982], yeah, I'm in junior high school, I'm on TV, I did 'Matt Houston,' I did an episode of 'Fame.'
Speaker 1: Let's talk about that for a minute.  Here you are, you're in the hood with your friends and people around, and now Malcolm's [HistoryMaker Malcolm-Jamal Warner] on television, we saw you on 'Matt Houston,' we saw you on 'Fame.'  How was that for you at that point?
Speaker 2: At home it was cool because in the neighborhood people, you know, knew me as that good kid.  But they also knew my mother [Pamela Warner] and knew that my mother's kid was not to be messed with.  So, you know, I think there was a certain, you know, fear or respect, respect or fear that people had of my mother.  So, you know, around the neighborhood it was, it was kind of cool.  At school, you know, it kind of became, kind of a cool little deal.  'Cause in school I was, I was in the, I was in the drama department at school.  You know, so to be in the drama department, to be doing plays at school and then to be on TV a couple of times was kind of like, it was kind of cool.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And I was feeling myself a little bit.  And there was one point, you know, 'Fame' had aired, I was doing two plays at the same time.  So, you know, I was really kind of feeling myself, you know, and had some, you know, chicks feeling me too.  So it was great.
Speaker 1: 'Cause right now this is like '83 [1983], '84 [1984]?
Speaker 2: This is, this is '82 [1982], '83 [1983].
Speaker 1: How old are you now?
Speaker 2: I'm thirteen, twelve, thirteen.
Speaker 1: Your puberty's in now and--
Speaker 2: Right, you can't tell me jack.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Life is good.  The chicks are digging me (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A little piece of change.
Speaker 2: Yeah, doing two plays at the same--not just TV but I'm doing two plays at the same time.  What?  And I went through a period, that whole seventh grade year, I went through a period where I got so, I got so caught up in myself and just like I said, you couldn't tell me, you couldn't tell me nothing.
Speaker 1: So how did, how did Mrs. Warner take that with you?
Speaker 2: It was different at home.  I didn't have that attitude at home.  But when I got to school, it was on.
Speaker 1: But you couldn't do it at home.
Speaker 2: No, she would never-and I knew, I knew enough to know that wasn't going down at home.  And it wasn't affecting my grades or anything.  And that's the other thing you know, my grades were popping.  So I was--
Speaker 1: You were the cat.
Speaker 2: I'm the cat.  And then eighth grade came and I didn't work at all.  I went on audition after audition, callbacks after callbacks.  You know, getting this close to the role and somebody else getting booked.  And that was really hard for me because it was like, you know, you go on a string of booking all these auditions and then you go on a string of getting close and not getting them, was--that was a pretty, it was a pretty, it was a pretty big reality check for me.
Speaker 1: Especially in compared to the previous year.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  So I kind of, you know, that was my first lesson in, wow, as quickly as it can come, it can go.  So interestingly enough, in eighth grade I'm doing my own self analysis, I'm doing my own self check and checking my own behavior and just kind of realizing, okay wow, maybe I was a little too, you know, a little too into myself.  I've got a couple of friends, I'm still friends with who I was, you know, in school with, and we talk about, you know, every now and then how I was really feeling myself.  And interestingly enough, once I just kind of figured that out and got a much better perspective on how this business can be, I just totally chilled out.  You know, I lost all of that bravado and just became me again with this wonderful realization.  And the moment that happened, I booked 'The Cosby Show.'
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: And I always say that if-had I booked 'Cosby' a year earlier, I'd probably be a different person.  But it was that, it was that eighth grade year of not working that really just kind of brought me back down.
Story_ID: 633662
Speaker 1: Do you think that sometimes a lot of what we'll call the younger actors that we see things today, when we say younger, some of them are seasoned by twenty nowadays (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you think some of those issues that we see when they're twenty, in their early--have been precipitated by their early years of maybe feeling themselves too much, and then--
Speaker 2: Definitely.
Speaker 1: And being catered to and then they get--and then what do you do when you're twenty?  You've had all this, done all this.  You find new things, huh?
Speaker 2: Yeah, or you find yourself at twenty, you're not working.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: And then, I think when you're older it's a much harder blow.  And I think because of that experience, my growing up, I was--excuse me.  I grew up with this maniacal obsession of life after 'Cosby' ['The Cosby Show'].  I didn't want to be one of those where are they now kids.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I didn't want 'Cosby' to be over and me not work again.
Speaker 1: So you actually thought about it while that was going on.
Speaker 2: Oh--
Speaker 1: You thought about like this--because I've seen a lot, you've seen a lot of those shows, and there's a lot of bitterness in people about their character.  And their character might have been, and we don't want to name names.
Speaker 2: Sure. Right.
Speaker 1: But they were heartwarming people-
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --and that's who they are, and they have a real hard time accepting that they're going to be that, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So how do you feel about that?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean--as an actor, you're an actor.  So you don't want to just be known for one role you did.  You know, if you're a singer, you don't want to be known for one song.
Speaker 1: One song.
Speaker 2: So that's a hard thing to deal with.  But I knew that that was not going to be my destiny.  That's not what I wanted.  My mother [Pamela Warner] even said to me, first year of 'Cosby' we're, you know, half a season in the show, blowing up, you know, doing all these incredible numbers.  And my mother says to me, I'm fourteen.  My mother says to me, "You know baby it's great that this show is a big hit, but you know how this business is.  This show could be over next year.  What are you going to do when this show is over?"
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: So that's fourteen, I'm on a hit television show and my mother hits me with that.  Like okay well if this is over next year, what's up?  What's your life after 'Cosby' going to be?
Story_ID: 633663
Speaker 1: Let's back up a moment and let's get to 'The Cosby Show.'
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you're doing plays, you know, you're the cat, you know and then you're going through what we'll call a metamorphosis in personality-
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --in the eighth grade [at Paul Revere Junior High School; Paul Revere Charter Middle School and Magnet Center, Los Angeles, California]--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --where you let it all go.  So now does Miriam [Miriam Balm] call you for this audition, for this show?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay and do you know what the show was when she sent you out?
Speaker 2: No.  She--when they were first casting, they were looking for a 6'2" fifteen year old.  Because--Ennis [Ennis Cosby] was 6'2" and was fifteen.  And you know the whole play of his being, him being taller than his dad [Bill Cosby], so they were really going for that.  So when Miriam first submitted me, they just weren't interested.  And I guess they'd been casting for months and they hadn't cast that role yet, at the time I was 5'5" and thirteen.  So after months of not casting that role yet, Miriam resubmitted me.  And I remember it was Good Friday, 1984 [April 20, 1984].  My mother [Pamela Warner] had the day off of work, so you know, we decided we were going to hang out for the day, so we'd go to the movies.  We ended up going to an early movie, like eleven o'clock movie or something like that.
Speaker 1: Do you recall what the movie was?
Speaker 2: I don't remember what the movie was.  But I asked my mom, "Why are we going so early?"  And she was like, "So we can get the things, you know get the fun stuff out of the way and there's some we need to do later," you know.  We've gotten--we've had, we've had the day to have our fun.
Speaker 1: Probably her intuition kicking in, huh?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, clearly it was her intuition.  And we get home, you know, 4:30, 5:00 to all of these messages on our answering machine from Miriam.  You know, "Malcolm [HistoryMaker Malcolm-Jamal Warner] has this audition for the Bill Cosby show ['The Cosby Show']."  So by the time we get back home and get the messages, you know, call Miriam, Miriam calls the casting office and you know, basically convinces them to stay until I get there to read for them.  So it's--you know, by the time I get to them, it's 6:00, 6:30.
Speaker 1: On Good Friday.
Speaker 2: On Good Friday.  And they stay.  I come in, I read, and I read with the casting assistant, I do the, you know, we do the audition.  He tells me to stay.  He calls the--calls the casting director, has the casting director come back to see me.  I read with the casting director, and they say, "Okay we want you to come back Monday."  Didn't know Monday was the screen test.  So Monday was the final--they had, you know, all of the people who were auditioning for all the roles were there.  There were two other young men for Theo [Theodore Huxtable].  There was--
Speaker 1: Do you recall who those young men were?
Speaker 2: One was from Chicago [Illinois], I don't remember his name.  The other was Carl Payne [Carl Anthony Payne II], who came back the following year to play Cockroach [Walter Bradley] interestingly enough (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: There was for Clair [Clair Huxtable] I remember Phylicia [HistoryMaker Phylicia Rashad] and Sheryl Lee Ralph.  I don't remember who the actresses were for Denise [Denise Huxtable].  I remember seeing Tempestt [Tempestt Bledsoe] there.  I don't remember who the other actresses were for Tempestt.  I remember Keisha Knight Pulliam and Jaleel White up for Rudy [Rudy Huxtable].  Because at the time, you know, the Huxtables, there were four kids in the initial show and there were--they didn't know if it was going to be two boys and two girls, or one boy and three girls.  So Rudy was initially a boy.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And they loved Keisha so much that, you know, they cast Keisha and kept the name Rudy.  But that was the audition where we basically saw everybody who was auditioning for these roles.
Story_ID: 633664
Speaker 1: How did you feel, because maybe outside of some of the kids, if some of those people like Sheryl Lee Ralph had some success already-
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --at that point.  So how did you feel like being in this audition now with these--of course you had been in some other productions--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --with some named actors.  But this is now Bill Cosby ['The Cosby Show'].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And was he--he wasn't there.
Speaker 2: He was there.
Speaker 1: He was there?
Speaker 2: He was there, yeah.  And interestingly enough, my mother [Pamela Warner] had always--you know, my mother would always talk about the importance of education.  She always used Bill Cosby as an example of, you know, going back and getting his degree when he clearly didn't have to because of his career.  So she always used him as an example of being a big proponent of education.  So when I go to the audition I'm there--
Speaker 1: The screen test now, right?
Speaker 2: The screen test, now it's the screen test--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --And I go with Gary Veney--who is at this time is basically my acting teacher, my acting coach.  And I would, you know, meet with him before auditions to work on auditions before I would go on one.  So he comes with me to the screen test.  You know, we spent the weekend working on the character and basically doing what I did that got me the call back.  Which was, you know, you know, I was playing the role like you saw kids on television, you know, precocious and smart alecks.   And we--in the audition doing the scene, the whole regular people and the whole monopoly money scene.  I'm playing the character again, like you see kids on TV.  So, you know, you know, dad [Cliff Huxtable] is talking to me and I'm like (makes noise) you know having funny lines and being smart alecky, and the room was laughing.  So it's, you know, I finished what I think is a great audition and Mr. Cosby sits there and he says, "Now would you really talk to your father like that?"
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: I said, "No."  He said, "Well I don't want to see that on this show.  You go back out there and you work on it and you come back a little later and do it again."
Speaker 1: Right there he tells you?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So I walked out of that room thinking wow, I tanked this audition.  Wow, (makes noise) I messed this audition up. (Background noise)  Gary and I went in the hallway, reconvened, found another direction.  After they read everybody else, came back in and, you know, gave them the total, you know, about face of what I had done.
Speaker 1: So now did--did possibly Gary kind of misread what he thought as your coach, did he kind of misread what he thought the direction you were supposed to go in, or did you misread what they wanted?  Because you probably could have given them anything they wanted, but did you misread what they--
Speaker 2: Again, we were going on based on how you see kids on television.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that was the thing that, you know, got me the screen test.  So, you know, that's what you saw.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that's what I got--you know I did that on Friday, they brought me back on Monday based on that.  Then I'm in the room, I'm doing it, the room is laughing.  So it's clearly, you know, it's the, clearly the right direction.  But Mr. Cosby was the one, and again this was his brainchild.  So he was the one that said, "No, that's not what I want on my show.  Damn what the rest of you in this room think is funny, but that's not what I want on this show."  But apparently he saw something enough in me to be able to say, "You know what?  Go back and give me something else."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And coming back and giving them something else was the thing that Jay Sanders [sic. Jay Sandrich], the director has always said is what got me the job.  The fact that I knew how to take direction.  'Cause I came in and gave them, you know, something totally different.  And it was, you know, it was a love fest.
Speaker 1: And then what did he say after that that you did something different?
Speaker 2: I think he, I think he smiled (smiles) (nods head).
Speaker 1: Okay so now, so you're there, you do the screen test, your mom is there I'm sure.
Speaker 2: No mom's not there.  It's me and Gary.
Speaker 1: Mom's still doing what she has to do (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My mom's working. My mom's real, my mom's at work (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: She got a job, I can't take, I don't, I can't take time off to take him to auditions, I've got a job.
Story_ID: 633665
Speaker 1: Your acting coach [Gary Veney] is there.  But your mom [Pamela Warner] is working.  She's always been working like that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she's always--like I said she's, when I said earlier, she's driven, she's very driven.  She was at work.  And before she got this particular job, she was in business for herself.  For about two years, my mother is an awesome cook.  So she'd gotten this idea to--she started out making these cookies.  She makes these incredible like oatmeal, butterscotch cookies.  So she's making these cookies, carrot cakes, fried pies.  And she would basically get up and make those in the morning and she would put them in a basket and she would go up and down Crenshaw [Los Angeles, California] and sell these cookies to like, you know, beauty salons or, you know, dentist office or doctor office.  These businesses where people couldn't necessarily go out to get stuff.  So then, you know, after these cookies and fried pies and carrot cakes being such a big hit, she decided that she would start making sandwiches.  So she started making barbecued chicken sandwiches, fried chicken sandwiches, chicken gizzards, collard green quiche, then she would do fruit salad.  It just really grew into this thing where she was literally going up and down Crenshaw now providing lunch for these businesses.  And it got to the point where she had to get help with one of her friends to help her because it had just grown so much and she had so much product and literally she would, you know be up four o'clock, five o'clock every morning making these meals.  And during the summers, I had kitchen duty.  I was on kitchen, I was on kitchen patrol.  But for about two and a half years, that's how she paid the bills and fed us.
Speaker 1: That's probably why you see folks doing that nowadays but she was light years ahead of her time.
Speaker 2: Man yeah, and the food was, the food was amazing.  And there are people who know us from back then who still talk about, you know, how great her food was.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 633666
Speaker 1: So she's [Warner's mother, Pamela Warner] at work while you're at this audition [for 'The Cosby Show'], I mean at this screen test.  So did they tell you that day before you left, "Okay you're going to be this character?"
Speaker 2: They told us before we left and Jay Sandrich came up, the director, who's an iconic director in his own right, came out.  And you know we were all in a room, and he said, "Listen, I'm really sorry, we hate to have to do this like this, but we are on such, you know, a time crunch that normally, you know, we'd have you go home and call your agents, but unfortunately we have to do this like this.  So if I, you know, if I point to you, I need you to come with me."  And he, you know, "I need (gestures) you, you, you, you, you," and I was kind of standing behind him, 'cause he couldn't see me.  And I was like--looks around, he turns around and sees me, "Oh yeah we need you to come with us too."  I was like, "(Gasps) Oh my gosh."
Speaker 1: So you didn't have a cell phone but you had a phone.  Did you call your mother?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I called my mother before my agent [Miriam Balm] called her.  I said, "Ma, I got it."  And she, you know usually she's expecting a call from the agent.  So she didn't really take it for truth until the agent called her and verified it.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: But you know, all we knew--so we were happy to, you know, be on this TV show with Cosby.  And then when, you know the next day when my agent, when Miriam was going over the deal with us, she starts talking about relocation money.  And we were like relocation to where?  And she was, "The show's going to be shot in New York [New York]."  We didn't know that part of it.
Speaker 1: Okay so now all of a sudden, there's two things happening here.  If--you can correct me if this is incorrect.  Now this is a real serious TV show for you.  This is the first--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but we don't know.  I mean all we know is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's a new show.
Speaker 2: NBC only ordered six episodes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So pretty much, you know when Miriam was talking about relocating, my mother had, you know it hadn't been a year I don't think, that she stopped doing the food business to get (gestures) a real office job.  So yeah, I don't think she had to be there, she was even there for year yet.  So now my mother is faced with, (makes noise) do I leave my job and go to New York with my kid, 'cause I'm not sending my kid to New York by himself, to go to New York just to do six episodes of this television show?  And ultimately she decided she would leave her job, 'cause she knew she was always going to work.  She could always find a job.  But she felt that it would be a great thing to have on my resume having done six shows with Bill Cosby.  So we packed up and moved to New York, pretty much thinking we were going for six weeks.
Speaker 1: So was it a quick thing, you just packed it up and said, "Let's go?"  Huh, was it, was it--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now at that point, there's some new things--I'm sure you had made some money doing some things, but now this is a negotiation thing that has to be negotiated with someone that we know is very successful.  Mr. Cosby, was he part of the actual negotiations of the--?
Speaker 2: Not at all. No, not at all.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you this--and was your mom savvy with the manager?  Explain that whole thing.
Speaker 2: My mother had not been, was not my manager at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it was pretty much, it was pretty much Miriam negotiating the deal (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Whatever--
Speaker 2: And Miriam was pretty fierce--
Speaker 1: Uh-uh.
Speaker 2: --on the negotiation end.  She's always been known for that.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: So she got you relocation money and all that stuff to go.
Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you go, you're on your way to New York--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: New York City now.  So where did you all live in New York when you got there?
Speaker 2: We lived in Flatbush [Brooklyn, New York].  We lived, since we, you know, figured we'd only be there, you know, maybe six weeks, we lived with--we stayed with my, one of my mother's friends, one of my mother's good friends in Flatbush.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because we were shooting in Brooklyn [New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So we were in Flatbush, you know we were going to be there temporarily.  But then when it seemed, when we found out we're getting picked up for nine episodes now, we don't want to put my mother's friend out so we said, "Okay, now that we know we're going to be here a little longer, we'll find a place."  So we ended up moving to Fort Greene--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Brooklyn.
Story_ID: 633667
Speaker 1: You're there in New York [New York], now another scene for you here, the total opposite, the opposite of L.A. [Los Angeles, California], but the same kind of energy when it comes to art and things of that nature.  So you're there, now you have to go to school also, right?  Are you being tutored privately now at this point?
Speaker 2: Well at the time, I was still--because this was going to be temporary, I was still enrolled in Paul Revere Junior High School [Paul Revere Charter Middle School and Magnet Center] here in Los Angeles [California].  But the problem with the schooling was we had tutors, but the problem was the school wasn't really set up to do correspondence program.  So because my work schedule you know, it may, you know, because my school hours were different from the school's school hours and they didn't really know how to compensate for that.
Speaker 1: And there was a time difference in itself.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so, you know, I--for the--once we realized we were going to be there for a much longer period of time, the second semester I pulled out of Paul Revere and started to going to Professional Children's School in New York [New York], which was clearly set up for professional children who were working, there was a school curriculum.  But they were just a flow, they knew how to work with kids who had schedules when they were working.
Speaker 1: Who were in the business.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 633668
Speaker 1: So you're there doing that.  Now let's talk about the first--yeah, let's go to the first day of shooting or rehearsing for 'The Cosby Show,' the first episode.
Speaker 2: Don't really remember much.  What I remember about the pilot episode, which the pilot we shot here in Los Angeles [California].  So this is--backing up, this is before the show is picked up--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --before we moved to New York [New York] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) New York.
Speaker 2: It was, right--we booked the pilot, cast the pilot.  We shot the pilot.  The pilot gets picked up, then we start having the conversation about relocating to New York.  So there was a little time period.
Speaker 1: I want to back up while we're there cause we can get ahead.  But, okay so the show gets picked up and gets cast.  Now who were the original cast members?
Speaker 2: All of us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Everybody, everybody that went on the show (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Just for the sake of--if you could just tell us who they were.
Speaker 2: Got you, so for, you know, for, they cast us.  And it's not even a pilot, they call it a presentation--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --which is just kind of a partial episode.  And in this presentation, you know, [HistoryMaker] Phylicia Rashad, Lisa Bonet, myself, Tempestt Bledsoe and Keisha Knight Pulliam.  And it was about, you know, this upper middle class family living in Brooklyn Heights [Brooklyn, New York].  This doctor who was married to a lawyer and they've got four kids.  And in that presentation Cliff [Cliff Huxtable] comes home and Clair [Clair Huxtable] says, "Why do we have four kids?"  And Cliff says, "Because we didn't want to have five?"  And of course later on, they ended up adding the older sister [Sondra Huxtable].
Speaker 1: So now the other cast--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --are they just as excited as you are at this point, and what was the interaction in the preliminary stages when you first met Lisa Bonet, Tempestt and all those?  Explain that interaction.
Speaker 2: I don't remember a lot of it in the very beginning.  Like I don't remember a lot in the pilot, when we were shooting the pilot.  I do remember while we were shooting the pilot I was thirteen, I had just started reading 'The Autobiography of Malcolm X' [Malcolm X and Alex Haley].  And I realized that I was having these militant feelings inside of me because I'm now, I'm on set working with a lot of these white people.  I remember really having to put the book down.  I know I had to come back to that book a little later.  But what I remember working, when working on the pilot, I remember a lot of strong discussions, let's just say, between Mr. Cosby [Bill Cosby] and the writers.  And I just remember Mr. Cosby being very strong about how he wanted the show to go and how he wanted these characters to be.  And you know, I think what was happening was the writers were writing the show like you see black people, like you've always seen black people on television.  And I don't think they really got where Mr. Cosby was coming from with the show (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Because of his comedy too, you think that had something to do with it?  Thought he was a comedian only and that he didn't really--
Speaker 2: I'm sure.  And also, and the other thing was you know they initially pitched the show to ABC and ABC turned it down.  Which, you know, when you look at Mr. Cosby's television track record, he had two Cosby shows ['The Bill Cosby Show' and 'The New Bill Cosby Show'] on before that really didn't do well.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So it wasn't like there were high hopes for this show.  So I think the writers were, you know, again, yeah he's a comedian, his last two shows didn't do that great so we're going to make this show how we see it.  And he was very clear from day one how he, how he did not want this show to be.  Thus I'm in the screen test, I'm reading this character the way I was.  The rest of the room was laughing, and he was the only one who said, "No, that's not what this show is about."  So he was very clear on what his vision was for the show, what his brainchild was.  So I remember--I remember Mr. Cosby and these writers having just some really strong discussions, (background noise) I guess battles if you will, on how the characters were going to be portrayed on the show.
Story_ID: 633669
Speaker 1: And as a sideline, now would it be fair in your opinion, of course you can't be specific because we don't know what's inside somebody's head, but would you think that the Bill Cosby of today that speaks out, may have had that inner burning and was using it through an artistic form to explain some things that he's saying right now.
Speaker 2: He's always had that inner burning.
Speaker 1: You know, to say it in different ways.
Speaker 2: Everything, everything that he talks about now in his--all the comments, those are not new comments.  Those are things he's been saying the whole time.  Just for whatever reason now the media is picking up on it.  But I've spent time going with him to high schools and hearing him speak to kids.  His message has never changed.
Speaker 1: It's been that way for years.
Speaker 2: He's been that way for years.  I think now it's even more--I think it's probably more--I'm sure it's more harsh now because of when you look at everything that 'The Cosby Show' represented and you look at everything that, you know, he's represented in his body of work, and you think, you look at the time where there was a time where we were proud to be black and black was a positive thing to now, where everything has just been on such a downward spiral--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --when it comes to black television, black films--
Speaker 1: Music.
Speaker 2: --especially black music.  So I think what you're, you know what you're getting now is the force of a man who has spent most of his career you know, doing, setting positive examples and it's just gotten so bad now.  But his messages have always been the same.
Speaker 1: So he was hoeing, he was toeing the line then in the writing and getting--so there was some strong discussions as you said.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I think with the show he was very much-you know, it was very much the Trojan horse using, you know as you're saying using that art form to get his messages out.  His, you know--he was very clear that 'The Cosby Show' was not going to be a black show where they talk about how hard it is to be black in America.  'The Cosby Show' was not going to be a show that had the same ingredients that made up a black show, which usually were yo mama jokes, you so ugly jokes, or I'm going to kick your butt jokes.  He was very clear that that's what, that's not what this show was going to be.  He was very clear that he wanted to show a different facet of black people.  Up until 'The Cosby Show,' neither white America nor black America really recognized the black middle class.  Thus, many of the criticisms--and the ones that really hurt that came from black people, well 'The Cosby Show' is not real.  Black people don't really live like that.  And you had people who were heartfelt in those sentiments.  Where I was getting letters from, you know, tens of thousands of letters from kids who's saying, "Thank you.  My family, you know, is the Huxtables.  My dad is a doctor, my mother is a lawyer."  So this was a show that finally gave voice to a, you know, whole facet of black life that had been all but ignored.
Story_ID: 633670
Speaker 1: You're on the set with Mr. Cosby [Bill Cosby], an icon, and Lisa Bonet and some other people there at that point.  How are you all as co-actors together?  How were the kids?  Because it's all young people pretty much (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure.
Speaker 1: So let's go past the pilot--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and let's go to New York [New York] where you are now, you all are working and the show's ['The Cosby Show'] on.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What is the interaction like among, we'll say the kids?
Speaker 2: By the time we got to New York, it was a special thing for us because you know, the, here we are, the show is this big hit.  And you know, up until this show aired, up until maybe the third week that the show aired, we were taking public transportation to work.  So I'm on a train, me and Lisa are on a train going to work in Brooklyn and it wasn't until, you know like, you know I think the second or third season where we started getting recognized and our parents were like no, these kids are not taking public--you're going to provide transportation for these kids to come to work.  So for us, it was this special thing because you know, the show was, you know, gaining popularity.  Lisa and I, you know, moved to New York from Los Angeles [California].  Tempestt [Tempestt Bledsoe] moved to New York from Chicago [Illinois].  Keisha [Keisha Knight Pulliam], though she was just in Jersey [New Jersey] and was much younger, but we were all thrown into Brooklyn, New York.  So for us, we will always have this really cool bond because it was a time when we all kind of had to be there for each other because we didn't really know anybody else yet.  So it was a, you know I think, I think that first, those first couple of years was a really, was a really cool time for us as kids.
Speaker 1: There was a sisterly and brotherly thing going on.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  I think at the time I wouldn't have called it that, it was just like, you know, we were friends but we were all, you know had to kind of be there for each other.  But in retrospect as I look at those first two years, it was definitely kind of a brother/sister thing going on.
Speaker 1: Was there chastising we'll say from mom and dad as far as [HistoryMaker] Phylicia Rashad and Bill Cosby being older.  Did they have to kind of get you all in line sometimes as far as acting, you know, anything else personally?  Because you know kids are kids. Where they--
Speaker 2: I think there--you know as beautiful and loving as the Huxtables are, or were, are--it still comes on.
Speaker 1: Thank goodness.
Speaker 2: As-
Speaker 1: Thank goodness it's still on (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, thank goodness it's still on.  And just how, you know, with the amount of respect and love that we all, actors have for each other on that show.  There still is a misconception that, you know, that the actors' lives were a, were really like a family.  You know, Mr. Cosby had five kids of his own.  Phylicia had her own family.  We all had our own individual families.  So our parents were enough to keep us in line.  It wasn't, you know, neither Mr. Cosby nor Phylicia had to do that, nor was it their job.  Everybody's parent was doing the job they were supposed to be doing.
Speaker 1: So you were--did know how to act already before you even--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, act, when I say act, I mean not in the art form, but as a child.  How to behave (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) As a young professional.  Yeah, so there were never any of those problems on our set because all the parents, you know, they were really involved in their children's lives.
Story_ID: 633671
Speaker 1: How was Mr. Cosby [Bill Cosby] as a coach for you all when you all were doing things?  Or say that you didn't quite get, hit it the way he wanted it to go down.  How was he in his delivery of telling you, "No, Malcolm [HistoryMaker Malcolm-Jamal Warner], that's not quite it," or, "You need to do it this way, or try it this way?"  Was it that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: Well I had a coach.  My coach [Gary Veney] came to New York [New York], was also in New York at the same time I was in New York.  So Mr. Cosby knew that I was always working on my craft, you know, while we were on the show.  So he and I had a really, you know we had a really great camaraderie.  You know, the best thing was that there was a wonderful, mutual respect between us.  So when it came to the work we were doing, it was always fun because you know, clearly those shows came from Mr. Cosby's monologue.  We were a very under-rehearsed show.  It usually takes five days to do a sitcom.  You rehearse three days, a technical rehearsal with the cameras and sound on the fourth day, then you tape the fifth day.  Well during this time and during the height of the show ['The Cosby Show'], Mr. Cosby was still doing his standup on the weekends.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: So here we are, the number one show in America right now on television, we would work pretty much four days, got down to three and a half days.  But we would work Monday through Thursday.  Thursday night after taping, he would get on his plane and he would go to either Tahoe [Tahoe City, California], Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada] or Atlantic City [New Jersey], do his standup, two shows, Friday, Saturday, Sunday night.  And then be back to work Monday morning.  So this was--and he was doing this kind of work at the height of this television show.  So because of that we were, you know, we were a very under-rehearsed show.  And when you do sitcom, you know, you're constantly rewriting.  So lines are constantly getting changed every single day.  So the great thing for me was to you know, be doing scenes with Mr. Cosby and he'd have these, you know, these monologues, he'd have these speeches.  And he wouldn't necessarily remember, you know, what the lines were.  So he'd always kind of go off into his own world.  And, you know, it was, for me it was great because coming from theater, it was like okay, well the show must go on, so you have to go with wherever the scene takes you.  So for us, it was a, you know, it was a really great exercise in improv.  Because if he went to left field, you know, we were right there in left field with him.  So because he, because he was very aware, you know, of the constantly changing dynamic of just the writing process, he was very, I think he was very respectful with everybody in terms of--I guess because he was part of the reason why lines were always getting changed (laughter).  You know because again, it was always that kind of battle between him and the writers, and the writers writing one thing and then him having to rewrite it because it wasn't fitting with what he had already claimed his vision to be.  That went on for eight years.  So because he knew the process, I think he was, you know, grateful for us all to be able to hang and go along with him.
Speaker 1: And do you think that might have been part of his jazz sensibility because he's also an aficionado of the music, and the ability to improvise.  Because he's very, you know, very much--he's half a way drummer.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, right.
Speaker 1: You know, and we've seen him be able to improvise.  Do you think that was the same thing in you being--your dad [Robert Warner, Jr.] teaching you about jazz and you being musical yourself.  Do you think that had something--'cause some people wouldn't have been able to do that.  They would have had problems-
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and issues with that (makes noise).  But you were able to go with it.
Speaker 2: Right.  I tend to attribute that more to my theater background.  Again because you're in theater, and you're in theater, and in theater you do a lot of improv work.  Even the workshop aspect of it.  So I attributed that to a lot of that, and you know, Phylicia, Phylicia [HistoryMaker Phylicia Rashad] was, you know, the master at that, she was the best at that because she had, you know, most of her scenes were with him and, you know, he would go and she would go.  So again, I attribute that back to her theater background.
Story_ID: 633672
Speaker 1: You all are going for a few years.  You're on the set, the show's becoming more and more popular.  What's going on with you in your personal life?  You and mom [Pamela Warner] and things of this nature now.  The show--We'll say we're four years into it.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: We're in the middle of it so to speak.  So now explain what's going on in your personal life with you and your mom.  Because now Malcolm [HistoryMaker Malcolm-Jamal Warner] is somewhat of a star.  I know the girls are saying, "Hey Theo's [Theodore Huxtable] on," they turn the television on, you know, and guys are trying to get their hair like Theo and do things like Theo.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Right.
Speaker 1: You know, you know, people are doing all kinds of things.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What's going on for you now at this point?  You got a little cash in your pocket now.  Everything is good for you now.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah, no life is good.  Well I definitely never lost sight of, you know, what happened to me in eighth grade when I had been feeling myself so much and then didn't work at all.  So I always kind of kept that in the forefront of my mind.  But at the same time, you know, I'm a teenager, I'm on TV.  There was really only but so much being full of myself I could be.  Because again, you know, the first couple of weeks into the show, my mother sat me down and was like, "This could be over next year.  What's your life after 'Cosby' ['The Cosby Show'] going to be?"  So there was never really a chance to kind of sit back and say, "Hey, I'm a TV star."  Because the focus was always what's happening after 'Cosby.'  So you know during this time, I start looking at directing.  I spent a lot of my free time if I was not with my tutors or in a scene, I'd be in the control booth with Jay Sandrich or the various directors just to kind of see how, you know, how that whole process works.
Speaker 1: Learning the rest of it.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Other side of it.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But at the same time, you know I'm still a teenager, so you were at a time now where my mother and I are going through that period that teenagers and their parents go through.  I think in many cases it's just inevitable.
Speaker 1: This is about like, get my first car, things of that nature.  All those kinds--
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't even that.  I think it was, you know I think it was me trying to test the boundaries and kind of see what kind of leeway I had.  And I think my mother really did an incredibly wonderful job at balancing, giving me my space that I needed as a teenager, but at the same time still being the authority figure.  It's, even now I shudder at my being a parent and having to, you know, to do that balancing act myself.  So I think she was really wonderful at being able to make that happen.  And eventually you know we, you know I think that period for us lasted two and a half, three years.  And you know we got out of that, and--
Speaker 1: Was it basically like staying out longer than you should--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was definitely that.
Speaker 1: Now and see your thing is in 3D now too also because you're on TV now.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: You have another hold card so to speak.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: So how are you using that, as what you gonna do Mama?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no.  There was--even, even at the height of, you know, the tumultuous period if you will, there was never any disrespect.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was just that kind of, you know, testing of the boundaries.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: But because I was on television living in the public eye, and because everything that Mr. Cosby [Bill Cosby] and the show represented, that was just really reinforcement to stay on a straight and narrow.  Because it's like now if I go out and if I mess up, not only is that a bad reflection on my mother and my father [Robert Warner, Jr.], but also Mr. Cosby, also 'The Cosby Show,' and also my reputation.  So that kind of you know, some people would, you know, say, you know, "Was that pressure?"  And again, I don't necessarily see it as pressure, but I see it as the--just the reinforcement on the values that my parents had really already taught me.  So whatever, you know whatever stuff I did, whatever you know, I don't even know if you could even call it rebelliousness.  But whatever my stuff was, you know, within, you know, very narrow confines.
Speaker 1: I got you.
Story_ID: 633673
Speaker 1: You're there now.  The show's going on, it's at the height of the show ['The Cosby Show'].  I mean the height of its peak, you're going through it.  Everybody knows about the Cosby's now, we're all watching it and now tell us about the fifth child they added.  When they added the fifth, the fifth child to the show.
Speaker 2: I think--and again I don't, I don't know if I ever really knew the reason why they finally added another, the oldest daughter [Sondra Huxtable].  My assumption was just that, you know, to make it more reflective of what Mr. Cosby's [Bill Cosby] real family life was.  To give, also to give, you know, I guess to give more story lines in terms of, you know, what he went through with his oldest daughter.  So, you know, I think the first season in, our first Thanksgiving show was when they added the daughter.  And it was just, it was so great because the show, I mean everybody remembers the line, "Cliff [Cliff Huxtable], why do we have four kids?"  "Because we didn't want to have five."  Everybody remembers that.  But despite that, you know, they added a fifth daughter.  And no one blinked an eye, the show never skipped a beat (background noise).
Speaker 1: So how did that--sometimes on teens and bands and in groups when you add another person into a mix that's been going where there's a groove and rhythm, did her rhythm or her groove upset you at all, or was it you getting used to having a fifth person, a fifth wheel so to speak.
Speaker 2: No, because you know, Sabrina [Sabrina Le Beauf] was older.  And Sabrina had come from Yale's [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] drama department.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So there was already a certain level of respect that everybody had for her.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And her character was, you know, not so much the outcast, but, not an outcast, her character was kind of on the fringe of what the core kids were anyway.  So I think adding her, you know, just really went along with what the relationship was with the, with the characters anyway.  Because there really wasn't a whole lot of interaction between--
Speaker 1: The kids and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 633674
Speaker 1: We're there on the set, now the show's going on.  You and your mom, you've had your little teenage thing--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --But of course you're working through that because as you said, you got the camera on you as far as what you're doing.  So you have to be kind of--you have to toe the line with it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And the Internet's coming up now.  A lot of Internet activity, you know, and--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Right.  And just, you know, just the core of the person I was and just, you know, what my parents [Pamela Warner and Robert Warner, Jr.] instilled in me as a young kid.  You know again, just the person I was.  I wasn't going to be way out.  I mean you know me and my friends still did, you know we still did our thing within the boundaries that we could.  But it was definitely the, you know, not wanting to get in trouble.  I think I've always had that.
Speaker 1: And as we move through the show, let's talk about some other people that have been on the show.  Let's talk about Raven [Raven-Symone].  Talk about when she first appeared on the set.
Speaker 2: Yeah you know it's interesting.  Raven was very much like Keisha [Keisha Knight Pulliam] when we first started in that they were both four years old, didn't know how to read.  So, you known, they had the job of having to remember what to say, how to say it, and when to say it.  So you watch a lot of the early episodes, you know, with Rudy [Rudy Huxtable] and Cliff [Cliff Huxtable] and I was saying, you know, how Mr. Cosby [Bill Cosby] would just kind of go off to left field, and you've got a four year old who doesn't quite know how to go to left field yet.  So there's a, you know, lot of magic moments where there's a lot of improv stuff between, you know, between them.  Because they would only know when to say their line when Mr. Cosby gave them the cue line.  So there was a lot of--just a lot of those episodes where you can see moments and you can see, you know, the wheels turning in the kids' heads and the experience with Raven was a lot like, you know, seeing Keisha all over again and it was great to watch.
Speaker 1: Did they have the same level of talent or was she more of a natural?  Raven, was she more of a natural do you think?
Speaker 2: You know, the difference is when you have--Michael Jordan growing up watching Dr. J.'s [Julius Erving] game.
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: Because you know, Keisha was, Keisha, you know, doing some modeling and was kind of doing some stuff, you know, and got on 'The Cosby Show.'  Whereas Raven pretty much, you know, Raven came out the womb wanting to be a star.  And Raven would tell you herself she used to watch 'The Cosby Show' and say to her, you know, say to her dad [Christopher Pearman], "Dad I want to be on TV with Rudy."  So she knew, you know, from day one that that's what she wanted to do.
Speaker 1: She kind of decreed it like you did at seven.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's what happened for her also.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  So I think she had a--so she came to the show with that star quality already.
Story_ID: 633675
Speaker 1: So, as the show's ['The Cosby Show'] progressing, you have all these different characters.  I remember some people coming, different things like Joe Williams was on the show one time I recall.  Different side characters.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: What were those experiences like?  Was there any one episode or anything in particular that really gave you that wow factor when you saw this person on the show for instance?
Speaker 2: Dizzy Gillespie, he was in our first season.  And to watch all these pictures of Dizzy Gillespie playing, but to actually see him close up, hold his fingers to his lips and blow his cheeks up (laughter).  All I could think about was I wish my dad [Robert Warner, Jr.] was here to see this.  Lena Horne, I mean (makes noise) you know, you grow up, you know on Lena Horne, and to see her in person, see her be just as beautiful in person was a big kick.  Stevie Wonder was a big kick.  You know, Joe Williams and [HistoryMaker] Nancy Wilson, you know.
Speaker 1: They were on the same show (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: They were on the same episode.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  [HistoryMaker] B. B. King, Danny Kaye, Christopher Plummer.  I mean we had a lot of really wonderful talent on the show.  And, you know, they were, you know, on the show at Mr. Cosby's [Bill Cosby] request.  You know, I keep blanking on the guy.  What's the opera singer (makes noise)? What's the opera singer, I can't--
Speaker 1: African American or--?
Speaker 2: Placido, Placido Domingo (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Domingo.
Speaker 2: Placido Domingo was on the show.  I mean we had all of these iconic figures.  The, you know, they were on the show and we got to actually meet them and, you know, actually talk to them.
Speaker 1: Do you recall any conversations in particular with any of those side celebrities that may have come on that really changed your life and gave you something to think about?
Speaker 2: No, not so much changed my life.  And not so much conversations that I really remember.  I--just the vibe and just, you know, being able, being, being around Mr. Cosby, who was, you know, a certain caliber, a certain, you know, level of class.  And those were the same types of people he brought on the show.  So that experience of, you know, birds of a feather flock together, if you will.
Speaker 1: Personal friends of his in the public sphere (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, man.  And they were all classy and all professional and all just had that level of shine.
Story_ID: 633676
Speaker 1: You're still in school during this time.  You're still taking classes at Professional School [Professional Children's School, New York, New York], but this school is designed for you to graduate and still do what you do--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And still manage your thing.  So you're getting older now.  Let's say as you move into your mid--you know what, sixteen, seventeen.
Speaker 2: Sixteen, seventeen, um-hm.
Speaker 1: The show's ['The Cosby Show'] still on.  And what are things like now as the show gets towards it final seasons?  Is the morale still the same?  Are you all still brothers and sisters, or is it more of an individual, or are there any problems that arose?  Like egotistic problems.
Speaker 2: No.  I mean the wonderful thing about the show was if anybody's career warranted coming to work and having ego, would be Mr. Cosby's [Bill Cosby].  And because he never came to work like that, there was no excuse for anybody else to come to work like that.  And, you know, and by this time we thought we were only going to get five years.  Because Mr. Cosby said he was only going to do five years.  So, you know, when we come back for a sixth year, we're like huh?  What do you mean?  So at that point, you know, at that point we didn't know how long the show was going to go on.  But, you know, being brought back and, you know, clearly they made offers that, you know, Mr. Cosby couldn't refuse or didn't want to refuse.  So, you know, just being on the show that has already, you know, gone past what its life expectancy was.  You know, it was, it was just great.  I think at that point, you know, we were all kind of getting older, all kind of, you know, moving on in our separate, our separate lives.  But still having this bond, you know of being on this iconic, at this time, globally iconic television show.
Story_ID: 633677
Speaker 1: Is your mom [Pamela Warner] your manager at this point?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay when did she take the helm for that?
Speaker 2: She became my manager I think about fifteen or so, just--I think pretty much at the start of that tumultuous phase in our lives.
Speaker 1: What necessitated that?  Did she just want to do it or because, because we know they get fees for management.  Did she decide that she could do this?
Speaker 2: It made more sense because I had a manager, but everything had to go through her anyway because I was a minor.  So at some point it just made more sense, you know, to keep the money in the family.  And since she was doing a lot of the work anyway, that, you know, this made sense.  And I think it was that--the fact that we had a business relationship now, I think that also kind of tempered that personal tumultuous period.  Because we knew we, you know, had to work together.
Speaker 1: I kind of recall a conversation with you one time when you said that your mom had to tell her to take some pay for her work as your manager.  You should be paid for this.
Speaker 2: Yeah, because, because what she was doing was you know, an extension of mothering.  So, you know at some point, you know she was my manager but at some point my, you know, the business people, my business manager was like, 'Okay well you know you're supposed to be getting paid for this."  But she was, you know, just very clear on you know, she didn't want to mess up my money.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: She didn't want to be accused of messing up my money because now we're coming out of a period where that's all we're hearing about how parents are screwing up their kids' money.  So my mother didn't want, didn't want that at all.  And she would drag me kicking and screaming, literally, to these meetings with, you know, my business managers, these financial meetings.  Because at fourteen I didn't care about that.  You know you can have that, I don't care.  But she wanted me to know everything that was going on in those meetings because again, she didn't want to be held responsible for having messed up my money or having made bad decisions.  So not like she made me make decisions all by myself, but she made sure that I knew what was going on so I could be informed and have a voice in decisions that were made.
Speaker 1: It's funny because when you say, when you say in Hollywood, but we know that 'Cosby' ['The Cosby Show'] was filmed somewhere else, but we already call it Hollywood.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But in the business were you privy to see a lot of people making some really bad decisions for themselves?
Speaker 2: I think the witnessing I did of people making bad decisions were the same as the public.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean you know, my friends, most of my friends were not in the business and had no desire to be in the business.  And, you know, the beautiful thing about that show as that we were in New York [New York].  So we were not in Hollywood, we were not of the Hollywood system.  So we didn't really have those same kind of influences that, you know, all other kids had growing up in this business.
Story_ID: 633678
Speaker 1: Do you think there's a definitive difference between that scene and the California scene?  Do you think there's a difference in acting on the East Coast versus the West Coast?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there's definitely a different kind of drive in New York [New York].  I mean ultimately you come to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] because you want to be a star.
Speaker 1: Is it more cultural in New York, you think to actually do the work itself?
Speaker 2: Yes, but I don't want to, I don't want to make the blanket statement that actors in L.A. don't do the work.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But you know, L.A., I mean New York just has a completely different kind of vibe.  You know people take the train to auditions, they don't drive to auditions (laughter).  You know, because the theater culture is so prevalent there, you know, there's just so many actors there who spent time in the theater before they're doing television.  I think you do have more--I think you have more actors in New York who, you know, act for the sheer desire and passion for the craft.  You have theater actors who will, you know, probably never become world famous, probably never become millionaires, but are still acting on that stage because they've got that passion and that dedication to the craft.  You come to L.A. because you want to do film and television.
Story_ID: 633679
Speaker 1: The show ['The Cosby Show'] is going through and it's coming to the end.  When did you realize that now this is going to be, this is going to be the end of the show?
Speaker 2: We knew the last year of the show.
Speaker 1: And what year was that?
Speaker 2: This was 1990, it was the '91 [1991], '92 [1992] season.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: You know, Mr. Cosby [Bill Cosby] had--he was very clear that, you know, this was going to be the last year because he really wanted to go out, you know, still on top.  And I think by the last year we weren't--we finally were no longer the number one show consistently.  We were still in the top three--
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: --so by the eighth year, he, you know he was pretty clear that this was going to be the last year.  And you know I think, you know for every--I think everybody was ready.  I think, you know we had spent eight years doing these same characters.  You know we were all fully transformed people from when the show first started.  Keisha [Keisha Knight Pulliam] just wanted to go to school.  She just wanted to be regular people and just go to school.  You know, Phylicia [HistoryMaker Phylicia Rashad], you know, had had another daughter.  So Phylicia just wanted to be a mother to her kids.  You know, Tempestt [Tempestt Bledsoe], you know Tempest had been in school, she was at NYU [New York University, New York, New York] so she just kind of wanted to just kind of chill.  You know, I was already working on a deal for my own show ['Here and Now'] the following season.  So we were all, we were all ready to move on and we all, you know, loved the show.
Speaker 1: Lisa [Lisa Bonet] was gone already, right?
Speaker 2: Lisa was already gone, yeah.  So you know, eighth year we were all kind of, we were ready.  We all agreed that the show said everything that it could say at that point.
Story_ID: 633680
Speaker 1: So, how did you feel about the, about the, about the 'Different World' experience that was coming into play through the 'Cosby' ['The Cosby Show'] scene?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, it's interesting because again, people you know, people think that there was a--I mean 'Different World' was a completely different show.  'Different World' was shot in a different world, it was shot in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], we were in New York [New York].  So I didn't really, you know, really know, I knew, you know, I knew Kadeem [Kadeem Hardison] 'cause he had been on an early episode on 'Cosby.'  He was on the garden, the Gordon Gartrell episode.  So you know I knew Kadeem and I had done the show like once or twice.  But it wasn't really like you know, we all hung out or we all really knew each other.
Speaker 1: It was two different casts so to speak.
Speaker 2: It really, really was, yeah, yeah.  So and also we taped on Thursday.  So not only did we not really get to--the only time we saw 'Cosby Show' was because they, you know for the audience, they happened to air the episode that was going to be aired that night so the audience wouldn't miss, you know, if they were watching at home.  But because we worked on Thursday, we never saw 'A Different World.'
Story_ID: 633681
Speaker 1: The show's coming to its close and what's on your mind now for you at this point?
Speaker 2: Well I had, I had--by the time I had already done my deal for the show I was going to have right after 'Cosby' ['The Cosby Show'].  It wasn't going to beg a spinoff, but you know, the deal was done.  It was part of Mr. Cosby's, one of Mr. Cosby's series commitments at NBC, so he was producing my show.
Speaker 1: That show was what now?
Speaker 2: That show was called 'Here and Now.'
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was a show where my character, you know, kind of like Theo [Theodore Huxtable] was in grad school and was working with young kids at a community center.  It was a show that again, was Mr. Cosby's brainchild.  But it wasn't a show that NBC was really behind.  So that really became--that was kind of a disheartening experience because here you've got this network and Mr. Cosby who you know, disagreed on how the show should be written.  How it should be executed, and difference in you know, what people found funny.  NBC never thought the show was funny enough.  However, it was the number two, was the second highest pilot screened of all the pilots that season.  But NBC still chose to put us on a Saturday night.  My being twenty-two, my audience is not home on Saturday night watching television.  So the show was really never given a chance to work because NBC just really didn't support it.
Speaker 1: So Mr. Cosby is still behind this show, so--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But NBC's not getting behind it.
Speaker 2: Yeah and that was interesting because that was really hard for me to watch too, because here you, you know you've gone for eight seasons.  Mr. Cosby, you know, I mean at one point they were calling NBC the network of Bill Cosby because, you know, this man brought this network from number three to number one.  This man made this network so much money (background noise) and simply because they didn't agree with, you know, how this show should be executed even though everyone else did and the show scored as high as it did.  To me it was just, it was such a slap in the--it wasn't anything I took personal.  To me it was a slap in the face to Mr. Cosby.  So it was really disheartening for me to watch that.  Like you know no matter what you do for a network, you know, they don't, they don't necessarily have your back.
Story_ID: 633682
Speaker 1: So, you're going through some changes now yourself.  That show ['Here and Now'] is not going, is not picking up the way it's supposed to (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: And also in the public eye there was some tragedies and things that were starting to occur in the years with Mr. Cosby [Bill Cosby] and his family.  Now were you friends with all his children?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And so you knew them pretty much on an intimate--do you recall the Ennis [Ennis Cosby] incident--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and those things?  How did that affect the cast?
Speaker 2: Well, the Ennis thing happened years later.  The show ['The Cosby Show'] was over.
Speaker 1: Right, I know it was over.  But as far as your relationship with the, with the family and Mr. Cosby.  How did that--what were your feelings during that time?
Speaker 2: Well I mean we've always been--me and Mr. Cosby's family have always been, you know, been real cool.  We've always been kind of close.  And so it was--I mean that was really hard for everybody.  Because Ennis and I were friends--
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: --you know, up until that time we had kind of grown up together.  So it was definitely a shared pain that we all had.
Speaker 1: That you went through.
Story_ID: 633683
Speaker 1: You had your show, 'Here and Now.'  That's not necessarily taking off.  What's coming on next for you on the horizon?
Speaker 2: You know, after 'Here and Now,' I was, you know I was a little burned out.  I needed a break from, really from the sitcom world.  I was at a point where I was really trying to--I was really interested in doing more film work.  So I took a break from the comedy world and just really tried to focus on doing more film work.
Speaker 1: So what were some of those movies that you did?
Speaker 2: During that time, we did 'Tyson' for HBO, 'The Tuskegee Airmen,' also for HBO, and I did my first feature film, 'Drop Zone,' with Wesley Snipes.
Speaker 1: Now how was that working, working with him?
Speaker 2: That was great, we were in Florida.  I'm in Miami [Florida] working (laughter).  It was great, it was a good time, it was good to be on a, you know, to be on a major film.
Speaker 1: Was it, was it any different for you feeling wise, acting wise than it was, or was it just a feeling of what you were doing was better?
Speaker 2: Well there it was definitely different, it was definitely a different muscle.  I mean you know, theater, television and film are three completely different genres and they require three different sets of muscles.  So to be in the film world was kind of like wow, this is really--this is what I want to be doing, you know.
Speaker 1: Is the work harder, easier?  Would you say versus film, versus movies and television?
Speaker 2: You know, it's really hard to say.  Because I used to--I didn't really gain a respect for sitcom acting until I realized how many great actors had been on our sitcom or other sitcoms and weren't good on those particular shows.  So it made me realize that you know, thinking if you've got great actors who aren't good on sitcom, I realized it's not the acting, it's the actual--it's the genre.  So it took me a while to really gain a respect for this, for sitcom acting and for the sitcom work I had done.  I think for a while I had always figured well this is easy, you know.  It's not really real acting like the, like dramatic acting.  So I think there was a lot of taking for granted that I did.
Story_ID: 633684
Speaker 1: What was your take on like the, Charles Dutton's [Charles S. Dutton] 'Roc' when they were doing that live?  As far as you know, you've done a lot of television.  So they were doing that show live.  Did you all--were you all aware of that when that started?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I thought it was cool.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: I mean that wasn't--you know I'm not, you know, really not one to really talk about I guess a lot of black shows on television--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --because you know, I'm sure part of it is my being biased.  But I don't think there's been a black television show that can really touch what 'Cosby' ['The Cosby Show'] did on so many different levels.  And I think because of that bias, and it's partially bias, the other part is just how I feel.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it's really--because of that, it's been difficult for me to watch black shows on television since 'Cosby' because, just because everything that the show stood for and to, you know to spend, you know, eight years under somebody's wing who had a vision and who was a champion for combating these stereotypes of how black people are portrayed.  There was, there was something exciting about that.  And it's disappointing when, you know, that show has been on for as long as it's been on and it's as if no one really took note.
Speaker 1: Of what it was really saying.
Speaker 2: Of what it was really saying, yeah, yeah.  And so that, it's kind of, it's kind of hard to watch.  The reality is what Mr. Cosby did on 'The Cosby Show' was a difficult thing to do.  Everybody can't do that and everybody does not have the Bill Cosby power to do that.  So I do recognize that as well.
Story_ID: 633685
Speaker 1: And you mentioned earlier and we've all heard it, where people would use the term the Huxtables as a slight-
Speaker 2: Um-hm (makes a noise).
Speaker 1: --or as a diss so to speak.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You see that a lot--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in society today.  Now you went through quite a few different little episodes, different shows and you worked as an actor over the next few years.  In '96 [1996] something else happens.  Tell us about 'Malcolm and Eddie.'
Speaker 2: (Laughter) 'Malcolm and Eddie' was a difficult part of my life.
Speaker 1: Explain why.
Speaker 2: Because here I, you know I was at, you know, NBC for eight years and the environment I just described, being under Mr. Cosby's wing and, you know, being around people who really cared about how black people were portrayed on television.  And then going over to, going over to UPN [United Paramount Network] where they didn't really take the same kind of care.  It was very clear when you looked at their marketing strategy that you know, combating, stereotypical African American images was not high on their list.  But, you know, having spent eight years watching Mr. Cosby fight, you know, for every episode, (background noise) I realized that that was clearly the role that I would be adopting as well.  And it was, it was hard because one, I'm not Bill Cosby but I still carry the same values and I found myself, you know, day in and day out fighting, you know, writers, producers, studio, network, sometimes fellow actors, sometimes the viewing public.  And you know, at some point I felt like, you know, no one's caring about the work I'm putting into this show to keep it from being--
Speaker 1: A minstrel show.
Speaker 2: A minstrel show, yeah, yeah.  That was, that was a hard, that was a really hard four years.  But I came--but there was so much that I learned, you know, personally.  There was so much personal development that came out of those four years, as well as a music career.
Speaker 1: Are you and Eddie Griffin close in this--
Speaker 2: We weren't really close.  We came from two different walks of life, two different schools of comedy.  And though we were not necessarily close, we were professional enough to get the job done.  There was not a--there was not a taping that we did not get together before we taped the show and get in our little huddle, hold hands and pray.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean that was our thing, you know.
Speaker 1: Do you think he saw it, saw it the same way you saw it as far as the (background noise)--it's okay to say the--because you had a mission for your work, not just the point of work.  I mean you wanted to hold up the banner of which you stood for.  Do you think a lot of times some of the actors on that show maybe they wanted to finish the show and get the show done?
Speaker 2: I'm sure, yeah I'm sure.  I mean that was--I'm sure that was a big thing with UPN as well.  I mean they're here, they're trying to write the show and here I am throwing up red flags every step of the way saying, "No, you know, we can do better.  I've come from a history making show that shows that black people can be funny in a different manner."  So I'm sure there were people who were, you know who weren't feeling (laughter).
Speaker 1: So is it safe to say you became Malcolm the hater [HistoryMaker Malcolm-Jamal Warner] so to speak?
Speaker 2: No, not so much the hater because people understood what I was trying to do.  People didn't necessarily want to do the work because again what Mr. Cosby did on that show ['The Cosby Show'] was not easy work.  And what I was, you know, requiring our writers to do on 'Malcolm and Eddie' was not necessarily easy work.  Doing a sitcom is difficult.
Speaker 1: Because you need to be funny, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) To be funny day in and day out.
Speaker 1: Line after line.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and so there is a, there is a certain, there is a well of resources that writers use that you know, are you know, time tested.  You know you know it works.  So when you're in your, in that crunch period, you know you go in that well and you pull out these things that you know are going work cause you're in a crunch period.  Well when you're on what's perceived as a black show, that well is more narrow and more limited.  And so the things that they pull out of that, you know little shallow well, you know are generally stereotypical and what I think, you know, can be harmful to the psyche of black people.  So what I was asking these writers to do was to, as cliche as it sounds, dig deeper, you know.  I was asking all of us to dig deeper.  And just, you know sometimes it worked, sometimes people just weren't trying to hear that morale.
Speaker 1: Are there any other shows on television that you saw over the years, like--I'll give you some suggestions, like 'Seinfeld,' did you see them digging deeper to be funnier?
Speaker 2: Never watched 'Seinfeld.'
Speaker 1: Okay to be deeper.  Are there any shows you saw where an attempt was made at least?  Maybe even if it was a failed attempt.
Speaker 2: You know what?  I'm not--I've never been a big television watcher.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Not as much as I, you know probably should because it's the business I'm in.  So at this point off the top of my head, I would be hard pressed-you know, not to say that there weren't, but right now I'd be hard pressed to.
Speaker 1: I understand.
Story_ID: 633686
Speaker 1: So, you did some more television and you're, you're still an actor.  I mean that's what you do, you've still been acting, doing a lot of different things, and your list goes on for things you've done.  But tell us about poetry and music.  Those are the two things that you're now being known for in a whole different genre.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What's your instrument?
Speaker 2: Bass.  I'm a bass player (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay now how did that come to play?
Speaker 2: In terms of the music, I'd been into, into poetry, I started doing poetry about '93 [1993] and was like full on.  I was very active in the research of the underground spoken word movement here in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], so for a couple of years.  And then you know, it was the first season of 'Malcolm and Eddie' and I realized that I was caring too much about this show and that I needed a hobby.  You know, acting had really always been, you know, my hobby even when it became a career for me, it was still that thing that I love to do.  So I figured okay if I, you know, I've always wanted to play an instrument.  If I picked up an instrument, you know, it will stay a hobby, it won't turn into another career like directing.  I would never record a CD [compact disc], I would never start a band, it would just be something that would kind of take my focus away from caring so much about 'Malcolm and Eddie.'  So I picked the bass.  The bass was always an instrument I loved.  I grew up--the very first record I lifted from my mother's [Pamela Warner] collection was Graham Central Station (laughter), you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Larry Graham, yeah.
Speaker 2: So I've always had, you know that collection to the low end.  So I figured okay now I'm going to pick up (makes noise) bass and it will just be a hobby.  And after several months of realizing that just sitting in my dressing room practicing scales to a metronome was not going to hold my interest.  I started doing, holding jam sessions at my house and ultimately took some time and went to Musicians Institute [Los Angeles, California] and, you know, put a band together because I figured if I put a band together, then it would make me practice, it would make me take playing bass seriously and--
Speaker 1: So you put a band together as a novice.  That took some guts to do that--to have a band around a novice player.
Speaker 2: (Makes noise) Yeah, go figure (laughter).  But you know at--I mean this is when I realized well you know if I, if I get guys, you know, who play for a living, then it's really going to make me take it seriously cause I can't waste their time.  And if they see I'm not serious about it, they're not going to want to be down.  So it was--so starting the, starting the band [Miles Long] was really an effort to make me stick with this instrument and take it more seriously than I probably would have otherwise.
Speaker 1: So it developed into a skill that now have.  Do you still see it as an artistic outpouring of yourself, but just a different--is it the same, the same energy, different motor skills, different model?  Would you say that it's your acting, somewhere different?  Is it the same, is it the same God given ability do you think?
Speaker 2: I think partially, yes.  You know with the acting, I think a lot of that is God given, but then it's also a lot of work you have to do to hone that craft.  I think the same thing with the music, there's you know, so much you have to do to hone you know, whatever God given ability you have (background noise).  Because it takes--I'll be the first to tell you it takes so much work just to be an okay musician.  Forget about being great for a second.  Just to be okay takes a lot of work, a lot of time, a lot of energy, a lot of focus.
Speaker 1: People don't understand--they just see the end result and they don't know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Just like acting.
Speaker 2: Just like acting, exactly.  People see the end result and don't know all that goes into it.  But the music you know, against my initial foray into music, it's now become another career.  But it's definitely a career that I'm very proud of.  I found a way to, you know, mix my poetry and the music.  When I first started the band, I wasn't doing poetry at all.  I mean I started the band because I wanted to be a bass player.  But at some point I realized in order to keep the band going, the band needed a front person.  And I could no longer kind of shrug the responsibility of being the front person, so I ended up kind of restructuring the band so the band--so the music centered more around the spoken word and it forced me to step up and really take that front man responsibility.
Speaker 1: So how would you describe your music today?  What kind of, what genre--we hate to put music into genres-
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --but how would you describe your sound?
Speaker 2: My--Miles Long, my band is a jazz/funk/spoken word band with a hip hop edge (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, got them all in there.
Speaker 2: Yeah, now if you're in a store, you know, even though we don't go to stores to buy CDs [compact discs] anymore, but if you were in a store and had to find a section, I guess it would, you know, it would fall somewhere in that R and B/Soul category.  But what--the thing I'm proud of about the music is that it's, you can't easily categorize it.
Speaker 1: You just dig it.
Story_ID: 633687
Speaker 1: As we go forward now, what are your, what are your aspirations for the future?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) When I was about thirty, I think about thirty was when I finally embraced the title artist.  I finally embraced the reality that look, I'm an artist, I'm not just an actor, I'm an actor, I'm a director, I'm a poet, I'm a musician, I'm a writer.  I have all of these avenues with which to express my creativity.  So you know, I'm at a place now where I want to continue to be an artist.  I'm finally over the maniacal obsession of having a life and career after 'Cosby' ['The Cosby Show'], so I'm in that, you know I'm in the, I'm in the next phase of you know of my career and of my life.  I think at you know I'm closer to forty than I am thirty.  But I still--I feel at this point I'm--this point, April 2, 2008, I am on the brink of yet another transformation.  Not just personally, but as an actor, as a musician, as a poet, as all of those things.  You know I feel, I feel that next surge happening within myself.  And that's exciting.
Speaker 1: So you, is it safe to say that you've gone through the apprenticeship and now you're ready to really go--walk into your masterhood.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Jacques [Jacques Lesure], I think you said it best.  Yeah, yeah, yeah.  I'm ready, I'm ready to, I'm ready to step up and--yeah and work on that masters.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 633688
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be, Malcolm [HistoryMaker Malcolm-Jamal Warner]?
Speaker 2: (Pause) I want--I never thought about it in that terms.  But I want my legacy to be you know, having, to be known as a man who always had integrity.  You know, never really, you know, never compromised his integrity for any level of success.
Story_ID: 633689
Speaker 1: There are countless young actors, young musicians, people who want to be artists out there.  What advice do you have for them?
Speaker 2: Be an artist for the sake of the art.  Far too many people think they want to be artists because they want to be rich and famous.  And the moment your art becomes a career is when the joy for that art, as well as your integrity, becomes threatened.  Because with any career there are politics and everything that comes with the territory of it being a career.  And because most people's focus is not so much to remain an artist, but to be a star, they find themselves in positions where they're really compromising a big part of their soul.
Story_ID: 633690
Speaker 1: What is your hope for the African American community in the future?
Speaker 2: Well, (pause) I think my hope for the African American community in the future (makes noise) is that we can collectively realize our greatness and not be afraid.
Speaker 1: So you're saying that you can realize it and still be afraid.  The key is not being afraid.
Speaker 2: Not being afraid, yeah.  Yeah I think, I think a lot--I think you know, us as individuals, you know, white, black, Asian, Hispanic, everything you know under the sun.  I think as individuals there are times when we can actually recognize our greatness and that recognition scares us and we don't follow through.  But the, you know, the concept that you know, the African American community as a whole, in its entirety, all the different facets of who we are.  If we could collectively recognize that greatness and not be afraid of it, (makes noise) the world would be a different place.
Speaker 1: Do you have any parting comments, anything you want to leave, any comment that you want to leave in the viewer's lives tonight?
Speaker 2: Just whatever you do, keep your soul.
