Story_ID: 91085
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Observing is Julia Woods.  And, sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: I'm Crain Woods, C-R-A-I-N, W-O-O-D-S.
Speaker 1: And can you give us your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My date of birth is 12-14-32.  I was born in Due West, South Carolina, Abbeville County.
Speaker 1: All right, and how do you spell, "Due West"?
Speaker 2: D-U-E, W-E-S-T, two words.
Speaker 1: Due West.  Is there a story behind the name of that?
Speaker 2: Well, most people laugh about it, and we say it's due West of anywhere you're going (laughter). But.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm a retired educator.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you once were?
Speaker 2: City Council and I've also been on planning and zoning and I've done quite a few things in the city.
Speaker 1: In the City of Myrtle Beach [South Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: This is 12-5-02.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at the Embassy Suites here in Myrtle Beach.
Story_ID: 91086
Speaker 1: Okay, before we go into depth, there are five "People Magazine-ish" type questions that I am compelled to ask you--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: The first one is, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Food.  (Laughter)  Really, I like fried chicken, and that's one of my favorite things, you know, the greasy food.  I like seafood, and I guess, equally as well.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Well, naturally, purple and gold.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, that represents--
Speaker 2: Well, I'm an Omega [member of Omega Psi Phi Fraternity].
Speaker 1: Oh, I had--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter)
Speaker 1: --for that connection.
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right, Omega, okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Well, I think springtime, probably when everything seem to be very fresh and moving, growing.  I like that time of the year along with the fall when things, the colors begin to come out.  So I, those are two seasons that I just enjoy.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Absolutely not.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess I could ask my wife that (laughter), but she probably would say, "you know".  I think I use that quite a bit.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: All right, I just have some idea of it.  I don't know exactly, but I have some idea.
Story_ID: 91087
Speaker 1: But maybe, sir, can you tell us about your family history.  How much do you know about the history of your family?  And what I mean is like what your ancestors--where your ancestors came from or when they first came to the State of South Carolina or what were they doing during, you know, before the Civil War or--
Speaker 2: Well, on my father's side, my grandfather, he came out of Brundidge, Georgia.  And, of course, my, on my mother's side, from what I understand, they came out of--her parents came out of North Carolina and went into Central, South Carolina.  And that's where she was born in Pickens County there.  And, of course, my father's father came to Belton, South Carolina.  And that's where he was born in Anderson County.  So--
Speaker 1: Did you know your grandparents and did they talk about how they were raised or what their ancestors were doing, you know?
Speaker 2: Yes, I really did.  And on my father's side, he was basically raised in Brundidge, Georgia, and he migrated to Belton where he met his wife.  And they were married there and where the family was born there.  And then they moved to Due West, South Carolina.  So it's been a long history of moving along there.  And on my mother's side--I'm not sure of the place in North Carolina where they came from, but they came into Central, South Carolina, and they were slaves, kind of run-a-way slaves.  And where he and his wife, they were married when she was 12 years old.  And they started their family there in Central.  So it's been a long time since then, but I remember stories that they told as he came along.
Speaker 1: Well, what are some of those stories and can you remember a story?
Speaker 2: Well, some on my mother's side where, you know, they were somewhat of Indian descent, and they would tell us about the things that they did and how they would grow crops and, and when they didn't have all the fertilizer, how they used stable manure to put down to grow their crops and things of this nature.  And it was very interesting to me as a kid, coming along as a child.  And I think that stayed with me.
Story_ID: 91088
Speaker 1: Okay, now, can you give us the--please give us the name of your father and could you spell it for us and give us the dates, the date of his birth?
Speaker 2: My father's name is Thomas Woods, T-H-O-M-A-S, W-O-O-D-S.  And he was born in Belton, South Carolina.  His mother's name was Ella, and his father's name was Jackson Waldo Woods.  And he was born on May the 29th, 19--1896--1896, I believe it was.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your mother?
Speaker 2: And mother, she was born there in Central, South Carolina.  And she was born in September the 1st, 1894.  And--
Speaker 1: And what was her full name?
Speaker 2: Her name was Ida Crain.  My name is a family name, my first name--
Speaker 1: Okay--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --which is very interesting.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, all right.
Speaker 2: Um-hum, her last name was Crain, her maiden name.
Speaker 1: Now, tell us something about your father.  What did he do and what kind of person was he?
Speaker 2: Well, he was very--a gentle person.  He was a farmer.  Of course, he attended school, Seneca Institute in Seneca, South Carolina.  And that's where my mother was also, and that's where they met.  And after their courtship there, they were married.  And, and then they came to Due West back to his home, and then they left there and went to Key West, Florida to work.
Speaker 1: Why did they go so far?
Speaker 2: Well, it was a matter of survival.  Money was tough during that time, and they had an opportunity to go and work, and he worked as a butler, and my mother worked as a maid.  But prior to that, he was able to get in two years of college.  And so was my mother.  They were able to two--that.  And then they went away, like we said, to Florida.
Speaker 1: When did your father go to college and your mother?
Speaker 2: It was Seneca Institute.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: And that's where he attended school.  And Harbison Junior College which was in Columbia, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: How do you spell that, Harbison?
Speaker 2: H-A-R-B-I-S-O-N, Harbison.
Speaker 1: So they were in Key West, Florida?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And how long did they stay there?
Speaker 2: I believe they stayed there approximately ten years.  They were married eleven years before a child was born, and then they, they came back for the birth of the first child.
Speaker 1: Okay, was that--and you were born--are you the--
Speaker 2: I'm the third child.
Speaker 1: Third, all right.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: How many brothers and sisters do you have?
Speaker 2: I have two sisters that's older, and I'm the youngest.
Speaker 1: And you're the only boy?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, only boy.
Speaker 1: Only male.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Can you--tell me something about your mother?  You know, what did she do and what was she like?
Speaker 2: Well, she was a very gentle lady, very firm, and very kind.  She spoke very softly, but she meant what she said as we came along.  And she was one that made sure that the housework and all was done, and she kind of kept all of us in line.  And, of course, dad was the breadwinner.  He farmed and then he would go out sometimes to do other work.  He worked at a ice plant where they made ice for a while.  And he did that at night and come in and working on the farm during the day.  So he was trying to make ends meet.
Story_ID: 91089
Speaker 1: Okay, now, tell us about Due West.  What kind of town is Due West [South Carolina] and where did you all live in Due West?
Speaker 2: Well, we lived in the country, and about two or three miles from Due West, from the city limits.  And it was more, it's more of a religious town.  Of course, we had more of Presbyterians and Baptist people there than any, anything else.  But, you know, it was just a very quiet town.  We had, Erskine College is there.  And, of course, at that time, during that time, only the, the Caucasians was allowed to attend school there.  The girls lives on one side of the town and the boys lived on the other side of town.  And the only Afro-Americans were--the only thing they could do was work there.  And you didn't go across the campus unless you were employed by the campus.  Other than that, you would go to the two or three stores that were in town.  So it was a very quiet and religious town.  You didn't--as one person--one of the stories used to go that "If a rooster would crow on Sunday, he would die on Monday."  (Laughter) It, you just didn't have that kind of noise there in town.
Speaker 1: A very quiet place.
Speaker 2: A very quiet place.
Speaker 1: Religious town?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Were there a lot of black people in the, in Due West?
Speaker 2: It wasn't a lot, but I guess, according to the population, again, it was maybe five percent blacks.
Speaker 1: And that's unusual for South Carolina to have--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --a town where blacks are so much a minority.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 91090
Speaker 1: So, I want you to reflect back and try to give us a sense of some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up in Due West?
Speaker 2: I guess if we could go back, it was, some of--well, we had some valleys there that were--and in mornings you would, it was a very fresh smell.  We had a lot of, it was really just a wonderful place to, to be at the time.  It's country and you just enjoyed that, you know, and morning glories that would grow there, and you could just get that sense of freedom that you would have there.  We had some little rivers and creeks around, didn't--there were not that many lakes around, in fact, very few were around.  But we did have quite a bit of springs and, and it's red soil, you know.  And it was hilly country.
Speaker 1: Did people ever eat the dirt, the red soil (laughter)?  I've heard--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, I've heard stories where they did, where they would eat some of the clay.  We never did as a family, but we heard stories of that, where people did eat some of the red clay and that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: It's mostly Georgia people that talk about--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 91091
Speaker 1: But, okay, so what kind of what little fellow were you when you were small?  What did you like to do?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, I was a mischievous person, very mischievous.  I would do a lot of things that wasn't pleasing to mom [Ida Crain Woods] and dad [Thomas Woods], and, of course, I was one to get quite a few spankings, you know.  But that was fine.  I think that was needed for, especially for me at that point.  And, you know, I grew up, just loved to play, just was more of a outdoor person than anything else.  I just loved that air and the freedom of being outside.  And I wasn't one that wanted to stay in the house.  It always was out doing something, loved to enjoy that, the outside.
Speaker 1: Are you still like that now?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, I still like to get out of the house.  I don't like being confined in the house at all.
Story_ID: 91092
Speaker 1: Did you have a lot of chores to do when you were--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  We had to milk cows and feed the mules and sweep the yards with a old broom.  You know, we used to cut down some dogwood brushes.  And then we had to keep the yard swept clean 'cause that was something that the males did more of than anything else.  So we had to make sure the yard was kept up to snuff, rake the leaves or straw or whatever it, was there.  And, you know, and, of course, you didn't have a lot of indoor toilets at that times.  You had your outdoor toilets, and you'd take your bath in the old tin tub and had to heat your water.  And wells, we had to draw the water out of our well.  And that was a well that--we had a dug well there, a large well at one point.  And then my grandfather [Jackson Waldo Woods] bought a well drilling machine where he would dig wells, a very--about a 12-inch well.  And we used a bucket, put terracotta down in there.  And so I was blessed to come along during that time, and was able to see all that being done.  And we were able to put our own well in.  We put wells all over the place there in Due West [South Carolina].
Story_ID: 91093
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you all go to church when you were in Due West [South Carolina]?  Did you go to church as well?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes.  Well, our church was a little bit out of Due West, a place Level Land [South Carolina].
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: L-E-V-E-L, L-A-N-D.  Level Land, which was about five miles from home.  And that's where my parents are buried now.  And so we would go there to church and we had a old-mom [Ida Crain Woods] and dad [Thomas Woods] had a T-Model [T-Model Ford].  I believe it was, probably a 1915 or '16' [1916] or something.  And T-Model that they, we used to drive.  They had a ole rumble seat to it.  We, all in (unclear).  They had, we enjoyed that going.  And so it was just the five of us, and that was a lot of fun.
Story_ID: 91094
Speaker 1: Now, tell me about school.  Did you like school or, and what kind of--and what school did you attend?
Speaker 2: Carver Elementary School, and there was Carver High School too, because it was either elementary or high school.  But when I came--in the beginning, I started to school in a parsonage.  It was a Presbyterian parsonage because we didn't have a school really for blacks at that point, for Afro-Americans.  So the minister didn't live in the parsonage.  He lived in another town.  So he gave the parsonage that we could have a elementary school.  And the Masonic lodge allowed the people to have high school in that.  So that's where the Afro-Americans went to school, in the parsonage and then from there to the lodge.  And then whatever else you wanted to go, I believe, you only went to 11th grade during that time.
Speaker 1: Okay, and this if, of course, an all-black school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yes.
Speaker 1: Was it named after George Washington Carver?
Speaker 2: Well, I've heard that.  And that's possibly true.
Speaker 1: Because it would have been contemporaneous with him--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --with his, I guess, fame, you know.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: So what were your favorite subjects in school?
Speaker 2: Well, I enjoyed science and it was something that, I guess, that I was more or less familiar with the things that was coming along, even though we didn't have a lab or anything of that nature.  I think the lab was really the country where we were out doing things.  And it was more of a hands on thing because you were experiencing these things on a daily basis, and I enjoyed that part of it.  And I just continued to go into that kind of area.
Speaker 1: Were there any particular teachers or mentors in grade school that you remember or people that you looked up to?
Speaker 2: Well, my goodness, going all the way.  There was a little lady there, Mrs. Janie Ellis, who taught my father [Thomas Woods].  And she was really getting up in years at that time, but she taught me.  And Mrs. Iokie (ph.) Davis.  The principal was Mr. Smith, Olden Smith.  And he was a great person.  He loved to sing a lot and played the piano and used to have us singing and be around with him.  And then we had a Mr. Wilburn who was the athletic person.  We had a little basketball team, and we did all kind of little things for that and go to different places to play basketball.  And then Mr. Reynolds, and I understand Mr. Reynolds is still living.  And we, we've known each other and I've grown to know him quite a bit in these years.  So it was just a closeness, a close-knit school that was there.  We, I think there at the school, when we got our first school that was built there, it was Carver, and we didn't have anything but a old, dug well there.  And the next year, we were able to--students, along with their parents, were able to dig a line about a mile long to put down one pipe or pipes so that we'd have water coming to the school, to get one little faucet of water there.  But it was something for us to do and as students, we got into anything.  We'd have to go out and dig a little bit, you know, in summer.  That was our punishment.  So it was--sometimes we did things to get out of class, so we could get out and do it.  But--
Speaker 1: And all accomplish something positive doing--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely.
Story_ID: 91095
Speaker 1: Well, tell me about high school [Carver High School, Due West, South Carolina].  Did you play basketball in high school?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.  Yeah, and enjoyed that.  I was Number 13, and it was a lot of fun.  I played Forward and, at that particular school.  So it was just fun.  It really was, and played baseball as well.  So we had a good time there doing that.
Speaker 1: Okay, who was your high school principal?
Speaker 2: Olden Smith.  He, yeah, was all the way up.  And Mrs. Janie Ellis was not a principal, but she was over the elementary part when I was coming up.  After we, after they built the school, it all went into one building.  So that's all we had was that one building.
Speaker 1: So, you were in high school throughout the War, World War II?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Can you--did you graduate in '48' [1948] or '49' [1949]?
Speaker 2: Fifty [1950].
Speaker 1: Fifty [1950].
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Story_ID: 91096
Speaker 1: And when you were on the verge of graduation, did you know what you wanted to do?  Or if you wanted to go to school or something--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: Well, my parents did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They told me what I would do (laughter).  They told me I would go to school.  So, you know, parents were pretty strong then.  They, they'd give you your option, and your option was what they told you to do.  So my option was to go to school.  And I knew I was gon' leave the farm.  I knew that because I was tired of picking cotton and peas and corn and that kind of thing.  So I knew I was going to school to find something else to do other than that.  But we made a good living there on the farm, but I knew I wanted to do something different.
Speaker 1: So what opportunities presented themselves for you to go to school--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, went in school, and continued there at Benedict College [Columbia, South Carolina] and then I left Benedict College and went into the military.  And--
Speaker 1: Tell me about Benedict College?  What was that like?
Speaker 2: Well, it's a religious school also.  Dr. Pecos was there as the president at the time.  And that was a time, parents used to carry potatoes and corn and stuff to the college to help pay for them, the people to--children to go to school. I mean that was just the way it was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So they would actually take produce--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yeah, they'd take produce for--
Speaker 1: How much, how many potatoes or (laughter) would it take--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, you could sometime, if you had ten bushels of potatoes to take there, you could take it there, and they'd--it wasn't as expensive.  I think it was about twenty some dollars a month and for board.  And, you know, you'd--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: And you'd use the potatoes would feed the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, feed the, feed the students.  And so it was a way of life, and people expected to do that.  So, because we were not--I was not allowed to attend Erskine College [Due West, South Carolina] or, as far as that, or the University of South Carolina [Columbia, South Carolina], was not open at that particular time for Afro-Americans.  So, and none of the other schools in South Carolina.  It was strictly a segregated situation.
Story_ID: 89870
Speaker 1: What kinds of, I guess, programs did they have for students at Benedict College [Columbia, South Carolina]?  Did they have special programs, I mean lecturers to come in and speak to you all?  Did they ever do that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: We had a few lecturers that came in besides the teachers that were--but no, we didn't have that many at that point because the college just couldn't, couldn't afford it.  And--
Speaker 1: Do you remember anybody that came to speak to the student body?
Speaker 2: Oh, nah, not really at this point.  But I do remember a few coming in to speak.  Names have just kind of slipped away from me at this point.  But we did have a few.
Speaker 1: And you majored in education, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, (unclear).
Speaker 1: Were there any teachers there that really stood out?  I mean (unclear), when you look back (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Mr. Hubbard.  Well, Dr. Johnson, and then we had a Mr. Hubert there, Dr. Perry and, and, oh, Lord, Mr. Williams, and I guess I could go on--Hansberry.  I could go on and probably think of a few others, but, yeah, those were--Cecil.  He was, he was a French teacher and--which I didn't care for too much, but (laughter) we had to go through it.
Speaker 1: Was this where--is it at Benedict [College] that you pledged for Omega Psi Phi?
Speaker 2: No, this was after that.  Couldn't afford it, couldn't afford it at that point.  Of course, later at Benedict, I thought one time I wanted to be a Kappa [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity], and I thought better about that and said, no, I--and I waited until after I was out and could afford it.  And I decided to go on and pledge my love, which was Omega Psi Phi Fraternity.
Speaker 1: You had all the major black fraternities and sororities there, I guess, on campus?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Alphas, Kappa's.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, had the whole group there.
Story_ID: 89871
Speaker 1: So, well, tell me about graduation.  What did, what were our plans at graduation time?
Speaker 2: My gradu--my plans at that time when I left was to leave Benedict and go to New York and go to work.  And I went to New York for a while and I just didn't care for it that much.  And I guess that's a part of my life that I don't talk about too much.  I just wanted to get away from that.  And I did.  I left New York, came back to South Carolina and started working in a retirement home there, doing, working with some of the patients and things they had there at the retirement home.  And I kind of enjoyed that, and had, had plans to go on to medical school.  And I thought better about that because some of my friends had already gone on to Meharry Medical College [Nashville, Tenessee], and we had said we were gon' go.  And I said, no, I don't wanna go to Meharry.  And then all of a sudden I had a job offer to go to Clarendon County and work there in the school system as a coach.  And I did, and accepted that job.  And I think it's the best decision I ever made in my life was to go, and that's where I--my wife and I, where we decided--well, which wasn't my wife then, but (laughter), shortly thereafter she became my wife, a young lady that I knew while we were in school.  She was at State [South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina], and I was at Benedict [College, Columbia, South Carolina].  So we got married and I think I stayed there three years, and after that I came on to Myrtle Beach for a different challenge and working in the school system, and, of course, you know, financially, it was a little better.  So you move along financially when you see things that you feel that can better a family, you know.
Story_ID: 89872
Speaker 1: Okay, so now, you went back to school, too, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did, went back to school, and, and we--in fact, my wife and I and several other teachers.  We used to drive from Myrtle Beach [South Carolina] to, it was South Carolina State [University, Orangeburg, South Carolina] then, at that time, because we wanted to obtain a Master's degree.  So I was the driver, and, and we would drive there once a week and it finally got to the place one time we had to go twice a week, which the superintendent approve because we had to leave school about thirty minutes early.  And in order to do that, it had to be approved by the superintendent.  And the superintendent was very open to that.  And we did, and then they had, most of them had already started ahead of where I was.  So I had to go a year longer--a year longer?  Or maybe a year and a half longer than they did because they had already taken courses.  And, and I hadn't so I had to stay in there and fight the battle until I could obtain my Masters.  And that's what I did.  And--
Speaker 1: Okay, now, were you--had they had black students at the University of South Carolina [Columbia, South Carolina] long when you started?
Speaker 2: No, no.  In fact, when I started to South Carolina State for my Masters, I'm not sure at that time whether they had accepted any into University of South Carolina or Clemson [University, Clemson, South Carolina] at that point.  I don't believe they had.  I'd have to go back and look at the date on that, but at least that was my choice to go on and further my education.
Story_ID: 89873
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now, tell me about your career in the Myrtle Beach system, you know, what, what things happened?
Speaker 2: Well, there were things that happened in the system.  And after working here a few years, when they got ready to integrate the system, again, I was called on to go to the grade school, and that's where Horry County integrated there, the staff there.  Superintendent, I think called the principal in one afternoon, and said who they wanted to transfer and the principal called me at home about four o'clock one evening and said, "You're to meet in the superintendent's office tomorrow morning for the purpose of being transferred."  And, again, I said, you know, I could have been asked, but I wasn't asked.  I was told, for the purpose of being transferred.  So that kind of really disturbed me a little bit that, that I was not asked.  And I think I told my wife that night, that evening, I said, you know, "I think I'll go back to New York," I said, "and go to work there and probably do some blood chemistry and blood typing," you know, this kind of thing, working in a lab.  And I remember, she looked at me and she said, "Well, Woods, if you're gonna leave your family here, then I didn't marry the man I thought I did."  Well, that was enough said for me to not to worry about a thing else, but go on down to the grade school the next morning or down to the superintendent's office, which I did.  And then there was, one of the teachers there, Fred Bagwell [ph.] met in the office also.  And he was a Caucasian, so he was being transferred over to the Carver [Elementary] School here.  You know, every town had a Carver school if it was black.  So we met, and we talked, and we had a great time with each other because he was open minded, and so was I.  So they carried us, carried--our first stop was down to the grade school where I was introduced to the classroom there that I would be the teacher that would be coming in the next morning and that Mr. Bagwell would be leaving.  And we went over to Carver School where he was introduced that he would be taking over that spot.  And that's the way it was done.  It was just done that simple, and that--but just, we moved along.  And so, you know, naturally, some people didn't like it and some people did.  So, you don't please everybody anyway.  So we just had a great time there, and I stayed there and, until they decided to--that they were gonna close that school.  And then they moved up to another school that was opened.  And they had--was building other schools along.  And from that I went into administration, assistant principal at the middle school.  And we stayed there until we retired.  And that was eleven years ago.
Speaker 1: Now, was busing the biggest issue in the schools when you were--
Speaker 2: Busing was a big issue because in order for Myrtle Beach, if blacks were going to attend high school, they had to go to, all the way to Conway [South Carolina] and that was not very good.  So once the schools were integrated, then that was cut out and you could stay within your own area and attend school.  So we had a, you know, it was a challenge, and everyone was up to the challenge.  So it worked, and it's working today.  So we're just pleased about that.
Story_ID: 89874
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, how did you get involved in politics?
Speaker 2: Well, after I retired, I remember one of the council members which was James Futrell, he was the first black that we had on city council, and he said to me, he said, "I would like for you to maybe go on there."  He said, "I'm not gone stay there too much longer."  And I said, "Oh no."  I didn't pay it any attention.  And so three or four other people came to me and said, "You know, we want you to run for council."  I said, "No."  So we had, I had just retired and I told my wife, I said--our daughter was living in Augusta [Georgia] at the time.  And I said, "Well, let's go down to Augusta and, for a few days and just kind of get away from everything."  And when I came back, it was, they had thing on the answering machine that said, "Come up to the church, come up to the church."  So I told my wife, I said, "I'm going up there."  I said, "But I," I said, "I believe I know what they want."  I said, "But I'm not gone run for council."  I went up there, and the minister was there at the church, you know, and said, "You know you have been slated to run for, for council, whether you know it or not." He said, he said, "Now the people have spoken.  Now, what do you say?"  I said, yes (laughter), of course, and, you know, from that it just went right along.  And that's what we did.  We went on and we were successful that time, and we put eight years on council.  And--
Speaker 1: So they basically--did they have a plebiscite is how that, how they did it to choose you as a candidate, as a (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, it was, it was just some of the people just got together and they just said, this was--they wanted me to run.  And I did.  And, of course, my wife supported me and my family supported me to run.  And many people, because, I guess I had taught people all over the city, you know, and whites and blacks, and there were so many of 'em came together to support me.  And I'm thankful for that.  It gave me a great opportunity to see some of the fruits of my teaching and all, 'cause a lot of the students came and said, "We want to work for you."  And I said, "Great."  So we had a great time.
Story_ID: 89875
Speaker 1: Now, what were some of the key issues facing the city [Myrtle Beach, South Carolina] when you came on to City Council here?
Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness.  Everything (laughter).  Number One, it was, I think lights, Christmas lights, because the economy was down, and, and certainly at that point, I--we were talking about putting Christmas lights in the city.  And there were a group of people who wanted to put them there, and then people would say, no, we can't.  And, of course, as I began to look at it, I said, well, you know, if we put lights in the city, the Christmas lights, we will--this will bring people here to see the lights.  And even though it was gonna cost money, I felt like, that we would make money.  And we did, and from that it just began to, just the economy began to grow.  We put the lights in and everything went along.  And now, they retired those lights, and we had some other issues of dealing with the airport and Myrtle Beach Jet Express.  And we got that in, and finally they went out of business.  And we had other companies to come in as well.  And then we had whether we should put up a baseball stadium or not, and, of course, that was a big challenge.  We did put that up, and that was done, and, and after that it came whether we should put--up to the present time, whether we should have a hotel here.  And that knocked around for a long time.  And then after that we--before we, we haven't completed that yet.  But anyway, the hotel now is about come to pass.  So we're seeing that.  And I am on that board, even though I'm not on Council, but I'm on the Convention Center Hotel Board director.  So, we're seeing that come to pass.  In fact, just today, we had a tour of the hotel to see how it's coming along.  And it is a magnificent building, which we're just proud of, to see.  And such thing as as boat ramps that we hope to get here, and I understand that some things will happen along with that, hopefully, pretty soon.  And, naturally, softball field.  The former Myrtle Beach Air Force Base and the closing of it, you know, and it was just--we just had a multitude of things that have gone on in the city.
Speaker 1: Now, who do you consider as your primary constituents here?
Speaker 2: (No audible response).
Speaker 1: Are you all--how many people are on City Council, first of all and--
Speaker 2: It's seven.
Speaker 1: Seven?
Speaker 2: Including the mayor.
Speaker 1: And you are--are you all elected at large or from districts or--
Speaker 2: At large.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--
Speaker 2: It's nonpartisan so even though sometimes people declare, but it's still nonpartisan.
Speaker 1: Okay, so any--now, were you the only black person on City Council when you were elected?
Speaker 2: While I was there, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And until today, you only have one black on there now.
Speaker 1: Now, you weren't the first, were you?
Speaker 2: No, I was the second.
Speaker 1: Second black, okay. (Unclear).
Story_ID: 89876
Speaker 1: And you feel like you represent the black community, you know, because they drafted you, sort of--
Speaker 2: I think we represented the city [Myrtle Beach, South Carolina], period.  Certainly, we were able to get things done in the black community, but so were we able to get things done in all the communities.  We, we--I'm a very open-minded person, and I believe that, even though we had been left out, and we were so far behind, I think we were able to get some of those things moving forward, and yet, you can't take everything from one community.  You gotta give, give too.  So we were able to do some things for all the community and do some things for the complete City of Myrtle Beach.  And we're just, was very pleased for that.  And we're happy, and we got our storm water drainage in.  And we were the first in the city to get that, and then other areas.  Now, they're beginning to get storm water drains going.  So it has worked--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) I'm sorry.  What exactly is that?
Speaker 2: Well, it's a drainage system, you know, where we would have thirty, forty-year period for the water that will come in, to handle that kind of water.  So we needed, we needed a system in because all before that we had water standing everywhere, in ditches and things of this nature.  So we were able to get that system tiled, get the ditches tiled and, and make the community more presentable.  And, and this isn't just for the black community.  This was for all communities.  It's good, it's good for the entire city.  So you need that, you know.  You don't need to just look at one community.  You need to--this needs to be done for all communities.
Story_ID: 89877
Speaker 1: Okay, so when you, when you look at the community today, I mean--what are your hopes and concerns for the community--black community basically?  I ask the black community (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I'd like to see the community grow and I like to see the community, to keep itself up, not to let go into a slum area.  I think that's the worst thing that we can do, is to allow ourselves to go down.  I think we wanna keep ourselves up.  And it takes some pushing to do that.  We can't allow, don't allow ourselves just to go down and drag ourselves down.  And I think it's our responsibility to see that cleanliness, neatness, our housing, we need this kind of thing.  You don't just need, you know, Habitat [for Humanity] has done a beautiful job in the community.  But you have more people than black people that need Habitat homes, you know.  There are lot--there are people that need Habitat homes, and I don't think we need to put a color to that, you know.  Poverty has no color to it.  At least, I haven't seen it.  I think people, you know--there's poverty there with people.  And we have to deal with those kind of things, you know.  Some of us are down because we want to be down, and some people are up because they want to be up.  And, and they strive to be up, you know.  It takes some doing to go to school.  I know when I went to school, I had to work and work and work and work.  And that was a choice I made.  Now, I could have dropped out and not worked and could have gone to the streets like others, but, you know, it--that wasn't in me to do that.  It was in me to go on to school and to further myself and, and try to help other people.  I believe in helping people because there are people who helped me.  And I believe in helping people.
Story_ID: 89878
Speaker 1: What do you see as--what are the highlights of your career as a, both a teacher and a City Council person?  What do you see as your legacy?
Speaker 2: Well, when I look back and see the growth of people.  Just the other day, I had a young man to call me, and he was just, just kind of, just out of it, and he said, you know, he said, I wanna thank you for the talks that you used to give to me.  He said, I miss that now.  And he's an adult.  He said, he said, I miss that.  And I look at you kind of as a father figure.  And he said, these are the kind of things--now, you can't--money can't pay for that.  Money can't--you have no--you can't put a price on that.  So you feel like that you're helping people along that line.  As I came along, I had children who wanted to come and just stay with us.  And, and, of course, you know, we, we could not do that, but I guess if I could just have a home, just to open a big home and just say, "Come on and stay", I would do that.  And my wife and I have talked about that, if we could afford something like that, you know, where we would just take all the homeless people and those who were--we would do something like that.  But, yes, we like to see people grow, and as they grow, you know, we, we sit back and enjoy that.  I don't wanna see anyone fail or fall.  If it's any way that I can help lift a person, I will.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, your parents [Thomas and Ida Crain Woods] died before you, you were a City Councilman, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: They were--I suppose they were proud of you, you becoming a teacher?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes.  I mean they were proud of that, and very happy, and that was just a great, I think highlight of their life was to see their only son move forward in the education.  My two sisters, they had gone on to finish school and, you know, at one point, I didn't want to go either.  I said, well, I don't need to go to school.  But I remember a note that mama wrote, and it said, "Son, are you gon' let your sisters do more than you?  Love, Mom."  And the next time mama heard from me, I was back in school.  So, you know, I think parents had a way of doing things and saying things that knew how to reach your heart and reach (unclear) the mind.  And I think we still have some of those kind of parents around today, you know, that encourage their children to move forward.  And we were very proud of that too.
Story_ID: 89879
Speaker 1: Now, what are your future plans now that you're not in City Council anymore, but do you have--what are our plans?
Speaker 2: Well, we like to keep the mind active.  But I think now that it's time to let some of the younger people move forward.  And we'll be there for their support, you know.  I believe in supporting them and doing what we can to help them as they move along through life.  And we do that.  We, we help everywhere that we can.  Just the other day we dedicated our house as a McGruff Home where children having problems, you know, they can stop by and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: They knock on the door?
Speaker 2: --and knock on the door and do the (unclear), yeah.  So we're still active.  We're still active in our church and in our community, and we enjoy doing that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And most of all, I guess we enjoy our granddaughter who's in, away in Michigan, and that's where we go (laughter), you know.
Story_ID: 89382
Speaker 1: Sir, now, this is a slightly different question than the legacy question, but how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As one who helped people as they go along the way.  I'm one to lift people.  And I think that's how I would like to be remembered, as one who have done all they can do to elevate people to a level that would be acceptable to society.  And I think that would be a great thing to be remembered as.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you so much.
Story_ID: 89383
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead when you're ready, who, when and where?
Speaker 2: Okay, that's my daughter and son-in-law and granddaughter, and that was taken, I believe--
Speaker 1: Two thousand one [2001].
Speaker 2: --2001 in Michigan, yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.  Ready when you are.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's a picture of my granddaughter when she was born, and, at Baptist Hospital in Columbia, and she was only 1 pound and 12 ounces, and there I am holding her there and my wife.  So--
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Year?
Speaker 2: Nineteen-eighty eight [1988].
Speaker 1: Nineteen-eighty eight [1988].
Speaker 2: That's a year before my daughter was born.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSON)
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: That's the, I'm presiding there.  I was chair of Red Cross here in Myrtle Beach, Oree County, and I was presiding there, and the year I'm not--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE-FEMALE):  Ninety-two [1992] or '93' [1993].
Speaker 1: Ninety-two [1992], I believe it was.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, that's good enough.  Next photo.
Speaker 1: And that's where we were having a luncheon.  I believe that--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Start again with the description because when he takes that photo down, sometimes I stop rolling.  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's another Red Cross meeting where we were having a luncheon.  And I believe that was in '92' [1992] as well.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 1: That's--what year was that?
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay, go ahead, sir.
Speaker 2: One second.  All right, this is one of our programs that we had at Mt. Olive AME Church.  And I was the boluses of the chapter here, Omega Psi Phi chapter.  We're presenting a retired lieutenant with the Myrtle Beach Police Department an award, and his name is Lieutenant Philip Brown who is living today, but he's confined.  And we were happy we were able to do that.  He had so many people from the police department there in church that day to witness that, which was the highlight of the program there. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: Ninety--that's when Archer, that's at Christmastime.  That might have been '92's [1994].
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE-FEMALE):  In '94' [1994], the year--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, '94' [1994].  Okay, that's--there I am there.  We're in my home there.  And I'm looking at one of the presents that I've gotten for Christmas, along with that is my daughter's father-in-law, Archer McCance (ph.).  And he's looking on and laughing at me (laughter), at a Christmas gift.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 1: That's a picture there where we're returning from Niagara Falls in '97' [1997], my wife.  We'd been to Niagara Falls.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next?  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: And that's a picture of my wife and my granddaughter and myself.  We're, I'm holding the baby, and along with my wife and that was in 1988, '88' [1988].  We're just--
Speaker 2: And that's a picture there, at one of the Democratic parties that they had meeting.  And that's my wife and I at a luncheon.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
