Story_ID: 304236
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Eugene H. Webb [HistoryMaker Eugene Henry Webb].  E-U-G-E-N-E, the H stands for Henry, that's H-E-N-R-Y, the last name is Webb, W-E-B-B.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your date of birth and p- place of birth?
Speaker 2: November 24, 1918.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the town I was born in is called Red Level, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I guess you never heard of that?
Speaker 1: I haven't and you say--where is it located?
Speaker 2: It's located in Alabama, the southern part of Alabama near Mobile [Alabama].
Speaker 1: All right, so it's north of Mobile.
Speaker 2: North of Mobile and south of Montgomery [Alabama].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And, sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm in the real estate business and I'm a licensed real estate broker in the State of New York, State of New Jersey, and the State of Connecticut.
Speaker 1: Right, and you serve on the boards of several colleges.
Speaker 2: I serve on the boards some of the colleges in the South, primarily in the South.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Why is because I'm a southerner from the South, and I felt that there's a school--the small schools that I attended down there and I should go back and have those who was similar to me in a similar position I was in.  So I served on Miles College [Fairfield, Alabama] board for approximately twelve years and that's in Birmingham, Alabama [sic.], and that's a Methodist school, Christian Methodist school, Miles College, been in existence about ninety years, I imagine.  And I served on Stillman College board in Tuscaloosa, Alabama, for about eighteen years, and that's a Presbyterian school.  And so in the South, I always felt that whatever little bit I could contribute to those kids there, it'd be better for me to go back there.  I have served on other school boards.  I served on Cambridge, Cambridge College board in Cambridge, Mass [Cambridge, Massachusetts], for that.  Now, my relationship--I also sit on a college--a, a, college board here in New York, which is New York Podiatric College of Medicine [New York College of Podiatric Medicine, New York, New York].  I'm a--I'm one of the board members there.  I am a consultant, real estate consultant in Knoxville College in Knoxville, Tennessee, which is one of the--also a Presbyterian school.  So my involvement with the school system been quite a--quite a job.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is December the 2nd, '04 [2004].
Speaker 1: All right.  And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: You're in my office in New York City, Harlem [New York, New York].
Story_ID: 304237
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that I'm compelled (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --to ask and they only take a short answer.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: First question is, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: I would say collard greens.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I would say my favorite color would be brown.
Speaker 1: Okay, sir, do, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Oh, spring.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I don't have a favorite destination that I like to go to.  I just like to move around in no particular place.  It depends on the weather.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I guess in my younger years, and my growing up years, and my adult years, I never had a, a favorite phrase that I use.
Story_ID: 304238
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your family history.  I'm (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side of the family--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and your father's [Eddie Webb] side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And we'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Her first name was Docia, D-O-C-I-A, and her last name was Webb, W-E-B-B.
Speaker 1: What was her maiden name?  Can you tell us?
Speaker 2: Her maiden name was Foster.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: That I won't be able to tell you.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause I don't remember that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have an idea maybe?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, do, do you have any idea how old she was when you were born?
Speaker 2: She should've been in the area of I would said around twenty-one or twenty-two because she passed when she was eighty-four.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So it's probably late 1890s, 1898.
Speaker 2: Something like that.
Speaker 1: Something like that.
Speaker 2: I never looked up the family history because one of the reason--when I came along during that period of time, my great-grandmother was alive and she was just--she was a young woman when slavery was ended.  And from her, there was no males that I was ever told about, only the--my great-grandmother I visit, I knew her.  Then, my grandmother had only one child, which was my mother.  I didn't know too much about her.  And then my mother was a--we, we never had a family history where--that we could say, well, my grandfather or my grandmother's this, my grandfather--great-grandmother's that.  We never had any type of family history.  We come from a, a farm in the area out in the country in a small town.  There was no records.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did your--did your grandmother ever talk about slavery?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she talked about slavery, but at the time, my age, I was such a young kid, I was about five, six, seven years old, and it did not really impress me or did not bother me.  Because when you grow up in that period of time, you're in slavery anyway because there's segregation, so you really didn't know much about the difference between what she was talking about on the farm or what you were talking about when you had--when you were segregated.  So to me, we never talked about that part.  When you're a young kid and you're grow--and you're born in that environment, you--slavery, segregation, you accepted that way of life and you don't challenge it and you don't discuss it.  You don't have any exposure to anything other than that, so it's different for, for, for a child and like I came along to be interested in that type of thing.  Or my family--my family--my great-grandmother was--washed clothes for white people for a living and, and I guess her income was maybe five dollars a week, you know.  She, she washed clothes for two white families; I remember that.  And then my grandmother, she worked for some white people I imagine in the--as a domestic worker in their home, so I was never too clear about all of that.  And my mother was not a domestic worker, but she was a cook in a cafe in this--in Birmingham [Alabama], and so I grew up with her being a--doing that type of work along with her doing a little sewing for people, hemming the white--the white population's clothes or people who came there like that.  So I don't have too much history on, on that subject.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did your mother have a chance to go to school?
Speaker 2: My mother--my mother went to Snow Hill [Snow Hill Normal and Industrial Institute, Snow Hill, Alabama].  It was called Snow Hill.  It was a--I think it was like a high school, and I'm not too sure whether or not she finished or not.
Story_ID: 304239
Speaker 1: One of the problems was that we grew up as a single parent with my mother [Docia Foster Webb] and on my father's side, I have no relect--I have no idea.  He was never in my life or involved in my brother's life, so he is unknown to us.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I have two brothers.
Speaker 2: Well, okay, you have two brothers and are, are you the oldest or?
Speaker 1: No, I'm the middle boy.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm the middle one.  I have the oldest brother still alive, the younger brother has passed.  But we never knew--we never knew too much about our father.  I don't--I don't recall ever, ever seeing him or meeting him when I became up to remember the family and things like that, so I have no relation to that.
Speaker 2: What was your father's name?
Speaker 1: His name's Eddie Webb.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's went our birth certificate.
Speaker 2: All right.  And you have a brother named Eddie Jr. [Eddie Webb, Jr.], right?
Speaker 1: Eddie Webb, too.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Eddie Webb, Jr., right?
Speaker 1: Jr.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Do you--did--have people like talked about your father?  Have you been able to gain some information about him by, by hearing people talk?
Speaker 1: Well, my mother--my mother had a--my mother--when we came up and went into school, my mother said your father, the best way we should do it is to just--when you ask your school, what's your father do and what's--just say he's dead and then you have no explanation to give about him, and that's the way we went through school.  So we buried that fella (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I had no, no reason to ever look for him or anything.  But it's unusual about that.  Years later, one of my--my mother said there's a woman who wanted to meet me, and I asked her who was the woman, and she said he was, "She was a half-sister to your father."  I says, "Is that right?"  And she said that--so I met the lady and she said that her, her brother was alive and in--out in--out Midwest someplace, but I didn't pursue it.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I wasn't interested.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Now are you gonna ask me why I wasn't interested?  He might need something (laughter).  That's the joke (laughter).
Story_ID: 304240
Speaker 1: When you grew up, your household consisted of you and your--
Speaker 2: My two brothers--
Speaker 1: --two brothers--
Speaker 2: --and my mother [Docia Foster Webb].
Speaker 1: --and your mother.  Okay.  So none of your grandparents lived with you or anything--
Speaker 2: No, my grandparents lived in Red Level, Alabama, and we lived in Ensley, Alabama.  That's where I grew up outside of Birmingham [Alabama], a little suburb.
Speaker 1: What's it called?
Speaker 2: Ensley, E-N-S-L-E-Y.
Speaker 1: E-N-S-L--Ensley, okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: That's why we got--it's a suburb of Birmingham.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So--well, do you have a--and, and your mother worked in a cafe, you said she was a cook?
Speaker 2: In a cafe.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But she worked in Birmingham itself?
Speaker 2: She worked in Ensley in a white cafe as a cook.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we--and we supplemented our income by receiving public assistance.  Back in those days, public assistance was welfare.  And you have to go to--every Saturday, you go to the warehouse and they would give you the food, the staple foods.
Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: In reference to what?
Speaker 1: Or just some earliest--
Speaker 2: Well, I was--
Speaker 1: The earliest thing that you can remember.
Speaker 2: As I was explaining to you, my earliest childhood remember is that my mother was able to bring food home in the evening from the cafe; they were allowed to do that.
Speaker 1: No, but I mean--I'm saying, do you have--what was the first thing that you remember from childhood?  I mean, is there--is there like a first thing that you remember being conscious of when you were a little kid?
Speaker 2: The thing that most vividly in my mind is that, that we, we would--I guess we would go in the summertime to visit my great-grandmother, and that was always that because we would get on the train (laughter).  You go there--that was big thing.  Other than that, it was just a normal life where that we lived in a what we call a shotgun house and toilet was out in the yard.  I remember that.  I remember going to the elementary school [Council Elementary School, Birmingham, Alabama] and, and I--you know, just normal things, selling newspapers, coming along.  But it wasn't no, no--it wasn't nothing exciting, it was just--when you were there, you accepted normal things.  Summertime, you didn't wear shoes.  You only wear shoes in the wintertime because you, you could go without the shoes in the summertime.  We were very--my mother--you know, my mother provided for us and we, we accepted whatever she provided.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I never had a problem with that.
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother would--taught us to cook and we ate the normal foods that we had there, and we played in the yard with other kids.  And Christmastime come, but we didn't have no toys, we'd take the next kids' toys, my brother and I, and play with their toys, ride their bikes, use their skates, and, and we got a whipping for it 'cause the parents would tell momma and we got a whipping.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So my, my, my childhood was not exciting like that, it was survive--trying to survive, I guess.
Speaker 1: So was, was it like tougher I think on, on your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I, I--
Speaker 1: --household than it was--
Speaker 2: When you were--
Speaker 1: --on the others--on the others?
Speaker 2: Let me say it this way, when you grow up in an environment and, you know, you're not accustomed to anything and, and everybody around you lives the same way, you don't miss anything.  If you miss a meal, there's--the next family's missing a meal, so you don't go around and--if you don't have no shoes in the summertime, the people around you are the same way, so there was no rich kids.  We lived in a section where everybody's the same.  When you go to the warehouse on Saturday morning and get your allotment of food, everybody's--your neighbors and all the other places--kids were around there.  So there was nothing strange.  You think nothing about it because everybody else is the same.
Story_ID: 304241
Speaker 1: Now did you all go to church a lot?  I mean was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, we went to church 'cause that's in the South.  You go to church and you go to--you go to Sunday school, you go to church, then you go to BY--BYU, I think that's what it's called.  You go in and--
Speaker 1: BTU [Baptist Training Union]?
Speaker 2: BTU.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: You go to BTU.  And when you--that visit with your grandmother, you went at night because we--they had to go to--they had to get a--get in a, a wagon, and when you get to the church, you stay there all day and you come back at night when somebody bring us back in the wagon.  We ride back with one of the other neighbors in the wagon.  We never knew such thing as a car back in those days.  And then when we lived in Ensley [Alabama] growing up, we walked to church every day like everybody else, and everybody that was in there was financially in the same boat, so it was no different.
Speaker 1: It may sound like--seem like a dumb question, but I--I've always wanted to ask this and I've never asked it before.  How do you get back home in a wagon at night with a--
Speaker 2: The mule know--that, that mule know how to go down that dirt road (laughter).
Speaker 1: 'Cause it's so dark you can't see--
Speaker 2: It dark--
Speaker 1: You can't even--
Speaker 2: --but that mule know how to go down that road.  And when you--and, and, and when you--when you sit in the wagon and when you get to your, your place, you hop out and then you walk, go about a half a mile and you go to your place, and then the mule--the farmer would just--if there's another family, he'd--he'll get out and--like that.  But the mule always knows where--always believe that mule could go home.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's, that's the Webb theory.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.  So--now--so what was the name of your church?  Do you remember?
Speaker 1: No, I don't remember.  It's Shiloh Baptist I think it was, Shiloh Baptist Church [First Baptist Church of Ensley] in Ensley, Alabama.
Speaker 2: That's--
Speaker 1: I remember the pastor though, Reverend [C.H.] Taylor.  That's all I know.  I remember the pastor, Reverend Taylor.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Because one of the things that, that stands out more vividly in my mind about that period of--the church was--the church helped us when my mother [Docia Foster Webb] would--had an immediate problem, you go to the church and the church would help you.  And, too, in, in, in small towns like that, the minister was the, sort of like spokesman for the black people.  You know, when you deal with the city or city officials or law enforcement agent, anybody, minister always the one--would--you go to him.  So he was more of a spokesman in, in this little town for black people.
Story_ID: 304242
Speaker 1: Can you remember growing up any times of crisis or anything that, that the minister had to really step in and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: When we were small, and as you know, Birmingham [Alabama] was--back in those days was a coal mine town and a steel mill town, and the--one time, my brother and I--and of course everybody used to do it that live around there, when the coal train came at night--the coal trains--also during the day, but at night when the coal train would come up, they had to go up an incline, and what the black people would do including my brother--my oldest brother and I, we would get on the coal--on top of the coal train car and push coal off the side of the train.  So then when the train get to the top of the hill, you hop off, 'cause, see, she slows down going up the hill, so you get on down here, you climb up there, you push the coal off.  We wasn't the only ones doing it; all the people were doing it.  So then the police--they--somebody hollered out, look out, here they come, that's--they're talking about the police thing like that, and everybody jump off on the other side of the train and run, but the coal's on the ground.  So what we would do is, the one time the police caught my brother and I, and so they took us down there to--the thing, we was kids about twelve years old, I guess, something--and they were--so Momma [Docia Foster Webb] went down and went and got the preacher.  So the sheriff told the preacher, make--tell Momma to whip us and that she did.  And that's how we used the preacher, see?  The preacher was the spokesman, and he could talk to the police department or whoever's in charge, always go to him when you had a problem.  I don't think any lawyers existed in that town (laughter).  He was a lawyer, the baker, and everything else.
Speaker 1: That's an interesting story.  So, so you had to promise not to do that anymore, too (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, got a whipping but, but, but Reverend [C.H.] Taylor told her--and the sheriff told her, you all whip them boys, and he said we will, and when, when Reverend Taylor told--we, we got a whipping at home, not too hard, 'cause we needed the coal.  Momma whipped us, but we, we sacked that coal up and brought that coal home.  And we wasn't the only ones doing it.  Everybody in the little town [Ensley, Alabama] was doing it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now this is--these are tough times--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that you're talking about.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  We didn't have the--you know, we, we needed heat.  We didn't have no other way to get it, so we had a potbelly stove and, and had one in the--in the--in the front room, we had three rooms, and the kitchen.  So we had to get the coal.  And you--we didn't have that quarter to buy a sack of coal, so we go up there like everybody else and get it off.  Sometime we would get--when they push it off, we didn't have to get all the coal out, just brought that and snatch it off the ground and put it in a sack and take it in the wagon, take it home.
Story_ID: 304243
Speaker 1: Now what about school?  Now, what--did, did you--what school did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I went to--I went to elementary school there, went to Parker High School [Industrial High School; A.H. Parker High School, Birmingham, Alabama], and went onto Miles College [Fairfield, Alabama].
Speaker 1: Now, wait a minute, I don't wanna get you that far yet.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 1: Now, just grade school.  Now, that's Parker High School?
Speaker 2: No, grade school was Council High School [sic. Council Elementary School, Birmingham, Alabama].
Speaker 1: Council High School.
Speaker 2: That was the name of the elementary school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Council High School, and that's in Ensley?
Speaker 2: Ensley, Alabama [sic.].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And so--well, how'd you like school coming up?
Speaker 2: Well, back in those days, you didn't like it, you had to go to school and everybody accepted the fact that you go to school.  So it never was a question you didn't like it, you didn't wanna go, Momma [Docia Foster Webb] said you had to go, so that ended that.  We didn't question what Momma said.  Momma was the judge, the father, the mother, and everything else, but when Momma said that, you, you didn't question that.
Story_ID: 304244
Speaker 1: Now were there any men around that--
Speaker 2: Nope.
Speaker 1: --that--
Speaker 2: Nope.  I never had any man to tell me to do anything.  No uncles, no nothing.  Momma [Docia Foster Webb].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So she didn't have any brothers around?
Speaker 2: No brothers, just single child.  Didn't have nobody like--just momma.  And when Momma spoke, that was the law.  You didn't question that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Other than that, you got a little whipping.
Speaker 2: Did you have any male teachers or anything, or?
Speaker 1: In, in the school?  In the--Council [Council Elementary School, Birmingham, Alabama]?  I don't remember.  I imagine we did because, you know, you had male and female, and in high school, you had the same thing.
Speaker 2: So the, the preacher was pretty much the only--
Speaker 1: Oh, the preacher [Reverend C.H. Taylor] was the--
Speaker 2: --male figure that really--yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, because we was in church [Shiloh Baptist Church; First Baptist Church of Ensley, Ensley, Alabama] and, and, and Momma didn't have to tell him about me being bad or anything 'cause Momma'd whip you herself.
Speaker 2: Okay, so she was a pretty strong figure.
Speaker 1: Oh, she was strong.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: She was in charge.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I brought you in the world, I take you out (laughter), you know, that's gonna be it (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's a famous line (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's famous line (laughter).
Speaker 2: I, I--I've heard it (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, you know, I, I, I brought you here and I'll take you out.
Story_ID: 304245
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite subject in school, something that you liked better than other subjects?
Speaker 2: No.  Nothing like that.  My school years wasn't that great to me.  We had to go to school, Momma [Docia Foster Webb] said you had to go to school, you had to pass.  If you didn't, back in those days, the teacher would tell your momma and you get a whipping.  And then if the teacher didn't wanna tell your momma, the principal would whip you.  Back in those days, the teacher could whip you.  Come up here, you didn't do your homework, hold your hand out, she take a strap out and whip you.  And nobody, nobody questioned that.  She didn't go home and tell you momma.  And if you got too bad, she send down to principal's office, he'll whip you.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: That's with everybody.  That wasn't just for us, my family, my brothers.  That was everybody back in those days.  The teacher could whip you and that was end of that.  And she--and the principal when she--they got a big boy, you send them down and the principal would whip you.
Speaker 1: Now, now what did you do--what were you like as a little boy, I mean, and, and what did you like to do for your own--your own enjoyment, you know?
Speaker 2: Like the rest of them, play ball, play baseball, like that.  We'd get a stick, to get the ball, get out there in the field and play ball, run--you know, play ball.  That's--we didn't have the--any--we weren't able to have toys like a--you know, buy a bicycle or something like that.  We didn't have that money like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: We didn't have that kind of money.
Speaker 1: Now I've--did you have to make some of your own baseball equipment?
Speaker 2: Well, we just get a stick and, like that.  We didn't have to have no baseball bat.
Speaker 1: What did you use for a baseball?  Did you have one?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had a rubber ball.  It used to be a hard rubber ball.  There was no baseball itself, a hard rubber ball.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: About the size of a baseball, hard rubber ball.
Speaker 1: And not a real bat necessarily.
Speaker 2: No, not a real bat, just a stick.  Take a broom handle, anything.
Story_ID: 304246
Speaker 1: Well we know this is the South, we know what time it is, but this is a history that you're giving us, so I'm, I'm asking you, what--what's your impression of race relations in that--in that place (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  No, no, then.
Speaker 2: Then?
Speaker 1: Then and what, what did you--
Speaker 2: Well, then, you--as I said, when you--when you are born in, in a, a period of time where segregation was accepted and we didn't--there was no such a thing as a Civil Rights Movement.  During that period of time, black people didn't rise up and say I'm not going to be segregated in schools, I'm not--housing, like that.  Black people accepted that.  And where I came from, we had no--we had no black leaders talking about white people was treating us bad or treating us good or--we were in--we didn't have this or we were denied this.  We did not have that.  So when you grow up in that environment and everything else around is, is that way, it really doesn't affect you.  We wasn't able to travel to other places to, like, Chicago [Illinois] or maybe some of the northern cities where there might be different type of style of living.  Were we grew up, there--we lived over in the, what they call a Bottom, the Sandy Bottom [Ensley, Alabama], for example, and those blacks who had better incomes, like a postman or a doctor or something, they lived in another little section.  We didn't live over there.  We lived in sand--what they call Sandy Bottom.  That's where all the very few--very poor people lived.  We didn't live in the section that the blacks that was mobile or financially were able.  We couldn't afford to live up there.  We didn't have no house.  We lived in a shotgun house; we rented.  We didn't own any land.  We didn't own anything.
Speaker 1: Who owned the house that you were in and was it a--
Speaker 2: Some Italian fella.  He owned the house.  And then I think he used to have the grocery store in the corner, and he owned those houses we lived in.  In the South back in those days, the companies used to have the company housing.  You worked in the steel mill, you could live in a company house or if you're a coal miner, you can live in their house.  They would be houses for their employees and the blacks could live there and then have a commissary where they could go buy.  I--we didn't live in one of those houses.  We lived in a house where we--this I--Italian grocery man owned.  He had a bunched of 'em and we lived in one of his houses, and that's who we paid the rent to.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: If we hadn't been able to, I've--if I had an adult that worked in the steel mill or coal mine, we would've maybe had a, a house, 'cause the company built those.  If, if my mother [Docia Foster Webb] had a better school teacher, perhaps we could've been able to move over to the better section of black community and we'd had a house.  We didn't have those things.
Story_ID: 304247
Speaker 1: You talked about selling papers earlier.
Speaker 2: Oh, when I was a kid we, we, we sold papers or whatever it took.
Speaker 1: What other kind of things did you do?  Did you have like a--I, I guess I'm trying to figure out.  Did--when did you first--well, I guess you had to be involved in some kind of business to--just to get by, I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Well, I--we, we, we--my brother--our oldest brother and I, we sold newspapers and, you know, in the black community, you go get the papers and you--and you deliver 'em, and then you go around collecting money, and then you take it down to the guy who was--you know, you worked for like that.  The other things that we used to do when I was coming up was a caddy.  We go to that and caddy, you know, caddy bags for, for the golfers and things like that.  But we made--
Speaker 1: Where would you caddy at?  I mean, what, what was the name of the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't remember the name of them, but we would go over there on Saturday morning and caddy, go Sunday--don't go too much on Sunday, but Saturday was primary day.  You go--when I was growing up, we could go there and carry bags and caddy, and sold newspapers.  And if--when we got a little older, we used to go over there and cut grass for--you know, for the people and mostly yard work and things like that.  We'd go over there and, and sometime you, you could go and the minister [Reverend C.H. Taylor] would have jobs that he wanted to recommend that you go do, and little jobs like that, and we go and he'd--he give us jobs.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He sent us on jobs, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Clean up a yard, something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the minister played a lot of roles as you say he--
Speaker 2: He was the man.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in that day--it's--you know, I tell you the honest God truth, ministers now is looked upon by the cooperative community and the white community as a leader of black people.  Look at Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson], for example.  Look at any of these guys like, you know, Al Sharpton [HistoryMaker Reverend Al Sharpton].  They say--Al Sharpton  say he leads poor people.  Jesse Jackson say, I'm the leader of black people.  Well, who appointed him leader?  But he's a minister and he grew up in that environment.
Story_ID: 304248
Speaker 1: Did you have any idea when you were coming along that you wanted to be a businessman?  I mean, when you were a little kid, did you--did you--what did you see as the prospects of black folks in that community (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Working in the steel mill or the coal mine.
Speaker 1: So you could see yourself doing that--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --maybe?
Speaker 2: That was the height of your ambition to go in the steel mill, not so much the coal mine, but the steel mill and getting the good job or 'cause in the steel mill, you could be a yard man, which shovel the cars back and forth in the--you know, in different plants, with railroad cars, and you look for those type of jobs.  Or you could be some kind of little operator that was--not, not the big operator, but a little operator and you, you made good money and you could--during that period of time, so your, your ambition was to be that.  My ambition was not to go and be a doctor, something that was visible to me, be a minister, that--like that, but, steel mill.
Speaker 1: Did you know--did you know any black professionals other than the minister [Reverend C.H. Taylor]?  Did you know any, any other black professionals or?
Speaker 2: No, except the doctor that I went to.  You know, we'd go to the doctor.  We knew him, but I don't--I didn't know any professionals that we associated with.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There was some--in, in the church [Shiloh Baptist Church; First Baptist Church of Ensley, Ensley, Alabama], there was a doctor that we went to.  There was the school teachers; they were in the church and, and like that.  But they was no--my, my mother [Docia Foster Webb] didn't associate with any of that and that type of persons.
Story_ID: 304249
Speaker 1: What was the name of your high school again?  It was--
Speaker 2: Parker High [Industrial High School; A.H. Parker High School, Birmingham, Alabama].
Speaker 1: Parker High, okay.  And was that in--
Speaker 2: Birmingham [Alabama].
Speaker 1: Birmingham, okay.  So did you have to actually move to Birmingham or did you just go from Ensley [Alabama]?
Speaker 2: No, no, car--street car.
Speaker 1: Street car, okay.
Speaker 2: Nickel (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: One nickel take you over, one nickel take you back.  And then it move to a dime will take you over, and dime take you back, street car.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was Parker named for a black person?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the, the, the school was named Parker.  I--the principal [Arthur Harold Parker] of the school was--I don't remember his first name but his last name was Parker and the school was named after him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  He was the--he was the principal of the school.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: It was all-black high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you like high school better than grade school [Council Elementary School, Birmingham, Alabama]?
Speaker 2: I didn't participate in any activities in the school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: None whatsoever.  When the school was out, I go home.  I got to go home and try to work somewhere.  I couldn't afford to participate, trying to play basketball or football like that.  I had to go home because I had to find--I had--I was always looking for a little work to do to get some money.  I didn't have any childhood like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it's--
Speaker 2: My childhood was a manner for us to survive, that was my oldest brother [Eddie Webb, Jr.] and my mother [Docia Foster Webb].  We had to survive.  So I didn't have the childhood--I played ball, this, and every chance I played a little stick ball out in the back, out in the field, wherever, but we didn't have time for the socializing.  You had to--we had to figure out how to work.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did--
Speaker 2: I shined shoes back in them days.  I used to go down to the barbershop and I shined shoes.  I didn't have time (laughter), you know.  We, we had to survive.  We was on welfare, basically, so you don't have time when--back in that, in this--you don't have time to go to socialize and get out of school, go play basketball and all that, you go home and you go over there to the barbershop and sweep the floor up in there, say.  You go--you ask the guy there to sweep the pool hall.  You go to the pool hall and sweep it--clean it up for him.  Whatever it required.  So if he give you fifty cents, you made fifty cents.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were used to sort of hustling around trying to--
Speaker 2: I got to.  We was on--we was--we was on public assistance.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So in terms of classes in high school, were you--I mean, were you a good student in high school?
Speaker 2: I passed (laughter).  I don't know whether I was good or bad.  My school was not of such.  It was--when I grew up as a young adult--a young kid goin' to elementary school and high school and things like that, it was a question of helpin' Momma survive.  We didn't have all the, the--we had--I, I, I would go to barbershop in the evening, man let me clean it up.  Give me fifty cents or whatever he gave me, and I needed that.  We didn't have that.  And so, Saturdays, we had to work on Saturdays.  Sunday, you go to church like everybody else.  But, we didn't have the luxury of that, so, I don't have any childhood.
Speaker 1: Were the--were there any people around you, teachers or the preacher or anybody, any of the ladies in the church [Shiloh Baptist Church; First Baptist Church of Ensley, Ensley, Alabama] that, that seemed to make you think that you could do something special other than just get a--just to work, you know, hard?
Speaker 2: No.  No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Didn't have no mentor or something like that.  They--I say, well, I wanna be like them.  That never crossed my mind.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Survive.
Speaker 1: All right.  So what--so you went through all four years of high school--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --in--at Parker and graduated?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay.  How big was the, the, the graduating class down there?
Speaker 2: Big because all the black kids went there.
Speaker 1: Yeah, we talking about a big black population (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah--
Speaker 1: --in Birmingham.
Speaker 2: --big black population, all--'cause in Birmingham, we had a big black population and, and that was a big school.  That was a high school, so it was a big--you know, you graduated with big black population.
Speaker 1: I think some people who maybe not think about the South, I mean--or not really don't--can't conceive of the South in those days, but the black population was huge.
Speaker 2: Huge.
Speaker 1: Maybe over half of the people in town.
Speaker 2: In town.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yep.  And, and that little other part, they control all the people, the jobs and everything.  You see, in, in those days, we had the pool halls that the guys hung out in, you had barber shops that they had, you had a few beauty parlors, you might had a, a--some other little shops around, but it wasn't a lot of shops.  Like I said, the, the guy on, on the corner was Italian with the grocery store you bought your food from.  And when you went down to the street, it was about three blocks long in Ensley [Alabama] and so--two-sided street, they had a Woolworth [F. W. Woolworth Company] there and things like that, but, you know, back in the--so there wasn't too much to do down there.  And most of those jobs was, was adult jobs, but most of the population worked in the steel mill and the coal mines, 90 percent of the population there.  So when you--when you was young like that, you go down to the barbershop and, and the man lets you--you know, clean up, he give you some money, fifty cents or a dollar, whatever, something like that.  But it--back in those days, a dollar was a lot of money.  We didn't--I didn't have that type of childhood where I would--had the luxury.  We didn't have that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now as I told you before, there's only Momma.
Speaker 1: Now do you remember any of your teachers as being--do you have a favorite teacher?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That wasn't the problem.  The problem was surviving with Momma.
Story_ID: 304250
Speaker 1: So when you graduated from high school [Industrial High School; A.H. Parker High School, Birmingham, Alabama], what were you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was working in a--I was--when I graduated from high school, I was working in a hotel as a busboy.  I was working in the Tuckbana Hotel [ph.] as a busboy in the cafeteria, the coffee shop.  When I was a senior in high school, I left the school to go over there and I was a busboy in the coffee shop.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the--we had the white waitress and, and, and the kids, the black kids as busboys, bus the dishes in there for them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you--at that time, going to college was--something like that was--
Speaker 2: I went to college, went out to Miles [Miles College, Fairfield, Alabama].
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, but, but then, when you were in high school--
Speaker 2: When I was--yeah, yeah--
Speaker 1: --did you think about--
Speaker 2: Well, my--see, my oldest brother [Eddie Webb, Jr.] went to Miles.  It was a junior college.  Miles at that time was a junior college.  It wasn't a four-year college.  It was a junior college.  And, and my oldest brother, him and I both worked in the--when we was in seniors, like in there, and he was ahead of me, we worked at a--I used to--before I went into the coffee shop as a busboy, I shined shoes in the hotel.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I go in there in the evening and, and the guy--he'll let me shine his shoes.  This black guy had the concession, like, you know, I shine shoes and then it's--shine shoes maybe on Saturday.  That's how I got in the coffee shop.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you, you graduated from high school, what, about 1936 or '37 [1937]?
Speaker 2: Something like '37 [1937].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Somewhere like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Nineteen thirty-seven [1937].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, so what did you do right after graduation?
Speaker 2: Well after I graduated from high school, I went out to--I, I was still working in, in the coffee shop and at that time.  I graduated from shining shoes (laughter) in the hotel lobby over to the coffee shop.  The reason I went over there, 'cause you get something to eat.  See, there's, there's a secret to it.  You shining shoes, you don't get nothing; you gotta go pay somebody.  But in a coffee shop, you would get something to eat.  So, so--but--and then you made more tips at the coffee shop, too.  And after that, I went out to Miles College.  My brother--my brother was out there.  He was graduated from the junior college.  My brother graduated and I went out there after that.
Story_ID: 304251
Speaker 1: Did you go to school full--I guess you probably worked while going to school.
Speaker 2: I went in and I, I worked at the coffee shop in the school, and I was only out there a year, was only there a year.  And then I--a young woman [Thelma Jean Jackson] got pregnant by me and I, I dropped out of Miles College [Fairfield, Alabama] to work full-time.  I went into the steel mill.  No, I didn't, I went into the coal mine first.  I didn't like that because I didn't like being in there.  I been there--stayed there about, I don't know, about two or three months.  But I went in the steel mill and worked after that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I worked in the steel mill.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I stopped college.
Speaker 1: So how long did you work in the steel mill then?  Just before--
Speaker 2: I worked in the steel mill until--for about a year, a year and a half.  Then--did they lay me off or fire me or why did I leave?  But I left the steel mill and didn't have a job.  And then--and I--the young woman that I married at the--and when she became pregnant, I married her.  I took her home to Momma [Docia Foster Webb] where we lived.  Then, a friend of mine said to me that he was going to California, and he went out to California and got a, a--he came back to New York and had a nice car, I said, man, that's the way it should be.
Speaker 1: He came back to Ensley [Alabama], you're saying, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he came back to Ensley.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I looked at him, I said you doing--well, maybe I should go.  So I left my wife and baby there with my oldest brother [Eddie Webb, Jr.] and I went out to California to see could I make a fortune (laughter).
Speaker 1: So did you ride out there with him, ride back out?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  I took the L&N Railroad [Louisville and Nashville Railroad], went to New Orleans [Louisiana], and took the--what do they call that train that used to run?  It's a famous train, Sunset [Sunset Limited]?  Something like, but it was famous.  I, I went to Birm--I went from Birmingham [Alabama] to New Orleans, took that train out of New York [sic.]--New Orleans, and went straight to California, straight to California in the coach.  And I left home with my brown paper bag, the chicken in there, and when I got to New Orleans, that was old, I got some more with another paper bag, and got back on the train and went to California.  Got out in Los Angeles [California], started there.
Speaker 1: Really?  Just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Because it was different--a different culture as far as work is concerned.  In California, they had no steel mills, coal mines or any of that type of industry.  Out there was mostly blacks worked in the service and you had to be a chauffeur or you worked for--as a house boy or something in some of those wealthy family home, like that.  You had menial jobs like that.  I came out of the environment where it was--you know, the muscle type of jobs, steel mill, coal mine, and I didn't wanna go in and be a boy (unclear)--be a chauffeur or anything like that.  Could not get a job in the hotel business because back in them days, they didn't have blacks too much in chauffeurs and those type of jobs.  The Japanese had those jobs and things like that, so it wasn't very successful.  I, I stayed out there about a year or six months and then I came back home.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had to come back because of my family.  I wasn't--my brother was supporting my family; my oldest brother was supporting them, and he was a little tired, and so I came back home.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is, what 1940 or so?
Speaker 2: I don't remember the time, now.
Speaker 1: About--
Speaker 2: I don't remember.
Speaker 1: It's gotta be around '40 [1940], '41 [1941].
Speaker 2: Gotta be--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Maybe around '40 [1940].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I don't remember the day's name.
Speaker 1: Forty [1940], '41 [1941].
Speaker 2: But I came back home and--
Speaker 1: Had the war [World War II, WWII] started?
Speaker 2: No.  No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is before--about 1940, I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Because the war starts--
Speaker 2: War hadn't started.
Speaker 1: --in '41 [1941], right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the war hadn't started.
Speaker 1: Right.
Story_ID: 304252
Speaker 1: Then, I--I got a job.  I went into the hotel business--back to the hotel and got a job as a waiter this time, not in the coffee shop.  Worked my way up to (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Okay, now did, did you learn some things in Los Angeles [California] that, that--
Speaker 1: It taught me one lesson, that the--without the--without a dollar bill in your pocket, you don't make it nowhere in America.  Now, see, in large, the difference between Los--a large city like Los Angeles is that the Japanese back in that time, the Mexicans and they were the--they were doing a lot of the menial--you know, mediocre jobs and things like that.  And then they didn't have a lot of employment because the guy that I, I was--impressed me, he was a porter in a Coca-Cola factory, a porter.  I wasn't interested in being a porter too much.  But I did work when I was out there, I worked for the Catholic church as a--as a porter.  See, the, the--where the nuns lived, the priests lived, I worked there for a while, but came back and became a waiter.  And I worked up to the main dining room and where the wealthy people eat in this wealthy hotel, which was like the Waldorf in Birmingham [Alabama].  And they had a black captain and a black head waiter, and all the waiters, I got the job as a waiter.  And that's when I studied how rich people live.  And I studied--and then I used to--you know, I never knew that you had salad plate (laughter), water goblets, wine glass, champagne glass, and had to set that.  I had to learn all of that.  Captain taught you all of that because you had to do it right.  Had to put the towel over your arm, stand a certain way, and carry it a certain way, and serve a certain way.  I learned all that from a black captain and head waiter, how to be a first-class waiter.  It was a good experience for me 'cause I watched how they eat.  They eat and drink, you know, wine before dinner and things like that.  It was very fascinating.  And so I said--and, and I--he gave me a dollar tip, you know, after you wait all night there and I took care of my family that way.
Speaker 2: And what--did you get pretty good tips if you--
Speaker 1: Yeah, according to those times, they was good tips 'cause we was in a first-class hotel, and you, you made good tips and, you know, it's like any other thing, back in that time, I don't remember what a good tip was, but it was a, a good tip for that time.  And then I had my family.  Then I left that and I heard that the waiters--the better money was on the railroad as a dining car waiter.  I said that might be interesting, so I got the news on how to do that, got a job as a dining car waiter.  Now, to move up from the hotel to the dining car.  And I'm running from Kansas--out of Birmingham to Kansas City [Missouri] on the Frisco Railroad [St. Louis-San Francisco Railway], and I was a dining car waiter.  Now I made more money 'cause I got more money from pay.  See, the hotel didn't pay per so much, this is what we pay you; they paid a small amount of money.  But then the rail--I worked on the railroad. Railroad for about a year or something, end of that railroad, then I said--the guy said, well, you make more money if you get on, on, on--go to New York [New York] or Washington, D.C., and get on those trains as a waiter, you make more money because from Birmingham to Kansas City and back, you, you carried like a farmer type of person, but this--that's what the waiters told me.  So I came to Washington, got a job on the railroad there, Seaboard Railroad [Seaboard Air Line Railroad], as a dining car waiter out of Washington.  You go--that's where the headquarters was.  Then you come to New York and go to Florida.  That was a seasonal type of job.  Then, mess around--I, I done that, then laid, laid it off 'cause see in the wintertime when everybody's going, that's when they use more waiters.  So then a guy told me about--I was living in Washington, a guy told me about the New York Central Railroad running from New York to Chicago [Illinois], you make more money.  Came up here and I got a job with the New York Central Railroad as a dining car waiter.  I worked there.  And then I went in the [U.S.] Navy.
Speaker 2: Now, now--so what happened to your little family?
Speaker 1: They were following me.
Speaker 2: Okay, so--
Speaker 1: They was with me.
Speaker 2: They went with you everywhere.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they was with me.
Story_ID: 304253
Speaker 1: But then I went into the [U.S.] Navy.
Speaker 2: Now this is like 19 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) About '41 [1941] or '40 [1940], something like that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: About '41 [1941] or '40 [1940].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Went in the Navy.
Speaker 2: Was the war [World War II, WWII]--had the war started at that point?
Speaker 1: Yeah, because I--when I went in the Navy, they drafted me.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I went out to Chicago [Illinois] to the Navy base for training and I was--
Speaker 2: Great Lakes [Naval Station Great Lakes, Lake County, Illinois], yeah.
Speaker 1: Great Lakes; that was the name of it.  I trained there.  Then when I left Great Lakes, I went to Hampton Institute [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], stayed there I think twelve weeks takinf a course in, in, in this--I don't remember, whatever the course the Navy was giving me at the time.  I stayed there.  And then I shipped out.
Speaker 2: What kind of course was it?
Speaker 1: Well, they was teaching us actually the rules of the, the sea, about being a sigman [signalman], you know, on the ships where they, they signal like that, they taught that.  I was taking boatswain's mate--that's--a boatswain's mate was a guy that over the cruise that run, he was called a boatswain's mate because St. James River [sic. James River] run up and down there and we had the little boats that'd teach you how to do the little boats.  I stayed there.  The whole idea was to stay out of going overseas or going to San Francisco [California] on one of them ammunition dumps and load the ship.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they had a big disaster up there.
Speaker 1: They had a big disaster--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --during that time.  So I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Port Chicago disaster they called it when they blew up that whole dock [at Port Chicago Naval Magazine, Port Chicago, California].
Speaker 1: Yeah, so then I decided that--they, they shipped me out, shipped me to 'Frisco [San Francisco, California], and then shipped me to South Pacific.  Got in the South Pacific as a stevedore, loading ships, cargo.  Then I got a job as a little--running one of the little boats between the boats with the mail.  And then I was in there and I was trying to get out all the time.  Finally, the war was over, they let me out, came back to New York [New York].
Speaker 2: So where were you in the South Pacific?  Which--what places did you go?
Speaker 1: I'm trying to think of the little island, Kwajalein Island [Kwajalein Atoll, Marshall Islands], I think it was, a little small--it was a small island.  It, it, it was a--what they--what, what they do, they bring the ships from the state with all the supplies and everything, they dump it here.  Then the ships out in the Pacific come there and pick up to supply the war ships, so that's what you're loading, ammunition, food, and everything.  I was stevedore.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay.  So, so you were that during the balance of the war--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and when the war was over, you came back.
Speaker 1: Came back.
Story_ID: 304254
Speaker 1: They (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So--
Speaker 1: I, I, I was discharged here in the city [New York, New York].
Speaker 2: Now did, did you--where, where was your family living?
Speaker 1: New York.
Speaker 2: In New York?  Okay.
Speaker 1: Oh you mean at that particular time?
Speaker 2: Yeah, when you were--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: --in the [U.S.] Navy in--
Speaker 1: When I was in the Navy, no, they was in Chicago [Illinois].  No, wait--no, they was here.  They was here, in here.
Speaker 2: Okay.  It was just your, your, your wife [Thelma Jean Jackson] and your--
Speaker 1: Wife and I had the--it was actually--I--when I came back, I, I got a divorce from her and took the children from her and took 'em to my mother [Docia Foster Webb] 'cause I could support 'em.  When I came back here, I--well, I went on a--I think I went on the railroad for a short period of time because you could go back.  Then, I, I decided I was tired of waiting on people.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.  So, so you come back and, you know--
Speaker 1: Then I decided I would do something else.  What I decided to do is that, I was single then. I was single then and I decided, what am I gonna do with myself?  I got a job--I was running on the road, and after that, I thought that I wanted to do something else.  So one time, someone said--mentioned to me about the real estate business, and so I said, that might be pretty good.  It was a guy from Birmingham [Alabama] that was in the real estate business, and he told me about it.  And I--and I said, I think I like to do that because he, he had a big car, living well (laughter), eating in the finest restaurant in Harlem [New York, New York] and like that.  So I thought I'd try.  So I decided to try, and that's what I done, and that's where it started from.
Speaker 2: Well, how did you get started in the real estate business?
Speaker 1: Well, with, with, with him, I started--I, I--the guy, name of Carl Jones [ph.]--I started--the guy name was Carl Jones.  He, he was quite a character in his self, but he told me about it.  I, I went to the real estate school here called Pohs [Institute of Insurance and Real Estate, New York, New York] and I graduated from there and got a salesman license.  I started to get 'em under him.  Then, I changed my mind 'cause I had met another fella here named G. Davis, George Davis [ph.], and I liked him, so I, I, I got my license under him as a real estate salesman, and that started me in the real estate business.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So--
Speaker 1: After that, it was real estate all the way.
Speaker 2: So was it--was it hard to get your license?
Speaker 1: No.  Yeah, I went to school.  I went to school, I think a six-month course, and then you got your license.  Back in those days, the real estate industry for the license part of it was very easy.  I could go down there and take it blindfolded--but I took the real estate and I worked for this guy as a salesperson.  And he was a very--actually, was one of the prominent businessmen in Harlem at the time and I worked for him.  But I wasn't the only salesperson there; I was just one of 'em there when I worked for him.  And then I decided that I was gonna go for myself, so I got my broker's license.  I remarried and got my broker's license.  And, and started out just like everybody else, I guess.  You get your--you know, you get a little office and you start at it and you work at it.  And then I had a--I--my--I was married to a school teacher that used to teach at West Virginia State [West Virginia State College; West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia], and she was a--and we got married, and so then she took another job here in the Westchester [New York].  And so when I didn't make no money that month, she had her salary (laughter).  But I was very fortunate that I, I, I moved right up to the ladder and made some money, and we--I moved on from there.
Story_ID: 304255
Speaker 1: And then I got involved with the political side of it temporarily.  And in working with the real estate business--back in those days, the--when I started out, the real estate--black men sort of controlled the, the economics in Harlem [New York, New York].  They owned the buildings that they--they owned--they, you know, had--we had a black insurance company here at the time.  And then we had a, a savings and loan just coming into being at that time, which was Carver Federal Saving and Loan [Carver Federal Saving and Loan Association, New York, New York].
Speaker 2: Now, would you say in those days that black folks owned--
Speaker 1: A lot of land in Harlem.
Speaker 2: But was most--was, was most of it owned by black folks or--?
Speaker 1: Yeah, most of it--I wouldn't say they owned much, but black folks owned most of the brownstone, the houses that they lived in, they owned bought 'em and things like that.  Because it was somewhat segregated, so you had in Harlem, the doctors, the lawyers, all the professionals that lived in Harlem.  It wasn't like they had left Harlem at that time.  There was still racism, and so most of 'em lived--and, and that was a period when there's--the, the renaissance of Harlem was so famous.  They had the Savoy Ballroom [New York, New York], they had the nightclubs, and bars, and had professionals up here, you know, and all the--all the professionals lived here, they didn't live in other places.  And then, too, during that period of time, a lot of the real estate men owned the apartment houses around in Harlem community.  So the real estate industry was very influential in the growth of Harlem back in those time.  Well, during that period of time, I started out.  Then you get involved with the local politicians coming along at that time.  The, the blacks were merging in the political arena, although that was before Adam Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.] came along.  Blacks were merging in the political arena, and all of the black insurance brokers and real estate brokers and professionals here, like when Amsterdam News [New York Amsterdam News] back in the--Adam--I mean, Powell--medical men owned the Amsterdam News, him and two doctors, and you had the little bank over here was formed by Carver.  Back in those days, it was just formed by Carver, the, the, the guys formed with real estate men and the doctors and the lawyers, they formed that.  Got this--it was like--then the insurance company had been here all the time.  It was controlled by the professionals, lawyers and like that.  Well, when I started out, I say I might as well get up here and try to be on the board with those fellas, so I worked to get on the board with those fellas and I became a member of the board of the United Mutual Life Insurance Company [Metropolitan Life Insurance Company, New York, New York] first.  And then later on down the line, I was on that board, somebody--one of the real estate men here recommended--actually, it was Dave Dinkins' [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins] father-in-law, Danny Burrows [Daniel L. Burrows], who was a real estate man.  He had a liquor store here and he was a politician; he used to be an assemblyman.  He had--he recommended for me to be on the board over there in United Mutual Life Insurance Company, and that changes your perspective now because you're looking at an institution and you're involved with an institution like that.  I--and back then that--then they was looking at forming a commercial banking and loan at that time, and this was after I became a broker and was in the business.
Speaker 2: About what time is this now--
Speaker 1: I don't remember that.
Speaker 2: --that you're talking about?
Speaker 1: I don't--
Speaker 2: Are we in the '50s [1950s]?
Speaker 1: I guess so because you have to look up when Freedom National Bank [New York, New York] was formed back in them times.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: If you look on that wall up there, I'm on that wall up there.  That's ion 1956, I think it was.  I'm a real estate broker there, closing a real estate deal in Harlem, and that's a picture up there I keep, I keep up there to remind me that I'm getting old.  But the idea is that--then, I decided that, that--then they form another bank here and I went--I became a member of that bank board.  And then in the meantime at that point in time in my life, I just--I went back to Alabama to Miles College [Fairfield, Alabama] as a trustee; it was a four-year college then, went back there as a trustee.  And a couple years later, three--two or three years later--my mother [Docia Foster Webb] was a Presbyterian and she had told some minister in Chicago [Illinois] that I was on Miles College board and blah, blah this, blah, blah that.  So he said, I'm gonna put his name in for Stillman College [Tuscaloosa, Alabama].  So I went on Stillman College board and that's how I got involved with those colleges.  Miles College is unusual story.
Story_ID: 304256
Speaker 1: Okay, now I was just talking--we, we just--you just described kind of quickly how you got involved (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --and how you rose and stuff, but, but what were--were there any obstacles to, to being a successful real estate person--
Speaker 2: Well, you know--
Speaker 1: --in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: --when you start out--
Speaker 1: In, in New York [New York]?
Speaker 2: --you're, you're poor.  There's always obstacles because you're poor and you start out.  You don't start out with a wealthy background or wealthy family in the real estate business, so you start out from scratch; you're very poor, and, and, and--far as real estate is concerned, and you don't have the luxury of having a family that's in there and that you have a foundation you build on.  When you start from scratch, you, you build a foundation, so I didn't--that wasn't successful.  I was helped along the way by a lot of people.  For example, I just said, Danny Burrows [Daniel L. Burrows], who was the father-in-law of Dave Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins], the former mayor, I, I was helping with him because he, he would give me business during that period of time, and other elder real estate brokers that had been in business a long time.  There's a guy named Lloyd Jenkins [ph.] who used to give me a lot of business, you know.  Because at that--at that stage in their life, the business that they--that they didn't want was like a piece of cake to me, but it was--you know, they didn't need it, they say give it to Webb [HistoryMaker Eugene Henry Webb], and that's what a lot of the old timers used to say, give it to Webb, you know.  It's like a crumb if you wanna look at it--back at it, but it was a piece of cake at the period of time.  So that's where you get the idea on, what do I do next with my life or what do I do to make my--to, to be able to make a better business than I got?  Well, I came to the conclusion, like I said, my friends was all over the--United Mutual [United Mutual Life Insurance Company; Metropolitan Life Insurance Company, New York, New York] was a company that was controlled by blacks, so I asked, like I said, Danny Burrows, I appreciate if you could, you know, if an opening come on the board, I'd like to be able to sit on that board and he said, all right, I'll keep it in mind.  Well, a couple years later, he mentioned it and says "I'm on--you wanna sit"--I said, "Yeah."  So I asked people like that who has helped me.
Story_ID: 304257
Speaker 1: Floyd McKissick was very active with CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] at the time, and CORE was one of the leading, you know, rabble rouser for the Civil Rights Movement, and so one day (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, the Congress of Racial Equality.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and so one day when he was talking to me, we was chatting, he was saying, you know, we got more income in Harlem [New York, New York] in rent that the black people pay in Harlem than some of the small southern towns.  And he came--and it seemed to me that if we could harness all that, we'd have a--if we could harness just the rents, we would have a good income.  I said, that's a pretty good idea.  Well, you had major real estate firms in Harlem that was black that controlled a lot of real estate up here, but Harlem was--had--the, the state had passed a law, they gonna build Mitchell-Lama housing.  There's a big Mitchell-Lama housing where the, the--they was gonna let people buy their apartments or like--they're co-ops, like.  I said, well, we could get on those.  So I decided in my mind, I would try to get this (unclear) over here at that time.  Well, John Lindsay was the mayor, so I didn't have any political clout or anything, but I was a member of the Masons [Freemasons], and I still remember the Masons organization.  So I went to the guys who was involved--there's a politician involved named Ray Jones [J. Raymond Jones], he's dead now, and I asked him about managing this place over here, this big development.  Of course, I wasn't here at that time.  I was down on 35th Street.  And he said, no, can't do anything about it, so a friend of mine who's a politician said, why don't you talk to the mayor?  I said, okay.  So I set up a meeting and talked with the mayor.  He said, I can't help you.  That's the black politician project and I don't want to--I needed a vote on the board of estimate.  At that time, we didn't have a city council, we had a board of estimate.  And those who sat on there had a vote.  And the mayor, John Lindsay said I can't help you because that's the, the--that's the project that he's developed.  So that made me mad.  So then I took--I said, well I'm gonna get me a--get a firm, so I'll have more juice.  That's how I founded Webb & Brooker [Webb & Brooker Inc., New York, New York].  It used to be Webb, Brooks and Brooker--Webb, Brooks, Ellerman, and Brooker [ph.].  Then, the two partners fell out; well, they dropped out, left George Brooker and myself.  And what we decided to do at the time was, he worked the white community, I take the black community--and I'll tell you something, he was a master with the white community.  Because of that, we worked for a lot of banks; we got a lot of banks.  We worked for Byron Saving Bank [ph.], New York Bank for Saving [sic. New York Savings Bank, New York, New York], the Empire Saving Bank [Empire Savings Bank, New York, New York], we worked for about seven banks.  Because during those days when you had a property in the black neighborhoods, we got the jobs, sell it, lease it, rent it, whatever it was, the banks call you because the white brokers did not want to--the white bankers or the brokers did not wanna go in the--in the black communities.  So we used to work for the Prudential Life Insurance Company, all of them, all over Queens [New York], Brooklyn [New York], everywhere, so it was good business because it was racism and we got the, the tail end because of the racism, so that's what--now one of the things that kicked us off is--that made us a success during that period of time--
Speaker 2: So racism in that--this sense was of some benefit to, to you.
Speaker 1: It was a benefit in that respect because dealing with the population of the blacks, the white real estate people, the bankers didn't wanna deal with 'em at all, so we was the person that they turned to, to handle all their business that they might have.  It might not be a great deal, but when you take five banks or seven banks and a couple insurance companies, it's a whole lot of business.  You might get two deals from them, one from them and like that, but you got a whole lot of business like that.  So that's what started us off and kicked it--kicked Webb & Brooker off.  Then we, we got very popular.  We decided to hire a PR [public relations] firm to project the company.  If you notice on the wall out there, there's a cover of a, a white magazine, with what's on the cover. Well, this PR firm really pushed us into the white community, real estate community--
Story_ID: 304258
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, this PR [public relations] firm--and, and, and they projected our business, and that made the company [Webb & Brooker, Inc., New York, New York] move forward, too, real rapid, fast like that.  George [Brooker] became a member of the real--of the white real estate board here, and then he became a governor, and that's where the power of the real estate business in New York City [New York, New York] stand.
Speaker 2: This is George Brooker?
Speaker 1: George Brooker, he was the partner, just him and I.  And that's where the, the--that's where the power in the real estate (unclear) and it's a--it's a real estate board here.  And so George became a very powerful member of that, and we got some business from that, and we got a lot of recognition from that in the meantime.  So at that time, we had a lot of community groups up here and we handle most of the community groups.  And then I went on the board of--as I said, I was on the board of United Mutual [United Mutual Life Insurance Company; Metropolitan Life Insurance Company, New York, New York]. I became chairman of the board of United Mutual.  Then I went on Freedom National Bank [New York, New York] board, and I was involved with them.  And then I went on Fannie Mae's [Federal National Mortgage Association] board and Washington Advisory Board [Advisory Board Company, Washington, D.C.].  I, I was on the advisory board of Fannie Mae down there (unclear).  But as I said to you before, I decided to take the black community, so I mean, I got involved in the black organization, the black real estates, national real estate board.
Speaker 2: Now, there's a--do you--there's I think they're two different--the black real estate association is called--they, they could be called (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) NAREB [National Association of Real Estate Brokers].
Speaker 2: And they call themselves realters [sic. realtists].
Speaker 1: Realtors, that's right.
Speaker 2: And white ones are realtors, right?
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: That's right.  I became involved with the realtors down there.  George was on the--
Speaker 2: Can you explain to us the difference in the names and why they had to be different?
Speaker 1: Well, but they all associations and the government regulates them to a certain extent.  That, that realtor is a trade name that they, they had, so when the blacks wanted to organize nationwide, they couldn't say a realtor, they had to say a realtist--
Speaker 2: Realtist, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Realtist.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I became involved with that organization very heavy on a national level.  George was involved with the New York branch.  Then, he was on--he--then he became involved on a national level with, with the, the white side, so we had that, and that's what we decided we would do, and that's the way we worked it.  And on the, the national--on the--on the--on the realtor side, I was in Washington [D.C.] once a month, dealing with the problems of HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development] and all the, the problems that are associated with the black real estate communities throughout the United States.  And we got a lot of publicity out of that.  We got a lot of contact and things like that.  I used to know most, all the real estate brokers around--black real estate brokers around the country.  I knew all the black banks because I sat on the board of Freedom National Bank.  I knew most all the black bankers around the United States.  And so we got involved like that.  And George then moved the company in the white community up, and then he passed and that's where we are today.
Story_ID: 304259
Speaker 1: And the company's [Webb & Brooker, Inc., New York, New York] been in existence since 19--I think--what is--I don't remember now, but we're about thirty-two or thirty-three years old.  And we have been here--the company--I am the chairman now and I've been the chairman for years and--
Speaker 2: So the, the company was founded around 1969 or '70 [1970]?
Speaker 1: Seventy--1969 or '68 [1968].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The company was founded then.  The reason that, as I said when Floyd McKissick gave me the idea to collect the--so we started managing all of these buildings, managing 'em for the banks and the private and everything else.  We worked for the state when Times Square [New York, New York] was there.  We--Times Square--we--when, when Times Square was gonna do it all over, was that the--when it was a piece of gut down there, we went in there and when the city used eminent domain, we went in there, and every time the, the state would take a building, we'd manage it until they demolished it or sold it.  We took theaters and everything in Times Square.  We--for--we was down there twelve years just doing that.  I'm saying, just using one illustration what we done for Times Square.  We worked for the City of New York [New York] for years, you know.  So from legal wise, we had the political strength.  And we worked for the black churches like that, and so we've been very successful.  I would hope that the company would continue.  It's gonna be very difficult moving forward in the sense that someone will buy out.  The small real estate firms, white, black, really won't make it.  Because every--everything's big now.
Speaker 2: So, so you kind of like have to fend off the wolves, I guess--
Speaker 1: Well, we--in one sense, you do that because recently, Harlem [New York, New York] has become hot.  And now the large white real estate firms are moving their offices in Harlem and they, they, they won't be here long.  See, everybody thinks that Harlem--Harlem runs from 110th Street river to river to 155th Street, maybe 168th Street.  How much real estate can be in here?  The juice is downtown in, in Battery Park [New York, New York] where you see all--where you see Wall Street and you see--that's where the juice is.  I predict--one thing that you might be interested in when I'm dead and gone, I--you can--somebody read this tape, black people and poor people won't be in Harlem, twenty-five or thirty years from now.
Speaker 2: You don't think so?
Speaker 1: No.  The major problem now on that, and I said this for the historians, we got seven major housing projects.  You can't move those people.  But years ago all over the United States when they had the urban renewal program, they moved that.  All over the United States now, the inner city is where they got to develop and they gonna develop it.  And, and inner city means poor people, minorities, all type.
Speaker 2: Now, you know, almost thirty years ago, they started knocking down the projects in St. Louis [Missouri], Pruitt-Igoe was--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --imploded.
Speaker 1: Same thing.
Speaker 2: And then city after city, it's in Chicago [Illinois] now, all the Robert Taylor [Robert Taylor Homes, Chicago, Illinois], Stateway Gardens [Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 1: All that.
Speaker 2: --all these places are being knocked down.
Speaker 1: Knocked down.
Speaker 2: Darrow Homes [Clarence Darrow Homes, Chicago, Illinois] and--
Speaker 1: They all homes--
Speaker 2: Cabrini-Green [Cabrini-Green Homes, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: And that's what they gonna do.  They done in Newark [New Jersey], they gonna do here.  This gonna change because the population--what we need--what, what New York City needs, is they need a workforce to service the businesses down there, and they--and those workforces are coming from [New] Jersey, coming from Long Island [New York], out of--they wanna live here.  They don't wanna live out there.  And so, therefore, poor people who can't pay the rent and can't make a--make a--they won't be able to survive.
Speaker 2: Now you may know Dempsey Travis [HistoryMaker Dempsey J. Travis] in Chicago--
Speaker 1: I know him very well.
Speaker 2: --and one of the things (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is he still alive?
Speaker 2: Yes, sir, and he told us in 1980 when I--when I was working for Black Books Bulletin, at that time he told us that in the City of Chicago, the plan is to really--and it's long range plan--
Speaker 1: Oh, it's long--
Speaker 2: The plan is to remove those poor people to the suburbs--
Speaker 1: --Suburbs.
Speaker 2: --around Chicago--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --and it would--and he likened the scenario to Soweto [Johannesburg] in South Africa--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --where, where the people--the poor people would be on the outskirts, mostly black and Latinos--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --and they bus themselves in to catch a train in to do some waiting tables or whatever.
Speaker 1: Or whatever.
Speaker 2: And then--and then they'd (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Go back out.
Speaker 2: --be out by nightfall.
Speaker 1: By nightfall.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 304260
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) One of the things that, that, that I predict for the real estate industry, there, there will be no more--in twenty-five years, there'll be no more white funds or black funds.  I think that the young kids that's coming out of--out of (unclear) school or coming out of the large universities, that's gonna be finding themselves at inner city real estate business, they'll work for the large white real estate firms, and they--it will be no more.  Now, right now in New York City [New York, New York], we got young, young blacks now who work for mostly large, major real estate firms and on a nationwide base, so there will be no need--a small firm like us may not exist.  There may be a niche for 'em, but either we're going to grow.  For this--amazing thing that we have, we have some whites working for us here.  We got--well, our accountant is over there.  She's a white woman over there.  She's working for us.  They don't care who we work for if you paid that George Washington.  You know, used to be--there--it'd be a disgrace, say I go work for a black man, but now it don't matter.  If you--if you--if you got the money, you can pay people.  That's the same as any now--any culture here, they'll do that.
Speaker 2: You think--I mean, likewise, do you think things--there are opportunities opening up for black business people that didn't exist before?
Speaker 1: Yes I do.  I do.  If, if you go and look at the--you look at the structure now, we--that's, that's--there's four.  We got four major corporations, the CEO of, of people of color.  American Express [American Express Company], [Kenneth] Chenault, you got Time Warner [Time Warner Inc.], Parson [HistoryMaker Richard Parsons], you got Merrill Lynch, boy from Alabama [Stanley O'Neal] (laughter), he's there.  Who else we got?  We got another one, I don't know, but, but, but there's about--the four majors, and, and Sears and Roebuck's [Sears, Roebuck and Co.] just got a--just elevated a guy to run their shop.  So, the--things are gonna change now.  And I think that on the political structure, the races now is gonna blend more together than ever before.  I don't think--I--when I go south and--when I go to the South, I find that there's no--there's much more harmony among races than it is in the--in the North and in the East.  It's--it--I--and I think it's based on the fact that we live closer in the South together than we do here and we got different cultures in the Northeast where that in the South, the whites and blacks always live together.  So now when, when you remove the barrier of segregation, they live together anyway.  I go to Tuscaloosa, Alabama, I stay on the campus.  When I go to the college, I stay on the campus of the University of Alabama [Tuscaloosa, Alabama].  They have a hotel there.  Sheraton Hotel is on the campus and that's where the faculty stays--I mean, that's where the trustees stay because it's close to the--to the--to the college.  And they treat you over there--they don't think nothing about nothing over there.  So the idea is different.  Going to Birmingham, [Alabama] when Arrington [Richard Arrington, Jr.] was mayor, he used to be out at my--he used to be the dean at the Miles College [Fairfield, Alabama] when I was a trustee.  And then he--and then when we--when we had to get a new president, the CMN [ph.] brought in the minister and Arrington thought he should've have the job, so he left.  Then if he had been out there a year, he'd been president and he never would've been mayor of Birmingham.
Story_ID: 304261
Speaker 1: So you think Harlem [New York, New York] won't exist as it does now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: --twenty-five years from now.
Speaker 2: Twenty-five years, that won't be a Harlem.  There may be no Harlem in any of the southern city--any of the large cities.  They won't exist.
Speaker 1: In the population, is there a trend right now as to--in terms of where the population is going?  Is Harlem losing black population now or?
Speaker 2: Yeah, because the wealthy--well, let me--let's use the hip-hop crowd of kids that came outta the ghetto.  All of these hip-hop kids you see now for the last ten or twelve years, they, they came out of the ghetto.  [HistoryMaker] Russell Simmons came outta Queens, Jamaica [New York] over there, he's a big hop--hip-hop star guy.  You got this P. Diddy [Sean Combs] boy.  His mother [Janice Smalls] lived up in Mount Vernon [New York], is a little black town, and the mayor up there is black.  His mother was a bus driver, a school bus driver.  So do--would he--do, do he come to Harlem?  Do Russell Simmons build--buy a house in Harlem?  He buys one in the gated community over in [New] Jersey.  All the basketball players moved to--I'm sorry, all the basketball player moves up in Connecticut or they move over in Jersey.  They don't live in Harlem.  There's not a baseball player, not a basketball player, not a football player, not any star athlete lives in the Harlem community.  If he is, he's without my knowledge.  And he don't live nowhere (unclear) in Chicago [Illinois] on the South Side, you won't find any of 'em out there.
Speaker 1: You're right.
Speaker 2: Now, they make millions of dollars.  Let me explain this to you.  Where are they?  They don't support Harlem.  They don't come up at night.  They go downtown and they'll spend a thousand, two thousand dollars a night drinking down there with their friends and things in those restaurants down there and they won't come--they don't come to Harlem.  It's where--and they, they started out--they grew up into young adults poor and when he gets to be a millionaire and gets a lot of money, he don't wanna be with poor people no more.  This little boy, P. Diddy, I, I know him.  He, he, he gets on a plane and fly to Europe, and it's all over in Europe, all in the press.  He, he bought a house on Hampton [East Hampton, New York] out there.  He bought a apartment on Park Avenue [New York, New York] and paid $4 million for it.  They don't come and spend no money.  So the idea is gonna change.  Those kids--I have to--I, I have to admit this.  That's--I got that in my family.  I have a grandson who went to Notre Dame [University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, Indiana], was a star football player, Todd Lyght.
Speaker 1: Right.  I--yeah, Todd Lyght.
Speaker 2: Todd Lyght.
Speaker 1: He played--he played for the pros.  Didn't he--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he did.
Speaker 1: --play football for the--
Speaker 2: He played for the Rams [St. Louis Rams; Los Angeles Rams] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Rams, right.
Speaker 2: --for ten years, got the ring and then--and went and played for Detroit [Detroit Lions]. Todd Lyght, my grandson, where do he live?  He just built a brand new house out in California, about two millions dollars in, in one of them upscale neighborhoods out there.  He don't--he don't live in Watts [Los Angeles, California] or Compton [California].  He, he go--
Speaker 1: Or, or even Detroit [Michigan], you know?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) He don't live--he built a house out there and the, the difference is this.  He married a Chinese girl, her father and mother are interracial, is white and a Chinese, and she is married to--so they have a baby, a little baby, so it's no more of this here, you know, black folks.  He, he, he associating with, with, with, him and his wife with Chinese people, white people, white--black people, but he don't have any--you know, it used to be just we all associating together.  I just use him as an illustration.  He didn't move in the--when he was playing football, you know where he lived?  He was down in wherever the Rams was, but he lived in a white environment, built a house, paid to build a house a million and a half.  He didn't go over there to where the black folks as far as--he went over there and buy--now, my grandson went to Notre Dame.  When he come out, I say, why don't you come work for me?  He think that a joke.  Why don't you come over here and work for me, son?  He thinks that's a joke.  Actually, he don't wanna come out and say it, but this is the bridge that helped carry him to the--carry the cross.  He don't come out and say it, but he don't wanna work in Harlem, work in--I don't know what he gonna do, be a--I mean and announcer or something, but those kids don't come back to the--back to the community.  That's what it's gonna be all over the country.
Speaker 1: So you're saying the community is being--
Speaker 2: There's gonna be (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) There's no economic base for the community.
Speaker 2: It's gone.
Speaker 1: Those who make money don't live here.
Speaker 2: Don't live here.  And the second thing, on the political structure, we was powerful, and that's what we got--that's why you got Harold--Harold Washington out there is mayor because of the black population.  You got black mayors here because of that.  That's gonna change.  That's gonna change.  And there--you got a kid going to--down to Washington [D.C.], now in the [U.S.] Senate.  They use--they, they been makin'--the Democrats been making a big deal outta that.
Speaker 1: Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama].
Speaker 2: Yeah, but you had the guy up here and Boston [Massachusetts] down there vote him--whatever the--I can't remember.
Speaker 1: Ed Brooke [HistoryMaker Edward Brooke].
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So the idea, all that's gonna change.  It's gonna be a new day.  You--you'll be here perhaps.  I won't, but you'll live to see it.
Speaker 1: Well, do you think it's gonna be good or bad?  I mean, what's your--
Speaker 2: I think it'll be for the best.  I think that we need the culture to become more tolerant of each other.
Story_ID: 304262
Speaker 1: What else you wanna know about me (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Okay.  Let's see, I--
Speaker 1: I can tell you some of the things (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: --that I--I've done that might make you--might be of interest to you.
Speaker 2: Well, we were talk--okay, we were talking about the black--well, go, go, go ahead.  I do have a couple things here I know, but--
Speaker 1: All right.  Well, I was saying that I have an interest and I think that, that one of the things that we, we--that the, the American black person should do is that we are--we are losing, is that we don't have kids that seem to be interested in education like they used to do, you know, South.  Where everybody wanted their kid to get an education and go to college, nowadays, we want instant fame and, and finance because of the fact that the--I think the hip-hop cultures have said that you don't need to do this or you need to do that.  You don't need an education, just need to be able to entertain, be an entertainer, and therefore you'll be a millionaire.  And the ultimate goal is that in America now with the minority kids, is let me see how much money I can accumulate or how much I can make so I can live the good life.  He doesn't realize that you get a certain amount of side effects when you can contribute to society as a whole in other respects.  So that's one of the things that we're going through a period of time right now.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that people are more concerned with getting paid than they are--
Speaker 1: Getting paid and, and being on TV and living the good life by having a lot of money.  We, I find, are not great in giving.  We, we are--we are not a giving nation.  We only give to the churches, but we do not support any institution, white, black, blue or brown, because the Civil Rights Movement, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] for example, well, it'll go out of business, Urban League [National Urban League], there's two of the organizations we have.  They didn't get support from--other than if the blacks in this country had to support 'em, they'd be out of business tomorrow.  'Cause they don't do the work--or the Red Cross [American Red Cross], for example.  The Red Cross have everybody nationwide, citywide, the Red Cross, is to help in a disaster and there's a need.  We have--all of these supposed to be able to uplift blacks at the Civil Rights Movement.  The Civil Rights Movement in my judgment at this period in time is dead.  I don't think we need a Civil Rights Movement anymore.  All you got to do is stop being all Democrats, for example, and some of 'em being a Republican, some being a Democrat.  You have access.  And Bush [President George Walker Bush] is very smart.  Did you notice he put the faith-based in there?  And all the preachers now that used to listen to Jesse [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson], he's going with Bush so he get that faith-based money and he can do something for his church or his, his community.
Story_ID: 304263
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community in light of some of the--there's still I think the, the highest cancer death rate is from black people.  We have the highest incarceration rate amongst any other group.
Speaker 2: That's a major problem.
Speaker 1: We have like the--more health problems--
Speaker 2: I agree with that.
Speaker 1: --educational problems and--than any other group.  I mean, we have--you know, we--
Speaker 2: Well, let me ask you a--
Speaker 1: Lowest income, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Does civil rights have anything to do with any of this or?
Speaker 2: Let, let me ask you a question as the--since you're interviewing me.  You asked if we have more problems with the prisoners' population.
Speaker 1: Yeah, there's more black (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Why do you think--
Speaker 1: --people in prison.
Speaker 2: Don't you think that it's--that's a problem, it's our problem?
Speaker 1: Is it?
Speaker 2: I mean, not, not, not mankind--it is the parents and our problem in this sense.  One of the greatest problem, how do we turn our population around with the prison system?  Because every young man wants to be a rap star.  If he doesn't wanna be a rap star, he wants to be a hoodlum, but he wants to achieve money to get material things so that he might live the good life, that he thinks is the good life.  He does not want to educate himself to be anything--to make a contribution any other way.  And he doesn't worry about that.  He wants to--he's on a--wanna be on the fast track and ends up in jail.  So my position is that we as elders is doing something wrong because we don't look at this problem.  We leave the problem to somebody else.  Because when we get wealthy, for example, all the entertainers, we shouldn't have a problem--and, and I look at the basketball player on TV the other night, when he--his attitude is that, you know, I'm--here's a kid, makes--he, he just lost I think the paper said $6 million.  For some people, black people, in a lifetime, they'll never make $6 million in their whole lifetime.  He throws it away.  Why?  Because he feels that you need me.  You don't need him in--to entertain.  Someday, we won't--hip-hop will go off the scene like everything else.  There'll be something else on the scene.  And if he doesn't really know how to invest his money or how to keep some of it, he'll be poor and he'll die as a poor man.  One of the problems that we have as, as families, I think we have lost a sense of direction.  We do not concern ourselves as where do the children--how I raised my children.  In Harlem [New York, New York], we have children--a woman across the street, a little kid about this high, about, about ten, twelve years old, black woman looks at the grandmother, looking at--look up and say, come on here you little (unclear) or something and use a foul language.  So what do you think's gonna happen when that child grows up?  So some time, I don't know, I think we will re-find ourselves, but I think that we gonna have to understand for us to, to make a contribution to society which is multiracial, we gonna have to improve on the conduct of the parents to--with the children.
Story_ID: 304264
Speaker 1: You say Harlem's [Harlem, New York, New York] gonna be empty of black folks in about twenty-five years, but--so why are you still here? You've got a, you know, as you said you got a tie, you got some employees, you know, you seem to be doing well, why don't you just move downtown and make the money downtown?
Speaker 2: Well, it's two reason.  The young adults here, the offices of this company [Webb & Brooker, Inc., New York, New York] I think would like to do that.  The reason that I-
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay.  You got the questions?  Okay, what happened is that I think the young executives here in this company would, would like that to a point.  However, some years ago, Chase [JPMorgan Chase & Co.] is our lead bank, and we collect the rents from all of these buildings that we manage for people and then those--a little few, we might own, and like that.  And when you put it all in a pot, you got a lot of money.  No whoever you put that money in the bank, you carry a little juice.  So Chase is our lead bank, so we don't carry a heavy amount of juice, just a little bit of juice because our little millions is, is minor compared--when we had Freedom National Bank [New York, New York], we were the big boys in the bank 'cause we had more money.  We kept more money.  Every day, we had more money in the bank than the damn bank owners.  But the idea is this. My Chase banker about ten years ago said to me one day, why don't you move downtown and get a prestigious address?  I said, I'll think about it.  Later on, he came back to me about a year later, said, you ever really think about moving downtown with--to get your prestige--you need a prestigious address.  I don't wanna tell him what was in the back of my mind, but I'll tell you what was in my mind.  If I move downtown in the Empire State Building [New York, New York] on the twelfth floor, nobody see me.  But every day, I walk out of that door, out on that corner down here, and that corner over there, and that corner over there, I put the uniform on, that's collar and tie and a suit, I walk that way with--every day.  I--my employees got to come dressed.  There's no casual.  You, you come looking like that.  You know why?  There's a high--a, a junior high school across the street, all these schools around here.  They--all they do is see the, the--with the pants hanging on their hips, hat turned around, and all these different things.  I don't have that.  They have got to learn and see somebody--if I, I can tomorrow morning let the--let the staff dress that way and if a tenant come in out there and raising hell about a rent and you call the police, they don't know who, who was in charge 'cause they all look alike out there.  But now, if he comes in there, he knows somebody's in charge 'cause you come out looking like you're in charge by your dress; that's number one.  Number two, you made a--you--in your question, you asked something.  I got the--as long as I'm in the ghetto, I have the juice.  The mayor calls me.  The governor calls me.  Everybody calls me.
Speaker 1: So it hasn't changed yet.
Speaker 2: Ain't changed yet.  So right now, it's to my advantage to be here from a political standpoint.
Story_ID: 304265
Speaker 1: Conversely, could some of these young guys that are here with you go into--go downtown as black (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And work for a large white firm.
Speaker 1: Well, could they--could they opt--could they be successful as a black firm downtown?
Speaker 2: Well, let me say it this way.
Speaker 1: I mean, as a black firm in terms of having the firm owned by black people, most of the employees are black, could that work downtown?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but you see, the problem--the problem--it, it, it would work in another city other than here.  New York City's [New York, New York] a mecca, financial districts here; it's a mecca.  He could go to a town like Newark [New Jersey] and move downtown and he could make it, but for, for--to go downtown here, the way the real estate industry work in a lot of--I don't know whether anybody ever thought of this, but Larry Silverstein owned the World Trade Center [New York, New York] and Larry Steen is the Jewish faith.  Larry--Larry Silverstein when he gets ready to hire lawyers, a battery of lawyers, he hires lawyers that are in the Jewish faith.  When he gets ready to hire architects, he hires architects in the Jewish faith, and might be a few in there, but the majority of the Jewish faith and it's a Jewish faith company.  If he gets ready to hire a contractor to rebuild World Trade Center, he is--he, he will hire--maybe I'm another--I just remember this, but the bulk of the money goes back to the Jewish community.  So his insurance broker is gonna be his cousin.  His architect is gonna be his aunt's son.  His banker is gonna be his grandfather's son.  And so when you look at it, that money flows back to the same pot in a sense of speaking.  So that's where we as blacks don't do that.  We don't--we don't make the money go back to the same pot.  It goes out, never come back.  So the thing that--for me to move from here, I would lose my political base, I guess, influence base, I guess, and the most important thing, I believe that if all the little black businesses like Earl Graves [HistoryMaker Earl G. Graves, Sr.] Black Enterprise, Brian Lewis [ph.] little thing, his little thing, and Ed Lewis [HistoryMaker Edward Lewis] with the Essence magazine little thing, and all the other little things, if we was all up here, we would be a powerful, powerful fighter and could affect this city if we were that way.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, you know, the Jewish community is held together by religion and--
Speaker 2: That's what I'm saying.
Speaker 1: --a sense of historical destiny.
Speaker 2: They--that--that's it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but, but we don't all have the same religion--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --necessarily, but--
Speaker 2: We don't have that teaching.
Speaker 1: --but the, the idea that we all have the same political destiny, that's something we could have, but it doesn't seem like something we do have--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --right now.
Speaker 2: And one of the problems as I said is that basically most of the organizations stay in one political party when we should be half in this part, half in that part.  If there's an independent party, put some over there.  If there's another party, put some over there.  So whoever has power, we have access.
Speaker 1: And we could work on behalf of the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Of the--of the--
Speaker 1: --black community and different--
Speaker 2: As a whole.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 304266
Speaker 1: Now this is a perfunctory question we ask (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: --and you've already asked most--answered most of this, but I'll ask it anyway.  What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Moving forward, I would--I believe that if Mrs. Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton], for example, became president of--ran for president of the United States, I believe she could ask Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] to run on her ticket as the vice president and he would be accepted by the American people, and that's how far we have advanced.  And I think we'll go far beyond that.  When Bush [President George Walker Bush] appointed him the secretary of state, the most powerful job outside of the president of the United States, and the most powerful job in the cabinet, we as a minority black people did not give him the (unclear), we did not think it was great.  All we said, well I, I don't know.  Then when--here's a man, principal, well qualified, he was accepted by the white community, Spanish community, every other community appraise [sic. praised] him.  Black people did not.  Black press, black leaders did not.  Why?  Because they're all over the Democrat ticket and following Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson].  And when Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] was in there, Jesse Jackson had access.  Vernon Jordan [HistoryMaker Vernon E. Jordan, Jr.] is a personal friend of mine; he has access.  Now that they don't have access, so if some--if, if Jesse had been for example in--and, and Vernon had been over with Bush, we'll have access right on.
Speaker 1: But, but don't you think that they--that there was a--the distance between the black leadership and Colin Powell had something to do with the policies of the Bush administration and the--
Speaker 2: I, I, I--like I said, it's--Colin Powell is a--is, is a soldier, number one, served all over Europe, all over the world in one sense, headed up world organizations.  When he came back here, he did not look at the community that I come from a black community.  He looked at it, I'm American, I served in our country as a soldier and I--and he did not align himself with the black causes or white causes or Spanish causes, he, he just says I don't align there.  And I think that he represent what we gonna have going forward in the future.  This Condoleezza Rice girl is--you'll find that you got three of four major sororities, black organizations, women organizations kind of of--they don't invite her.  Why?  Why wouldn't she be invited to United Negro College Fund?
Speaker 1: Well I think you, you kind of answered the question by saying that she doesn't consider herself as representing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She doesn't.
Speaker 1: --those people, so why would they invite her?
Speaker 2: Because why would you--
Speaker 1: If she's saying--
Speaker 2: Well then, if she--why would you invite Bush?  He--because he represents American people.  She represents American people.  She doesn't represent black people, she represents American people.  And when--why do we (unclear) invite Bush?  He don't represent us.  He's the president.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: She is a, a--is the advisor to the president on foreign affairs, so why couldn't--she don't have to--I--she don't establish that I, I represent black people, she says I represent American people.  What's wrong with that?  She's still color, color of her skin.  I'm not talking about her brains, her skin color.  And then she--Colin Powell doesn't go around and say that I represent black people.  He says I represent the American people.  When he goes to Europe and speak to other countries or other ambassadors or whoever it might be, he doesn't represent no black people.  He represents--he's American.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but, still there's a question of policy and, you know, some of the things--
Speaker 2: He followed the policies of the president.  If you work for him, you got to follow--if somebody out here worked for me and don't do what--do it like I want, I fire 'em.  I sign their check, indirectly, you know, the machine signs it, but I, I sign their check.
Story_ID: 304267
Speaker 1: But still, there's a question raised about if the--those policies are, are--
Speaker 2: Whether they're good?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, if you don't agree with Bush [President George Walker Bush] policy, for example, and you think that he, he--he's not good for the country as a whole, then that's one set of problem.  If you think that he's not good for me because I'm of color and the colored don't participate, well that's another problem you have to look at.  My position is I follow whoever's in power because I need to--I got--on this--my payroll just in this office [of Webb & Brooker, Inc., New York, New York], twenty-seven people.  They depend on that check to take care of their family.  I don't pay the little salaries, I pay big salaries, and I give 'em health benefits that I pay for.  They don't participate in it.  I pay for the health benefits, so if I got those people here, I can't say on Friday hold your check 'cause the rent's due on the first, wherever they live.  They got children that go to school; you gotta buy food.  So if anybody would have to suffer, it would have to be me.  I can't afford to keep--I have to--the--I have to--I have to instill in black people, when you work for me--I'm like Chase Bank [JPMorgan Chase & Co.] 'cause they always would be nervous that maybe they won't get paid Friday.
Speaker 1: You got that right (laughter).
Speaker 2: So my reputation (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They, they would be--they would become nervous.
Speaker 2: My, my reputation is that you work for Webb [HistoryMaker Eugene Henry Webb], you work for Chase; it's simple as that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: You have to--and you have to indoctrinate these kids with that, come out of these neighborhoods 'cause they, they--when they come here, they look around, say wonder if we gonna get paid Friday?  I don't have that.  I been--in thirty-seven years, never missed a payroll, never held a check. I don't do that.
Story_ID: 304268
Speaker 1: But you're suggesting that we, we outta be more pragmatic in terms of power relationships is what you're saying (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think we should be--I think going forward right now, in my generation we did not have the opportunity.  In my generation, we all tried to get an education.  This generation now just try how fast can I get rich and they're stupid, so I'm, I'm predicting that in an interview like this, what you're, you're, you're doing for the historian fifty years from now, you said, Webb [HistoryMaker Eugene Henry Webb], are you concerned how the historian would treat you fifty years from now?  I guess you never heard a black man say, like, you got to be a educated guy and a history major or something like that who looks out and say, well how will the--during this period of time, how will the historian treat Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell]?  Or how would a--the, the historian treat this president, you see?  If you look at the two--I'll give you an illustration what I mean.  Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] is, is not well respected and everybody say he was a bad, one-term president, this and that, but I'll say this about Jimmy Carter, fifty years from now, the historian is gonna, gonna treat him well.
Speaker 1: Well he, he gets respect on some--when he got--
Speaker 2: He, he--
Speaker 1: --the Nobel Prize [Nobel Peace Prize]--
Speaker 2: He got the Nobel--
Speaker 1: --and--when he was in--
Speaker 2: But right now, the politicians and American public do not give--and the--and the media does not give him the proper respect, but fifty years from now, the historian will treat him well; you can believe that.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: This man does--he goes all over the world doing, doing calls for, for mankind, and when fifty years, now when they look back at this period, you gonna say, okay, well how will they treat Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]?  They will treat him the same way 'cause when you're a martyr like he is, the historian look at that, you know, and, and why was you assassinated.  So when you look for it fifty years from now and why you're doing your story here for, for, for the generation to follow, you're saying to me, what do you say to the generation, Webb, fifty years from now for this period of time?  'Cause he's the one's gonna judge you.  Is that right?  And the historian's gonna look at your--at your--at your TV camera and your film and he's gonna say, what did that black guy say in Harlem [New York, New York] on such and such a day?
Story_ID: 304269
Speaker 1: You're a complicated person and as, as I toured your office with you and I know you appeared on a, a film, 'Harlem on My Mind,' [sic. 'I Remember Harlem'] the William Miles film, you, you love this community, I believe, and--
Speaker 2: I, I--as--I love this because I believe that for me to move out of Harlem [New York, New York] among the people, the poor people, that I must stand just as a rock, maybe a little shining rock, but a rock so that those kids out there--all of 'em grew up me in these houses--these houses around here.  All the houses I manage. That I might own or manage for others, these kids grew up with me.  They know me.  They know what I look like and they know I'm in Harlem 'cause Momma [Docia Foster Webb] come here to pay the rent, I--mail the rent to me here.  I walk into these buildings and I--and, and the--and they all grew up with me.  And before you go, I'm gonna show you the pictures where I used to--we adopted a school across there--I used to send the kids to Washington [D.C.].  When Cyrus Vance was here, I sent 'em to him because he was a friend and he would let 'em come to his office and they'll, they'll spend the day with his office.  Mrs. Vance [Grace Sloane Vance] used to be with the [New York] Urban League up here.  I adopted a school over there.  Because if you go into my background, it was Momma and me and my brothers.  And in Harlem, a lot of these women got two and three kids by different men and they are kids themselves.  They are seventeen and eighteen years old and they got two babies by two different fellas.  And they--and, and, and the mother was on welfare and now they on welfare.  And that's why Knoxville College [Knoxville, Tennessee] is a school that's a work program.  That's why I give the time and the money to Knoxville College because there's a work program.  I have three kids--I have about five kids went through Stillman [Stillman College, Tuscaloosa, Alabama], that I've sent to Stillman.  I sent 'em there.  I have a scholarship fund set up for Stillman.  I--
Speaker 1: You also had some deep concerns about black colleges [HBCUs] not being in exist--in existence and--
Speaker 2: Well, I, I, I--the reason I--
Speaker 1: --the private black colleges (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The reason I--
Speaker 1: --or those founded--
Speaker 2: --reason I--
Speaker 1: --by the black churches.
Speaker 2: Yeah, reason I--reason I'm concerned, because these kids are out here, they may knowing how to do a--turn a computer on and maybe a wizard on there, but he won't be able to spell, he won't be able to do math, he won't be able to think.  You see, one of the problems out there you got to keep in mind now, the kids now buy computer and he learns how to do the computer, but he don't have to spell anymore because he got spellcheck on there.  And then the second thing on that computer, he don't have to add.  He get a machine and it adds for him.  If you went into the grocery mart--super market right now, you go out to checkout counters, if you think those kids behind there could, could subtract that money fast, that machine, they just punch it, then they put the dollar amount in, then this machine says give 'em (unclear).  Do you think they even knew in their mind years ago--the, the kids do that by--in their mind?  They don't do that no more; it's a machine.  And that's why I said, all those out there, he's going to jail.  How do we change the prison population?  We may not.
Story_ID: 304270
Speaker 1: I've hired kids out of the prison population.  I have a building down here; we have two narcotic centers in there, a methadone program center they call.  These kids here that work--these guys work here don't wanna go in there.  I go in there every day, any day I want.  I manage that building myself personally.  You know why?  I go down there and I get on the elevator and them junkies get on there, and sometimes I--and, and this building is spotless.  And you know what I make the men--I watch the men down there, but I make 'em clean that building like the--like the--like (unclear)--what, what is the guy's name, said you sweep the stress like--so it would be like--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --whatever, what--I make them clean that building.  I make them respect them junkies down there.  They come in there getting their medication like that.  But I go in the building.  There's only Spanish down there, a few whites, and a whole lot of blacks.  And I--and on Saturday, I have to go down there sometime when they having a problem.  They lined up to get that 'cause they close that--I have to have a police car sit out there, keep 'em in line, they'll tear the door down, and like that.  But, see, I don't have a problem going down there.  I'm from Alabama.  I was raised down there.  Those are my people, but they are sick.  And I don't--I'm not ashamed of 'em and not afraid of 'em.  See, a lot of black people--see, see a lot of wealthy black fellas are scared to come to Harlem [New York, New York].  I have a doctor friend of mine, told me I wouldn't drive my car to Harlem.  I don't come to--he's on the TV--he's on, on the national TV, and he said to the interviewer, don't ask me nothing about Harlem.  I know nothing about Harlem.  I don't go to Harlem.  I go down to East River Drive, West River Drive, so don't ask me nothing about Harlem.  He's ashamed of Harlem.  I'm not--these are my people out here.  I don't have to be ashamed of 'em whether they good, bad or wrong, these are my people.  And I'm--and I don't lock my door out there and I ain't got no guy sitting with a gun out there 'cause everybody know, this is Webb [HistoryMaker Eugene Henry Webb].
Speaker 2: Yeah, this is a community where if people know you and respect you, they don't bother you, right?
Speaker 1: They know that.  I'm like that preacher, I told you, had to go to Reverend Taylor [Reverend C.H. Taylor].  Everybody want--everybody come in here, can't pay the rent.  I say you took your money and you gambled it away, I'm gonna put you out.  You go down to see, they give you some--they'll give you a check for the next month's rent, that you learned your lesson.  Other than that, I'm gonna put you in the street.  I'm--I have to be disciplining but I don't have a problem being in here.  And then I'll tell you something that's most important before you close your interview, everybody lives off of poor people, the wealthy people, the, the, the managers, that--those are the upper middle class y'all call the middle class, their the managers of the mass of the poor people, and not just black people, poor people.  And you know what we've done now for you?  We give you a charge card and make you a slave.  You don't--you just--you just wait for that and pay 18 percent.  Don't pay me all of--give me ten dollars and then pay--and then you pay 18 percent so you're safe, but everybody lives off of poor people.  And then the wealthy people got the upper class, the managers that I call 'em, that manage the masses, about 80 percent of the people are poor, and then they got 10 percent or 15 percent managing those 80 percent, and then they got the 5 percent super wealthy up there.
Story_ID: 304271
Speaker 1: Now what I was getting at before, though, was you've, you've done a lot of different things.  You've had a complicated kind of existence here, and you--you've even offered free rent to the, the, the embassy of the country Chad, right?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: When they couldn't pay their--
Speaker 2: And let me tell you about them.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: They put--the white real estate broker downtown putting--was putting 'em out.  They had no place to go.  He called me and said, "Webb [HistoryMaker Eugene Henry Webb], they got to go to their own place."  I said, "Can you put out the embassy?  I'm puttin' them out."  I went to the road to the ambassador, went down there and told them about, you ain't got no place to go? Come to Harlem [New York, New York] and I'll put you in a--one of my buildings and give you free rent for a year. I just said that.  You know what he told me?  I don't--I don't take often to a black community and landlord put him out.  And when he--'cause his government couldn't afford to pay.  I've had that instance.  We worked the UN [United Nations].  I, I said to the UN--I used to go in the UN, I used to--the ambassadors, I used to entertain 'em up here.  They'll come up here if you got some women for 'em, the men, but when they move their office up there, they wanna be downtown in a white building.  They feel empowered down there.  That's because it was--come out of (unclear), you know, they--when, when the slavery, when they was a occupied country by the British or France and Germany, so they feel like if you're down there with him, they got more power.  I don't have a problem with that, see?  And a lot of the fellas down there, years ago, I used to say, all them black guys, move you all--let's all us stay in Harlem.  Nah, I'm going downtown.
Story_ID: 304272
Speaker 1: I'm not gonna call this fella's name, but I was on Fannie Mae's [Federal National Mortgage Association] board, advisory board, and I was in Fannie Mae in Washington [D.C.], sitting there in the board meeting, they brought in a advertising group from New York [New York] 'cause they gonna do a special campaign nationwide.  So I was sitting there, so I said to the guy, "Do you have any black publications?"  "Oh, no, this is nationwide, Mr. Webb [HistoryMaker Eugene Henry Webb]," he says, "and we want to--there's no black publication newspaper that go nationwide so we can't use any of them."  I say, "Is that right?"  I said, "Well, let me--just a minute"--you know how they put the people around the wall behind and I said, "Get me Earl Graves [HistoryMaker Earl G. Graves, Sr.], Black Enterprise.  Get me Earl Graves on the telephone."  So they went out and then the phone--you, you know, you got the long beautiful table and you got a phone right there and you got everything like that, and you, you think you a big shot because you at Fannie Mae, you know, and you're doing all--got all this money and they give you a little check every month, you know, when you go down there.  So anyway, I got Earl Graves on the phone.  I said, "Earl, this is Webb."  He said, "Yeah.  I said, do you--you go nationwide."  I knew what he done, I said, "You go nationwide, don't you?"  He said "Yeah."  I said "Hold it"--I said "Hold just a minute."  I said, "This guy says the Black Enterprise goes nationwide."  He said, "Well I don't know about Black"--I mean, he might have not.  I said, "It's a black magazine in New York and I want to take out the center page."  That mean when you open the magazine up to the center page, he got this side and that side.  I said, "Earl, how much does that center page cost?"  I think he said seven thousand dollars or something like that, I don't know what it--and I told that--now, that was a--what, what he was gonna do in [The] New York Times and these national papers was going to be a whole lot more.  So I said--he said--so the, the chairman up there said, "Oh, that's no problem, Webb.  We, we, we--as long as we running campaign, run that--run that--what's, what's the name of that mag--Black Enterprise, run it in there."  Now, some years later, about two years later, Earl called me and said, well they not gonna--oh, the black--the white boy called me and said, "Listen, Webb, I got a problem."  I said "What's your problem?"  He said, "I'm getting a call from this guy, Earl Graves.  He's saying--he's threatening that he's gonna write something about Fannie Mae and ain't gonna put him in the paper."  I said, well--I called Earl, he says, "Well I'm just trying to get another" (laughter), you know what I'm saying.  I called him back, but I said, "Give him another one and tell him this is gonna be the last time."  But, you know, that's the way we have to work with another like that.  And Earl's been very successful, you know, over the years with his Black Enterprise, where other little papers, magazines are folding.  He's a good business man.
Story_ID: 304273
Speaker 1: When you look back on all the things that you've done, is there any major thing that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I, I had opportunities when I was starting this business [Webb and Brooker, Inc., New York, New York].  If I'd done things different, I would've been able to accumulate more wealth and been able to make a greater contribution and, and distribute that wealth when I look back at it.  I look at--it's a lot of things.  For example, I had a foursquare--a bank came to me and we bought from the bank on a real cheap price of the Dunbar Apartments which is a landmark in Harlem [New York, New York].  And we bought it and the black people--I wanted to turn it into a co-op.  Black people up there jumped up and rebelled against it and they had formed a tenant league and everything.  And I said I'm gonna sell you the apartment for five hundred dollars down and, I don't know, about five thousand dollars.  I had--run the numbers on them, that's why we came--something in that area.  Black people up there organized there with the--there was a--there was a Catholic church up there, a priest.  This is a full scale block; it's about three hundred apartments.  Dunbar is a landmark in Harlem.  And the priest--there's a meeting at the church.  So they had--when we took the building, the bank had violation on 'em, so they went to the billing department and they took, took us into court, Brooker went to court.  And this church said, if you don't do this and do that, I'm gonna put you in jail.  And I went up there and tried to talk to those black people and you know what the guy up in the church, church--they had the meeting in the church up there, it's right up street here, the guy said, "You think you're Donald Trump."  I said, "What difference does it make if I think I'm Donald Trump?  What difference does it make?"  "Well you wanna get rich."  I said, what did--, "I want you to own the building.  Someday, you won't be able to live here unless you own it."  So I found out we couldn't do anything with the tenants, so I call the bank, say, "I'm gonna sell the building or you take it back."  The bank practically gave it to me because I worked for the bank.  I mean, we worked for the bank and so it was just--was--came up and they say--and, and the guys, the senior vice president, Charlie Morgan [ph.], said, "Webb [HistoryMaker Eugene Henry Webb], we'll give it to you for a little of nothing."  So I told 'em take it back.  I regret that.  I should've kept it, for this reason--and made it turn into a co-op.  And, and don't I--but my theory was, I don't have no time to waste on a bunch of stupid black people who don't understand the value of owning something.  That's one of the things I, I--things like that I might've made a mistake and regret.  But when that judge told he gonna put Brooker in jail, I said, I won't let--I won't--I won't--we won't take that and have no judge threatening us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was a mistake.  I should've kept it.  And then--and, and said, to hell with the judge.  If he wants to put somebody in jail, I--I've got enough lawyers that work for me that I be out--I won't--I won't spend one hour in jail.  Then when you go down there, all they can do is fine me, and if you fine me, if you give me thirty days, I think I'm man enough to do thirty days.  I never been to jail so I don't know that I could do thirty days or not (laughter).
Story_ID: 304274
Speaker 1: Likewise when you look back over your life and all the things you've done, I know you've received many awards.  You got the Frederick Douglass Award from the [New York] Urban League and, and many other awards. What, what would you consider at this point to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Explain what you mean by legacy (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, you know, what, what are the things that you left behind you think that will like stand the test of time, that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'll, I'll tell you what--
Speaker 1: --would be a real contribution--
Speaker 2: Let me--
Speaker 1: --to the community.
Speaker 2: Let me say what I, I, I believe and what I think.  I told you I sent about five kids through college that there.  I use this as illustration one and this is what I hope that would be my legacy.  A young man came in here to see me and asked me could he be a real estate salesperson.  I said, "You go to school?"  He said, "No, I've been to high school.  I finished high school."  I said, "Why didn't you go to college?"  "Well, I, I didn't have no money.  My family don't have no money."  I said, "What do you do now?"  He said, "I'm a orderly in a hospital.  I mean, I mop the floors and things like that."  I said, yeah.  I said, "Well then, do you have a car?"  "Oh, yeah, Mr. Webb [HistoryMaker Eugene Henry Webb], I just bought a new car."  I said, "'Cause you'll need a car in the real estate business, go around showing properties, things like that."  "Oh, I got a brand new car."  And I looked at him, I said, "How old are you?"  He say, "I'm twenty."  Yeah, I said, "I'll tell you what I want you to do.  You wanna work for me?"  He said, "Yeah, I've heard about you, Mr. Webb, and I wanna work for you."  I said, "Okay, you have to have a college degree, a college education to work for me.  Here's what I'm gonna do.  You go back home.  You, you not married or anything?" "No."  "You go back home and tell your momma and daddy that Mr. Webb said he gonna send me to college, but I got to sell my car and give up my job, and see what they think about it."  He goes, "Well my daddy and momma's not together."  I said, "Yeah?  Where's your momma?"  "Momma lives up here, Daddy live in Harlem [New York, New York] as a mechanic."  I said, "Okay.  I tell you what I want you to do.  I want you to go there and tell your daddy that Mr. Webb wants you to go to college and he'll give you a job.  Second thing, I want you to sell the car 'cause you can't care the car--the car--'cause you can't pay the notes.  The other thing, I want you to tell your daddy, come see me with him--with you."  He came back, brought momma, not daddy.  And I said, he's bright, why don't--I--she's says what?  "Why you gonna send my son to college?"  I said, "I'm gonna get him a scholarship from the school."  "Oh."  I guess she couldn't understand the motive.  Why would you spend money to send my, my son to school, so momma come to see me 'cause she might've thought that it was a trick or something wrong.  I could've been (unclear) or anything, you know.  So she says, oh.  So I told her, I said, "I want you and your son to write to the college president, tell 'em Mr. Webb, and that he's--he wants to come to college there, get his grades from the high school, send them down there, and tell--and then--that you got his train fare to get him down there and everything, and can--how much can you send him?"  She, "Well, I can send him about fifty dollars a month."  I said, "Then he's gonna have--I'm gonna get him a little job down there, but he's gonna get a scholarship.  'Cause I have a--I have a scholarship fund set up."  That kid went there and finished at the top of his class, this young man.  Then he went to Auburn [Auburn University, Auburn, Alabama].  There was a--there was a, a white math teacher been at, at, at that college.  She was a Presbyterian nun that--like that.  And he left there and went to Auburn and stayed two years.  He's bright.  He now--he didn't finish.  He's getting--he was getting a grad degree from Auburn.  He--she paid for that, for him to go down there 'cause she put him in there.  But I--my scholarship fund took him to the college.  He married and got a child and he teaches school in Baltimore [Maryland].  He every now--about every year, I get a Christmas card from him.  I changed his life.  He was mopping the floor, big car.  He's now--has an undergraduate degree, graduate degree, teaches in Baltimore.  I haven't seen him, but he sends me a card every year.  I use him as an illustration.  He will, I would hope help somebody like I helped him.  I would hope that he would say, that kid that--he's, he's in a academic ward as a teacher.  I would hope that him and his wife would say--and he got a couple kids himself I understand.  He told--he sent me some pictures.  And I would hope that he would say, I'm gonna help another kid.
Story_ID: 304275
Speaker 1: One more story like that.  The president of the Stillman College [Tuscaloosa, Alabama] done a tour in the Caribbean, and he--and he brought a student back, not one, about three of four students that--invited 'em to come to college.  And he walked in the board room and said, you know, I got something for you, Mr. Webb [HistoryMaker Eugene Henry Webb], being all smart like.  I got a student for you.  When he said that, that was your student.  You paid for it 'cause that what his thing.  He gave trustees a student that he felt they paid for it.  This girl came from St. Kitts [St. Kitts and Nevis] no money, sent her through there.  She graduated, went on and got a graduate degree from them.  She came to New York [New York]--after she graduated, she, she came to New York.  She told me she wanted to get--'cause we have a relationship, Stillman College with NYU [New York University, New York, New York].  She came here with no clothes.  I had my wife [Danna Wood Webb], not me, I told my wife to take her shopping, buy a winter coat and clothes.  We got her a room in--my wife went and got a room in the concourse.  The reason I let my wife do it, because some time young girls think that having sex with an old man, he'll help me.  I didn't do that.  I let my wife do it.  That young woman now is at the UN [United Nations] representing her government.  She came to see me about six months ago.  She's down there.  She lives in the Bronx [New York].  While--but she, she, she lives in St. Kitts, but she represent--she represents our government at the UN.  She came up here because she's with one of the political parties that she wanted me to see, could I give a--I, I don't give--I can't give contributions to an outside like that.  But I'm proud of her.  I've--I took her, paid for her, bought her clothes, at least I didn't buy 'em, my wife bought 'em.  You know, I didn't go to the store and shop, my wife did.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, that's quite a--
Speaker 1: She grad--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's quite a--
Speaker 1: She graduated, came to New York.  She graduated and went back to St. Kitts, came back here as a diplomat with her government down there.  That's what I'm most proud of.
Speaker 2: That's a good, good story.
Speaker 1: I got other stories about other kids like that.  I just use those things to tell you.  I don't need a legacy.  The olden days, they didn't put things in Africa down on paper.  There was a story teller who told the story.  I got that out of Haley's book ['Roots: The Saga of an American Family,' Alex Haley].  He was a storyteller.  You can put it on paper, but if the kid tells his children and he helps somebody get a education, that would be my legacy.
Story_ID: 304276
Speaker 1: Sir, did your mother [Docia Foster Webb] get a chance to see you become successful before she passed?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she did.  You wanna hear that story?
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: On this wall over here, up there, I'm receiving a honorary degree from Miles College [Fairfield, Alabama].  And there's the honorary degree right over there.  When my mother went out there at the junior college and took my oldest brother [Eddie Webb, Jr.] out there, she tried to register him.  It took seven dollar--twelve dollars.  My mother only had seven dollars.  And the--and at the time, the man who's president of the school named Bell [William A. Bell], and it was a junior college.  Miles College was a junior college at that time.  Bell told her, the president, he couldn't take my brother because he, he had too many kids out there with kids that didn't pay.  Mom went back to church and talked to Reverend Taylor [Reverend C.H. Taylor].  He called out there and said we will stand for the five dollars.  This really gets to me.  And Reverend Taylor stood for the five dollars, so my brother went out there.  I don't know the year they gave me that honorary degree up there 'cause I don't remember it.  But I'll tell you this, I was on the board of Miles College. That's when they gave me an honorary degree.  And when they said they was gonna give me an honorary degree, I took Momma and her family to Birmingham [Alabama] in the Hyatt Hotel [Hyatt Regency Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama]; I rented the top floor.  I took with me three people outside of my family.  I took the president of Freedom National Bank [New York, New York], I took the president of United Mutual Life Insurance Company [Metropolitan Life Insurance Company, New York, New York], and I took the president of Webb & Brooker [Webb & Brooker, Inc., New York, New York].  I had three, three presidents with me, Momma and my family.  And when my momma said to me on the plane, "Son, why you spending all this money?"  I said, "Momma, God has blessed us.  When we didn't have it, you be here."  I own that damn school 'cause I'm one of the big contributors.  'Cause my friend you used to say to me, "You must've bought that little old college in Alabama (laughter)."  I said, I do just like the white people do it.  When they give $50 million, they say, name a building after me, Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], they name a building after him when he give $50 million.  Any building they want, they'll name it after him, you know?  So I said that, so don't tell me when I bought--but my momma went back there and stood in line all--after all these years, and that's one of the reasons I went on the board.  The bishop came to me and said I represent the Seventh Episcopal District.  He says, Miles College is in my district, I want you to serve on the board.  That's how I got on the board.  But those--for Momma, that was my greatest moment.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That I had the power.
Story_ID: 304277
Speaker 1: Is there anything that we haven't asked you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, you asked me--
Speaker 1: That you think that--
Speaker 2: --everything I know.  You didn't ask me everything.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, I'm married now--I'm married now and this is my third marriage.  My wife [Danna Wood Webb] now is an attorney, practices elder law.  She was a former professor at Columbia University [New York, New York], about twenty-four years.  She's associated--well, she was professor, then associated dean, and all that--but now, she practices law.  When she--she had gone to law school while she was in latter years in--at Columbia University, in the school as a social worker.  And she went to law school, passed the law, passed the bar, and she practices elder law and because of the fact that her background is social worker, I think that's why she accepted that.  I have two, two daughters, five grandchildren.  As you know, one of 'em--one of 'em is there and all my grandchildren are very successful.  I have an interracial family.  A granddaughter is married to an Italian boy and she lives in Italy, in Rome, and she's been there for about the last fifteen or twenty years.  She is an Italian citizen as well as an American citizen, have two children.  And then I have the great--this grandson married to (background noise).  Cut it off.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So she practices law.  I have a young son.  The other--all my grandchildren are doing well, two daughters, and both of them are well and hearty.  You might ask why I want--do they work for you?  No, my children, my two daughters are not interested in this business and my grandchildren are not interested in this but also live everywhere else.  And so I have one in Atlanta [Georgia] and some down in Savannah [Georgia], and some in Chicago [Illinois], so they all over.  Nobody wants to move to Harlem [New York, New York], so it's just now the--my new wife--my--not my new wife, my present wife, and mine.  We, we live in Westchester County [New York] and I have one apartment here in the city--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in Harlem.
Story_ID: 304278
Speaker 1: Well, the last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And it's, it's this, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I will be remembered, I believe, in the Harlem [New York, New York] community during this period of time, I really believe that.  I think when the historians look at this period of time and look at Harlem and say Harlem was fading out or won't be no more Harlem, like that, I would like to be remembered as a legacy that I wanted to make a difference and do whatever that I could to uplift and help my people, that is the black people.
Story_ID: 304279
Speaker 1: One other thing, one other thing, and I didn't--I neglected to ask this, and I think that--not like this anyway, and I think you may have eluded to it, but, is there--what's your business philosophy for success?  I mean, how--if you had to advise some young person now going into business, I mean, what would you think is the most important thing to do to be successful in business?
Speaker 2: In going forward with this generation?  It's to get an education.  Go to school.  I think we gonna be a technolic [sic. technologic] society going forward and I think that a young kid nowadays need to go to school, get as much education as you can.  There'll be very little manual labor for him to go look in a factory or things like that.  We, we outsource now most of that.  I don't think the manufacturing industry will ever come back.  I think now if you--in New--the--for example, we work for Columbia University [New York, New York] and they're expanding the campus and we, we handle all that for Columbia University and, and this expansion, like that.  They are gonna put a research center.  I have been attempting to get one of the large research centers to come into the Harlem [New York, New York] community.  I have not been very successful.  I've tried major, major pharmaceutical houses and--to come into Harlem community so that we might attract young blacks who would perhaps wanna live in the Harlem community because usually people that's in the science is more liberal in their thinking.  They are not worried too much about status or, or seeking that type of level to be recognized.  They are more in, in trying to better mankind through technology or through science or something like that.  So what I would like to say is that I would hope that when they look at this period, I like to say that, did he make a difference?  Some may say no, but I stayed because these are my people.
Story_ID: 304280
Speaker 1: Gil Noble, years ago when he started his show 'Like It Is,' the ABC News was gonna almost kill the show and put it in the basement.  I read about this in the paper and I called Gil.  I called Gil Noble, and I said to Gil Noble, I'd like to see--he came here to see me.  I got pictures of this and this is--it's record, this is on file.  And I said, "What can we do to save the show and why?"  He said, "Well, you know, it's a public show, public show.  There's no sponsors, no nothing.  So, therefore, if the station don't feel like it's worthwhile carrying it, it won't carry it."  So I said, "Well how much do the sponsors have to pay?"  He said, "Well, it's not that much."  This was thirty years ago.  And Gil tells the story too.  I said, yeah.  So I called the chairman of the board of United Mutual [Life] Insurance Company [Metropolitan Life Insurance Company, New York, New York] because (unclear).  I called every black business up here.  I called Benta's Funeral Home [Benta's Funeral Home, Inc., New York, New York], all the businesses up here that could afford it.  We bought the show.  I think the show cost--I don't remember the exact amount, but let me just use the figure $100,000 for a year.  But I went down to see the, the ABC and I saw the--I, I can't remember who I talked to.  It was somebody that had to do with this show and he said--I said, "Why you cutting the show off?  And we love this show, it's a great show for us up here."  Well, they say, "We don't have any sponsors."  Well, Gil had already told me that.  I said, "Well, you, you all can't find no sponsors?"  "Well, nobody wanna sponsor that type of show.  We got a lot of sponsors, but he don't wanna-'Like It Is,'" you know, tell me.  So I said, "Well how much the show?"  I think he said $100,000.  If he didn't say 100, he said $75,000.  I said, "We'll buy the show for a year."  I came up here, organized these fellas, went back down there with the check (laughter).  I said them white folks down there will never overcome me like that.  Gil know from then on, never look back.  He always tells it.  He'll tell anybody, go up there and see Webb [HistoryMaker Eugene Henry Webb].  But--and I didn't allow that show to close.  That was one of them things I wasn't--made up my mind, wasn't gonna do.  Ain't nobody--I'm like--nobody can hurt me in the business community.  I make a living on poor people by giving them shelter.
Story_ID: 304281
Speaker 1: I told you that from the start.  I collect the rents and HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development], the government, pays me when the poor people can't pay.  HUD says, Webb [HistoryMaker Eugene Henry Webb], I want you--I'm gonna give these people some vouchers or I'm gonna give 'em whatever they wanna call it and you just give 'em shelter, so the poor people--I don't--I don't manage rich people.  It's poor people I manage.
Speaker 2: This--about HUD, I've neglected to ask you about Robert C. Weaver, and he was the first black head of--
Speaker 1: He was the first one.
Speaker 2: --a housing urban development, right?
Speaker 1: He was.
Speaker 2: So, do you have any reflections on Robert Weaver?
Speaker 1: Yeah, on Robert Weaver?  He was a close friend of Brooker's, close friend of George Brooker.  When he was secretary, he told George that whatever I can do to help you, come to me.  He lived in Brooklyn [New York].  And he also was a member of a club that George was a member of at the time, but they were good friends.  I wasn't a personal friend of his.  It was George Brooker who was a personal friend of his.  And Weaver was good.  He made, made things possible that we could get some contracts and things like that.  He was very good to--and he was very strong in his opinion.  Back in those days, I think he--actually, to me, he carried more influence when he was in the cabinet than some of the cabinet members we have now.  I think that--and he was a man of conviction, you know.  It's just like--
Speaker 2: He was in the Lyndon Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] cabinet, right?
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And he was a man--and then he could deal with Lyndon Johnson for the fact that Lyndon Johnson being a southern [sic. southerner] could--they could relate to each other like that, but he was very helpful to us.
Story_ID: 304282
Speaker 1: I don't worry about things I might--we have pictures where that all the groups--what Gil [Gil Noble] used to do--also getting back to Gil, he used to run out on a board, has us on a board and the, the camera was--spanned it down like this, not rolling, like, spanned it down like that, like United Mutual Life Insurance Company [Metropolitan Life Insurance Company, New York, New York], Webb & Brooker [Webb & Brooker, Inc., New York, New York], Freedom National Bank [New York, New York], Benta's Funeral Home [Benta's Funeral Home, Inc., New York, New York], just run down the line like that.  It, it must've been about fifteen of us that raised that money up, you know?  But I--it was proud day when I went down there with that check and Gil knows.  And then that's what we got out of it.  They agreed that, that we could get the publicity sponsors by--he--when--at the end, this program was being sponsored by the following.  And like they roll the thing down.  And that's what--we got something out of it now.  And I was proud to see when they rolled it down, Webb & Brooker (laughter).  I, I called all my friends (laughter) and tell all my friend, look at Gil Noble 'cause I, I know on the show ['Like It Is']--we was a sponsor.  I was very proud of that, you know.  I thought we were somebody at the time.
Speaker 2: Well, that's quite a story 'cause, you know, 'Like It Is,' Gil Noble's a--Gil Noble has affected not just the Harlem [New York, New York] community, but the community nationwide, black communities all over the country.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: --but that's what we done for Gil Noble.  He'll tell anybody that (unclear).  And I, I said to him, Gil, there's a lot of people you need to interview other than me.  I, I don't--a lot of guys wanna do that.  I was curious--I turned y'all down one time, but the guy that booked--the, the guy that recommended me to you all bugged me about it.  He called me up.  I--he was a principal over at this school over here.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the--Dr. McMurr. [ph.]
Speaker 1: Dr. Murr [ph.].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: He was the principal and he called me up and he--I think you got a story to tell.  Now, you should be on the TV and everything.  I said, listen, man, I've been on so many camera TVs, I don't need no more.  And, he, he called me.  First time you all write, I turn it down.  Next time he called me, I talked to them again and they want you be it.  Man, I want you to do it.  I said, okay.  But he wanted to do it.  I gave you all somebody, too.  I gave you a woman named, Dr. Barbara Hatton.  She's the president of Knoxville College [Knoxville, Tennessee].  Keep in mind, I told you, they lost accreditation.  She turned it from a, a, a college into a work college where the students have to work.  No student will ever come out of that school without having--and have a big debt on it.  And I gave her--because that job, when that school lost its accreditation, she started--had fifty students.  Now, she got about--got up somewhere like 350.  She's gonna be comin' here to speak for the Mason [Freemason] state convention and, and talk to--don't talk to student--she's talking to the grandparents there 'cause it's a work college and the grandmaster's gonna do that here in the masonry for her.  And so she's traveled all over the country and she's--but she held that school together.  As a Republican, the main head of the [U.S.] Senate is from Tennessee, Frist [Bill Frist], he's head of the Senate.  She went to see him and he--and he put us--put her in the appropriation from the next (unclear) coming up 'cause the school is on the edge.  I gave 'em the money and I sponsored her on Tony Brown's show ['Tony Brown's Journal'].  Tony Brown carried, carried that show, running three times for me.  He had my wife [Danna Wood Webb] who was chairman of the board and her on this show.  They came to New York [New York] and he'd done the show here, and he done a--during another time--then, he'd done a show with Dr. Coles [HistoryMaker Thomas W. Cole] who was president of Atlanta U [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], and, and Dr. (unclear) 'cause Dr. Coles sit on the board.  So Tony Brown ran those shows for me.  I'll, I'll always love him for it.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Tony Brown.  He's, he's--I've been, you know, like that.  I told Tony, don't run me, I don't want you put me on your show.  I know he, he (laughter) won't see this 'cause they all--nobody--this going to history.  I don't want him calling me up, why you said on the history you won't be on my show.  I wouldn't have nothing to say on the show, but he done that for me.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Tony Brown.  And, and some day, I put her [Dr. Barbara Hatton] name in.  She is a woman--you see that picture of that man with (unclear) out there?  That's her.
Story_ID: 304283
Speaker 1: Now you've got a hallway with portraits of black leaders.
Speaker 2: Well, you wanna know why it's that way?  So when you come in this building and you don't know--you can't read or write and you look up and down there, you learn something by saying who is that, that's Ralph Bunche.  He ain't never heard of Ralph Bunche.  Then somebody got to tell him.  These kids here, like coming here, they don't know half them people out there until they get here.  They go out there and look at--look at Douglass [Frederick Douglass], anybody, don't know who that is.  They know Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], but you look over at Thurgood Marshall, they don't know him.  They--so I got it out--so I got it out so when the kids come in here, I want 'em to feel proud.
Speaker 1: Okay
Speaker 2: That's why.  And you ask--now, I'm gonna tell you one more thing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You ask me why I was (unclear) for--out there.  There was a young black artist in Harlem [New York, New York].  He was--he was on drugs.  He came to me, Mr. Webb [HistoryMaker Eugene Henry Webb], he said, I don't have no money and I'd like to paint you.  And then I said, how much?  He said five hundred dollars.  I said, he said--anyway, he came back about two weeks later, Mr. Webb, I'd like to paint you, how much?  Five hundred dollars.  He didn't cut his price.  He said, but I wanna actually do you and him.  I said, but--he said, I'll tell you why.  I'm getting--I'm gonna get me a studio.  I said, well maybe he is.  So I said, "George [George Brooker], let's let him paint us."  He said, "Now I'm not gonna paint you like you look now.  I'm gonna paint you when you get up to eighty years old.  I want you to look that age."  That's what he told me.  So the kid--a lot of stuff and these kids.  See that painting over there?  That--that's what I love.  That's the greatest painting of all.  That's an old man, got his grandson headed to the city.  That's an Alabama painting.  That's an artist in Alabama.  It was given to me by a friend; a lawyer down there gave me that and I hang it there.  So all this other stuff painted.  George is--I told you was a great artist, and he loved this, you know.  And that's all I--that--that's a Haitian painting.  But the idea was--around here is for--really for the children.  When they come in this building, they come in there, I want them to see all them paintings.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is a cultural institution as well as a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I want the children to know that.
Speaker 1: --business establishment.
Speaker 2: Let me tell you about--
Speaker 1: But anyways--
Speaker 2: See, black kids don't know nothing about art.  Black kids don't understand art.  They don't go to art shows and things like that in this neighborhood.  I'm not saying black kids as a whole, but this area of black kids, they don't go to--they don't even go to Schomburg hall [Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York].  They didn't learn it now because they, they have a little jazz program and that sort of thing.  So on this wall out here, when I bring them kids across the street over there, I give 'em the test.  Who is that?  And I even take the adults, come out here and say, who is that?  Half of them, they don't know who is that.  Mayor (unclear), most of 'em fail on her.  Most of 'em fail on her.  And then the part is that, you know that's Wyatt Tee Walker [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Wyatt Tee Walker] right there behind that door.  That's Wyatt Tee Walker.  You know who he is, don't you?
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: He's a minister.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Wyatt Tee Walker.  He's a great minister.  He's a friend.  But that picture up there is where I was and--and I said, there's a picture right here, the one down there.
Story_ID: 304284
Speaker 1: Just give us a description of the picture and the year.
Speaker 2: Yeah. In 1956, this was a real estate closing at Carver Federal Savings Bank [Carver Federal Saving and Loan association, New York, New York] at the time.  The guy sitting at the end was the attorney and the people on the right, that, that was a--that was a doctor, that was his son who was a doctor, his wife, and that was the attorney, and I, I don't know the other person there.  On the other side of this guy on the end was a broker, he was a broker, he was also a lawyer, the other man was from the title company, and that's me up there.  I don't remember who the other fella was.  That's important, that one there.  But--
Speaker 1: Years ago, when we started this business [Webb & Brooker, Inc., New York, New York], we had one more--idea was to hire as many black vendors and contractors as we could.  So if you count on there, you got one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten.  There's about ten or eleven of us and that's George Brooker and Webb [HistoryMaker Eugene Henry Webb], that's me, we were there.  We hired all of these firms, like, the guys behind you, that these--people you see.  The woman on there was our insurance broker.  Going on around, some of 'em was a electrician, some of 'em was plumbers that had small companies that we used as--the idea was behind this was make this picture to preserve for the company so that they would always have the motto that we must hire and re--and recycle the money through the business community in Harlem [New York, New York].  That's a beautiful picture there.
Speaker 2: This is a very unusual picture here.  This picture was here--to Eugene Webb and George Brooker from Charlie Rangel [HistoryMaker Charles B. Rangel].  Charlie Rangel's a congressman.  I'm gonna call these people's off so you don't--the first man on your right is doctor--is Senator Bowles [ph.].  He was a state senator, right here.  The next man there was lieutenant governor, governor, governor of New York State.  The next man to him was a large real estate broker here who was very powerful in the political arena, and that's my little head peeking out of there.  The man with his hands crossed was senator--I mean, he was the secretary of state, [HistoryMaker] Basil Paterson.  The next one was--person was a woman.  She was a assemblywoman, Geraldine Daniels [Geraldine L. Daniels].  The next one woman to him is Carl McCall's [HistoryMaker H. Carl McCall] wife [HistoryMaker Joyce F. Brown] who is now president of a fashion institute college [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York] or something like that.  The, the next person to her is Dave Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins], the former mayor.  That's Dave Dinkins right there.  And the next to him is the boss of Harlem, that's Charlie Rangel with his hands folded.  The next person, woman you see there, is David Rockefeller's daughter, Peggy Dulany.  That's his daughter.  She was a member of the New York City Partnership, and also she was president of Cambridge--chairman of board of Cambridge College [Cambridge, Massachusetts] where I served on the board.  The other woman there was secretary of labor for the State of New York.  The last woman was secretary of labor, Lillian Robert [sic. Lillian Roberts], was secretary of labor in New York.  And the--in, in the back part, the guy that's standing between the two women is Denny Farrell [Herman D. Farrell, Jr.].  He is the democrat--chairman of the--he's the chairman of the Democrat Party in New York State.  The man next to him is Carl McCall who was the controller [sic. comptroller] for New York State, and that's his wife there as I pointed out.  The, the other fella next to Carl McCall is one of the senior vice president of Manufacturers Hanover Bank [Manufacturers Hanover Trust Company, New York, New York] at the time.  And that was made in a restaurant in Harlem here called Copeland [Copeland's] restaurant and it was a breakfast.  And the breakfast was there--is to bring the political leaders together.
Speaker 1: Turn it up.
Speaker 2: No, we turn it that way to scan it better.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We actually--yeah, we capture it from the video and (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Okay.  Oh, you got it now?
Speaker 2: --computer.
Speaker 1: This picture was--there was a magazine that was--that a, a black publication of a magazine that came out, and the woman wanted to do the cover shot and she wanted it, primarily the sign post say 125th Street and back behind there over there, so she asked us to stand up on the divider so that she could get my picture along with one of the other real estate brokers and attorney.  He was--that was Edward Miles [ph.] and that's me standing there.  She wanted to put me on the cover of her magazine.
Speaker 2: This is a picture, very important.  As you see, I'm on the right.  The next picture there is Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.  You know, his father [Adam Clayton Powell, Sr.] was a minister and congressman; that's his son.  The next man on there is the grandmaster of the State of New York for the Prince Hall Masons.  The next man on there was a young lawyer that was practicing law; I don't remember his name.  The other guy on there is--was very--he was a senior vice president and (unclear) wines and liquor, and he was a great contributor to the businesses in Harlem.
Speaker 1: Okay, you, you got there--I was receiving at Gracie Mansion [Archibald Gracie Mansion], which is the mayor's home, a plaque from the deputy mayor, and on my far right is Lloyd Williams who is the president of Chamber of Commerce [Greater Harlem Chamber of Commerce], and then you see the, the, the other fellas there.  I received an award--a plaque.
Speaker 2: About what year?
Speaker 1: That was about five years ago.
Speaker 2: Oh, that's the staff.  Those are the--those woman, the woman that was the key officer--the, the woman right behind me in the chair was my daughter.  She worked here and the other young lady was a, a--the head bookkeeper, she worked here.  The other lady was George Brooker's secretary, and the lady on the far left was my secretary.  This was a picture we just made for the family.
Speaker 1: That's board of directors of the College of Podiatric Medicine [New York College of Podiatric Medicine, New York, New York], and I'm receiving an honorary degree.
Speaker 2: That's Eugene Webb in his younger days (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's a very important picture that I, I, I have there.  This picture was made with the President Clinton's [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] wife [Hillary Rodham Clinton].  She is now senator for the State of New York.  We was in Howard Rubenstein's home, and we made a picture together there because some day I think that she might be the next woman president of the United States, so I thought it might be a good idea if we have a picture made.
Speaker 2: And that's when the, the--the gentleman on the right was a political ally, the woman was a nun, and I, I had received my honorary from the College of Podiatric Medicine.
Speaker 1: The young man sitting at the desk, sitting down, is--you better pass that one by because I can't remember--I know the doctor but it, it, it--that--I can't remember all those people there.
Speaker 2: Oh, that picture, to your far right was the secretary of HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development] and--
Speaker 1: Robert C. Weaver (unclear).
Speaker 2: Robert C. Weaver, far right.
Speaker 1: He's got a cigar in his hand.
Speaker 2: Got a cigar in his hand and he's one of the first black cabinet members.  The rest of those people are--was member from a bank called Bowery Savings Bank, [New York, New York] and all of those officers--it was a banking affair and Robert C. Weaver was there.  He was on the board at the time of Bowery Saving Bank, and the rest of the people, they're all associated with the bank.
Speaker 1: It was 1978.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 1978. Oh, that's the governor.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, that's [George] Pataki.
Speaker 1: That's Pataki where he spoke at the real estate convention, real estate annual dinner.  And as you know, everybody wants to have a, a picture made with the governor at the time and that's--I, I remember the board, so I had a picture made with him.
Speaker 2: Is this--did we do this one?
Speaker 1: Yeah, you done that one.
Speaker 2: Okay.  It's just another copy.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: This is a picture that was made in Westchester County [New York] and the most important picture on there, and most of those are politicians, but the most important person on it is Mayor Davis [Ernest D. Davis], who is the mayor of Mount Vernon, New York, and we was at some--
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: That's right.  He's there.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: I sit on the board of the ABO [Associated Builders and Owners of Greater New York], which is one of the large associations here and it's a picture of me with the officers of the board.  I'm a--I'm a governor there and these are all the other governors there.
Speaker 1: Oh, the two fellas on the right there are assemblymen, two state assemblymen and my wife, Danna [Danna Wood Webb], and myself.  That was made in Albany [New York].
Speaker 2: Well, that's me as I age and grow older.  And as you notice, I'm losing--I--my hair's receding (laughter).
Speaker 1: Mine's starting (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, mine's receding.  I, I, I think--you see a picture--
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: Get--that makes it so important.  The year now is 19--oh, I mean 2004.  The young man on the left built an office building in Harlem and the president, the former president of the United States now has his office--Clinton has his office in the building that he, he built.  So he is a man of, I would hope historians would treat well.  Next to him is the Deputy Mayor Malcolm [ph.] who--that's Deputy Mayor Malcolm.  Then the others is George, my partner, and the other fella's an associate.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Well, this picture is in my younger days.  That's all I can say about that.  That picture, I was--
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: When was that shot do you think?
Speaker 2: Look up on that--look right there, right--look, look, look at right there.  Look over that wall and tell me what that, that, that--where I got the honorary degree.  What year was that?
Speaker 1: Was that Miles College [Fairfield, Alabama]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  Not that, the next one.  This here.
Speaker 1: Okay (unclear) 1982.
Speaker 2: All right, 1980--this picture was when I received an honorary degree in 1982 from Miles College.  And the fella there at the time, president, was Clyde Williams [W. Clyde Williams], was president of the college.  And I was receiving an honorary degree from Miles College, and I was very proud of that, very proud of that.
