Story_ID: 482437
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Robert Lee Wright, Jr. [HistoryMaker Robert Wright], that's R-O-B-E-R-T, L-E-E, W-R-I-G-H-T.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, is there a story behind having the name of Robert Lee, as in Robert E. Lee or, or is it any--
Speaker 2: I don't know.  My dad was named Robert Lee [Robert Wright, Sr.], I don't know how he came up with the Lee, but his name was Robert Lee, mine's Robert Lee.  I never asked him.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, I thought maybe a family tradition passed down or something.
Speaker 2: No, I never heard Robert E. Lee mentioned in relationship to Lee (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  So it was never mentioned in relationship to it?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think down south, you know, where I'm from I've noticed a lot of people have Lee in the middle name.  I don't know if that's historically from Robert E. Lee or what, but lot of us have Lee in our name.  Could be but I never, I never made the connection.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: March 17th, 1937, in Columbus, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Presently, I'm chairman of a company called Flight Explorer, which is a real-time tracker of airplanes in the air in real-time.  We--it's called an ASD--our product is called an ASD, aircraft situation display, so once a plane is off the ground and in the air then we can sort of track those planes from point A to point B.  So I'm CEO and chairman of that company that I founded.
Speaker 1: Okay, and this is--I know you were the founder of another, Dimensions--
Speaker 2: Dimensions International [Dimensions International, Inc.], right.  And Flight Explorer was a subsidiary of Dimensions International.
Speaker 1: Okay, and those are like, these Black Enterprise 100 companies?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Dimensions was a Black Enterprise 100 company in, back in I think '80 [1980], I mean, '05 [2005].  Dimension was Black Enterprise Company of the Year, that year.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Do we take a break between?
Speaker 1: Yeah, the tape rolls out every half an hour.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Or any time you need it, let us know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, carry on.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Oh, can you give us today's date, today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date?  I think it's May 1, 2008 (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right, and where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: Right now?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: We're in Alexandria, Virginia in my office.
Story_ID: 482438
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that management compels me to ask of everyone, and they only require a short answer.  First one is: do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I do have a favorite food.
Speaker 1: And what is it?
Speaker 2: My all-time favorite, banana pudding.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I like blue.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summer, that's my favorite time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Rome, Rome, Italy.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause it could be Rome, Georgia, right (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Right, could be Rome, Georgia.  It's Rome, Italy.
Speaker 1: All right, and the last one is: do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I do.
Speaker 1: All right, what is it?
Speaker 2: What is, is.
Story_ID: 482439
Speaker 1: So, I'm gonna ask you about your family history now.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side of the family first--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and then I'm gonna ask you about your father's [Robert Wright, Sr.] side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Pauline Lillian Talley Wright [Pauline Talley Wright].
Speaker 1: Okay, can you spell that for us?
Speaker 2: That's P-A-U-L-I-N-E, Lillian, L-I-L-L-I-A-N, Talley, T-A-L-L-E-Y, and W-R-I-G-H-T.
Speaker 1: And, sir, what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My mother's date of birth was May 13, 1913.  She was born in Columbus, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side?  How, how far back can you trace her side of the family?
Speaker 2: Not very far.  Only because we never talked about--from time to time she would talk about her mother's parents, but not very far.  I knew her mother, you know, my grandmother, very well.  Her name was Hannah, H-A-N-N-A-H, Talley.  Hannah Bryant Talley.  She was from one of the outlying cities in and around Columbus.  I remember her as a kid growing up, she was a very strong-willed woman, very family oriented, and I was her first grandchild.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And so I was special, yeah.  I was special.
Speaker 1: Now, you said from time to time your mother would talk about her mother's parents, your great-grandparents (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not a lot.  I don't know beyond--a lot beyond her mother's or her father's parents.  But I did--but I was intimately involved with my grandparents, her immediate mother and father growing up.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there any stories about the family that come out of the slave experience or Reconstruction, or that you know of, that are passed down in the family?
Speaker 2: Not, not really.  I didn't get a lot of those stories.  I'm sure there were many but we just never talked about them.
Speaker 1: Is there any tradition that they're from someplace other than around Columbus, Georgia?
Speaker 2: Any what?
Speaker 1: Is there--are there any stories that they're--that the family lived some other place other than around Columbus, Georgia?
Speaker 2: No, they pretty much lived around Columbus, Georgia.  Now there were some stories that maybe my grandfather's people may have come out of Oklahoma.  But we've never been able to trace that back to Oklahoma.  So there, we just don't know, but apparently there are some Talleys in Oklahoma that could be related to my grand, my granddad.  And his name was William Arthur Talley (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right.  Okay.  That'd be interesting if somebody was from Oklahoma and ended up back in, you know, on the east in Georgia.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now what did your family do on your mother's side?  What did they do for a living?
Speaker 2: You mean her mom and dad or her sisters and brothers, or you mean all of them?
Speaker 1: Well, yeah.  Did they live primarily in an agricultural setting or were they in town, or where were they?
Speaker 2: No, their mom and dad, my grandparents, they lived in the city.  My grandmother, Hannah, was primarily a housewife, and she ran the house.  My granddad, William Talley, Sr., worked at the post office in Columbus, Georgia for forty-five years.  He sorted mail there at the post office. He retired, as I said, after forty-five years of service and that was the only job that I knew that he had growing up, post office.
Speaker 1: Sounds like--I don't know if it was or not but correct me if I'm wrong, but that sounded like a pretty good job working in a post office, for black people (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, probably was.
Speaker 1: In the time.
Speaker 2: Back then anyway, I mean, that was probably a real good job.
Speaker 1: Maybe a railroad job or something like that would be considered a decent job.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.  So I'm sure it was a decent job, I have no idea how much money he made but he was inside sorting mail.  And there was a picture once of him with an apron on, sorting, putting mail in various slots there at the post office.
Story_ID: 482440
Speaker 1: Are there any stories about what life was like in those days in Columbus, Georgia that were passed down in the family that, you know, what went on in Columbus, Georgia with--we're talking about the days of the segregated South and all that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, things were segregated.  We grew up in a segregated environment, we grew up in segregated schools.  We, you know, we went into restrooms that were colored, water fountains that were colored and white.  I remember distinctly once going to--my mother [Pauline Talley Wright], my brother [William J. Wright] and I went to South Carolina to visit one of her sisters, my Aunt Mary Frances [Mary Frances Talley Stephens], and the railroad cars back in those days were segregated.  Normally, the cars for the black passengers were near the front of the train, right behind the engine because those were coal-burning engines and all the smoke and soot and stuff, and so they put us in there up front.  I remember distinctly going to South Carolina, and the car for the black passengers, or colored as they would call us back then, totally was overflowing, so my brother and I had to sit on our suitcase, my mother had to stand.  There were plenty of seats in the cars for the white passengers, but because things were segregated, we were sort of like cattle, you know, in that one car.  And that has always stayed with me as part of that old South that, thank goodness, we're not having to deal with now.  But that's a story that I distinctly remember.
Speaker 1: When you were growing up, did you get the sense from your [maternal] grandparents [Hannah Bryant Talley and William Talley, Sr.] that things were better than they had been when they were growing up, or were they about the same?
Speaker 2: I think I got a sense that things were better.  My grandmother, I think she came from what we called the country, which was probably one of the outlying areas in and around Columbus where she probably grew up on a farm to a certain extent, probably.  And, the house down on 2nd Avenue, 2nd Avenue in Columbus was a fairly large house.  The family house was a fairly large wood-framed white house.  They weren't wealthy by any stretch of the imagination but apparently, as you just said, that my grandfather was probably making a decent living, whatever, however we would classify decent back in those days to the extent that my mother became a nurse.  She was one of the early classes of nurses to graduate from Meharry Medical School [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee].  Two of my aunts, her sisters, got college degrees.  One from Savannah State [Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia], another aunt from Tennessee State [Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee], and another aunt finally got her degree from Alabama State [Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama].  So I grew up in a family that were achievers.  I was blessed in that regard.  College graduates, blessed in that regard.  But I think it was important to my grandparents that their children, my mother and my aunts and uncle [William Talley, Jr.], went to school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they did.
Speaker 1: So, was there a good public high school in Columbus?
Speaker 2: Well, again, the high school was segregated.  You know, we have to say good by what standards.  Segregated schools--typically in the South the black schools were typically inferior.  I don't necessarily think we had inferior teachers 'cause I think we had some very, very dedicated and smart people teaching, but the facilities were not as good.  Sometime we got hand-me-down books (background noise), things like that.
Story_ID: 482441
Speaker 1: The high school you--I mean, the school that was there was called--what was the name of the school (unclear)?
Speaker 2: The school I graduated from was Spencer High School [William H. Spencer High School, Columbus, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Right.  And it was a good high school.  Segregated, but our teachers were good.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And as I said, sometime we got hand-me-down books coming up through elementary school and high school.  Sometimes the football uniforms that were used for practice were hand-me-down uniforms from the white school.
Speaker 1: Is that where your mother [Pauline Talley Wright] went to school too?
Speaker 2: Actually, when she was coming along, there was not a high school for black kids to graduate from.  I think she graduated from Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] back then that was a high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she actually went to Spelman to finish high school?
Speaker 2: I think so, yeah.  That's where she had to go.  I can't recall when my aunts behind her--where they, you know, went to school.  But there was no high school when my mom came in.
Speaker 1: Now, what stories did your mother tell you about growing up?  Did she, did she talk about growing up and what it was like for her?
Speaker 2: I'm sure she did.  I can't remember a lot of stories other than, you know, it was her and her sisters.  There were five girls and one boy [William Talley, Jr.].
Speaker 1: Did she tell you why she wanted to be a nurse?
Speaker 2: She's always had a lot of compassion for people.  I think that's probably her drive, or that's her personality and her nature.  Very caring person.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, I think that was--I think nursing really was a good fit for her personality and where she considered her mission in life to be.
Story_ID: 482442
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father's full name is Robert Lee Wright, Sr. [Robert Wright, Sr.].  It was R-O-B-E-R-T, L-E-E, W-R-I-G-H-T.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: His date of birth was October 25th, 1906, and he was born in or around Tuskegee, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, what do you know about his ancestors, and what they were doing?  Are there any stories that go back any further than your mother's side?
Speaker 2: Well, over recent years I have attended family reunions on his side, and it's been somewhat of a remarkable discovery.  His dad was a man named Tommy Slaughter [ph.], and he apparently worked on a farm or a plantation or something like that.  And he was, quote, considered to be one of the overseers, he was the--I guess he was the person that saw to it that people were doing what they were supposed to do in the fields and so forth and so on.
Speaker 1: Now, was he black?
Speaker 2: He was black.  He was black.  Yeah, very black.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I've seen pictures of him, I have pictures of him.  And I never met him.  I do remember as a child perhaps attending his funeral, but I never saw him.
Speaker 1: Now, he's your father's grand--
Speaker 2: His father's father.
Speaker 1: Grandfather?
Speaker 2: My father's father.
Speaker 1: Your father's--so that's your grandfather?
Speaker 2: That's my grandfather.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: On my father's side.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, so your father took his last name after his stepfather or something?
Speaker 2: Yes.  That's what I understand, historically.  So our name probably came after--came as a result of my stepfather.  And, so that was, you know, that's been an interesting story.  His mother--can't think of his name now--was a--I think we called her--I called her Nee Nee.  I remember her being somewhat of a sickly woman, probably asthma, so bad that she sort of talked with a whisper.  We used to visit them in Tuskegee from time to time.  But my father became a bricklayer, and he moved to Columbus, Georgia, where he met my mom [Pauline Talley Wright].
Speaker 1: Now was he a graduate of Tuskegee Institute [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] or did he go there to learn (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, he had a sixth grade education.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was only a sixth grade educated man.
Speaker 1: Okay, I know they taught bricklaying at Tuskegee so I wondered if there was a carried some kind of a connection, but--
Speaker 2: And he probably, you know, learned bricklaying at Tuskegee but not in the school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not in Tuskegee Institute, as it was called then.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, when he came to Columbus, he came as a bricklayer, and he met my mom I think at a dance or something and they dated, and got married.  And you know, and although he was a sixth grade educated man, he really had two passions in life.  One was to own his own home, and he built that house brick by brick on weekends after work, pretty much on his own and the help of his friends.  Secondly, he wanted to educate my brother [William J. Wright] and I, although he did not get an education he felt strongly about making sure that we got an education.  And, I will forever be indebted to him for the sacrifice that he and my mother made to educate both me and my brother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it's just something I'll always be grateful for.
Story_ID: 482443
Speaker 1: Now, when you think about your parents' [Pauline Talley Wright and Robert Wright, Sr.] talents and dispositions and personalities, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I take after--I think I take after both of them pretty much equally.  As I told you before, my mother had a lot of compassion.  She was a very caring lady, she just sort of liked to make sure everything was all right.  So she was that rock.  And I think I have the similar compassion and feeling for people and things like that she did.  I think from my dad, I got his strength of courage to stand for what you believe is right.  Because I remember when he was a, a bricklayer in Columbus, Georgia working side by side with a white bricklayer but he was making a dollar less, probably laying more brick.  And he had a serious issue with that, and he formed a black bricklayers' union in spite of threats and intimidation that he got from some of the white contractors.
Speaker 1: Now, about what year was this?  Can you remember?
Speaker 2: That was probably in the early, that was probably late '40s [1940s].
Story_ID: 482444
Speaker 1: Yeah, let me ask you again about the black bricklayers' union that your father [Robert Wright, Sr.] started.  Now, when did he start that?
Speaker 2: I think that was probably in the late '40s [1940s], as I can recall.
Speaker 1: Now, this is before what many people would think is the birth of the Civil Rights Movement?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah.  But, you know, he took a stand because he thought it was an injustice to be--not being paid equally with a white bricklayer only because he was black.  And, I think over time I've learned to, you know, in my life I've taken stands.
Story_ID: 482453
Speaker 1: What happened when your father [Robert Wright, Sr.] formed a union?  There's gotta be a story, were they successful or did they--
Speaker 2: Oh, they were very successful.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, obviously, his life was threatened because typically people didn't wanna, you know, pay him more money.  That's taking money out of the contractor's pocket, you know, if they could get cheap labor, why not?  But they were so successful that the white union and the black union ended up merging.
Speaker 1: Okay, did they merge in the '40s [1940s]?
Speaker 2: They merged in the '40s [1940s], late '50s [1950s].
Speaker 1: That is incredible.
Speaker 2: Late '40s [1940s], early '50s [1950s] they merged.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's incredible because a lot of the unions in the North were segregated up through the '50s [1950s] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, but they merged.
Speaker 1: Chicago [Illinois] and other places, all, I mean, we've talked to people in electrical unions, carpenters' unions that weren't integrated in the North.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So this is interesting.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they merged and then he became president of the merged union.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what was the black union, the black bricklayers' union?  I mean, did they have a name for it?
Speaker 2: I can't remember what the name was.
Speaker 1: It would probably be historically significant if somebody--if there was--you--if you remembered the exact name of it.
Speaker 2: Maybe I can find it.  Yeah, there's still a couple of guys still around that's living that probably can remember.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know who can call for that.  But, yeah, they formed one union.  And pay was equal from that time on.  So, back to your question, you know, I got, you know, from my father I learned, you know, courage of your convictions.  Stand up for what you believe is right.  And I also learned a sense of responsibility as a man, because oftentimes when work would run out in and around Columbus [Georgia], he would have to leave and go other places to seek employment or to find, you know, for work.  They knew where other work was but normally it was--I remember places like Davenport, Iowa; Milwaukee, Wisconsin; Wilmington, Delaware; Cincinnati, Ohio, these are places where he would, you know, he and three and four other bricklayers get in the car, they knew there was work there, off they went.  But, the thing that he taught me in that process was every Friday or Saturday, while he was gone, my mom [Pauline Talley Wright] would put my brother [William J. Wright] and I in the car, go down to Western Union [Western Union Company] and pick up his check.  He never failed us.  And, that's why I have so much respect for him as a man, as head of the family, he took care of us.  He never failed us and I learned from that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I learned a lot from that, so in addition to sacrificing and sending us to college, he's just very committed to what he wanted to do and how he did things, and very responsible.  With a sixth grade education.  And one of the things he told me that I never will forget, when I was a young, young doctor going back home to practice optometry and I'm running from one, one loan company to another loan company, robbing Peter to pay Paul, trying to make ends meet.  This sixth grade educated man told me I could not borrow myself out of debt.  That's a profound economic statement.  That's so true from the lips of a sixth grade educated man.  Cannot borrow yourself out of debt.  "At some point in time," he said, "boy, you got to stop and pay up."  And I, and I totally agree, because there are people that live, you know, trying borrow them, you know, trying to borrow themselves out of debt and can't do it.  Can't do it.  Just one of the little things I learned from him growing up and with that sixth grade education he could take some blueprint and build anything, absolute anything.
Speaker 1: So, he actually built the house that you grew up in?
Speaker 2: Oh, he actually built that house with his own hands.  But he could take a blueprint and build a skyscraper, he was that good at what he did.  It's amazing, man.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, now you have a brother, right?  Any, any other siblings?
Speaker 2: No, just one brother.
Speaker 1: Okay, he's younger than you, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, about three years.
Story_ID: 482454
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Of him [Wright's father, Robert Wright, Sr.]?
Speaker 1: No, of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Do I have a early childhood--
Speaker 1: Yeah, memory at all, I mean, you know, your first childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I have early childhood memories.
Speaker 1: I mean is there a first one, an earliest one?
Speaker 2: That I remember?  I don't know whether, I don't know what the earliest, if you can classify earliest, but I remember being--many times being with my [maternal] grandmother [Hannah Bryant Talley] down at her house on 2nd Avenue.  I remember being in her house, being in the kitchen.  I don't know, it was a good home environment.  I remember back then there were many--Columbus [Georgia] is the home of Fort Benning, Fort Benning, Georgia.  It's probably the largest military, [U.S.] Army base in the country.  And, you know, back in the, back in the '40s [1940s] a lot of military people from other places of the country would come to Fort Benning as they do now.  But all times, black soldiers and their wives had no place to stay off the base and so my mom [Pauline Talley Wright] had a, you know, she had--our home became somewhat of a rooming house.  And black G.I.s and their families would--she would take them in and they would occupy one of the rooms upstairs.  So, I do remember that, and I do remember a lot of military people coming through that were black, that stayed with us.
Story_ID: 482455
Speaker 1: Yeah, I hear a lot of stories about Fort Benning [Georgia], you know, seemed to be the staging area for World War II [WWII].  A lot of the soldiers would muster there then they'd go out.  Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah.  Absolutely.  Yeah, Fort Benning is a--has been an integral part of that community for as long as it's been there.  And a very positive influence.  And I think because of Fort Benning probably some of the problems that were faced in other cities, probably were minimized in Columbus [Georgia] because of the influence of Fort Benning.
Speaker 1: The presence of the national government making things a little bit easier.
Speaker 2: Well, I can't say the national government per se, but you had a lot of people coming to Fort Benning that were not from the South, not from Georgia, not from Alabama, not from Mississippi.  They were from Pennsylvania, Illinois, the Midwest, California.  So you had a strong mixture of people in and around Fort Benning that did not have a lot of the old southern views.  But, more importantly, Fort Benning is a very--is a strong economic base for that area.  I mean, the number of troops, their families that's always at Fort Benning, the payroll of Fort Benning that means people come in Columbus to buy cars, they buy clothes, they buy food, they buy this.  So it--that whole economic engine has had a good influence.  I remember back when I was growing up there was a lot of police brutality, particularly against black soldiers when they would come to town.  And sometimes they didn't have to be black, it was just meanness on the part of, you know, members of the police department who may have seen a young G.I. on the street and just would pick at him and things like that.  And I remember later in life--rumor has it that Patton [George S. Patton], the general threatened to bring his tanks in if they didn't let his G.I.s out of jail.  And, of course, that's a rumor.  But also, I specifically recall there was one general who threatened to keep his soldiers on base if the local police did not leave his troops alone.  'Cause once you keep 'em on base they can't spend money, they can't buy cars, they can't buy clothes, they can't buy this, that and the other.  But I think through, through the political leadership and leadership of the chamber of commerce in Columbus, there has been a strong working relationship between Columbus and Fort Benning.  And Fort Benning has been a very positive influence in, you know, in Columbus.  There were people coming into Fort Benning who were interracially married way back when.
Speaker 1: And that goes--that's against the laws of the State of Georgia, right?
Speaker 2: It could have been back then but, I mean, they were at Fort Benning.  They were probably okay on the base.  But because of that, I mean, now it's very common.  Nobody raises an eyebrow now.  But that has been somewhat of a positive influence in the whole--that whole area, which is--which considering Fort Benning, Alabama, Phenix City [Alabama], Russell County [Alabama] across the Chattahoochee River and Columbus, you're probably talking about 300,000 people.  So it's a pretty good metropolitan area.
Speaker 1: That's a good-sized community for--yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Good-sized community, yeah.
Story_ID: 482456
Speaker 1: You grew up in the same house I take it that your father [Robert Wright, Sr.] built (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) From third grade on to high school, through high school [William H. Spencer High School, Columbus, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So he built it about the time that you were, what, six or seven, second grade or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Third grade [at Fifth Avenue School, Columbus, Georgia].  I remember moving out to that part of town around third grade.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Prior to that we lived two or three other places I can recall.
Speaker 1: Okay, what was the name of the part of town that you lived in?
Speaker 2: Wynnton [Columbus, Georgia], W-Y-N-N-T-O-N.  There was where we moved.  Prior to that we lived downtown, in downtown Columbus [Georgia].  It was considered downtown.
Speaker 1: Okay, was there a black side of town in Columbus, or a black neighborhood?  I mean, you know, I know it would have to be, this seems like an obvious question but, you know.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  There's always black sides of town in most cities.
Speaker 1: Especially in the segregated South in those days.
Speaker 2: Especially in the segregated South but, yeah, I mean, you can find black side of towns in New York [New York] and other places too, quote, back then.
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: But, yeah, there were areas that were considered black.  East Wynnton, part of East Wynnton, parts of all of Cusseta Road area was black and impoverished, dilapidated houses back then.  We used to live in a shotgun house.  You probably heard [HistoryMaker] John Lewis, Congressman Lewis, talk about a shotgun house?
Speaker 1: Yeah, describe one for us?
Speaker 2: Well, a shotgun house is a house where, if you open the front door, you can look straight through the house through the back door.  That's a (laughter)--that's called a shotgun house.
Speaker 1: So you can shoot a shotgun straight through.
Speaker 2: You can shoot a shotgun through.  (Laughter) You can literally shoot a shotgun right straight through the house.  And many of us grew up living in shotgun houses.  Some of my friends who lived up in--who lived in the projects used to say they lived in brick houses while we lived in shotgun houses.  So that was interesting.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And were the projects prestigious in those days?
Speaker 2: Well, back in those days somewhat, they were new, they were brick, more modern than the shotgun house.  But then over time they became old and dilapidated, and some are being torn down now and replaced by better houses.
Story_ID: 482457
Speaker 1: Well, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Sights and sounds?
Speaker 1: And smells, yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, some of the sights were a lot of dirt streets, dilapidated houses, people struggling to make ends meet.  Back then you would see a lot of people on the street that were mentally and physically challenged.  Sounds, sometimes we hear sounds from Fort Benning [Georgia] when they're on the rifle ranges, shooting ranges (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So a lot of guns going off and--
Speaker 2: Guns going off or sometimes we can look over our head and we can see the, the airplanes dropping the paratroopers in training.  Sometimes, some of the smells were near our high school [William H. Spencer High School, Columbus, Georgia] there was a slaughtering house for pigs.  They'd bring in hogs and bring in--that was awful smell, just awful smell.
Speaker 1: That is.  'Cause I, you know, we were near one at one time.  And I--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's terrible.  And course that was in the black neighborhood.  I always will remember the sight and the sounds when [HistoryMaker] Hank Aaron came to town as a minor league ballplayer, played with the Jacksonville Suns [Jacksonville Jumbo Shrimp].  And we had never, I mean, we had seen black ballplayers but they always were on all-black teams.  But when he came to town on an integrated team, I think the black community--probably everybody in the black community turned out.
Speaker 1: Okay, now this is like a farm team of the Braves [Milwaukee Braves; Atlanta Braves], I guess?
Speaker 2: Milwaukee Braves, farm team of the Milwaukee Braves, you're absolutely right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And, in the ballpark, Golden Park [Columbus, Georgia], it was--there was a rope that separated the black from whites at the park but they had to move the rope over because so many of us showed up.  My dad [Robert Wright, Sr.] took us to see Hank Aaron and so--
Speaker 1: Seems like, now, this is an ironic kind of a situation.  Lot of contradictions.  You got a segregated community, segregated ballpark, but the--since the Milwaukee Braves decided to integrate, their farm team becomes integrated.
Speaker 2: That's true.
Speaker 1: And so the players are playing together on the field but the people in the stands have to be separated.
Speaker 2: That's true.
Speaker 1: Is that a description of it (laughter)?
Speaker 2: That's true, that's very, very true.  And there was this rope that separated us, you know, but when Hank Aaron came to town they had to move the rope over 'cause more of us showed up at the game.  So they had to give the black fans more space.  It's just--sometime you look back on things like that and you just sort of shake your head.  And I go--and when you look at the South now and things are so different.  In Columbus [Georgia], things are so different.
Speaker 1: Okay, now just for the record, Columbus had a pretty sizeable black population even then, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Pretty good, big population.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and even more so now.
Speaker 1: So, blacks are a minority in the country, 11 percent or so, in Columbus, Georgia, there wasn't that--it wasn't that low, right?
Speaker 2: We were almost 50 percent, black are almost 50 percent of the population in Columbus today.  And I think it's, you know, it wasn't always that way but it's been quite a large population.  I probably can't think of a time when the black population in Columbus was less than 30 percent.  It's grown over time.
Speaker 1: Okay, I just wanted to make that point that a lot of black people, they weren't in the numerical, you know, small numerical minority, if that (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right.
Speaker 1: You know, during the census a lot of times people are not even counted, you know.
Speaker 2: That's true.
Speaker 1: So, sometimes we have no idea how many, yeah, at any given point.
Speaker 2: Right, that's true.
Story_ID: 482458
Speaker 1: So did you ever get a chance to meet [HistoryMaker] Hank Aaron, yourself?
Speaker 2: Not then but in--
Speaker 1: Later.
Speaker 2: Later, yeah.  In fact, he and I served more recently on the Presidential Commission for the National Museum of African American History and Culture.  We served on that president's commission to write a report to give to President Bush [President George Walker Bush] and to [U.S.] Congress as to why this museum should be built.  Why it should be built, where it should be built, what it should contain, how it should raise money, things like that, so we gave that to Congress and to the president.  That was a couple, three years ago we completed that report.  So, Hank was on that, and I've seen him several times, you know, over the years.
Story_ID: 482459
Speaker 1: What were you like as a little kid growing up?  What, what things did you like to do?
Speaker 2: Liked to play baseball.  I thought I was a fairly good baseball player.  Played shortstop, second base.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, I always have liked sports and I guess that was the main--most things--the main thing that I liked to do.  Liked to play football also, but I played baseball a lot better.  Never got big enough, heavy enough somewhat to play football but I could play lot of baseball.
Speaker 1: Now, did Columbus [Georgia] have a Negro League team?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we did have a Negro League team back then.  What was it called?  I think they called itself the Columbus Black Cardinals [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Black Cardinals, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, you know you had the Birmingham Black Barons.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: And the Kansas City Monarchs, but I think we were called the Columbus Black Cardinals.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So you liked to play ball and, now, your family attended the First African Baptist Church [Columbus, Georgia], was that true?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My mother [Pauline Talley Wright] and my--and her sisters and brother [William Talley, Jr.] and my grandfather [William Talley, Sr.] and his wife, Hannah [Hannah Bryant Talley].  And my grandfather was the treasurer of that church for forty-five, another forty something years.  He was treasurer at First African, First African Baptist Church.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They're still there today.
Speaker 1: How old is that church?  With the name, you know, 'cause I know at one point we stopped using African in the titles but it--by having that name seems to give it additional age.  I don't know if that's--do you have any idea how old it is?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.  I would--if I had to hazard a guess I would say that church could be maybe close to a hundred years old now.
Speaker 1: Okay, at least, huh?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, it could be.  Certainly, in the eighty or ninety years.  And I just use that based on my age alone because I was, you know, very young when the pastor of that church used to stop by the home house every morning for coffee, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  He'd pass by--stop by what, your--
Speaker 2: The house.
Speaker 1: The house, okay.
Speaker 2: My grandfather's, grandmother's house.
Speaker 1: What was the pastor's name?
Speaker 2: Reverend Smith [J. Henry Smith], Reverend Smith.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, were there many other churches--black churches in town I guess?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: I supposed there had to be, yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, lot of black churches in town.  Fourth Street Baptist [Fourth Street Baptist Church; Fourth Street Missionary Baptist Church, Columbus, Georgia], Friendship Baptist [Friendship Baptist Church; Friendship Missionary Baptist Church, Columbus, Georgia], you know, those two come to mind.  St. Mark [St. Mark United Methodist Church, Columbus, Georgia], (unclear), bunch of black churches.
Speaker 1: Did you spend a lot of time in church?
Speaker 2: I did.  Friendship Baptist was the church that my mom and dad [Robert Wright, Sr.] belonged to, and that's the church we grew up in.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they didn't belong to First African Baptist then?
Speaker 2: Well I think my dad joined Friendship and my mother moved her membership over where he was.
Story_ID: 482460
Speaker 1: Tell us about school.  Now, where did you start grade school?
Speaker 2: I started grade school at a school called Fifth Avenue elementary [Fifth Avenue School, Columbus, Georgia], which was not far from where I was being raised on 2nd Avenue, close enough to walk to school every day.  Maybe about four blocks, five.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you like school initially?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I've always liked school.  I always liked--always enjoyed school.  And always enjoyed being around other students, and I did.
Speaker 1: You said your parents [Pauline Talley Wright and Robert Wright, Sr.] encouraged an education.
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.  In my family, we felt that failure was not an option.  And they set good examples because they had already achieved, gone to college.  And basically provided guidance to the kids that came along, my brother [William J. Wright] and I, our cousins, in terms of what we should do in our lives.
Speaker 1: Now, did you have a favorite subject?
Speaker 2: Yeah, science.  Science, biology.
Speaker 1: Now, did you--your mother being a nurse, did you have an eye to becoming a doctor in those days?  Were you thinking about that?
Speaker 2: I did.  Yeah, I sure did.  Not only that, I mean, you know, back then the grandparents, parents and aunts and uncles, you know, they, they start you off talking about, you know, "Bobby [HistoryMaker Robert Wright], Bobby you need to be a doctor," I mean, you know, barely four, five years old.  You know, he's gonna be a doctor when he grows up.  So I grew up with that in mind, you know, they sort of put that in my brain.  I think they'd have been happy just being a productive citizen, but, you know, they sort of pushed me in that direction.  And I, like I say, I enjoyed science.
Speaker 1: Okay, were there any black doctors in town when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: There were some, not a lot but some.
Speaker 1: Did you know any, I mean, did your parents know 'em and interact with 'em?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my mom used to work for one of them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The one that delivered me she used to work for, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So was he kind of like a role model for you in some ways?
Speaker 2: Not really 'cause I really didn't get to know him that well.  I mean, he delivered me and I knew him growing up but he was not really a role model necessarily.  I knew some of the other doctors, but not well, before I went off to college.  I remember the McCoos [Mary Holloway McCoo and Wayman McCoo], Dr. and Dr. McCoo.
Speaker 1: McCoo?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Marilyn McCoo's [HistoryMaker Marilyn McCoo] parents.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Were physicians in Columbus, Georgia.  And I remember seeing her, they used to live on the same street right across from the house on 2nd Avenue as we were growing up.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you know Marilyn McCoo then, or she would have been a little younger than you were, right or--
Speaker 2: Just a little but--maybe just a little.  But they were bunch of little--she had some sisters.  And, but, you know, I didn't know her that well, you know.  They were kids and we were kids, they did not stay there in Columbus that long but they were there for a little while.
Story_ID: 482461
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite teacher or any mentors that--when you were at--in grade school at First Avenue [sic. Fifth Avenue School, Columbus, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: I guess my favorite teacher at 2nd Avenue [sic.] probably was my kindergarten teacher, who was Miss Kennon [ph.].  That was my first teacher I ever had.  Then there was Miss White, Mattie George White [ph.], she was good.  Miss Vontres, was good.
Speaker 1: V-O-N-T-R-E-S?
Speaker 2: V-O-N-T-R-E-S, Miss Vontres, thought was a good teacher.  You know, I always was a pretty good student so I enjoyed school and I got good grades.  And I was not a disciplinary problem.  I would have gotten killed when I got home if I had been.  But, I enjoyed school, I enjoyed my schoolmates, folks I grew up with.  There're still some folks that started off in kindergarten with me that are still around today, and went all the way through high school with.  So--and I see them every once and a while, time to time.
Speaker 1: Who are some of your friends that--from grade school?
Speaker 2: Oh, Beverly Kendricks [ph.], used to be Beverly Moore, Robert Lyles [ph.], we played baseball together.  There are many that's deceased now, George Fortson [ph.], he's deceased.
Speaker 1: George Ford?
Speaker 2: Fortson.
Speaker 1: Fortson, okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, he's--I could name a lot.  Many of 'em, Mary Cook [ph.], Sylvester Stevens [ph.], lot of--I can keep naming probably if I kept going but lot of people I met along the way that are still my friends today.
Speaker 1: Now, did you have a middle school?
Speaker 2: No, just elementary and then high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you went through eighth grade and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Eighth grade and then went into ninth grade.
Speaker 1: First Avenue?
Speaker 2: Fifth Avenue.
Speaker 1: Fifth Avenue, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Fifth Avenue, elementary.  And from the eighth grade we went to high school.
Story_ID: 482462
Speaker 1: So this is at Stevenson High School, right?
Speaker 2: Spencer High School [William H. Spencer High School, Columbus, Georgia] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Spencer, all right, I got my S's mixed up.
Speaker 2: Yeah, William H. Spencer High.
Speaker 1: Spencer, William H. Spencer.  Who, who was William H. Spencer [William Henry Spencer], was he a local black person that did something?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was--the school was named after him.  I think he was an educator, and eventually, you know, the school, Spencer High School, was named after him.  It's still in existence today.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's been relocated twice but it's still in existence today, Spencer High.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: He was a local black educator.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're there and this is like the mid-'50s [1950s] I guess or early '50s [1950s]?
Speaker 2: At Spencer?
Speaker 1: Yeah, when you start school.  When did you start high school?
Speaker 2: At Spencer, probably around the early '50s [1950s].  I finished in '55 [1955] so I had to start there around '51 [1951].
Speaker 1: Fifty-one [1951], okay.  Okay, now were there any special teachers there or mentors at Spencer High School?
Speaker 2: At Spencer?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess the most special teacher there was my aunt.  She was Anne Hudson at the time, she later married a gentleman named Dugas.  But Anne Hudson [Anne Hudson Dugas], my aunt, she was probably the most special person there at the school.  But then there were some very special teachers like Miss Vernon [Delmarie M. Vernon], who taught biology.  I'll always be indebted to her; I think she was probably one of my best teachers.  I think I was one of her better students.  And she's still living, and we talk about that sometimes.  There's Miss Gibson [Elizabeth Jordan Gibson], she's still living, she taught me English, Ms. Childs [ph.], another good teacher that also taught me English.  There was Mr. Leon Brown [Simon Leon Brown], who was the bandmaster.  I played drums in the band.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I still see him from time to time.
Speaker 1: Okay, when did you start playing drums?
Speaker 2: Probably in '51 [1951], about '52 [1952].
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were in high school when you started to play, huh?
Speaker 2: I was.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Was that typical in those days that you would start, you know, playing an instrument in high school?
Speaker 2: Usually typical.
Speaker 1: 'Cause you probably didn't have--did you have access to musical instruments--oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Not before high school, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: No.  So, I played drums in the band and under Mr. Brown.
Speaker 1: Okay, you have a decent marching band in those days?
Speaker 2: We thought so.  Yeah, we had fun.  Yeah, we had a lot of fun, I thought.  Yeah, thought it was a good band, you know, majorettes and rest of the band.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, did you play high school sports at all?  Did you get a chance to play baseball in high school?
Speaker 2: I went out for the baseball team and I thought I'd made it but I didn't.  I thought I was good enough to have played but, you know, I think the coach liked, he liked his athletes to play all sports.  So if you played football, you played basketball, you played baseball and you ran track.  So, for a guy who didn't play any sports but really was a good baseball player, I just sort of got knocked out of the deal.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, but you did get around to a lot of the games I guess by being in a band I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Ran into what?
Speaker 1: You got around to a lot of the games by being in the band.
Speaker 2: Well, being in the band we were at most of the games.  Absolutely.
Speaker 1: And, did Spencer play like the other black towns, is that who they played?
Speaker 2: Other black schools around the area.  A lot of schools we played were out of Atlanta [Georgia], Savannah [Georgia], Augusta [Georgia], some of the other bigger high schools were in those larger cities.
Speaker 1: Were there any other black high schools in--
Speaker 2: In Columbus [Georgia] at the time?  No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: At the time I came along, there used to be a school called Radcliffe [Radcliffe School, Columbus, Georgia] that was in existence just prior before me getting into high school.  But then Radcliffe sort of merged with Spencer I guess.  And so Spencer then became the black--the high school that all the black kids went to.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the bused us in those--lot of 'em were bused in from all over the county.
Speaker 1: So, did the band travel to these games and these other cities, to Atlanta (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sometimes but not a lot.  You know, if there was a special game, maybe homecoming game or something like that at one of those schools we would, but not on a regular basis to every game.  But sometimes we did travel, from time to time.
Speaker 1: All right, now were you a member of different clubs in high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  You know, I was a member of the Honor Society [National Honor Society] and we had our own club called the Gladiators.  It was a bunch of us got together, we felt we were sort of bad (laughter).
Speaker 1: You have jackets and everything?
Speaker 2: We had, we had, yeah, we did have some jackets and stuff.  We were gladiators.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Where'd you get the--what inspired the name Gladiators?
Speaker 2: I think we had seen one of them--we had gone--we had seen a movie or something, yeah.  I think it could--may have been 'Demetrius and the Gladiators' or something way back when, you know.  So we thought that would be a good name.  So, but, you know, we didn't consider ourselves a gang.  Just a group of guys forming a club.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And so I saw one of those guys the other day not too long ago.
Story_ID: 482463
Speaker 1: What was the popular music when you were growing up?  What was--who was popular?
Speaker 2: Oh, Ray Charles was very popular back then.  "See that lady with the red dress on."  James Brown was always popular and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He was just starting out, right, I guess, when you were in high school [William H. Spencer High School, Columbus, Georgia].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: He was from Augusta [Georgia].
Speaker 2: He was from Augusta, right.
Speaker 1: Did you ever see him--did you see him live in the early days?
Speaker 2: I did.  But not in the early days, no I did not.  Not, not--well, I saw him--no, not in the early days.  I did see him in 1980, '81 [1981].  He came to visit me at SBA [U.S. Small Business Administration] when I was the head of a program, a social administrator for minority small businesses at the Small Business Administration.
Speaker 1: You saw him in a professional capacity, you know, that was for business (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He came to see me.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he came to see me.  He had a, he had some business that he had done with SBA and I think maybe an SBA loan or something.  But he came and talked to me about it, and Al Sharpton [HistoryMaker Reverend Al Sharpton] was with him.  Al Sharpton was with him.  And I have a picture of that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Al Sharpton--he was Al Sharpton's mentor from what I understand.
Speaker 2: That's correct.  And so Al Sharpton came to SBA to--James Brown was a friend of Lee Atwater who was at the White House [Washington, D.C.] at the time.  And Lee called me and told me he wanted me to see James Brown, so I said, "Fine."  So he came to see me and Al Sharpton was with him.
Speaker 1: What was it like?  What'd y'all talk about?
Speaker 2: He had a problem with the SBA.  I don't know--I can't remember it's been so long though, but he was trying to deal with an issue and they sent me over to see if I could help him with the issue.  So we talked, that's what we really talked about.  We didn't get into anything else.  I will always remember the line outside my door.  My employees, you know, that worked in my office, waiting for him to come out so they can get a autograph of his albums and stuff like that.  So, it was quite a riot but it was very interesting.  He's quite a guy, quite a person, quite a musician.
Speaker 1: Did--was he--did he surprise you in any way?  Did you, I mean--
Speaker 2: Not, not really.
Speaker 1: So you expected him to be pretty sharp then, huh?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah.  He was, you know, he told me what he needed and what his problems were, what his issues were.  But he was, you know, very genuine and very businesslike, you know.  Talked about his issue, and I will always remember that, always.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, Ray Charles is a big star.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Ray Charles was big back then.
Speaker 1: Was there a, was there any black music on the radio in those days?  Did you listen to the radio much?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we did.  We had a lot of deejays play a lot of different music.
Speaker 1: Were there any black deejays in Columbus [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Plenty.  Oh, yeah, well, early on the, the deejay that was playing black music was Dr. Jive [Ed Mendel], he was white, playing black music.  But then eventually I think Rudy Rutherford, he called himself The Deuce, he became a black deejay, Warren Palmer, The Baron.  We had another deejay called Hound Dog, they were very entertaining.
Speaker 1: Now, these are the formative years of what people start calling rock and roll or rhythm and blues.
Speaker 2: Yeah, probably, yeah.
Speaker 1: And it becomes rock and roll or--so, did you--could you feel like a transition going on in those days?  You know, people going from the band thing to the rock, to the more rhythm and blues music?  I don't know.
Speaker 2: I mean, in retrospect, yes.  You know, but I really wasn't into--at that stage of my life I really wasn't into the big band, Count Basie and Duke Ellington or--
Speaker 1: Did your parents [Pauline Talley Wright and Robert Wright, Sr.] play that kind of music at home, or--
Speaker 2: No, no.  But, my aunt and uncle, my aunt and uncle did buy a lot of records, you know, those records if you drop 'em they gonna break on the floor.
Speaker 1: Those 78s?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, was it 78s or--well, I'm not sure.  I'm not talking about the big ones that were--but they weren't the 45s, but they weren't the seventy--I don't know what they were.  But, anyway, they were made of certain materials that if they fell on the floor, they're gonna crack and gonna break.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's usually the 78s (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 78s, could have been.
Speaker 1: I think they started making vinyl when they did 33 1/3, you know.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Could have been 78s, but I remember my aunts and uncles buying a lot of records back in those days, and they had a little box they could play it on.  But my parents didn't play a lot of music, not a lot at all.
Story_ID: 482464
Speaker 1: Was television a big deal?  Did you all buy one of those when they came out?
Speaker 2: Well, eventually.  But the first television I saw was owned by a Mr. Crawford, who owned a local cab.  He was a--had--he was a cabdriver and he eventually owned his own company called Crawford Cab [Crawford Cab Company, Columbus, Georgia].  And, he had a very nice home, his wife worked in the bakery, so we used to like--and he had two daughters so we used like to go down to their house 'cause their mother used to bring rolls.  And Josephine [Josephine Crawford Bell], that was her daughter's name, used to bring--their mother used to bring some of that pastry and donuts and cookies and things from the bakery she used to work in.  And they were very nice and hospitable, so her dad used to let us come watch television.  First television I ever saw was in their home.
Speaker 1: Okay, about what year is this you think?
Speaker 2: Well, we were--that was in the--had to be like '40s [1940s], very early '50s [1950s].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, maybe '40s [1940s] 'cause I think we were just, we were just high school boys back then, just going into high school [William H. Spencer High School, Columbus, Georgia].  And I do remember that.
Story_ID: 482465
Speaker 1: Now, when you were in high school or just before you graduated--let's see.  They hadn't started--Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] hadn't started up yet.  I think in '55 [1955] the Montgomery Bus Boycott and all that hadn't really cranked up yet I don't believe.
Speaker 2: No, when I--the early part of high school it hadn't cranked up yet.
Speaker 1: But the Brown v. Board [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] decision came down in '54 [1954] and I think the Little Rock [Arkansas] incident was on television I think and in the news in those days.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Did you have any thoughts about that in those days or were people talking about it a lot?
Speaker 2: Well, we were wondering when and if we were gonna be integrated.  But integration never took place before I graduated.  And, even after I graduated it was five years later, even a little later than that even when I got back to Columbus [Georgia], as some of those articles indicate, it was in the '70s when, when mandatory busing was ordered by the [U.S.] Supreme Court.  But all (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So that'd be like twenty years before.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so a lot of time passed from the time, you know, we should have really been integrated and the time integration really began to take place.  Now, we did--eventually the high schools played football against each other but they were still segregated.  And it was Spencer High [William H. Spencer High School, Columbus, Georgia] against Columbus High [Columbus High School, Columbus, Georgia].  Columbus High was the old traditional white school where all the white kids went pretty much, and Spencer was the school where the black kids went.  So it was really exciting when we eventually played.  And that was in the, that was in the '60s [1960s] when we went to--weren't integrated yet but we played against each other.
Speaker 1: Well, that was a--that must have really been quite a game, you know.  Did Spencer win or--
Speaker 2: Spencer won.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's when James Brown had just come out with his song, 'Say It Loud, I'm Black and I'm Proud.'  So, I mean, we were all over town blowing our horns and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is like 1968 or so?
Speaker 2: Somewhere in there, yeah.  That was, that was quite a day.  I mean, you'd have thought we had been, you'd thought we had been emancipated.  (Laughter) 'Cause we beat the white high school.
Speaker 1: Still had a long way to go though, right?
Speaker 2: Had a long way to go.
Story_ID: 482466
Speaker 1: Now when you were a senior in high school [William H. Spencer High School, Columbus, Georgia], now, you said you were in the National Honor Society.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was in the Honor Society and probably a few other organizations.
Speaker 1: Did you run for class office?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, I wasn't a class officer.
Speaker 1: So, so you graduated pretty high in your class if you were in the National Honor Society I would guess.
Speaker 2: Fairly high, how high I don't know.  When I went to Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] I flunked my math, I flunked math and English placement exams.
Speaker 1: Let me just be--how did you manage to choose Ohio State?  What kind of counseling did you have and--
Speaker 2: Well, as I told you, you know, back in high school my aunt [Anne Hudson Dugas] was there.  And, as I began to try to decide what I wanted to do in life or what I wanted to major in, in college, she recommended optometry.  She brought it to my attention.  I wore glasses and I'd been going to an optometrist for eye exams and glasses.  But I really never really considered that as a, as a potential profession until my aunt brought it to my attention.  And once she brought it to my attention, I said, "Well, you know, that's now bad.  Maybe we should check that out."  So we did.  There were eleven, at that time, eleven schools of optometry around the country and Ohio State was one of them.  There were two in the South, one in Houston [Texas] and one in Memphis [Tennessee] that were obviously segregated.  So I considered Ohio State, Penn State [Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania], Indiana [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana], I think one school up on the, up on the East Coast up in New England.  And, ironically, January 1, Ohio State was playing in the 1954 Rose Bowl game.  And, my aunt picked up the phone and called and said, "Do you see that band out there on the field?"  I said, "Yeah."  She said, "You could be playing in that band next year."  I said, "Oh, yeah?"  And so we applied to Ohio State, I got accepted.  I didn't play in the band, I tried, but that's how I ended up at Ohio State.
Story_ID: 482467
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you go from Columbus, Georgia to Columbus, Ohio?
Speaker 2: I went from Columbus, Georgia to Columbus, Ohio.  Then after I finished in Columbus, Ohio I stayed up there a year and went back to Columbus, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay, now tell us about Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio].  What was it like, I mean, you're going--this is the first time you actually lived in the North, right, so.
Speaker 2: First time I ever lived in the North, first time I ever been away from home on my own in my life.
Speaker 1: What differences did you--could you see, you know, at Ohio State?
Speaker 2: Well, it was a cultural shock to me.  I mean, I'm going from a totally segregated environment I've been in all my life to an integrated environment.  And when I went in to take my placement exams, you know, all I saw was maybe a handful of black students and just white students everywhere.  And I'd never set down beside a white student in my life.  So I think a combination of that cultural shock and maybe, you know, having the jitters or whatever, I flunked my entrance exam, so I had to start off in remedial math and English at Ohio State.  And it wasn't until I got close to graduation that I learned from my counselor when she called me to her office that according to my test scores when I entered Ohio State I should have flunked out in the second quarter.  I never should have made it through.
Speaker 1: Okay, was it like an administrative oversight that they didn't--they should have flunked you out but they didn't?  Is that it?
Speaker 2: No, no, it was due to me digging in.
Speaker 1: So, they shouldn't have let you start even with your bad test scores, that's what you're saying?
Speaker 2: Well, I couldn't start on a college level.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had to start on a remedial level.  So I started on that level, I was able to do well, and then went on and got in the regular college courses.  But I had to play catchup from the beginning.  And sometimes in retrospect, I look back at that maybe as a blessing in disguise because the courses were not that difficult, so it gave me an opportunity to sort of get some traction, build my confidence up, and from there I was able to thrive, you know, as a student.  So, it could have been, could have been a blessing in disguise.
Speaker 1: Now, were the remedial courses populated by a lot of other black students?
Speaker 2: Not a lot.  There were still a lot of white students in there.  Which gave me some comfort, that I just wasn't the black dumb guy.  The white students can, you know, can have to take remedial math and English too.  Fortunately, ironically, also my instructor was a black guy working on his Ph.D., so that gave me some comfort, you know, in that math class to see somebody that looked like me and he, he took some patience, took a lot of time with me.
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: I think his name was Dr. Thomas [ph.], can't think of his first name.  But, but he was a big help to me.  But once I was able to--it gave me time to, as I said, get traction to understand what college life was all about, to understand how I should be studying what's important, what's not.  So once I got past those classes I was able to do okay.
Story_ID: 482468
Speaker 1: I know some of the black students that were there I think, I think if I'm not mistaken Jesse Owens' daughter, Marlene [HistoryMaker Marlene Owens Rankin], was there.
Speaker 2: Marlene was there.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, and there was a--were you aware of the incident around her being--I think she made--
Speaker 2: She was homecoming queen.
Speaker 1: Homecoming queen, right, right.  Are you--do you know the story around the dynamics of that?
Speaker 2: I can't recall.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  I know we interviewed her and she was saying that there was big controversy over who was gonna kiss her on the fifty-yard line.
Speaker 2: Oh, is that right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, the president [Novice Gail Fawcett] said, "I'm not gonna do it.  I can't kiss a black woman on the fifty-yard line."  And, you know, I don't know if you remember that story or that controversy but they finally, you know, her father--they brought her father in to kiss her.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The figured that would honor him plus they wouldn't have to do it.  That was (laughter)--
Speaker 2: I don't remember that controversy but I vaguely may remember something was going on back then.  But I remember Marlene, her husband Stu, Stu Rankin [HistoryMaker Stuart Rankin].  You know them (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yes sir, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we were all at Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] together.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you know Mel Nowell the basketball player?
Speaker 2: Knew Mel.
Speaker 1: Played on that great Ohio State basketball team.
Speaker 2: Sure did.
Speaker 1: Won the NCAA [National Collegiate Athletic Association] championship.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: In '59 [sic. 1960] I think it was, wasn't it?
Speaker 2: Could have been.
Speaker 1: I think that's when they beat the California Bears [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] and then they lost to Cincinnati [University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio] twice.  I mean, they were in the finals three years in a row.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah. Bob Ferguson and some of the other football--the football players, I mean, did the athletes, the black athletes interact with the other black students?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Oh, yeah.  Sometimes they would come to some of our functions.  I joined a fraternity when I got there, that was very helpful to me.
Speaker 1: Oh, which one?
Speaker 2: Alpha Phi Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so I became an Alpha.
Speaker 1: So was there a sense among the black students that they needed to unify and form organizations and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I mean, we were in such a minority that we had to find each other, and we found each other through our fraternities and our sororities, and then we all interacted, you know, regardless of whether were Alpha Kappa [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] or Delta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority], AKA.  We all interacted together and I think that made for a--it was very comforting to me, because when I went to Ohio State, I didn't know anyone.  I didn't know anyone on campus, I didn't know anyone in the city.  First time away from home other than going to a Boy Scout camp, and the first time in an integrated environment that far away from home.  So I had a major adjustment to make in my life.  It was challenging to say the least.
Speaker 1: Okay.  In those days, what was the housing like at Ohio State?  Did the black--was it integrated on campus or--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Housing was integrated.  You know, we had the dormitories.  I lived in the Stadium Dorm [Stadium Cooperative Scholarship Dormitory], which wasn't as expensive as Baker Hall.  And, but everything was integrated.
Speaker 1: And did you have a black roommate?
Speaker 2: Well, I had twenty roommates, one was black because at that time a lot of guys were coming back from Korea and so they built these--they enclosed one end of the stadium, one side of the stadium and just made big rooms that we all lived in.
Speaker 1: This like a barracks or something?
Speaker 2: Sort of like a barrack environment but they were in the--under the stadium.  And we had a bunk, we had a locker, and we had a desk and a chair.  And there were twenty of us in a room.  So that was interesting, that was a very interesting environment to--but we survived it.  Did most of our studying in the library so it was really a place to sleep and eat.
Story_ID: 482469
Speaker 1: Oh, we were talking off-camera about the friendly rivalry between the fraternities.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Said, it was a pretty--but it was more of a collegial atmosphere.
Speaker 2: Very much so, yeah.  And we, we enjoyed each other.  We competed against each other, we attended each other's functions and things like that and we were just all friends.  I mean, we had to be, we were in such small numbers at Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] that--
Speaker 1: Ohio State was then the largest--or second largest school in the country then, as it is now.  Either the largest or the second depending on which way (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, it's a--
Speaker 1: UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] and the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] go.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  But we think we're the largest in the country right now.  And I still spend time there so sort of keep up with what's going on.
Speaker 1: So, did--were there any, other than Dr. Thomas [ph.] who mentored you in the remedial courses, were there any other teachers who were like role models for you or who you had a special relationship with?
Speaker 2: No, I think he's the only, only black professor I ever had throughout my entire career there at Ohio State.  And, but it was okay.  I did--I got through it.  Yeah, I got through it once I got my feet on the ground taking those remedial courses.  'Cause I was in a pre-optometry curriculum so I had to take a lot of math, lot of science, physics, chemistry.  Pretty, pretty rigorous curriculum.
Speaker 1: And so, after your--now, did you get involved or did you have the time to be involved in extracurricular activities in college other than the fraternity [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity]?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah.  I made time.  I was involved in intramural sports, I was involved in the Block O, Block O is the card section that, you know, just sit up there and they flash the cards and things like that.  I was involved in that.  And, I don't know, I think I was involved in the Urban League and some other activities that were going on around the campus at the time.  So, I was pretty active.
Speaker 1: Did campus activities like the Urban League like take you into the East Columbus [Columbus, Ohio] and, you know, and--
Speaker 2: I can't think of what some of the issues were that we were dealing with at the time but we did have some interaction with the Urban League while on campus.  But I'm not so sure we went out in East Columbus.
Speaker 1: Okay, I mean, you know, community activities and that sort of thing in the city, you know.
Speaker 2: Oh, a little bit.  A little, you know, we didn't really get involved in community activities through the Urban League per se.  Although, I do think we were--may have been involved maybe with the Urban League in some picketing and things like that at some point in time downtown.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you graduated from Ohio State in nineteen--
Speaker 2: Sixty [1960].
Speaker 1: Sixty [1960], okay.
Story_ID: 482470
Speaker 1: You had to then go into optometry school for another--how did that work (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, no, the whole curriculum, the whole curriculum of optometry was a five-year program.  Two years' pre-optometry and three years in the school of optometry so it was five total years.  So I had to do two, two years pre and then three years in optometry school.  And I did it all there at Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Okay, so you didn't have to get a bachelor's degree first then go to optometry school.  It was all within a five-year--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, I didn't realize that.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, it's not that way now.  You got to go, you got to do four years of pre-optometry in a curriculum that's pretty, pretty much in line with what you would do if you were going into pre-med or pre-dentistry, and then you go into the College of Optometry.  So, that whole curriculum has expanded, the whole knowledge base within the profession has expanded, technology has increased, so it's just a lot more for students to learn now before they go out as doctors.
Speaker 1: Okay, so when you graduated you went back to Columbus, Georgia, right, immediately or did you stay around?
Speaker 2: No, when I graduated--well, yes I did.  I went back to Columbus, Georgia immediately because I was anticipating going into the [U.S.] military.  I had applied for a commission as an officer in the Medical Service Corps.  I was assuming I was gonna receive my commission and be sent someplace to work in a hospital or something like that.
Speaker 1: Now, were you in ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] or something in, in Ohio State?
Speaker 2: Well, first two years I was in ROTC but I did not go all the way through ROTC because I figured I was gonna get commissioned anyway once I finished optometry.  Well, they--when they asked me about, you know, had I had this, that and the other on my physical, I checked that I had asthma as a child.  But, I had no idea that was gonna disqualify me for military service, so that disqualified me from getting my commission.  And, after sitting around down in Georgia for a whole summer waiting to go to the [U.S.] Army, I found myself, you know, trying to decide what I was gonna do.  And so, Ohio State, Ohio, the State of Ohio was the only state that I had license to practice in, so I ended up going back to Columbus, Ohio and opening up practice out on the east side.
Speaker 1: Okay, how did that go?
Speaker 2: It went well; it went very well.  I had--my mother [Pauline Talley Wright] came up to visit.  I'd gotten, I'd gotten married [to June Russell Wright] before I moved back to Columbus, Ohio and my mother came up to visit my wife and I.
Speaker 1: Now, was this your high school sweetheart or something?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I figured had--she had--you'd had to have met her then I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah, met her in high school [William H. Spencer High School, Columbus, Georgia].  So, we moved to Ohio and then we moved--my mother came up and told me that--brought me up to date on what was going on in the Civil Rights Movement in Columbus, Georgia.  And some of my friends had gone to jail for, for integrating the buses and things like that.  And at that moment I thought I should go back home and make a contribution to the community.
Speaker 1: So about what year was that?  How long were you in Columbus, Ohio before you came back to?
Speaker 2: A year.
Speaker 1: A year?
Speaker 2: A year.  After I
Speaker 1: So this, this takes us, what, to 1962 I guess?
Speaker 2: From where?
Speaker 1: This takes us to '62 [1962] or--
Speaker 2: Well, '61 [1961] I went back, went back to Columbus.  I graduated in '60 [1960], went back to Columbus, Georgia right after graduation, which was in the summer, May, June.  Stayed there until July, August--no, September, October.
Story_ID: 482471
Speaker 1: Then I went back to Columbus, Ohio and opened a practice.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And, my mother [Pauline Talley Wright] came up and told me what was going on.  I applied for the Georgia boards, I took the exams, passed and in October or November of '61 [1961] I was back in Columbus, Georgia.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Opening a practice and getting involved in the community.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you felt an obligation to try to do something to change the conditions and--
Speaker 1: I did.  I did.  I wanted to go back and see what I can do to help the situation.
Speaker 2: Now, I read in an article--one of the articles I was reading this morning said that when you came back as an optometrist, I mean, it didn't mean a lot to the people and to the black community that you were an optometrist.  There weren't a lot of people who even knew what to do with an optometrist.
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: Or they weren't used to going to an optometrist I guess.
Speaker 1: Well, they were used to going to an optometrist to a certain extent.  They just weren't used to going to a black optometrist to a great extent.  Since I was from the area and my parents, you know, and grandparents had very fine reputations, I was able to begin to build a practice.  But then, obviously, you got to educate people that--back then that I was just as good as any white doctor.  And that was always a factor that had to be overcome.  But, I built a good practice.  I enjoyed what I was doing.  I teamed with Dr. Delmar Edwards and we built a professional building back in '68 [1968] that housed both of our practices, because we wanted to have first-class facilities for ourselves and our staff, and our patients.  And so, we were the first professionals, black professionals to build our own facility, and that building is standing today that we built.
Story_ID: 482472
Speaker 1: I also read that in, in I guess '65 [1965] you participated in the march from Selma [Alabama] to Montgomery [Alabama]?
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, was this the first big civil rights action you were involved in or, or had you done things previously (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The first big march I was on, first march I was on.  And, they'd already--the marchers had already come across the Edmund Pettus Bridge [Selma, Alabama] and then there was the staging area out in Montgomery called the City of St. Jude.  And that's where many of us went to the staging area for the final push into Montgomery, and that's where I joined the march and I marched into Montgomery with Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], [HistoryMaker] John Lewis and the rest of the leaders of the movement.  I was just one of the thousands that made up the crowd being supportive.  But (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right.  So you, you've got your optometry business, practice, you know, established and, now, at some point do you get involved in local politics?
Speaker 2: Got involved in local politics.  We consolidated our city, county government into one metro unit so instead of having Columbus [Georgia] city government and Muscogee County [Georgia] government, the citizens by referendum combined the two governments into one metro unit.  We had six councilmen that ran at-large in six--and four through districts and I was one of the councilmen that ran in the district race.  And, district two, and I was elected to the city council [Columbus Council] in 1970.
Story_ID: 482473
Speaker 1: What role did J.R. Allen play?  I read something about him.  He was the leader of a local progressive Republican group.  That's what I heard.
Speaker 2: Yeah, J.R. was a young, aggressive guy.  He had gotten lucky and bought a Kentucky Fried Chicken franchise I think when you could have gotten 'em for five thousand, six thousand dollars.  And, so he brought Kentucky Fried Chicken to town, and I think he made out well financially almost overnight.  Well, he had a vision for our city that the city should move, should move aggressively forward.  The Republican Party at that time was, was non-existent pretty much in the South.  And, as you can also can recall, the Democratic Party was inhabited by the Lester Maddoxes and the George Wallaces and people who thought and acted like they did.
Speaker 1: The Dixiecrats, they called 'em.
Speaker 2: The Dixiecrats.  So, Republicans represented--the Republican Party itself represented an opportunity to run in a general election, because other than that you have to run in a Democratic primary.  Under that Democratic primary, J.R. Allen and the rest of the guys felt that they would not even survive the Democratic primary 'cause they were taking on the system, the status quo.  And so, I was recruited to run on the party ticket.  I was gonna run because I felt I'd done everything that a young man should do to prepare himself for run for public office, being involved in practically every worthwhile cause, you know, in and around the city.  And, so I told J.R. that I intended to run.  He said, "Yeah, but I'd like for you to run as a Republican," and that caused me to pause for a second because I just didn't know how I would be perceived running as a Republican, you know, with the folks I'd have to run seeking votes for.
Speaker 1: Yeah, most people you knew I guess would have been Democrats in those days I guess (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Democrats and blacks, Democrats and blacks.
Speaker 1: And they had just probably changed recently I guess from--'cause at one time most of the black politicians were Republicans in the South until the FDR [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] era I guess.
Speaker 2: That's true.  Right.  So, I told J.R. I'd probably have some problem with that and--but then he convinced me that, look, let's not look at what's happening nationally, let's look at what we can do in Columbus [Georgia] and, and you and I both gonna have problems getting elected if we ran as Democrats.  And I think we ought to, you know, just run on my team.  Let's change this city.  And he had already been elected, you know, before we consolidated our government.  And to his credit, he had reached out to the black community in ways in which no white politician had ever done in the history of Columbus.  He had appointed blacks to various boards and commissions, and he attended black churches.  He was just a, he was just that type of guy, and he was very genuine in his outreach.  So, it was not difficult to follow his lead which is what I did.  And I think that decision to join J.R. Allen and, and that Republican Party is probably--was a turning point in my life for what I've been able to accomplish.  Because it sort of put me in a position once I won that election, it sort of put me in a position of being one of the few blacks in the country that were elected Republicans, and ultimately I got attention in Washington [D.C.] with the party, with Bill Brock when he was chairman to go out around the country, work for--help get Republican candidates elected that were targeted, targeted in our area.  Because we did--me and John McNeal, who was my partner in the consulting firm, political consulting firm, and other people that worked with us like Thelma Duggin.  Targeted candidates for us meant candidates who had a positive image in the black community and with the right type campaign strategy should be able to address those issues that would perhaps increase their percentage of black votes.  We did not go into campaigns where there were hardcore right wing candidates that we felt were not sensitive to the black community.
Story_ID: 482474
Speaker 1: --During that period, that was a time when the Dixiecrats had grown disgusted with Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] and started flipping to the Republican Party at some point.  So was that like a source of--did you find yourself in the same room with a lot of right wing, former Dixiecrats?
Speaker 2: There were some folks that had started switching but being in the right in the same room with 'em, that's not how we were structured.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because, you know, it's not like a bunch of people sitting around a table and I'm in that room.  They were candidates in their own right in various places around the country.  But there could have been a candidate in Mississippi, as an example, who genuinely wanted to reach out to the African American community who may not have been a Dixiecrat that had switched, if you understand what I mean.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  'Cause they were already Republicans in the South.
Speaker 2: Some.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And they would typically be the more open-minded people back in those days in terms of the racial issues and things like that.  So, those the kind of folks that we--not that they weren't conservative, but I always felt that conservatism does not necessarily mean racism.  It depends upon how far you take it.  And the candidates did not--that were conservative but not anti-race or had--or did not have a racist image, were the candidate we felt that we could go out and try to support.  Bob Livingston down in Louisiana is a good example.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We, he ran and part of his district was the 9th Ward [New Orleans, Louisiana] that was affected so much by Katrina [Hurricane Katrina].  We took Bob into the black churches, we took him into, you know--met a lot of the black leaders.  Bob did not have an image of someone who was anti-black, and basically all we were trying to do is make sure we got his message out in a positive way to address those issues that were sensitive to the black community.  And we did that.  And Bob got 35 percent of the black vote in New Orleans [Louisiana].  I think I remember him years ago, being I was on 'The MacNeil/Lehrer Report' ['PBS NewsHour'] talking about that race in New Orleans, and I think I used the statement that we had to make the black community and the candidates understand that Republicans don't all have horns and tails.  But that if they had the right attitude, the right message, and the right sensitivities it's no reason why they could not go out and get some of the black votes.  We worked for--campaigned from Mitch McConnell up in Louisville, Kentucky, who is now Senator McConnell from Kentucky.  He was running for county judge at the time, which is really like the chairman of the county commission, and I think we got over 40 percent of the black vote for him because he had the right message, the right sensitivities and things like that.  So, we worked targeted campaigns and we think we had some successes in that.
Story_ID: 482475
Speaker 1: And then, of course, while we were working for the national party, Reagan--President Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] got elected.  I ended up being appointed to the [U.S.] Small Business Administration.
Speaker 2: Now, you were re-elected in Columbus [Georgia] three times, right?
Speaker 1: Three times.
Speaker 2: Okay, then was it in 1980 that Reagan was elected in '80 [1980] and did he appoint you right away in his first term?
Speaker 1: He did.  But I decided in '78 [1978] after the '76 [1976] election--I announced in '78 [1978] that I was not gonna run for re-election to city council [Columbus Council].  So, I never lost, I never lost my--I never was defeated in my council seat, so, and that's always a good feeling, you know, when you leave on your own terms.
Speaker 2: Now, what was your relationship while on city council with the Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] administration?  'Cause you got like a Georgian in the White House [Washington, D.C.], and I don't know.
Speaker 1: I did not have a lot of direct relationship to the Carter administration.  From '76 [1976] to 1980 when we were working for the Republican Party, I knew a lot of the people in the Carter administration.  Most of my friends, most of my political friends have always been Democrats, but we also have a good relationship.  I think Congressman Clay [HistoryMaker William Clay, Sr.] said it, said it better, you know, and that we should have a, what, a special interest?  How did he put it?  It just sort of slipped me for a minute.  But the bottom line is, I think we should be--should keep the doors open on any and all political parties that are making decisions for us to the extent that if we can help influence just a little bit of change, then I think it's incumbent upon us to do that.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you were--correct me if I'm wrong, you were the--appointed to be the head of SBA's minority office I guess?
Speaker 1: Yeah, associate administrator for minority small businesses.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Associate administrator for minority small businesses at the Small Business Administration.  And in the role, I was the chief--the key advocate for minority businesses across the country.  I was responsible for the 8(a) Program [8(a) Business Development Program] which got minorities into a sheltered program where they could receive federal contracts on a non-competitive basis, so that they can learn and understand how the federal government did business, so that they could grow their firms and be self-sustaining.  So I headed that whole program across the country.
Story_ID: 482476
Speaker 1: It's interesting I think, now, again, correct me if I'm wrong, but I think SBA [U.S. Small Business Administration] really grew during the Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] administration to--
Speaker 2: Some of those programs were put in place during the Nixon administration.  You're absolutely right, and were built upon because President Nixon believed in black capitalism.  I think he was the first president to really say we need to get more minorities involved in business.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: That's a pretty difficult argument to argue against.  Pretty difficult position to argue against, because I've always fundamentally believed that unless we're economically strong we're always gonna be socially weak.  And, as we continue to grow economically, then things just automatically get better for us as a race, we're more independent, we're able to stand more on our own feet, we'd be less dependent upon other people, and we can employ folks, we can grow our capital and we can do things that we couldn't do without it.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, and in your position there were some--couple of contradictions I read about.  One was that you were ordered to reduce staff, but also ordered to do a better job in policing the contracts from, you know, the SBA contracts.  So, how did you manage to, I mean, was that a real conflict, I mean, a dilemma for you how to cut down on the resources you have and then plus do a better job?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess that's part of some of the frustrations in dealing with government and working for the government as opposed to the private sector.  I think in a lot of administrations people feel you can do better with--should be able to do better with less.  It makes the job very difficult, and that was a real conflict for me.  But you know, you just have to try to manage, manage through it the best you can and I think I did.  But it wasn't easy because we were saying you need to, you need to cut staff, you need to cut budget, but we expect you to expand what you're doing.  You know, it just runs counter to good sense so to speak.  But you have to do what you have to do.
Speaker 1: Now did you--I mean, did you pretty much--did you consider yourself in sync with the policies of the Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] administration pretty much or just in sync on certain things?
Speaker 2: Well, I was in--well, let me just say, I never agreed with--I, I don't ever agree with everybody on everything.  And there were some things I agreed with and some things perhaps I did not.  But I do think, under the Reagan administration, we provided a lot of opportunity for a lot of minority businesses to grow and make a lot of money.  I still have friends tell me they made more money under President Reagan than any other administration that's been in.  And a lot of 'em did.  When we were able to, you know, administer or give out contracts of fifty, sixty hundred million dollars to minority-owned businesses, that was pretty hard, you know, pretty good lick.   That's not happening today, it didn't happen in previous administrations since Reagan.  And so, things have been tougher in terms of, you know, really accessing the government in the way in which it was done back in the Reagan.  And, of course, you had the big [U.S.] military buildup, there was just a lot of money out there.  Lot of minority businesses were able to do quite well, and I was--I'm glad I was in the position to help them.
Story_ID: 482477
Speaker 1: Now you were at the SBA [U.S. Small Business Administration] for two years.  We were mentioning off-screen Sonicraft [Sonicraft, Inc., Chicago, Illinois] as being one of the--in Chicago [Illinois] as being one of the minority-owned businesses that you helped fund, you know.  And quite a few businesses got big contracts, you know.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, quite a few businesses got huge contracts and, you know, I was instrumental in trying to get some of those contracts.  The idea being if you get the contract, you can hire the people, you can bring the expertise, you can grow a business, you can make that business competitive so that when you can't bid for these or get these kind of contracts, you have a, a good foundation in which to grow your business on a competitive basis.  That was the whole idea.  We provide management, technical assistance.  In some instances, we provided equipment to firms, so it was a great opportunity in my opinion for minority businesses to really get a step up.
Speaker 1: So the rewarding of contracts based largely on the management capacity of the business and what it's able to--
Speaker 2: Yeah, to a great extent and expertise to be able to handle the work.  You, now, we wouldn't give a contract to make a, a highly technical electronic gadget to a guy who's a barber.  That's not his expertise.  Not taking anything away from that profession, but it's just not his expertise.  But--so, the people that got contracts should've had some type of background that would lend itself to the contract that they were getting, either by having worked for someone else, having the degrees in that, or having a business that had grown up in that industry.  Which is interesting because ultimately what I did in my business [Dimensions International, Inc.] is totally different from what I was trained to do (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right.  It was--I was listening to you talk, I say, well, now.  So, but, now, now you were, you were at SBA for two years.
Speaker 2: I was.
Story_ID: 482478
Speaker 1: Now, what happened that you decided to--was it--and I guess I'm, you know--now, I'm thinking as I'm hearing you tell this story, so you're awarding these million dollar contracts to people and you see what it takes to get these contracts, and you're working on a government salary.  You're thinking, well, heck, if I can get on the other side of this--is that what you thought?
Speaker 2: No, that was not my driver when I started Dimensions [Dimensions International, Inc.].  As a matter of fact, when I left the government I did not start Dimensions right away.  I had no intentions for going into the government contracting business.  I became a consultant to try to continue to help other firms get government business, try to help other firms get through the maze of the SBA [U.S. Small Business Administration] machinery so to speak.  So I had, no, no, no--so I wasn't motivated by, oh, that's the way they're doing it, let me get out and do it to.  But, I started a consulting business and at some point in time I got--I had several clients but unfortunately they all didn't pay me and that created--that was--presented problems for me.  I'm going out helping a guy get a contract and, you know, and I'm need to be paid or help to do some marketing, or open a door and, or whatever.  And, so I decided, well, maybe I need to look at this a different way.  So, it was at least two years after I left the government before I really started, you know, taking a look at the government in terms of an opportunity for myself.
Speaker 1: Okay, so by 1984, I guess, then that you--so, well, really you started Dimensions International in '85 [1985] but I guess you started planning, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Around '85 [1985] is when I really began to change the concept 'cause I started out as Bob Wright and Associates as a consulting firm.  But then I began to--took on a new name with a different focus around '85 [1985].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's when I formed Dimensions International, and eventually incorporated as Dimensions International.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what did Dimensions do, basically?
Speaker 2: To start off I was just--I was in management consulting, doing studies, surveys, you know, things like that.  And then one day, a firm that had outgrown the 8(a) Program [8(a) Business Development Program], the Shelton Market [ph.] was about to--then I eventually went into the 8(a) Program myself.  I'm trying to get my story straight.  And I went in as a management consulting firm.  Eventually, this firm that was running computers for the [U.S.] Department of Agriculture had outgrown their ability to get this particular computer contract.  And they asked me would I become the prime on that contract, they had the expertise and they would become a subcontractor to me.  Well, that's a win-win for everybody.  It's a win-win for their company because they're able to keep part of the business.  It's a win for me because I'm able to get into a business I'm not in already with someone who's in it to provide the expertise.  You see what I mean?  And so, I was able to get into that contract--
Story_ID: 482479
Speaker 1: So you were talking about your--this first contract with Dimensions International [Dimensions International, Inc.], well, the computer contract.  Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh, yeah.  That got us into IT, information technology arena, where we were actually running--had a staff of people running computers for the [U.S.] Department of Agriculture gathering data on crops and things like that from satellites.  And we were programming that data on the mainframes and stuff like that, so we had people running those systems and collecting that data (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, so this is about 1987 or so?
Speaker 2: Could've been.  Could've been '87 [1987].
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Around that timeframe.
Speaker 1: And then things just start to grow I guess from that point 'cause I see that Dimensions International is all about myriad of activities, you know, all around systems information and engineering.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: Support technology, logistical support, air-space management, security engineering, and some of these things, I mean, the layman knows nothing about at all, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  Well, we won a contract from the FAA [Federal Aviation Administration] to support the air traffic control systems around the country and when we won that contract, again, we brought in a lot of talent.  You know, and that's the key to success in business, if you got the right talent, we feel we can do anything.  And we brought in a lot of engineers, lot of radar engineers, programmers, people who had a lot of ideas about how we can take--develop some aviation technologies, and out of that became Flight Explorer.  Flight Explorer, you know, tracks all the airplanes in the air in real time.  We developed that under Dimensions International.  And then we set up a separate company, a subsidiary under Dimensions for that.
Speaker 1: So, Flight Explorer is the--let us understand, that's the technology that used by commercial airlines right now to track--or the FAA to track airplanes around the country?
Speaker 2: Eighty percent of the airlines use our system to track their planes once they're in the air (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right, okay.
Speaker 2: We have some system at O'Hare Airport [Chicago O'Hare International Airport, Chicago, Illinois], some of the airlines--lot of the airlines flying in and out of O'Hare use our systems.  Some of the bigger carriers have systems they develop over time.  The Hughes [William J. Hughes Technical Center, New Jersey] system costs millions of dollars.  We developed our system and we pioneered this concept into the aviation community.  So, we are the leader when it comes to aircraft situation display.  Pull up your--pull up our website sometime, flightexplorer.com, and you'll see everything you need to see on Flight Explorer.  Now, Dimensions International, however, was more geared toward logistics.  However, a lot of our work in the early years after '89 [1989] was with the FAA where we supported all these systems around the country, with most of our people up in Atlantic City [New Jersey] at the FAA technical center.  So, we just began to grow, you know, we grew in the FAA, we grew in the [U.S.] Department of Defense, we grew in the [U.S.] Army, we grew in the [U.S.] Navy.  And we just began to expand our capabilities pretty much worldwide.
Story_ID: 482480
Speaker 1: Now, Dimensions International [Dimensions International, Inc.] was sold to Honeywell [Honeywell International Inc.] in 2007, is that true?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So currently you're--and you were the founder of that and of the--chairman of it, chairman emeritus of it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At the time we sold it, I was chairman emeritus.  My son was chairman, CEO.  And Johnny Wilson was president and chief operating officer.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Right, now you still have Flight Explorer?
Speaker 2: Flight Explorer, I own Flight Explorer.  I bought it from Dimensions at the time we sold--before we sold to Honeywell.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, and that's--now how much--I guess--well, you know, what kind of business are you doing?  This is a big deal.  This is really big so--you are in the Black Enterprise's Top 100 black businesses (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Dimensions International was.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Dimensions International.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we were one of BE's Top 100.  In '05 [2005] we were Black Enterprise Company of the Year.  Dimensions International was.  So we feel pretty good about what we've been able to accomplish.  We feel pretty good about being able to build a business from scratch, take it to the next level, growing from one or two people to 1500 people and then sell it to somebody like Honeywell.  That was a major accomplishment for us.
Speaker 1: That is something.  Now, SENTEL [SENTEL Corporation, Alexandria, Virginia] was a company that you acquired.
Speaker 2: We acquired SENTEL, right.
Speaker 1: And that was another black business, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's correct.
Speaker 1: Dealt with a similar--
Speaker 2: Well, SENTEL mostly is an engineering services company.  The guy who formed, who founded, Jim Garrett [James F. Garrett], is an engineer.  Got his degree from North Carolina A&T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina], and they've done a lot of work in the technology areas on weapons systems and things like that, a very technically-oriented company.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So what are your future plans, I mean?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: I know your son is pretty much--now, your son, Russell [Russell T. Wright], right?
Speaker 2: Russell, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he's set to take over, or if I'm reading it right he's--well, you tell me (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, when we sold the company to Honeywell, he became one of their vice presidents.  So, he's a vice president of Honeywell, so he's with Honeywell right now.  He had to make a commitment to stay with the company for a period of time, you know, during the transition.  And that's a good thing to do because, you know, he knows the customers.  He and General Wilson both are very much engaged, so he's with Honeywell right now.  What am I doing?  I don't know, Flight Explorer is a good company, you know.  I'm excited about the technology we've developed, we're gonna continue to do that.
Story_ID: 482481
Speaker 1: I'm also involved in things I consider really relevant to what's going on.  The Martin Luther King Memorial [Martin Luther King, Jr. Memorial, Washington, D.C.], I'm involved in that the whole leadership council.  I was a chair at the commission, you know, for the African American Museum [National Museum of African American History and Culture, Washington, D.C.] and handed that off to the Smithsonian [Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.].  And [HistoryMaker] Lonnie Bunch, you may know Lonnie from Chicago [Illinois] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Dr. Lonnie Bunch, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, he's--
Speaker 2: Used to be head of Chicago Historical Society [Chicago History Museum, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Absolutely.  I was with him last week at a luncheon and, you know, he's taken the ball now and he's running with it and doing a tremendous job.  And I still talk to him and give him whatever counsel I can from where we sit, you know, developing that report.  I sit on the board of Aflac [Aflac, Inc.], I chair the order committee there so that keeps me pretty busy.  And, I spend time with Ohio State University [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] in supporting the president in his capital campaign, and things like that.  So, you know, I'm doing a lot of fun things.
Speaker 2: So, you're involved with Columbus State University [Columbus, Georgia] too in Georgia, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Columbus State, I just did a, you know, gave a million dollars to Columbus--gave a million dollars to Columbus State but I also gave a million dollars to Columbus Technical College [Columbus, Georgia] that will train nurses and x-ray technicians and radiology technicians and surgical assistants and things like that down in Columbus, Georgia.  So, I stay as busy as I need to be or wanna be.  Trying to make a contribution, I think it's important for those that are--have some degree of success to give back to the community.  And again, I got that from my mom [Pauline Talley Wright], because we cannot, cannot overlook those who are still trying to make it up the ladder.
Story_ID: 482482
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well, I would like to see us become more economically viable.  As I said before, I think that's gonna be the key to our success.  I'm encouraged by the--by what I see with some of our young people today, I think there are some very bright, talented, young people, you know, need people like myself and others to sort of hold 'em by the hand and sort of keep 'em on the straight and narrow but a lot of talent out there.  I hope we can continue to come together as a community of people with a focus on what's important as far as long-term and for our future generation's long-term.  So those are some of my hopes and dreams, and aspirations.  And to the extent I can lend myself to support some of those causes and some of those efforts that will help get us there, then that's what I'd like to do.
Story_ID: 482483
Speaker 1: Now, when you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently now if you could?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  When you're young and impetuous, you like to have success tomorrow.  What I've learned over my life is the way you start out is not the way you end up, by virtue of what I've been able to accomplish away from what I been trained to do.  I can't go back and redo the script.  I fundamentally believe that God sort of takes us where he wants us to go, when he wants us to go there and what he wants us to do.  So I cannot think about--think of anything I would, I could go back and change.  Obviously, along the way, there're certain decisions that you make that you would do differently if you had an opportunity to, but there's been nothing that has been so detrimental to me getting to where I've been blessed to get to that would say I wish I'd done this, that or the other differently.  I'm sure over life you go through and you meet people, and you may--there could be some things I may have done or things people done to me, maybe I didn't say I was sorry or they didn't say they were sorry but that has not happened very often.  And I can't even think of what I'm talking about really, but I've been blessed.  That's all I can say, and I'm happy to be where I am today and hope I can help other people realize some of their dreams.
Story_ID: 482484
Speaker 1: --What today, when you look back on all your successes, do you think would be your legacy?
Speaker 2: I think my legacy, and I hope my legacy will be that I was able to help a lot of people obtain some of their dreams and aspirations.  And I say that because even with Dimensions [Dimensions International, Inc.] when I, through the process of growing that company over twenty years, I created an ESOP [employee stock ownership plan].  An ESOP is an employee-owned company where I sold a percentage of that business to my employees.  And, as a result of me selling a part of the business years ago to my employees, when I sold to Honeywell [Honeywell International Inc.] I think I probably created at least ten millionaires of people that had worked for me for a long period of time.  I was able to put money in people's pocket who probably never would've received a lump sum of money just working a job.  Because when we did the ESOP it replaced the 401k, you see.  And I have had any number of people to come up to me and thank me for having the foresight to do that, and that they're able to see now how they can educate their child, see now how they can buy that home, see how they can do something for their mom or dad.  I hope that's my legacy (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: That's what I feel good about.
Story_ID: 482485
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about your family now.  Are you married to the same woman [June Russell Wright] that you married out of high school [William H. Spencer High School, Columbus, Georgia]?  Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yep, still have two kids.  Russell [Russell T. Wright], who finished Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], and came to work for me in '89 [1989] and I groomed him to take over the company at some point in time, so when he did take over, he's well prepared.  When he first came to work for me, he was like any other kid right out of college, irresponsible.  I don't know, just had to be groomed to understand what work and work ethic's all about.  And one day he came to me and said that he needed a raise.  I told him he didn't deserve a raise, hadn't been here long enough for a raise.  He said, "But I need more money in D.C. [Washington, D.C.]."  I said, "Well, sounds like to me--excuse me--you need to go find a part-time job."  Came to me about a week later and said, "Hey, dad, look, I found me a part-time job."  I was shocked.  I said, "Where?"  He said, "Down at T.J. Maxx," so I said, "Okay."  So, as any parent, you know, we wanna go and snoop around, see what the kid's doing.  So I went down there one day, he's on the cash register.  That told me a lot about him as a person, as a man.  And he's carried those values into Dimensions [Dimensions International, Inc.], and, quite honestly, he took the company to the next level.  When he took over, we was doing a little over $50 million.  When we sold the company, we were doing $200 million.  I give him a lot of credit for doing that.  My daughter's [Kimberly Wright Lavender] a doctor.  She finished Morehouse medical school [Morehouse School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia] after getting her bachelor's degree at Tulane [Tulane University, New Orleans, Louisiana] and she is a psychiatrist.  And she has two kids, two daughters, Sydney [Sydney Lavender], eight, and Lauren [Lauren Lavender], five.  And my wife was a nurse also as my mother [Pauline Talley Wright] was, so she worked and retired as a public health nurse after working on the same job for about thirty-four years.  So that's the family.  I have one brother [William J. Wright] as I told you before, and he's married and has three daughters.  One's a lawyer, one works for Deloitte Touche [Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited] and the other is in real estate.  So, we feel we have been really blessed as a parent, as a family.  But it all started with my mom, the registered nurse with a lot of compassion and love for people.  And my dad [Robert Wright, Sr.], who had a lot of guts and backbone to stand up for what he believed in, and with a mission to educate my brother and I.  And for those two people I will always be grateful.
Story_ID: 482486
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything I haven't asked you we need to touch on before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: I can't think of anything, I think we walked right through early days to right where we are now.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, the last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Well, I would like to be remembered as someone who had a reputation as being a good person, caring person, a person that reached out, helped a lot of people, treated everybody like they would like to be treated.  I think that's how I'd like to be remembered when it's all said and done.  That I had the courage of my convictions to stand up and fight for those things that were not only important to me but important for other people.  And I think I did that and when I ran the company [Dimensions International, Inc.], fought for my employees, I fought to make things better for them.  I fought to help minority businesses when I was at SBA [U.S. Small Business Administration] and when I was on the city council [Columbus Council].  I also did all I could to make the lives of my constituents better than they had been in the past, better housing, better schools, better job opportunities and so forth.  So, when it's all said and done if I can be remembered that way, I think I can close my eyes happy.
