Story_ID: 73986
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the interviewer for The HistoryMakers today.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Ma'am could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Zenobia Grant Washington, Z-E-N-O-B-I-A, Grant, G-R-A-N-T, Washington.
Speaker 1: That's... I'm going to ask you, what is the significance of Zenobia?
Speaker 2: It's interesting in that the family that I married into, one of my husband's first cousins was in my mother's wedding, and her name is Zenobia.  And she loved that name, my mother loved the name Zenobia so much.  And then when she was pregnant with me, she saw the name Zenobia in print, and so that kind of sparked her to name me that.  And she said that when she saw it, it was an East African name that meant "Daddy's girl."  So, I guess that's what she was hoping for in the end, and thought the name was beautiful.  So, she named me that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what's your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born in Newark, New Jersey.  And I was born on November 24, 1966.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a doll maker, an artist.
Speaker 1: Alright.  And what's today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is December 5, 2002.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: In Myrtle Beach [South Carolina] at the Wyndham Embassy Suites, at the Wyndham something or other plantation... Kingston... all of them, yeah.
Story_ID: 73987
Speaker 1: Alright, five "People" Magazinish-type questions we always ask.  They just require a short answer.  The first one is, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My mother's corn pudding.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's real specific.  (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Purple.
Speaker 1: Alright.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No, but I would love to be able to take a vacation one of these days soon.  So, no, I don't have a favorite vacation destination.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I don't... yeah, but I don't think I could (Laughter)...  No.
Speaker 1: You can't say it?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 73988
Speaker 1: Well, let's talk about your family origin.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Do you know much about the origins of your family, and where they came from?  How far back can you go?
Speaker 2: As far as I know, both sides of my family--my mother's [Susan Armstrong] side and my father's [Joseph Howell Grant] side of the family--are from Georgetown County [South Carolina], as far as I know.  My father's mother's mother, I know is from a place called Arcadia Plantation.  And I'm in the process now of trying to figure out how far that family goes back on that plantation.  So, I know that her name was Elisa [ph.] Ward.  And she married a man... and her maiden name was Johnson.  And she married a man who was a Ward.  And from what I understand, he was also from Arcadia Plantation.  So, and her mother and father were on the Arcadia Plantation.  And I've also been hearing stories about the fact that her father may have come here on a turpentine ship, from where I don't know.  But I'm in the process of trying to figure that out.  My mother's mother's mother, whose name was Sarah Loggie, was from, her people were from a plantation that is literally across the street from the Arcadia Plantation.  And it's called Hobcaw Baruch Plantation [sic, Hobcaw Barony Plantation, which is now owned by the Belle W. Baruch Foundation].
Speaker 1: Wait a minute, now.  Can you, let's spell some of these places.  Can you spell Arcadia Plantation for us first?
Speaker 2: Oh, A-R-C-A-D-I-A, Arcadia.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Is that right?
Speaker 1: It sounds right.
Speaker 2: I need a pencil to--
Speaker 1: It sounds right.
Speaker 2: --write it down.
Speaker 1: Can you, can you spell... now what was the other plantation across the road?
Speaker 2: Can I write on this?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Hobcaw, H-O-B-C-A-W, Hobcaw Baruch, B-A-U-R-C-H [sic, B-A-R-U-C-H], Baruch Plantation [sic, Hobcaw Barony Plantation].  And they do a lot of environmental studies on Hobcaw Baruch now.  And I cannot remember the lady that used to own, was the kind of matriarch of that plantation, I can't remember [Belle W. Baruch].  But it was privately owned for many years as well.  And Arcadia is still privately owned, a privately owned plantation.
Speaker 1: Now, Hobcaw Baruch, is-
Story_ID: 73989
Speaker 1: Alright, now, yeah...  What you just told me... can you tell me... about Hobcaw Baruch Plantation [sic, Hobcaw Barony Plantation, which is now owned by the Belle W. Baruch Foundation]?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  And Hobcaw Baruch Plantation is where my grandmother, Sarah Loggie, is from.
Speaker 1: How do you spell her name?
Speaker 2: L-O-G-G-I-E.  And it took a long time... Loggie... and it took a long time for me to figure out exactly where she was from, because I had never heard that name.  And you know, when you live in a small town in the South, you're used to hearing Washington, Green, Brown... (unclear) Whatever the name is, it kind of rings a bell.  But I couldn't find any other Loggies.  So when I was doing research on my father's family on the Arcadia Plantation, one of the ancient women on Arcadia was talking to me, and it just came to her just like that.  "Well, if she's a Loggie, she's from Hobcaw Baurch Plantation across the way."  So, that's kind of how the research is coming; all of these things are coming to me.  So, she's from--
Speaker 1: Her first name was Sarah?
Speaker 2: Sarah.
Speaker 1: S-A-R-A...
Speaker 2: S-A-R-A-H.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my mother's father [Joseph Davis] is from a place on the way to Charleston [South Carolina], on Highway 17, called Midway [South Carolina].  And it's really Georgetown County.  And apparently at one point, my... his... my great-grandfather, Jeff Davis, owned quite a bit of property out there, though it's all chopped up in family members and people selling and all that.  So, a part of my family is from Midway.  And my father's, father's family is from Georgetown City.  But where they live now wasn't the city at that time; it was some outskirts.  So, as far as I can tell, everybody's from right around in this area.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, what are they--The Arcadia Plantation is, can be visited now, or--?
Speaker 2: Well, if you know somebody or have an affiliation with Arcadia, it's fine to go there.  But it's not at all open to the public.  She does open up, she does open up the gardens, which is about forty acres of gardens for, like a tour of homes type thing to benefit our non-profit organization.  And she does that once or twice a year.  But other than that, it's private.
Speaker 1: And you said, I think off-camera that students have come up and visited--
Speaker 2: Yes--
Speaker 1: Hobcaw Baruch [sic, Hobcaw Barony] and--
Speaker 2: Yes, well, yes.  They went... I had students that came in from Buena Vista University in Storm Lake, Iowa.  And I went out there to do a little bit of work on cultural diversity, and to kind of expose a lot of the children that are from that area.  And they're not children--I mean they're college students--to African-American people.  I mean Storm Lake, Iowa is in a place...  I mean Storm Lake, Iowa has like ten black people in the whole town.  So they, it's really like an awareness, it was an awareness type trip.  And so, and the best way I thought for them to really have that exposure is to come into a culture and kind of do an immersion type tour, where you go in and actually sit in people's homes and eat and enjoy the food and casual conversation--and not in an up-tight type of way--where you can ask... feel comfortable to ask questions and have dialog with people that you really, you know, should be familiar with but are not.  And Arcadia Plantation was one of the places that moved them the most--to be a place that is so unchanged, because it hasn't been affected by any development.  And to be able to walk the grounds where people actually cultivated rice and were slaves and were enslaved people, was just awesome just to be there.  Even when words weren't spoken they were truly touched by the experience, and to be able to see the actual plantation home and, you know, the way things were.  Most of the houses faced the river, because that was the mode of transportation, and how they got their supplies and stuff in.  It was just wonderful for them to be able to, to be touched like that.  And I'm glad that a place like Arcadia Plantation still exists the way it exists, because a lot of places are getting to be so touristy.  And so, it's kind of expected to be able to go in a place like that and have that experience.  I think is wonderful.  So, I hope it stays like that for a while.
Story_ID: 73990
Speaker 1: Now, this area here, you gave me some geographic parameters before about this area and its distinct cultural background.  Can you tell us about this?
Speaker 2: Georgetown County [South Carolina] on down... I say Highway 17 all the way to Sea Islands, Georgetown County down to Charleston, Beaufort, St. Helena, Hilton Head--all of those islands that are kind of jutted up in there--down to Sapelo Island, Georgia, are considered to be where Geechee people lived.  A lot of times when you talk about the Geechee Gullah culture, people focus on Charleston and Beaufort and St. Helena.  And it really encompasses all of this area.  And I consider the Geechee/Gullah culture to be one of the jewel cultures that still exists in America.  There are people that still speak the language.  And for a long time it was... for example, I'm thirty-six.  And it was never proper for us, people in my generation, to speak the language because it was considered to be backwards and ignorant and bad English.  But that was my learning language, because all of the, a lot of the women that raised me spoke Geechee/Gullah.  And so--
Speaker 1: Can you, can you spell that for us, just for the sake of the HistoryMakers.  Geechee..
Speaker 2: Gullah is spelled G-U-L-L-A-H, Gullah, which is the language.  Geechee, G-E-E-C-H-E-E, Geechee.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Sorry, spelling is not my thing.  But so, it was my learning language.  So, in my mother's [Susan Armstrong] kitchen and my grandmother's [Mary G. Davis] kitchen, as you started to cook--and you receive instructions from the people who are teaching you--every Geechee woman needs to learn how to cook proper rice.  You don't cook nothing until you cook... learn to cook nothing until you cook rice.  So, you--
Speaker 1: Now, what is the language?  How is it different from English?  I mean, what--
Speaker 2: It's broken, it's a broken English. And you know, I'm not a, I'm not really the right person to really to talk with any intelligence about how it derived.  But I know it has... oh, Gosh, I'm trying to think of the place in Africa where the dialect is so similar, and I can't get it.
Speaker 1: I think it's... I think its Ebo country, I think.  But--
Speaker 2: Yes, but it's also--
Speaker 1: (Unclear)
Speaker 2: Right, up in that area.  Oh, Gosh, I can't remember, but it'll come to me.  But it's the bridge language from... that bridged people from Africa to here.  And so people aren't really--
Speaker 1: So it has some African flavor to it--
Speaker 2: Right, have that flavor, kind of--and a lot of people mistake it for like Caribbean.  But it's deeper than that, kind of like a guttural type of--it's deeper than that.  So, when we hear people--when I grew up hearing people saying, "din dan this yuh" you know, that was... you know, you don't say those words.  But I heard them all the time, and that's how people communicated with one another.  And then I also--
Speaker 1: Can you speak a little bit more of it for us, so we can get an idea of what it's like?
Speaker 2: Oh, it's hard for me to speak it on the spot.  Now, if I was in my mom's kitchen or if I was talking to--
Speaker 1: Okay, the rice is going on in the kitchen.  And (Laughter), I know I don't look like your mom.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  Okay.  My mom, or my grandmother might say, or my great-grandmother might say, "Gal whut I tell you to do?" to say, you know, "What are you doing?"  You know, or "Why you put dat dar in de pot?"  You know, so it's kind of that kind of language.  And it's hard for me, because I can't speak it on cue.  But if my great-grandmother or some elder was talking to me, I would respond, you know, in that way.
Story_ID: 73991
Speaker 1: But it [Gullah/Geechee] was a very, it is a very important language, in that people who really get into...  Marquetta Goodwine is... I don't know if you ever heard of her.  They call her Queen Marquetta Goodwine, Queen Quet.  And she's queen of the Gullah/Geechee Nation down in St. Helena [South Carolina].  And she is fluent in Geechee.  And so, she would be a wonderful person for you to talk to about the, you know, if you want to really get into the language and all of that.  But it was really important that the language existed, because it was a way for people to communicate with one another without white folks a lot of time knowing what was being said.  So you know, when the drums and things were banned, you know, we always found a way to keep communication.  And so, it was like a code language.  And so, and it was also a way for women and men to voice frustrations during the time when you couldn't voice frustration.  So, you could be talking much trash (Laughter) about somebody, and they were right there and they wouldn't have a clue what you were talking about.  So, it was real important for many reasons.  And so, I'm grateful for the people that still speak it, and speak it fluently and keep it alive.  But it really has... and my daughter [Susan Alexis Washington] has picked it up as well, which you know, is interesting to me that.  Because I don't really speak it unless I'm around people that are speaking it.  But she, she just picks it up.  And it's real interesting, and I'm glad for that.
Speaker 2: Spell Marquetta Goodwine.
Speaker 1: Oh, Marquetta, I have no...  M-A-R-Q-U-E-T-T-A, Marquetta; Goodwine, G-O-O-D-W-I-N-E.  And they call her Queen Quet--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --of the Gullah/Geechee Nation, which is, I think a non-profit organization, yeah.
Speaker 2: I've seen that big--I know they've been raising money to try to preserve the culture.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, right.
Speaker 1: But she would be a wonderful person to talk to, she's awesome.
Speaker 2: On the big Gullah/Geechee website?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, uh-huh.
Story_ID: 73992
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So, give us some idea then about your parents.  Can you tell us your father's name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And give us his birthdate if you can, and where he was born.
Speaker 2: My father, he was born in Georgetown, South Carolina as far I can tell.  I tried to call him last night to make sure that I was not telling no stories on him.  But as far as I know, he was born in Georgetown, South Carolina.  His name is Reverend Joseph Howell Grant [Joseph Howell Grant].  And he is 60 or 61 years old, which would put him in '41' [1941], October 8, I think, 1941.  My mother's name is Susan Davis Armstrong.  She's been, she re-married about four years ago.  And she was born in Georgetown, South Carolina as well.  And she was born February 13, '41 [1941], so she's 61 as well.
Speaker 1: They're the same age?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  She's a little bit, she's a couple months older than he is.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, tell us something about your father.  What did he like to do as a person?  And what did he do for a living?
Speaker 2: He taught school in the public school, PS 166 [now The Richard Rodgers School of the Arts in New York City, New York], taught there for as long as I can remember.  And he retired from that probably... he retired real early.  You know, a lot of times back during the time when he started teaching... people started teaching at 18, you know, 17 and 18.  So, he had plenty of years, and he retired about five or six years ago.  And he was... and stayed in school; he always stayed in school.  He was always pursuing one degree or another.
Speaker 1: Where did he get his first degree?  Do you know?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I think that the first degree he got was from Voorhees [College] in, wherever that is, in Denmark, South Carolina?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: I think that's the first place that he got his degree.
Speaker 1: That's an Episcopal, black Episcopal school.
Speaker 2: Okay.  That's where he got his first degree, I think.  And I think, and I can't remember any of the other places that he's gone to school.  But he's gone to school many times throughout my life, pursuing... I think he just liked to learn and that type of stuff.  And he lives in Hempstead, New York now and is an associate pastor at a C.M.E. church.
Speaker 1: Okay, Christian Methodist Episcopalian?
Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh.
Story_ID: 73993
Speaker 1: My mother [Susan Davis Armstrong] is a retired crane operator.  And she was the first woman to work at Georgetown Steel 27, 28 years ago.  She went there and she just, you know, handled her business.  So, she, I think that she would make a wonderful HistoryMaker as well.
Speaker 2: How did she become a crane operator, you know?
Speaker 1: She, my father [Joseph Howell Grant] and she divorced, and she moved down with two small children.  And the time that we moved back to Georgetown, there were really not that many opportunities to make a whole lot of money if you weren't teaching, which I mean that's not a whole lot of money either.  Or you were in the school system or one of the mills, or you just were doing domestic work or working at a grocery store or something like that.  And she knew that that would not feed her kids and clothe her kids.  And so, there was a requirement made that they open up the mill to women back in the seventies [1970s] when a lot of that was going on.  And so, she went in with several other women, and she was the only one that really stayed.  It was good money, and more than that, it was wonderful benefits.  And so, she did it because she knew that she wanted for us to have the best that, you know... that we could have.  So, that's why she did that, and really wound up making a real big impact on that place.  She went through a lot of rough times in that mill, a lot of rough times, and you know, really came out of there...  She had to retire early because of some health issues.  But she retired with the respect of almost everybody there--people that, you know, really didn't want her to be there, and tried everything they could for her not to be there.  They had to tip their hats and say, you know, "You've done good, Girl," and you know, let her go out gracefully.  So, it was wonderful.  You know, she did a wonderful thing for me.
Story_ID: 73994
Speaker 1: How did your parents [Susan Davis Armstrong and Joseph Howell Grant] meet?  Did they have a story about how they met?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't know.  I know they went to high school together, went to Howard High School together.  I don't really know how they met.  My mother doesn't talk that... (Laughter), doesn't talk that well about my father anymore, so I don't know.  But I know they went to high school together and were probably in the same grade, and kind of met maybe that way.  So--
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, basically your mother and father split up early in your life?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, I was eight years old when we moved back down to South Carolina from the Bronx [New York City, New York]; we were living in the Bronx at the time.  So... and my brother was six.
Speaker 1: Do you... well, I guess the difference must have been dramatic, you know--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --to leave the Bronx to come here?
Speaker 2: It was, it took a lot of getting used to.  One of the things that I had a hard time with was the... there was such strict racial lines drawn.  PS 166 [now The Richard Rodgers School of the Arts in New York City, New York], was such a diverse school, and I went to school with everybody.  And just the fact that now you come down South and you're either black or white; there were no in-betweens.  And there were no Muslim children, no Jewish children, no Hindu children, no... nobody.   Either you were black or you were white, and that was it.  No Hispanic children, no nothing.  And so it's like, "Where everybody at?"  That was the first thing, you know.  And then to be looked at funny because you spoke to somebody and had a conversation with somebody who was white.  And people are, "What are you doing talking to her?" took a lot of getting used to... to get used to just the drastic way people perceived race and friendship and that.  So, that was really hard.  And then to, coming down here from museums and theaters and all that kind of stuff to nothing, really, it was kind of...  I mean to be... I shouldn't say nothing.  I mean it was the beach... it was a whole different type of... something.  But it wasn't as fast-paced as what we were used to.  And the faces just weren't the same, so it was hard to kind of adjust to that.  And I don't think I ever did really adjust to it until I moved back to this area, and I left here kicking and screaming.  I mean I was like, "I am ready to go, I'm never coming back," and that whole thing.  But having children sometimes makes you humble, and sometimes you can come back to a place and see and appreciate some of the things that you missed as a young person.  So, that's the process that I'm going through now.
Story_ID: 73995
Speaker 1: So, tell us about your childhood.  You know, I guess it was split up--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --you know, in two different places, two really diverse places.  But what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of childhood?
Speaker 2: The beach, my grandmother's house.  My grandmother, Mary Davis, who's deceased, was like, she was like the bomb grandmother of all time.  And so, I think that of all the people that have loved me in my life, she loved me the best of all.  And so, a lot of my childhood memories revolve around the relationship that I had with her and my grandfather, her husband, [Joseph] Joe Davis, who was quite a rogue, but a wonderful, wonderful granddaddy.  And so, I remember going out to the country in Midway [South Carolina] and watching my grandfather, Joe Davis's mother, slaughter chickens in her yard and feeding the hogs bubble gum.  And I mean, all that kind of--
Speaker 1: This is your grandmother?
Speaker 2: Yes, and getting the worse beating of my life.  I remember trips to the beach.  I remember begging one year to go into the tobacco fields.  Because I thought that they were saying "the back of" like they were going in the back of something.  I didn't know that they were talking about going in the tobacco fields.  And I begged to go (Laughter) to the "back of fields" because everybody was going, you know.  And I remember being so miserable out there, and begging my granddaddy, "Please come and get me."  (Laughter).  And I only lasted two weeks out there.
Speaker 1: What job out there did you have?
Speaker 2: I didn't have any job.  I was so miserable until nobody wanted to fool up with me.  But my great-grandmother used to go every year.  And I can't even tell you what we did out there, I was so miserable.  My granddaddy came and got me, and he was like, "I bet you won't ever ask to come out here again."  I smelled like tobacco for two weeks.  It was, it was, it was one of those experiences that I'm glad I had, but I would never want to do that again.  I remember going into big fig orchards and picking figs.  I remember going to butterbean fields and picking butterbeans.  I remember church services that lasted all day long.  I remember Easter speeches and choir rehearsals.  And it was a wonderful... I had a wonderful childhood, wonderful childhood.  My grandmother was a very strict disciplinarian.  And so I remember getting my behind cut for a... you know, lots and lots of things, but most of all for having a sassy mouth.  So, but, but I always remember being extremely protected and loved, and mostly by the women in my life.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, it was good.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What kind of things did you like to do when you were coming up?
Speaker 2: Sing.  In high school [Winyah Senior High School], you know, I was big into fashion design.  And I'd lay a piece of my mama's [Susan Davis Armstrong] good fabric out on the floor, and trace it out and cut it and make a dress.  And I loved animals.  And I loved my, you know, hanging with my girlfriends and stuff like that.  But I was really into, I was really into dreaming a lot about what I thought other parts of the world would be like.  And I couldn't wait to spend...  I wasted a lot of time praying for the opportunity to get out of Dodge.  So, but I fantasized a lot about what it would be like to be back in New York, or to be in Atlanta, or to be in Dallas, Texas or places that I felt were far away and exotic.  So, I did a lot of that, too.  But I was really into fashion and design, and not fashion for the sake of fashion.  But I was always curious as to how clothing was put together, and why different designers did what they did to drape a dress or to stitch a dress, or whatever.  So, I was really into that type of stuff.
Story_ID: 73996
Speaker 1: Well, let's talk about school.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And go all the way back to grade school.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And what grade school did you attend?
Speaker 2: I went to Bynum Elementary School, P.S. 166 [now The Richard Rodgers School of the Arts], in New York, then Bynum Elementary School here in Georgetown.  And my mother bought a house on the other side of town, and we went to Kensington Elementary School.  And from--
Speaker 1: Is there a difference in elementary schools that you could detect, in terms of what they taught and how they taught it?
Speaker 2: No, not really.  Not, I couldn't really tell.
Speaker 1: I mean between Brooklyn and, you know, and here?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, man come on.  It was like, you know...  (Laughter).  It was like night and day.  It kind of felt like starting over, in a way.  But I was just so used to there being such a mix of...  At P.S. 166, which is in Manhattan [New York City, New York], actually, something happened there that I wish would happen in the school systems now.  Because there were so many cultures and so much diversity, a lot of the lessons were taught using culture, and using people's diverse... the way they looked and the way they... you know, there was a lot of that.  And here, that wasn't the case.  It was kind of, you know, stiff, and to me just kind of stiff and not interesting.  And for a long time, I thought that that was because there was no more culture and history here, which is so wrong, you know.  But because there's a lot of hurt and pain around a lot of the history in this area, it was just kind of, you know, cut out, which is sad, because it really could have been used a teaching enhancement tool.  I mean, in fourth grade was when we learned about South Carolina history.  And slavery was like... you know, that was it.  You know, we were slaves, and people treated their slaves good.  And slavery was over, and... the end.  And they sent a note home--that was the year that 'Roots' came out [1977].  And they sent a note home with everybody asking, "Please don't let your children watch this, because all it's going to do is just cause strife and confusion.  And we would appreciate it if the children don't."  It was that kind of stuff.
Speaker 1: Now, that's incredible.  I've never heard that before.
Speaker 2: Oh, man, yeah, it was--
Speaker 1: They actually sent a note home?
Speaker 2: Yes, they did.  And you know, it was like, y'all have lost y'all's minds.  But they really did not want that whole thing coming.  And so--
Speaker 1: Well, what happened?  Did it stop people from watching it?
Speaker 2: Well, of course not.  It probably had the opposite effect.  But I think that the fear was that because they tried to squash that part of history and tried to kind of glaze over it and make it kind of--play it down--they really didn't want people to see--I mean fourth graders to see it, and have questions that they would really have to answer about slavery and what it really meant.  And we still do that; you know, we still do that.  They still have a hard time dealing with that subject in the school systems.  And this is like, you know, we're all in the cradle of it, man.  You know, this should be the place where the kids should know about it the most, and know about it the right way.  But they're still having--there's still a lot of heartache and too much pain, and people don't want to deal with it.  But I think it's important for people to understand, particularly if you go someplace like Arcadia Plantation.  For as many stories as there are about the pain and heartache and destruction that slavery caused, there are such stories of victory and triumph and just inspirational stories that lie within those places.  And so, I think, to teach both sides of it would be wonderful.  No matter what happens, no matter what people try to do to you, you could still, you know, rise above it.  And many people did in awesome ways.  And so, all of that needs to be taught as well.  But you got to through the first part first, you know what I mean.  You've got to go through that first, and we're not... they're not ready to do that.
Speaker 1: Still not ready in 2002?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: You said it so sad. (Laughter).
Speaker 2: No.  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, let's hope we can get there.
Speaker 2: I'm hoping so.
Story_ID: 73997
Speaker 1: So, so, when you were in school here [Georgetown, South Carolina], you were at in integrated school.  But the population wasn't really integrated, you were saying.  There was kind of, there was still a big separation between black and white?
Speaker 2: Exactly.  So, even when you managed to have... I really didn't... really there was a separation in school up until about high school.  And then you... and I think it was because...  I'm thinking that the class of 1980 that came into Winyah High School, we were the largest group of African-American children coming in.  They had African-American kids at the school before, but never in the amount as when we came in.  And so, we... you know, you kind of remember those faces from elementary school and junior high school.  You know who they are; you just maybe didn't strike up conversations with them or whatever.  And so, there were--you know, it was kind of cool, you know, to talk to the white girl or, you know, hang out with the white boy or whatever, you know.  So, there was a little more interaction in high school.  But when we left school, it was like you hardly... you know, maybe if you saw them in Walmart or something like that, you might, you know, wave or whatever like that.  But it wasn't like we, you know, went over to each other's houses.  Or, we certainly didn't go to church with one another, and that type of stuff.  So it was still really, really separate after school.  But there was a lot of interaction in school.  So, we learned a lot about one another in high school.
Speaker 1: Now, what were your favorite subjects in high school?
Speaker 2: I had a psychology class in high school, Mr. Tommy Schubert [ph.].  I enjoyed that class, and I loved literature.  I had Miss Peterson in literature, and I enjoyed her class.  But other than that, you know, math was like, Ugh.  And some economics, I enjoyed.  And I loved Spanish class because of all the kids that were in them.  And I really didn't learn that much, but we had a good time in that class.  So, yeah.  But Mr. Thomas Schubert's [ph.] psychology class, I think was my favorite class.
Speaker 1: Why was that your favorite?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  Maybe, you know, when you're that age you just, you know, question your own... you know, you just feel like, you feel so twisted at, you know, 15, 16.  So I kind of, you know, was interested in what people had to say about how the mind worked and how emotions played into, you know, our lives and that type of stuff.  So, kind of... I guess that kind of helped me on the path that I'm on now with self-discovery, and trying to figure out what I want to be when I grow up.
Speaker 1: Now, were there any other teachers that played a major role in developing you in high school?
Speaker 2: I had a teacher by the name of Mr. Edgerton [ph.], who was really... he was just a nice man, and I always remember that.  And there were other teachers, like Miss Diggs, and other teachers that I knew from the community that kind of always--you know, Miss Howard, who was the choral teacher who kind of just looked after you, because they knew you from the community and that type of stuff.  But I didn't really have like a favorite, favorite teacher or somebody.  I never... no, nobody like that.  But there were lots of teachers that, you know, you'd see them in church and stuff like that.  And they kind of had your back, and that was important.
Story_ID: 73998
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, when you were on the verge of graduating from high school [Winyah High School in 1984], did you know what you wanted to do?
Speaker 2: I know that I wanted to do something with fashion, I knew that; that I wanted to... and something hands on.  So, that's what I pursued, and I've been doing something similar to that most of my life.
Speaker 1: Can you draw?
Speaker 2: No, I can't draw a lick.  But, but I can cut things.  And I'm one of those people who do it straight from my head to wherever.  So, all the dolls... anything that I create, I create from here and start on the project.  I can't, I don't have any... I can't draw.  Stick people, maybe, but that's about it.
Speaker 1: Did you start creating dolls when you were in school?
Speaker 2: No.  Actually, I didn't.  And I never even had the desire to create dolls, or do anything like that.  How that came about was really interesting, in that--and I don't know if maybe, you know, we'll get into that later.  But when my only brother [Trevor Grant] died of AIDS [Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome] that kind of put me on the path of, to what I'm doing now.  So, no, I was really into clothing, jewelry, and that type of stuff in school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 73999
Speaker 1: So, did, did you, did you dress yourself in special ways in school?
Speaker 2: Oh man, please.  I was always... people were calling my mama [Susan Davis Armstrong].  And she would be like, "Look, is the skirt long enough?  You know, are all her groceries in?  (Laughter).  Don't call me no more, because I know when she left her, she had the fishnet stockings on."  I mean, I would wear roach clips all over my clothes.  I didn't even know what a freaking roach clip was, you know what I mean?  I was trying to figure out how they went and killed the roaches and everything.  (Laughter).  But I had all these feathers and stuff hanging; they would have the feathers and stuff on them.  And I would have them all in my hair, all dangling off my clothes.  I'd have on the stiletto heels and fishnet stockings.  I'd take a dress from a consignment shop and spray paint, you know, some, you know, "Free the Whales or the Dolphins" and stuff.  You know, I was always doing something crazy like that.  So, yes, I was always the one that was trying...  I mean I came to school with a gold lame outfit on and protested because... when Marvin Gaye died [April 1, 1984].  Because I just felt we needed that day off, you know what I mean?  (Laughter).  It's like, "Marvin Gaye is dead, and we need to be home."  (Laughter).  And so, needless to say, that didn't sit well with the principal or anything.  But that's just the type of person I was, and you know, people would just look at me and say, "You know, that's just Zenobia.  Y'all just need to leave her alone, because she's just special."  So, yeah, I was always that type.
Speaker 1: So, you didn't really get into any trouble or anything, did you?
Speaker 2: No, I really was not.  Because I... and I still have a healthy fear of my mother.  And she would kill me, man.  I mean there was just no excuse.  And so, don't come home with no static.  She was working really hard and, you know, I mean I don't think that I was a particularly good child, but I was fearful, (Laughter) you know, of getting a real serious beat-down.  So, for the most part, I stayed clear, and I was home when I was supposed to be home, for the most part.  And I didn't go where I was not supposed to go for the most part.  You know, because you stepped out of line, man, it was... it was hell to pay.  So, you know--
Story_ID: 74000
Speaker 1: So it was just you, your mother [Susan Davis Armstrong], your brother [Trevor Grant], and your grandmother [Mary Davis]?
Speaker 2: Well, my grandmother lived in a separate home.  But yeah, we all... yeah, her house was... being at my grandmother's house was like being at home, being in a second home.  And she, yeah...  For example, I'm married to the man that I dated in high school [Willie Washington].  And when we dated in high school he had to ask my mother, my grandmother, and my grandfather [Joseph Davis] if I could go somewhere.  And if one of them said no, then that meant I couldn't go.  And he if said that we would be home at eleven o'clock, we had to be home at a quarter till.  And if he didn't walk me to the door, then, you know, my grandmother would be calling his mother, and he would have to be at the house to explain what the deal was.  So, it was serious, you know.  It's not like it is now; they were serious.  My, my... one Christmas my cousin came down from New York.  And we were like big kids, we were like juniors and seniors in high school.  And my mother had this Audi, and she'd let me drive it every now and then.  But for the most part, I drove my grandfather's truck and my grandmother's car.  So, my cousin and I wanted to go out to this club called Playboy Gardens.  And so, my mother said, "Well, you know, y'all are grown enough.  Y'all go ahead and y'all just be back at such and such a time."  Well, my grandmother was a nurse at the hospital.  And she came to that house and found out that my mother let us go to the Playboy Gardens.  I just want you to know she came up in there (Laughter) with her nurse's uniform and got on the DJ thing and called us out of the...  That's the last time I ever went in that club.  But that's just how it was.  And she told my mother, "You didn't have any right to tell those girls they could go.  You did not ask my permission, and they are not allowed in there."  So, that's kind of how it was.
Speaker 1: Now, this kind of... linear kind of relationship to the elders--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --is something that is very African--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --that you, you don't see a lot of it here anymore.
Speaker 2: No, and that's so sad.
Speaker 1: You know--
Speaker 2: It's very sad.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 74001
Speaker 1: I just spoke with, to a group of Presbyterian women day before yesterday.  And that was one of the things I spoke about--the fact that it's disappointing that...  You know, women always--and African-American women--you know, we've always had our issues with one another for--you know, you've got more money than me, or you're lighter skinned than me; your hair is prettier than mine, or whatever.  And there was also always gossip and always that type of stuff.  But we always kind of had each other's back somehow.  And so that, you know, if I was walking home from school and this boy wanted me to get in the car with him, there were five women that would call my grandmother and tell her that somebody was messing with your granddaughter.  And we don't have that now.  And I don't know why, exactly.  I don't know whether it's because people don't want you to talk to their children or discipline their children.  But it was really more of a community effort to raise all of us.  And so, we knew that.  You know, there was no way you could get away with a lot of stuff, because everybody's eyes were on you.  And it's not like that anymore.  And I think that our kids are suffering because of it, you know.  I would be nervous for my child to walk from one end of my street to the other without me watching her at eight years old.  I mean, but we walked from one side of Georgetown [South Carolina] to the other, because you knew--and that house was Miss so and so, and that house was Miss so and so... you know.  And they'd pick up that phone in a heartbeat and call, or snatch you in that house or whatever, you know.  But it's not the same, and I think it's really sad, especially with...  And another thing, too, that I've noticed is that there's safety in a small town, in that you kind of know.  So, I can look at you and say, "Well, you look like a Green," or "You look like Miss so and so's son."  Or "You look like, you know, Miss Mattie's husband," or whatever.  And now, with people coming in and people moving around, I see people that I have no connection to.  So, it's like they're not even from here.  So, it's not an uneasiness, but it's kind of like, okay, well I've got to kind of... you know, keep my daughter closer, because I don't know who lives at that corner house anymore.  So, you know, you expect change and you want progress.  But those are some of the things that happen with change and progress.  But yeah, I really do wish that we had each other's backs a little bit more, especially as it pertains to our children.  But, you know, it's just not the same.
Speaker 2: So, when you were that age, did you realize that it was a good thing, or did you resent it?
Speaker 1: Oh, I was very resentful.  It was like a nuisance, you know.  You couldn't even have a conversation.  I thought there was no privacy.  I'm just saying "Hi" to this boy, you know what I'm saying?  And there's like five people, you know, that called my grandmother and said, "You know, she was talking to this boy or whatever," and you'd get the third degree when you'd get home.  But you don't realize that type of stuff until you get to be big, you know, and you're raising kids on your own, and those things really become important, you know.  I have my mother and I have my mother-in-law, but all those people in-between don't exist anymore, they don't exist.  So, you know.
Story_ID: 74002
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, well, what did you do after high school [Winyah High school]?  What did you do?
Speaker 2: I went to school briefly at Columbia Junior College in Columbia, South Carolina and took their fashion program.  But it wasn't really what I wanted.  So, I transferred to the Art and Fashion Institute of Atlanta [Art Institute of Atlanta, Georgia?], which is where I graduated [1987] and went to school there.  And I lived in Atlanta for a while after that.  One of the first jobs that I got after college was with a jewel company called Reah [ph.] Jewelry and Belts, and I designed... started off designing hairpieces and... yeah, hairpieces and things for them, and then started doing belts and jewelry and that type of stuff.  So, I worked in the jewelry industry for a while, freelancing, and New York and stuff like that.  And then I started my own business, and sold and made jewelry, did that for a while.  And just kind of gypsied everywhere.  I really was kind of looking for myself.  And so, I just gypsied.  I moved and then called my mama and said, "Well, I'm not in Atlanta anymore, I'm in Harlem [New York City, New York] and you know, doing whatever, whatever."  And she'd just say, "I just pray the blood of Jesus over you, because every time you turn around, you're someplace else doing something else.  (Laughter).  So, I kind of gypsied for a long time, just kind of--
Speaker 1: Did you set up any events to sell your jewelry?
Speaker 2: I never did that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I still don't like to do that with my dolls.  I, you know, I like that kind of personal relationship with retail establishments or, now, with galleries and stuff.  And I like... and individuals, whoever wants to purchase them, and stuff like that.  So, that's mostly how I, how I've always done business.  And had, you know, stores that would buy from me, and I'd go visit and re-stock and that type of stuff.  So, I did that for a long time.  And then re-met, my husband [Willie Washington], and married [October 5, 1991].  And people really convinced me that I needed to do grown-up things.
Story_ID: 74003
Speaker 1: Well, how long was it between the time that you last, had last seen your husband [Willie Washington] and married him--met him and married him?
Speaker 2: My husband and I dated until the eleventh grade [Winyah High School].  And I didn't see him, oh, God, for years.  We got married in 1991 [October 5, 1991].  So, I probably didn't see him again until 1990 or '89' [1989], something like that, is when we came back in contact with each other.  He had married and had two children.  And so, that was like off-limits.  It was like we had no conversation, no, you know, contact with each other at all.  So, it was quite a while before we got back together again.
Speaker 1: Now, how many years was that?
Speaker 2: From, what was that--1983 to probably '89' [1989], '90' [1990].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, it was a little while.  But people convinced me that, "You know, you need to get a real job; you need computer skills; you need to be, you know, stop gypsying around and playing.  And you know, and the clothes and all are cute; you know, the jewel is precious.  But you need stability."  And so, I did that.  And my husband was in the military at the time and we lived in Germany.  So, I took a job with the federal government working as a passport ID agent.  And I enjoyed... I mean I can't say that I enjoyed it.  But I appreciated those jobs and stuff, but it just never was, it just never was me.  And so when we, when he got out of the military, I worked for Time Life in customer service.  So, I mean I did all that kind of stuff... customer service work.  And then when my husband and I moved to Raleigh [North Carolina], we really got gypsy.  Because one of the things that happens to a lot of military men when they get out of the service is they, they're so used to moving until when they stay a certain place for a while, they get the itch to move.  And so, my husband and I did that several times, because he just felt... he had that moving in his blood.  So, every year or so, his eye would start twitching and, you know, he'd want to go someplace else.  So in Raleigh, North Carolina... we finally settled in Raleigh, North Carolina probably about 1993.  And I had the urge... I had no desire to be a mother when I first married, and didn't think I would particularly want to have children.  And then all of a sudden, something just jumped on me, and I started crying over people's babies and I wanted to hold people's babies.
Speaker 1: How old were you then?
Speaker 2: I was 20... okay, I was 25 when I got married.  So, that was about 26, 27.  And it's like, I want to have a baby.  And my husband had two children already.  So, he was like, "Oh, Girl, don't start this mess.  You know, because we already talked about this.  You said you didn't want no kids," and blah, blah, blah... this, that, and the other.
Speaker 1: There is a theory about that. (Laughter).
Speaker 2: So, I, you know, so I didn't push the issue because I did... you know, I didn't want to be a liar, you know, so I didn't push it.  So we waited, because I was twenty-eight when I had my daughter [1994].
Story_ID: 74004
Speaker 1: And I started working for an organization called--when I was pregnant with her [Susan Alexis Washington], about five or six months pregnant with her--I started working for an organization called "Hospice for the Carolinas."  And I didn't know that at the time, but that... I mean that was just the start of God really having a hold and really directing my life in ways that I'm just now beginning to understand.  After I had been with them for a couple of months, I was nine months pregnant, and I got a telephone call from my brother [Trevor Grant] telling me that he had AIDS [Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome].  And I knew that he was sick, but I didn't know with what.  And I probably did, but I probably didn't want to deal with it.  But that was the first time that he came out of his mouth and said, "I'm sick and I have AIDS."  And so I had no clue what Hospice was when I started working there.  I didn't know that they worked with terminal illness.  Anyway, that organization was really the organization that helped me get through my brother's death, and his life, just before his death.  So, I was kind of doing that, and kind of worrying about my brother on the side--living in Raleigh [North Carolina], had this baby, working and had her in daycare, and just not feeling that at all.  And my husband [Willie Washington] got a job with International Paper Company.  And once again, you know, here we are pulling up and moving again.  But we were coming back home, and so he promised me, "This is it.  This is where I want to be, and I feel like..." blah, blah, blah... yakety yak.  And so, we moved back down to [Georgetown] South Carolina.  And even in that, when my brother really started to get really sick, we were here in place... I was here in place to take care of him.  So, once again, things were happening in my life that I didn't have any clue why they were happening.  But they just kind of happened for the right reasons.  And my brother lived for three years after we moved here.  And it brought my mother [Susan Davis Armstrong] and I closer together, because it was really... something that we really had to do together; we had each other's back, in, you know, caring for him.  And that just really changed my life, watching--he was twenty-eight when he died, two years younger than me--watching someone go and know that--you know, a big man--he was like 6'4, you know, handsome to me, you know what I'm saying?  Independent and all that.  And then all of a sudden to see him be, you know, a hundred pounds and emaciated and sick and nauseous and all of that--and to have to--you know, to have to change diapers and, you know, that type of stuff.  It really... I thought it would make me weak, but I think that it, that was one of the most wonderful things that could have happened in my life--to be able to care for him like that.  But when he died, I went through a real bad depression.  And I thought that it was because--I thought that we were--I would be fine, because we were prepared for his death.  But I really realized that you can't be prepared for something like that.  When somebody's energy just kind of leaves the space and goes to another space--it's hard to deal with.  And that's how the dolls came about.  After he died, I went through this real bad depression.  And then these dolls just kind of came to me; these women just kind of came to me.  And they started kind of invading my brain.  And they would kind of line up one behind the other, and just kind of jockey for position.  So, they would ask to be, "I want to be done first."  And I didn't know what it meant; I had no clue what they were talking about.  Then I started experimenting with different materials and stuff.  And here these dolls started to appear.  And the only thing I knew is that they made me feel good.  I didn't know, I didn't know anything about selling 'em; I didn't know anything about doing anything; I was just doing it.  And people started kind of liking them and kind of having a connection with them.  And so I kept doing them, and then galleries started approaching me; people started approaching me about, you know, speaking on the subject of creativity and grief, and all that kind of stuff.  And so that's how this whole... what I'm about now has evolved.  I hope that makes sense.  Did it?  Did I have it twisted?
Speaker 2: You know, we can explore it more.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 74005
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now we were talking about the dolls and the creative process and how they, they kind of started lining up in your mind, to be creative.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  I think one of the biggest... what really took me over the edge was the fact that there were seven names of young men that my brother [Trevor Grant] wanted me to call to let... if... when he died.  And when I called them, they were all dead except for one.  And I mean, I was sick to my stomach.  I mean I just felt as though I had just been robbed so many times.  I felt like there was this gap.  I just felt that there was this hole of young men, I mean that just fell into this pit, and were lost.  I just couldn't believe that everybody that he was friends with, except for this one person that I didn't particularly like, was still alive.  Everybody was gone.  And so, the depression that I was in, deepened with that.  And I don't know how that, why that I affected me so strongly.  But it's, it was such a terrible sense of loss.  And I was laying on the couch trying to figure out how I was going to be productive that day, because it took so much out of me to even get up and go to the bathroom.  And my husband [Willie Washington], who was trying to get my daughter [Susan Alexis Washington] ready for school--and so she came out with like one purple sock and one green sock, and one ponytail up here and one over here.  And she had, you know, stuff all over her face from--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).  This is a critique of his ability to dress her?
Speaker 2: Well, he was doing the best he could, you know, but that just wasn't his responsibility all of this time.  And he was really trying, I mean, you know.  This was back during the time when he was trying.  And so, and she was just so happy.  And she was like "Bye Mommy, I just hope you feel better."  And I said to myself at that time that I have to do something to get myself out of this depression; I cannot function like this anymore.  And it was at that moment that I decided--and I think it's so important for people to understand, that it was at the moment when I decided that I needed to do something; it wasn't something just that happened.  You know, I made the decision; I didn't know what it was going to be.  But I knew I had to do something, or I was going to just perish.  I mean, you know, I was just going to just walk out in front of a bus or something.  And at that moment, that's when the dolls just kind of appeared to me.  And they started to do their little thing.  And so, basically, what happened was that I was forced to re-discover the creative process after so many years of putting it down, and not following what was really in my heart to do.  And I continued to work for the local Hospice.  After we moved down from Raleigh [North Carolina], I worked for the local Hospice in Georgetown [South Carolina], which was called Hospice of Georgetown County at the time, as a clinical secretary.  And so, I kept my ties with them.  And I am telling you, when my brother was dying... them people... I don't know what I would have done without Hospice.  And he was not a Hospice patient, because he...  Because he had AIDS [Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome], there were other organizations that had programs that allowed for more services.  And so, we opted for those.  But I opted for those services knowing that Hospice would always be there to help me.  So, I had 24-hour nurses practically; social workers at my beck and call, just because I worked there.  And they really helped me through the whole process.  And so, one of the conversations that my brother and I had just before he died was a kind of "just do it," you know conversation.  And he looked at me, and he was like, "Well, you know, I am dying.  And I'm not really wanting to sit up here and listen to you bitch about the fact that you're not happy in your life.  Whatever the hell you want to do, just do it."  And so you know, with the dolls and with the other creative things I do, that's what I'm beginning to do now.
Story_ID: 74006
Speaker 1: One of the things that was unexpected about creating the dolls, for about two years, I would make them and I knew that they would make me feel good, but I didn't know who they were.  And then it occurred to me that they were, and are, the women in my life that have raised me and have nurtured me, and have taken care of me and have given me such a rich culture in which to pull from.  Now, one of the things that I said earlier in the interview was that I left from here [Georgetown, South Carolina] really not in a respectful way.  I mean, I was angry.  At what, I don't know.  And I always felt like I would be able to find more sophisticated, more elegant, more--better class of people someplace else, all of those places that I used to dream about in high school.  And so that's what I did when I gypsied around; I tried to find these women that were better, that were prettier, that were smarter.  You know what I mean?  That were more cosmopolitan and all of those things.  But in coming back here, especially with the little one, and looking, re-looking into the faces of the women that raised me, I realized that there are no other women for me that are prettier or more cosmopolitan or more sophisticated than the women that raised me.  And so, as an African American woman, sometimes it's--we, we pick and choose the women that we want to be like and we put up on pedestals.  So I mean, Lord knows I love Oprah [Winfrey].  And Halle Berry, you know, got it going on, and all those people.  But they really didn't have any impact on my life until much, until now basically.  And so I started to think that for me to praise Oprah and Mae Jemison, and to not give, pay homage and respect to Miss Lois Scott, who was my Girl Scout leader, and to Miss Ida Bell Singleton who was my, who was our choir director, and to my mother [Susan Davis Armstrong] who, you know, sacrificed so much, it was just a sin and a shame.  And so, I came to realize a couple of years ago that the dolls were my way of paying homage and respect to those women that have done so many great things for me.  And to s- to say I'm sorry for leaving in such a disrespectful way, and to just lift them up.  So, each doll comes with their own story.  And she's a story of little country women that, that, that need to be--a lot of those stories need to be heard.  And people need to know what wonderful and strong women come from this place.  So, that's the story.
Story_ID: 74007
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what are your dolls made of?
Speaker 2: Most of the dolls are made from a bottle base.  And that's just, that comes from the recycling part of me.  People... I mean I would just see all of these bottles just kind of sitting around and, you know, nobody was using them.  So, and if you look at a bottle, it has a really feminine kind of shape to it.  And so, lots of people have said since I've been doing them for a while, "Oh, you need to go to China and have them do this base for you," and all that.  But, you know, they throw bottles in the trash every day.  So, I'll continue to use bottles.  And there's a black fabric that's stretched over the bottles that form the arms on the faceless dolls, and then fabric from every which I can think of.  But about eighty-five percent of the dolls are made from recycled materials.  And they have just been a wonderful blessing in my life.  So, many of them are--either depict the whole woman or parts of that woman's personality, and help me to tell the story of all of these women, all of my people.
Speaker 1: Is there any particular kind of bottle you use?
Speaker 2: Whatever's anybody's drinking, Honey, whoever...
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My husband drinks Ice House, so I use a lot of Ice House bottles--wine bottles.  There's this dude that bootlegs, you know, liquor out in the country.  And he, you know, his customers like Crown Royal bottles.  And so, he brings the Crown Royal bottles.  I got winos who just think they just drink just for me.  (Laughter).  So, they empty the bottle right in front of my house and stick the bottle on my porch, you know.  And so just whatever, any kind of bottle... you know, I'll use.  But it's interesting that most of the bottles that I use, used to have liquor.  (Laughter).  And I don't know what that's all about, but maybe I need to go back to that psychology class and see what that's all about.  But the majority of them are wine or beer or liquor bottles.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the fabric is fabric that you just are able to--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, I buy a lot of fabrics.  I like to recycle old clothing.  So, if somebody spills coffee on it, or stains the front of a dress, you know, I can use the back of the dress and create with that.  Then they, I have a wonderful gentleman who goes back--he lives in Atlanta [Georgia], but he goes back and forth to Cameroon and brings back these wonderful fabrics and packs the fabric down with the incense and stuff.  And boy, when he comes... I mean I just... it's an orgasmic experience for me to just put my hands on fabric and beads and stuff, it really is.  People think I'm lying, but it's... it's the truth.  I went to go shopping in New York for fabric.  And the people were like, "Excuse me, but do you need help?  Do you need for us to call somebody to get you up out of here?"  But that fabric just smells so wonderful.  And when I'm cutting it and sewing with it and everything, it just smells so wonderful.  And it's so vibrant, and I just have a wonderful time with it.  So, it's a combination of--and I try in every doll to do a combination of new fabrics and old fabrics.  Because I like the touch and the feel of old fabrics and how they, when they've been washed or worn.  It just has that wonderful feel to it, especially if it feels like it's been loved--that piece of fabric has been loved--or that piece of clothing has been loved.  So, it's a combination of all that.
Story_ID: 74008
Speaker 1: Now, when did people start to notice these models, I mean, these dolls, you know?
Speaker 2: Probably about four or five months after I started making them.  And I started just kind of carrying them around in my car, and I'd ask people their opinion about, you know, "What do you think of this?"  And they'd be like, you know, "Well, this is really good."  And I'd say, "Really?  You know, it's alright.  It's just something I'm doing to kind of, you know, get myself together and, you know, after Trevor's [her brother Trevor Grant] death and all that."  But people started really, really liking them.  I was working with an organization called Five Rivers Community Development Corporation; I was on the board.  And the woman, Beulah Priest White, who was the Executive Director, had connections with the gallery up in Litchfield [Litchfield Beach, South Carolina].  And that was the first gallery called Art Works that started carrying the dolls.  And the response was just phenomenal.  And one of the things that I think is so important to me that is that it's wonderful to be able to do something that you love to do.  But when it touches other people--and other people consider it to be art.  And when they can look at it and say, "You know, that particular piece touches me in such a wonderful way," that is, I get the biggest kick out of that, the biggest kick.  And so, you know, a lot of my customers, a lot of people that buy from me, see the dolls in a very empowering way.  So... which I think is awesome, you know.  And I mean, for example, one of the first women that bought a doll from me was dealing with cancer.  And she's in remission now and is fine now.  But she bought the doll right after her last chemotherapy treatment and all of that.  And she just felt so beat down.  And she said when she saw it, she just felt like she needed to--the doll that she purchased--she just felt like she needed to continue on and to just fight and, you know, do better.  So, I have lots of stories of people that for some reason or another find inspiration in what I do, or interpret the dolls as being inspirational.  And to me, that is wonderful.  That just brings tears to my eyes.  So and then, you know, I turned it into what I do every day.
Speaker 1: So, how many dolls do you create a week?
Speaker 2: You know, I have made, I made about three hundred this year [2002].  So, I don't know.  Sometimes I do two a week; sometimes I do twenty a week.  Sometimes... you know, it just depends on, you know, how... what I've got going on at a particular time.  But I've done about three hundred this year.  So, it's, it's a big deal for me.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's almost one a day.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Almost one a day.
Story_ID: 74009
Speaker 1: So, so, you just do that?  You do that full-time now?
Speaker 2: Well, and I'm a mama full-time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's my "full-time," full-time job.  And the doll-making allows me... and I speak.  And I'm an artist-in-residence in the South Carolina school system.  And one of the things that I do there--the most important thing--is to... I love working with special needs children, especially the ones that have been labeled with behavioral problems, which I still have not understood how that whole thing works.  Because they seem to be doing the same things that we did, but they didn't... there weren't the same labels put on us that were put on them.  But they don't seem to be that different, I don't know.  But it's interesting how children are labeled and why they're labeled and all that.  But I really and truly think that the creative process helps, is a blessing.  I think that God put the creative process in each and every one of us as a way to help us deal with whatever issues we're dealing with.  And for me, it was grief.  And I see in the children that I work with that grief manifests itself in many ways.  And they deal with grief issues so much earlier, it seems like.  There are two kids in my daughter's class--and she's in the third grade--that have been taken out of their homes by the foster care system for some reason.  And those kids are, it's awful.  You know, they just want to go home; they don't understand the reason why they're not home.  I don't know what's going on.  But so, I think that a lot of times children act out because they don't have any... they feel like they don't have another way to be heard.  So when you put pen and ink, or fabric, or crowns, or chalk--or whatever it is, in their hands, a lot of times they find a way to have a voice.  And sometimes it's easier for you to talk to that child after that process than it is to just call them into the office, and say, "Okay, what's wrong with you?"  You know what I mean?
Story_ID: 74010
Speaker 1: We were just talking about the creative process and--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And how many you make and--
Speaker 2: Well, we were talking about the kids and the creative process, and--
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: So, anyway, that's one of the things that I do in the school system is help... assist art teachers and teachers to somehow kind of weed out the children that can really be helped, which is a whole lot of them.  Right now, it seems like there's this many kids that are labeled not teachable and destructive and all that.  But I really think that it's [holding fingers together] that many kids, you know.  There might be that many that need to go to the penitentiary, but certainly not this many.  And so, artistic creativity won't reach all of them.  But you know allowing them to do their own, you know, poetry, artwork...  It won't reach all of them, but it reaches quite a bit, quite a bit of them.  And it's important I think before we give up on a whole, a whole generation of children, that we do everything that we possibly can... everything, to try to save them.  And then, you know, whatever's left, then you have to deal with those kids however you feel.  But I just think that so many kids have been left out.  It's amazing how empowering a lot of the kids... how empowered they feel when they can create.  You know what I'm saying?  And so that's what we try to do with the programs that work with in the schools, and the after school programs, to let them know that they do have the ability to create and do wonderful work.  And so... "Talk like that," or you know, "Express yourself like that."  That way you don't have to hit or push or call anybody a name, or be disrespectful or anything like that.  And, you know, you'll be heard.  So that's one of the things that I really enjoy that come out of my work, and speaking, you know, to audiences about my experience and different ways that we can empower--as African-American women--can empower ourselves to... and keep ourselves uplifted.  Because a lot of times you look to the outside world to do those things, and it just don't happen.  You know, you need to find it within yourself some kind of how.  So, that's what I do.
Story_ID: 74011
Speaker 1: What are your future plans for your work?  Do you plan to continue to sort of freelance your work?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Or develop your business?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  I would love to diversify and be in galleries that are in other parts of the country.  But I think that I really would like to do more work in the classroom.  Though I like doing it freelance, I don't think I would want to be a fulltime teacher; I like the freedom to kind of come and go.  And also to continue to do some of the research work that I'm doing as far as this area [Georgetown, South Carolina] is concerned, and kind of encourage African-Americans to come down to this area and to really take advantage of the richness of the culture instead of falling into the beach shops and tee shirt shops and the golf courses.  I mean, all that stuff is there, and it's fine.  But when you kick the dust in this area, the history just kind of blows up in your face.  And it really does need to be preserved.  And we don't really need no more golf courses.  (Laughter).  You know what I mean?  There's enough.  You know, we don't need another Wings [Beachwear].  But we really need to stop moving people's graveyards around and, you know, and we really need to--
Speaker 1: That's the kind of danger that, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know.  Yeah, you know, yeah, we really don't need to move a graveyard so that we can put a Wings there.  We really don't need to, you know, fill in the wetlands so that there can be a house put there.  We really do need to preserve a lot of the plantation homes, so that people can see and understand, and have a historical reference when you talk about history--slavery and the Civil Rights Movement and Reconstruction and all that stuff.  And its right here, you know, it is right here.  So, I'm all for change and I'm all for progress.  But a lot of times you cover over when you concrete over things that, you know, make the area unique.  So, it's important for some things to remain the same.  So--
Story_ID: 74012
Speaker 1: This is almost a follow-up of what you just discussed, I mean a kind of segue into it.  But what are your hopes and concerns for this community, and for the black community in general?
Speaker 2: I think one of the things that I hope for the black community, especially my generation, is we get ahold of--we get ahold of ourselves and realize how important our history is, and that we pass it on to our children in earnest.  And for a lot of us, that means to really learn it and understand it... and that we appreciate it.  You know, that we really appreciate it and don't downplay it, and don't wash over it like a lot of people have done in this area.  You know, and don't accept what people tell you, because that's not... you know, don't accept what you read, because that's garbage.  You know what I'm saying?  And it's so sad, because it's right here.  But you can't accept what people say, you can't accept the version of the story that's out there now.  We have to really dig through and find what the truth is, and allow our children to be taught by that truth.  We are so blessed.  I mean I collect ancient women, I love old women.  And there are still many, many of those old women and men in our communities that just, you know, are there for you to ask questions, you know.  And they really do hold the stories in their minds; that's why this is such a wonderful project.  Because, you know--I hope that I'm dead and gone a long time from now--but you know what I'm saying?  It's really important that the story be told the way it needs to be told.  Because you know, listening to it the way other people tell it is not always the right way.  So, it's important for us to get ahold of that, and to really realize that the Geechee/Gullah culture is a jewel culture, and it needs to be preserved and respected, and not prostituted.  And a lot of people want to do that, too; they want to make money off of it.  They want you to, you know, see the basket weavers and they want to hear the drummers.  And they want to do it, but they want to do it in like this bastardly type way.  They don't really want to get down to the root of why it is the way it is.  And they'll be able to do that if we don't take control and make them understand how important it really is, you know.
Story_ID: 74013
Speaker 1: But what would you consider as your legacy at this juncture?
Speaker 2: Oh, my Gosh, that's a hard question.  At this juncture I think that my legacy would be the sincere... my sincere effort to give the women--put the women that came before me in their proper place; to elevate them to their proper place, and to give them the homage and respect that they have been owed for a long time.  And, to hopefully make other women feel responsible to do the same for the women that have affected their lives in positive ways.
Story_ID: 74014
Speaker 1: And this is slightly different, but...  Oh, well, did your... but your mother's [Susan Davis Armstrong] still alive, right?
Speaker 2: She's still kicking, man.
Speaker 1: Well, what does she think about your artwork?
Speaker 2: She's so proud, and that is so important to me.  You know, one of the things that happened... people would call me that I hadn't heard from in a long, long time and say, "You know, I'm so proud of what you're doing," and you know, "You keep up the good work."  But my mother is extremely proud.  But I think that one of the things... more than the artwork, she has said to me that "I think that the personal journey that you've taken yourself on to find yourself and to cultivate your artwork, has made you a better mother."  And that to me is like the best compliment of all--that my mother, who was the best mother, would compliment me and tell me that she thought that I was a good mother.  It's like, you know, she won't have to say nothing else.  Because it's important for me to be that in her eyes, because she sacrificed so much for us.  So if she never says another word to me, that was the best compliment.
Story_ID: 74015
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is slightly different from the legacy question.  But... hopefully you'll be around a lot longer.
Speaker 2: I hope so.
Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered?  We always ask people this, so--
Speaker 2: Oh, man, I don't know.  That trash-talking... you know, just that off-the-wall chick, you know what I'm saying?  Just that off-the-wall chick that, you know, just made you think.  You know what I mean?  Engaged you in conversation or said something to you that just made you think. You know, "She was over there and we didn't quite know, you know, what she was going to do--whether she was going to break into song and dance or whether she was going to do something else."  But I hope that when people leave a talk, or leave a classroom, that they're inspired to think for themselves and take whatever information that I might be able to give them, or whatever information I might be able to pass along, and just process it and do whatever you can do with it.  So, that's it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you so much.
Story_ID: 74016
Speaker 1: Okay.  This was 1967, I guess.  I was six months old.  And this is a picture that was given to my grandmother.
Speaker 2: Very good, next.
Speaker 1: I'm not sure.  Probably, that's probably '67' [1967] as well.  And that's a picture with my grandfather, [Joseph] Joe Davis, my grandmother, Mary G. Davis, and my cousin Linda, Terry, Ricky, Kimberly, Chauncey, and Craig Allen.  That's a family picture.
Speaker 2: What's the year?
Speaker 1: In '67' [1967].
Speaker 2: Go ahead.
Speaker 1: And that is 1984.  That's my high school I guess graduation picture. Last graduating class of
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: This one would be in November of 1967.  That's my first birthday party, and I think that was taken in the Bronx [New York City, New York].
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my daughter, Susan Alexis Washington, and myself up on the roof of the Rice Museum in Georgetown, South Carolina.  And my daughter's eight years old.
Speaker 2: Go ahead.
Speaker 1: And that is me.  That picture was taken last year in 19--, I mean 2001.  Another artist by the name of Alvin Outlaw took that picture of me.
Speaker 2: Next.
Speaker 1: And that's a picture of one of the dolls.  And she is called "The Warrior."
Speaker 2: Now, what do you make the arms out of?
Speaker 1: Wire and fabric.
Speaker 2: Okay, very good, next.
Speaker 1: I can't remember when that picture was taken.  But it was a Christmas picture taken probably in the seventies with my brother, Trevor [Grant], and I dressed up in our parents' [Susan Davis Armstrong and Joseph Howell Grant] clothing.
Speaker 2: Okay, thank you, next.  Go ahead with your description.
Speaker 1: That picture was taken when we were still living in the Bronx.  We were on our way to the zoo in that picture, my brother and I, my brother, Trevor.
Speaker 2: Next okay.  Go ahead with the description, please.
Speaker 1: That picture was taken probably about ten years ago, Christmastime, at my mother's home in Georgetown.  That's myself and my cousin, Nathanial.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: That is junior year, just a Walmart picture we took at Walmart.
Speaker 2: Next, description, please.
Speaker 1: That is my junior prom.
Speaker 2: Okay, very good.  Next.
Speaker 1: That is myself and my grandmother, Mary Davis.  And we were leaving one of my first piano recitals.
Speaker 2: Year?
Speaker 1: Ninety-eighty-something [1980s], I don't know.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of myself, my mother--
