Story_ID: 343969
Speaker 1: My name is Denise Gines.  I'm the interviewer, and Matt Hickey [Matthew Hickey] is the videographer.  So will you state for us your name?  Please spell it, including your middle name.
Speaker 2: Okay, my name is Ann Williams [HistoryMaker Ann Marie Williams].  That's spelled A-N-N, middle name is Marie, M-A-R-I-E, Williams, W-I-L-L-I-A-M-S.  That is the name that I use as my professional name.  My birth name is Annie, A-N-N-I-E, Marie Williams.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your date of birth?
Speaker 2: My date of birth, I was born October the 21st, 1937.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where were you born?
Speaker 2: I was born in Coolidge, Texas, which is really about ninety miles south of Dallas [Texas].
Speaker 1: And today's date is?
Speaker 2: May 2nd, 2006.
Speaker 1: And if you would, give us the location of this interview, the address.
Speaker 2: The address is the Dallas Opera facility [Karayanis Rehearsal Production Center], located behind Fair Park and Fitzhugh Avenue, Dallas, Texas.
Speaker 1: And tell me your occupation.
Speaker 2: I am the founder and artistic director of the Dallas Black Dance Theatre.
Story_ID: 343970
Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask you five People magazine-ish kind of questions (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay (laughter).
Speaker 1: Tell me your favorite food.
Speaker 2: My favorite food is potatoes.
Speaker 1: Okay, your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Favorite time of year is the autumn.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Favorite color is brown.
Speaker 1: Vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Well, St. Martin, I love that.
Speaker 1: And tell me your favorite phrase, or bible verse (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, really, favorite, I guess, phase--phrase that I would use is, let's get moving.  That's, that's something--
Speaker 1: Is your theater--
Speaker 2: --dancers always say.  And of course, from the Bible I love Ecclesiastes, you know, that's my favorite Bible.
Story_ID: 343971
Speaker 1: Now we're gonna talk about your family tree.  Tell me about your mother.  What was her name?
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Izora Elizabeth [Izora Coleman Ferrell], maiden name was Coleman--very wonderful person.
Speaker 1: Where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born also in Coolidge, Texas, a little community called Sandy [Limestone County, Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay, what year was she born?
Speaker 2: Oh, now that (laughter)--my mother was born in 1907.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you remember the date?
Speaker 2: Yes, August the 13th.
Speaker 1: Nineteen zero-seven [1907]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And spell her name for me.
Speaker 2: Her name is spelled I-Z-O-R-A, Elizabeth, E-L-I-Z-A-B-E-T-H, Coleman, C-O-L-E-M-A-N, Ferrell, F-E-R-R-E-L-L.
Speaker 1: Okay, did your mother share any stories about when she was growing up?  How far did she go in school and--
Speaker 2: Well, yes, of course.  She came up--my family is made up of a lot of educators, so my mom came up, even though she did not earn her four-year college degree, she did come up teaching and had lots of children (laughter).  There are, there were twelve children in my family and very close-knit family.  She had I think about five sisters and really about four brothers, so came from a large family.  And of course, some of those stories in the, in the times that they had was passed down from her to her children; a lot family reunions, family gatherings.  And one of the things, as I said, that was always stressed was education because that could get you to the next step.  And one of the things she really believed in is that each generation should be better than the one before.  And it was togetherness of all of these kids, you know, so sharing in the small facilities that they grew up in, the small bedrooms, and the household, and the family dinners.  Those were good times, and those were some traits that she passed on to us, you know, was siblings helping each other, loving each other, taking care of each other and each other's children, but lots of in and outs of each other's houses.
Story_ID: 343972
Speaker 1: And do you remember your grandmother?
Speaker 2: Yes, I do remember both (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --of my grandmothers.
Speaker 1: Okay, tell me your mother's mother.
Speaker 2: My mother's mother was Venezuella Coleman [Venezuella Melton Coleman], and she was a wonderful lady.  I think I had to be about thirty when she passed--but very demanding, strong individual.  I member--remember so many times my grandfather [Nathaniel Coleman] moved too slow for her, you know.  That was something that irritated her all the time, you know.  She believed in jumping ahead and getting things done when she wanted something done.  He would do it always at his own pleasure and at his own speed.  And by the time he would get ready to do whatever she said do, if it was even take out the trash, she would have already done it.  So, again, we talk about some of those traits that some of the women in our family have picked up, you know, and 'cause the men move when they get ready, you know, and the women, we just go on and do it, get it done.  But she was a very wonderful lady.  And of course, my grandfather, she would always call him N.  She never called him by his, by his complete name.  She always called him N, the initial N, so, just, just a--
Speaker 1: Do you remember (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous) wonderful person.
Speaker 1: --do, do you used to go to visit them?
Speaker 2: All the time in the summer.  We kind of grew up not with them in the same community [Sandy, Limestone County, Texas], but each summer we were there at her house.  And some of those best times were with other cousins, with other of their, of her children's children coming there.  So, in the summertime our, our parents sent us all there to them.  And we had lots of fun, and we worked; remember peeling peaches, making preserves.  And it was so good to eat in the mornings for breakfast, you know, when she would do the biscuits and the bacon.  And then you would have those wonderful peach preserves that some of us had helped to sit there and peel or bother her while she did those, those kind of things.  Some of the other remember--memories were I guess was pulling off our shoes and having to walk from one grandmother's house to the other house bare feet in the hot sand.  That, that was not so good.  But those were the good days, and sun hitting you, and by the time you got to one house, you were deep perspiration.  We didn't know any better then, you know, no air condition; you know, it was just fun.  But we often sit back now and talk and wonder how we made it during those times, but those were wonderful times and, and just being able to go fishing with them, because a lot of times the, the tank, what they call, was right on the property that they lived on.  And you could go out there and even wade in the tank and the water; good days, good days, had a wonderful bringing up.
Speaker 1: So they lived in more or less the country?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was, oh, it was the country (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was the country.
Speaker 2: It was, it was the deep country, yes.
Story_ID: 343973
Speaker 1: So, the community that you grew up in?
Speaker 2: Well, the cremun- community I was born in that environment and then moved from there [Coolidge, Texas] I guess, probably, I think I always said when I was about five or six we moved from there to, to another community, and then from there into the, into the Dallas [Texas] area.  But the community that I came up in as far as I can remember, going to elementary school and going through grade school, was almost the same as that, because it, it, it was a small town, so it was really a little country town, you know, and not very far from the grandparents.
Speaker 1: We'll, we'll talk about school days, but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: --I wanna get back to--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 343974
Speaker 1: Your grandmother [Venezuella Melton Coleman] is the oldest relative that you can remember?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I would say that she would be the oldest, although I have glimpse of her mother and sister, and--but she would really be the oldest that I can remember.
Speaker 1: Do you remember her mother's name?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right, well, is there anything else you'd like share about your mother [Izora Coleman Ferrell]?
Speaker 2: Other than to say that I think I had one of the best mothers that anybody could ever have.  She was quiet, liked all of her children, and all of her children's friends, and her children's husbands, and, and wives and things, and never complained, even though some of us did not like them, you know.  She never made a difference.  She was very--even though she was a strong lady, she was, she was very much a gentle and a sweet woman, never hardly raised her voice like any of us, you know.  We wondered some time who, who received her traits (laughter).  And one of the most, I would say, peaceful things about her is that she died just as she lived.  She had Alzheimer's for about eight years.  And the doctor said it was one of the longest living persons that he had ever administered that had Alzheimer's, and never complained, never was irritable, always smiling, always sweet, and she died that same way, you know.
Speaker 1: What year did she die?
Speaker 2: She died seven years ago.
Story_ID: 343975
Speaker 1: So let's move on to your dad.  Tell me about your, your father.
Speaker 2: A character (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) And what was his name?
Speaker 2: His name was Lloyd, L-L-O-Y-D, Ferrell, F-E-R-R-E-L-L [Lloyd Ferrell].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Just the opposite of my mom [Izora Coleman Ferrell] in, in many ways.  He was truly his mother's [Lela Ferrell] favorite son and, and of course got away with a lot, with a lot of things, who was a, was a wonderful father insofar as providing, but kind of restless at times because his career-wise, he--we lived on, in this small community and came up as farmers during that time.  And then, of course, when we moved from there into the city at my mother and my older sister's and them request, my father came, but that wasn't what he wanted to do, did not want to--really, the eight to five job was just not him, so he went back to the country.  So, we sort of had that, that second home, you know, was where he, he was.  But again, his family was very much like my mother's because they, their, their parents I guess less than a half a mile from each other.  They grew up in that same community.  Everybody grew up in that same surrounding, same community of Sandy [Limestone County, Texas] and Mexia [Texas].  And so, from a farmer, then he became a minister when he went back and had several churches and was very good at that.  He was a Methodist minister, sort of self-taught, although he did go through the, the Methodist-Christianity part down in Atlanta [Georgia]; was very much a part of educating himself and went to all of the seminars, even went to Southern Methodist University here in Dallas [Texas].  So once he got into the minister, then his whole life changed, and, and, and that was what he chose to do once we moved to the City of Dallas [Texas], became a minister and then got a church and went back to different places.  So we were, we were sort of like around and in and out with a lot of places, him until--by that time we were all grown though.  But, and, then in his age, his older years, he was under the care of me and an older sister of mine and turned back into a baby, you know.  So he, he, he was precious to us, but we loved him.
Speaker 1: And when did he pass away?
Speaker 2: He passed away a year before my mom did, so he's been dead now for eight years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My mom's been dead--
Speaker 1: How old--
Speaker 2: --for seven.
Speaker 1: How old was he when he died?
Speaker 2: My father I think was seventy-two, and my mom was seventy-three.
Story_ID: 343976
Speaker 1: And your grandparents on your father's [Lloyd Ferrell] side?
Speaker 2: I did not know them as well as I did on my mother's [Izora Coleman Ferrell] side because they died at a very, very early age, well, when I was young.  I think there was, I was sort of like nine or ten, but I do remember them.  His father died in a house fire.  The house caught on fire, and his father was burned there.  And his mother was, died at a, at a, at a, at an older age, and I do remember her.  I do remember visiting her in the hospital when she was in her last days.
Speaker 1: Do you remember her name?
Speaker 2: Yes, Lela, Lela Ferrell.  And my father's father was Sam Ferrell [Samuel Ferrell].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you remember anybody else older in, on that side of the family?
Speaker 2: Well, yes.  All of his sisters, after my grandmother on his side, when my father's mother passed, his older sister, who was Isola Ferrell--well, she was really Isola Echols [Isola Ferrell Echols], sort of like became my grandmother then.  So we remember her, and we always refer to her now as our grandmother on my father's side.  And that was a place where we went in the summer to do the same things that we did for my mother, my mother's mother [Venezuella Melton Coleman] and her family.  Then my aunt was that person on my father's side.  And of course, those were wonderful days.  She was a wonderful aunt.  And we cared for her until she passed.  But we would visit her not only just during the summer but during the holidays.  We would go to her house for Christmas, for--many times for Thanksgiving.  She was, she had no children, so we were her, her kids.  What she did was a lot of gardening.  She loved to garden, raised corn, peas, all of those kind of things.  So you could always go to her house and stack up on all of the frozen things and bring them back to your, to your house.  I mean it was only until I got married that I knew about going to the store buying frozen peas and corn and stuff like that because she kept us supplied, even with fruit.
Story_ID: 343977
Speaker 1: Tell me about your siblings.
Speaker 2: Well, as I said, there were twelve of us, six boys and six girls.
Speaker 1: Well, let's do them in succession (laughter).
Speaker 2: Beginning with the oldest, two are deceased now, one brother and one sister, so they're still ten of us.  My oldest--
Speaker 1: Give all, give all of their names.
Speaker 2: Okay.  My oldest sister is Andora Mitchell [Andora Ferrell Mitchell].  She lives now in San Diego, California, and she is eighty--something like eighty-three.  She joyfully just turned eighty-three years old.  And then the--she was a schoolteacher for a long time in Los Angeles [California], retired from Los Angeles, moved down to San Diego where her only daughter [Lucye Jaine Mitchell] and son-in-law and their children live.  She was married to a wonderful man who preceded her in death three years ago.  Elbert Joe [Elbert Mitchell] was her husband.  And of course, she has always been called, my husband [Nathaniel Williams] calls her the general of the family, so she's always been like one of those grandmothers, you know, bossed everybody.  She was also the guardian of my mom [Izora Coleman Ferrell] in my mother's older, older age, because she was in California then, and my mom was with her during the days that she had the Alzheimer's, 'cause, 'cause she had retired then from, from teaching school.  And even though she is in good health, she--even though she's in poor health, she still bosses everybody.  So, I mean, it's not a week that you don't get a call.  She's telling you what to do and telling me what to do for the other siblings, you know.  And I said they're all grown now, you know.  That doesn't matter to her.  She, she's a wonderful sister.  Who can ask for anybody any better than she?  Then the person next to her is, was Jaynell, Jaynell Evans [Jaynell Ferrell Evans], J-A-Y-N-E-L-L, and Jaynell died three years ago.  And she and I were closer in the last twenty years because we both lived here in Dallas [Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we were very best of friends, and it's very hard to talk about her because I was with her during a year of the illness.  She had stomach cancer, and that was very, very hard to, to lose her because we grew up together in the last twenty years, close as Andora and other sisters grew up together and once they had moved to, to Los Angeles.  So that was--and I guess what was so sad about her death was it was happening during the holidays, during the Christmas holidays, and her birthday was December the 10th.  So, her stomach cancer was diagnosed the, when she went in for surgery the day of 9/11 [September 11, 2001] and was with her that whole weekend when all of that was going on, so a lot of, lot of memories there.  And then each Christmas for the past three years it, it hasn't, has not been very good for me during that time, for me and my family.  And she had no children, so I was her caregiver.  And so, that was her.  She had, had two marriages and had lost both of her husbands.  But she was a teacher in Dallas Independent School District, retired; was one of Dallas Independent School District's best kindergarten teacher and got many awards for that.  She also had lived abroad in Germany for about ten years and taught overseas and had, had an opportunity to travel.  Just about every holiday she was somewhere, in Jerusalem or--she's had, she had a wonderful life, you know.  But in her last five years of her life, her illness--she was avid, avid bridge player, loved to play bridge.  She went to all the tournaments and had lots of friends.  So, I miss her, miss her dearly.
Story_ID: 343978
Speaker 1: Then following her [Williams' sister, Jaynell Ferell Evans] is Loretta [Loretta Ferrell Hatcher Talus], who is the sister of the sisters (laughter).  She is down in the Mojave Desert in Arizona.  And she's the feisty one of the, of the family and has one daughter.  And of course, although she's the third oldest in the family, everybody still says she's still the baby of the family 'cause she loves to be pampered, you know.  When you go see one sister and don't come and see her, she feels left out.  So, I mean, we're all characters (laughter).  And she lost her husband [Olden Hatcher] about four years ago.  She has one daughter that lives in Henderson, Las Vegas County [sic. Clark County, Nevada] and one--she has three grandchildren.  And she is a Mary Kay consultant, has been with Mary Kay [Mary Kay Inc., Dallas, Texas] for many, many years, so that brings her back to Dallas [Texas] every August, where she comes and stays with me and my husband [Nathaniel Williams] and does cooking for him 'cause she likes to spoil him 'cause she loves to do that.  But she's, she's, she's really wonderful.  We, we love her, but then she, she likes to be petted and babied.  We're getting ready for our family reunion.  It's gonna be in August, so it's gonna be here in Dallas.  We generally travel around from California to different parts of California where the sisters are back to Dallas.  And one of her complaints this year is that nobody asked her about when the family reunion was gonna be because that means she has to make two trips to Dallas, and so she should have been advised, you know, so.  So, like my husband said, she wants to change it because it doesn't fit her schedule 'cause she can't come to Dallas twice in October, so.  So we said well, we'll have it without you, and she said no, we can't (laughter) do that.  So that's, that's, that's the way she is.  And after her is another sister, Mary, Mary Sampson [Mary Ferrell Sampson], who lives out in Carmel, California [Carmel-by-the-Sea, California], Seaside [California], the Monterey Bay area.  And she and I are more closer now I guess since I left, lost my, since we lost Jaynell.  She is, or was, a, well, she was, her profession was a dietician and worked at the veteran's hospital in veteran's, yeah, veteran's hospital in, in Monterey.  She was a manager there.  Her husband was a career service person, and he's also deceased.  She and he lived in Japan and Germany, and that's where most of their children were born, there.  And so when they came from overseas, then they settled at, in Seaside, Monterey, at the [U.S.] Air Force base there at Fort Ord [California].  And she lives there with one of her older daughters.  And her other two daughters live here in Dallas area and very close to me and my daughter [Angelia Williams Chancellor] here, so we kind of have them.  She has two other boys that are in, one in Sacramento [California] and one in Los Angeles [California].  And following her then was my oldest brother, who passed thirty something years ago.  He had kidney problems, polycystic kidney, which runs in our family--(unclear).  And he and his wife had one daughter, who is now in Alabama.  And let's see, after him is another brother, Samuel [Samuel Ferrell].  My oldest brother was L.V., L.V. Ferrell.  And then Samuel, S-A-M-U-E-L, is the next oldest and the one that we all look up to now as being the leader of the family.  He lives here in Dallas with his wife and family.  And he's a re- retired schoolteacher also.  He has two children.  After him is me.  That's where I come in, as the seventh child.
Story_ID: 343979
Speaker 1: And then after me is another brother that's Clarence [Clarence Ferrell], who lives in Chicago [Illinois], and Clarence has five kids.  His wife, he and his wife are divorced, and his kids are everywhere.  Well, most of them are all here; they're all here in Dallas [Texas].  But he's in Chicago, and he's been there I guess for about forty years.  He let--he's one that left, went from Dallas to Kansas City, and then from Kansas City to Chicago.  But he's home every, every holiday, his bunch of kids, and they all love him, and he loves them.  He takes care of them.  They're all grown now, so now he has lots of grandkids, you know.  Think he's the only one that has more grandkids than anybody else does.  After Clarence is who, Joe Louis [Joe Louis Ferrell].  Joe Louis is blind; he can't see.  He lost one eye when he was small when were in the country, I understand.  I can't recall during that time, but the story was that my mother [Izora Coleman Ferrell] was gathering some wood for the wood-burning fire.  And he was pulling on her, on her dress tail, and a piece of the wood stuck in his eye, and so that put that eye out.  And then later, in his heydays, as he called it, he got into an accident, a fight, and lost the other one that way, you know.  So he's blind, but we call him the blind person that can see, because he knows everything.  He remembers; he's a very good mind.  And if you go pick him up and carry him anywhere in Dallas, he can tell you which street turn on and all of that, so he's very, very acute, very knowledgeable, but he is a character.  And then following him is Benjamin [Benjamin Ferrell], who lives close to me now, who has two twin daughters and one that I've adopted as a guardian and, and helped to send off to school, so.  And then after Benjamin is the baby brother and that's Willie [Willie Ferrell], who has his own business.  Sam [Samuel Ferrell] also has his own business too.  Willie has his business of, of a courier service.  So he lives here in Dallas with his wife, and he has one son.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And let me see, and that's just about it I think (laughter).
Story_ID: 343709
Speaker 1: So we're gonna talk about your early years growing up.  Tell me the name of the town that you grew up in again (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was Limestone County [Texas], and the little place was Coolidge, Texas, which is situated around Mexia [Texas], Waco [Texas].  So right out in the middle of that is a community that's called Sandy community [Sandy, Limestone County, Texas].  And what was important about it when I grew up from my earlier remembrance of it is the church house.  It's a little white church house, Sandy Community, Sandy United Memorial Community Church [sic. Sandy Methodist Episcopal Church; Union Memorial United Methodist Church, Coolidge, Texas], something like that.  It's a Methodist Church.  But right besides that church house is the, is the cemetery, and that's where all of the families are buried.  That's where my mom [Izora Coleman Ferrell] and father [Lloyd Ferrell] and my sister [Jaynell Ferrell Evans] are buried, 'cause we have a large plot there.  We, we often say that, that was one of the earlier and good things that my father did, you know, out of all of the other things (laughter) that he did.  He, he has one of the largest plots of land there, although his kids have grown up, and they all have their own.  But there's still plenty of room there, you know, when we tell all of them, you know, if you go one way, well, you know where you can always be buried.  But the families are buried there.  So, remembrance is--and then on the other side of the church is a two-story building that was the lodge.  It was like, for the women it was the Eastern Stars [Order of the Eastern Star], and for the men it was the Mason.  So, and, and then, of course, down the road was a little school, was a little two or three-room stool--school that I remember going there I guess maybe when I was first grade and second grade and third grade probably of those ages, of those grades.  And the reason I say that, because I think I do have the, the, the card from that.  We got the one card that gave you your grades, and I remember the teacher.  But that's what I remember--
Speaker 1: What was the teacher's name?
Speaker 2: My teacher was Yuma Murphy [ph.].  And she passed two years ago, and up until then she, whenever I would go back there for funerals and things, because all of our relatives, close relatives, whose children live other places, they always carried their parents back there for that, for that burial, and she always said I was one of her most famous students.  You know, so we always had that.  But I, I do remember really learning to read under her, and 'cause she was always my favorite because I loved the way she dressed.  She was very proper, very much a lady, and has really been a role model for me all of my life, you know.  We, we remained close until she passed two years ago.  But I remember is the, the good times.  You know, even if it was a funeral, there was still a lot of food because the women brought food, you know, had that after the funeral; you know, the families were fed.  And I remember my aunt [Isola Ferrell Echols], who I said earlier served as my grandmother on my father's side, you know, she would do all of her baking and her cooking the night before.  And, because if we wanted to be there early the next day, we would go down the night before and spend the night with her.  And you know, the next morning she would cook breakfast, and, and just, just wonderful times.  And then, of course, after the funeral or after a church celebration, then she would go to her, her car and have my uncle [Leon Echols] to open the trunk.  And then she would bring out her baskets of food, and they would spread it.  It was just good times.  I remember that; I remember that very good.
Story_ID: 343710
Speaker 1: Who lived in your community [Sandy, Limestone County, Texas]?
Speaker 2: Families.  Like we were the Ferrell family; then you had the Briscoe [ph.] family.  And everybody was related.  The Briscoes, the head of that family was the school principal.  The Murphys were the teachers in that particular school.  The Morgans, that was another family.  And let me see, what else is there?  The Briscoes, the Echols, that was a family.  So you had all of these families, and everybody were related.  One, I remember the Morgan family were for the longest that, the head of that household.  He was the, the head person in the Mason.  And the ladies in the Echols family, she was over the Eastern Stars [Order of the Eastern Star].  And when they had those positions, they didn't give them up, you know; they kept them, you know, forever.  So that's how you knew them, because every time there was a, a church celebration you would see those same persons up in front of the church there.  And, but they, they were good times.  And so we came up because all of the families had siblings that kind of equaled or matched everybody in my family.  For instance, the Briscoes there were almost as many children, so I'm the same age as a Briscoe child, as an Echols child, as a Morgan child.  And that's the way it is with each person in our family.  And we now still see each other, you know, 'cause we started out to school and all left at early ages.  But those were, those were good times, and so you, you always went back.  When my mom--when we moved to Dallas [Texas], then it was my sister [Jaynell Ferrell Evans] that passed, and myself would always carry my mom [Izora Coleman Ferrell] back down there for any kind of church celebrations, for funerals, you know.  She could call you two days ahead of time and say sister so and so, so and so died.  I wouldn't even know her, but then I knew I had to carry her back down there.  So those, those were fun times, and it gave us time then, too, to keep the family name, the Reeds and all of that together.
Speaker 1: So were the other families very instrumental in your upbringing?
Speaker 2: Very, very much so because, as I said, siblings were mixed with other siblings, and so those kids went off to school.  It was like every family wanted their family to do well, you know.  Coming from a small community, education was the niche of that community.  And then, of course, you knew, because in our family there were twelve of us, so that meant the six oldest of our family, they all went off to school.  I was like the seventh and the youngest.  So my older sisters and brothers were hardly ever in the house with us when we were growing up, because I remember from a child, I had to help take care of the younger ones.  And I remember they were all in college.  And then the older I grew, then they got married and went away, you know, lived their own lives.  And of course, they always came back and was very influential to make sure that we stayed in school and that we helped each other in college.  And that's the way it was in all of the families down there.  So if the Reed child went off to Prairie View [Prairie View Agricultural and Mechanical College of Texas; Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas], then, of course, you know that we were going to Huston-Tillotson [Huston-Tillotson College; Huston-Tillotson University, Austin, Texas] or some of those other places.  And so everybody kind of, like, kept in contact like that.
Story_ID: 343711
Speaker 1: Who was the first in your family to graduate high school?
Speaker 2: My oldest sister, yeah, Andora [Andora Ferrell Mitchell].
Speaker 1: Okay, and she went off to college.  She, she, was she the first one to graduate from college?
Speaker 2: She was the first one to graduate from college.  In fact, she started teaching before she graduated from college.  She came back.  When she was like nineteen, she came to Coolidge [Texas] as a teacher because they needed teachers there then.  She was only in college like two years.  So she came out of college I think and taught two years and then later on went back and finished her degree.
Speaker 1: So now we have you in elementary school (laughter).  And I think we talked about one of the teachers.  Who was, the teacher was--
Speaker 2: Mrs. Murphy, Yuma Murphy [ph.] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Mrs. Murphy.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she was the person, I would say, that was most influential in my life at an early age, an early teacher that I--
Speaker 1: What, what--
Speaker 2: --can remember.
Speaker 1: --did she do to in--I mean, how did she inspire you?
Speaker 2: Well, it was her, I would say her demeanor, just seeing her every day, and from memory now, as a role model, you know, next to your mom.  Your mom send you off to school, and the next person you saw was your teacher, who was kind to you and complimented you.  Evidently, I was a pretty good student, you know, because I got pats on the back, you know.  And later on, from the things that she would tell me, I remember those, and as I said, visiting back in this community, because she stayed in the community.  And even as I went back through the years, she would talk about me as a student and the things that I was doing at this time, how she saw them, you, you know.  So, I mean, all you could do is listen to what they said (laughter).  Very, very few of it that you do remember, but I do remember her giving us books to read.  I do remember that.  I remember magazines.  I remember even back then she--giving us newspapers.  I remember papers like the Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier], things that I had never heard of.  I re- I remember those kind of things, of her bringing those things to school and reading to us, which I assume now were news, you know, from other parts of the, of the United States and probably was telling us about other famous people from other parts of the United States, not just the people there in the community because we didn't have those kind of role models there then.  But I do remember stacks of papers that came from other places and her telling us about even famous people and what was happening.
Speaker 1: You, you mentioned magazines.  What magazines do you remember?
Speaker 2: I, I remember Life, Life magazine.  I remember that.  I, I, I know we didn't have Newsweek and those kind of things.  But I do remember Life magazine and, as I said, I remember the paper, the Pittsburgh Courier, something else that was from another state, can't recall right now.  But she was that person that also told us about, and I think at that time it must have been about Joe Louis, you know, people that were of that age that--and of Nat King Cole.  You know, that was when I heard about those particular people that we would never see.  And you know, we didn't have TV, so when, when they were doing things, then she was the one that was telling about current events.  That, that was really what, what her extra thing was that she was giving us.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the elementary school you went to?
Speaker 2: It was Sandy Community School [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was the name of it.
Story_ID: 343712
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You went straight from elementary school to high school?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, because there in those days, there were no middle schools.  You, it was either you were all under the same roof, where it was first through twelfth grade, and we moved from there to another little place called Hubbard, Texas.  When we left Sandy [Limestone County, Texas], my father [Lloyd Ferrell] carried us to Hubbard, Texas, where we lived on a, on another farm.  And I remember what was so exciting about that was it, you know, it was a house with a picket fence.  And, and we had lots of chickens and lots of cows and all of those kinds of things, and it was milk, and it, it, it was really nice.  We were only there for about four years.  And so, there, I was at a school called Phyllis Wheatley [Phyllis Wheatley High School, Hubbard, Texas].  It was an elementary and going into the high school.  My brothers were in the high school.  That's why I remember that it was all under the same roof.  Another teacher that was influential in my life then was Mrs. Trousdale [ph.].  I don't remember her first name, but she just passed a couple of months ago.  But I remember her as being a role model for me because she came from another city.  She came from the city and lived there through the week and then went back to her home on the weekend.  And I guess we kind of thought it was fascinating, 'cause she had long hair like you did, like you do (laughter), and, and she was from the city, you know; she was not a community person.  And, and, and then most importantly, she was one that was telling about her college, you know.  Mrs. Murphy [Yuma Murphy (ph.)] never talked that much about college 'cause Mrs. Murphy was more or less a cousin, sort of like in the family.  Mrs. Trousdale was another role model.  She was also a single woman at that time, had just gotten out of, of college.  And so for us she was really like a young mother to us.  She had no children, not married, and, and we just kind of thought it was great to be a, a teacher.  She had a car, and we just kind of thought, you know, that's, that's a good career, you know, 'cause she was pretty, and, and she was smart, and, and nice, and, and she had a car, and she would drive, you know.  She was single, you know, so, that, that in itself then kind of told you what a, an important part it was to be a teacher and educator, which was another phase.
Story_ID: 343713
Speaker 1: So when you were coming up, the places that you would live, would y'all rent those (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: --places or--
Speaker 2: No, we owned those places.
Speaker 1: You owned it?
Speaker 2: Yes, we owned those--
Speaker 1: So your family--
Speaker 2: --places, yeah.
Speaker 1: --did own property?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What about your mother [Izora Coleman Ferrell] and father's [Lloyd Ferrell]--I mean your grandparents?  Did they own their land?
Speaker 2: Yes, they did, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we still have those places, yeah.
Speaker 1: So you still own that land?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  We still have the, still have the land of my, of my father's mother [Lela Ferrell], yeah.  We still have that land.  And then we still have the land of my father's sister [Isola Ferrell Echols], who became my, who became my aunt, my aunt, too, was like a grandmother, still have that too.
Speaker 1: So did that teach you that it was important to own land?
Speaker 2: Well, yes, we, we, we always felt that ownership--the only time that we've ever lived in a, in apartments was when we first came from the country into Dallas [Texas].  And we were in apartments I guess for like a couple of years, and then we bought a house.  So it was--and I can't remember that much about that.  But we've always kind of like been homeowners, you know, and property owners.
Story_ID: 343714
Speaker 1: So now you went on to high school.  What, what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) High--
Speaker 1: --year was this?
Speaker 2: God, you would ask me that (laughter).  High school was in Dallas [Texas], well, from, from grade school to, to high school.  When we came to Dallas, went to a private school, St. Anthony [St. Anthony School, Dallas, Texas], which was a Catholic school, and from there into high school.  This would have to be--finished high school in '55 [1955].  This would have to be in '51, 1951, entering Lincoln High School [Lincoln High School and Communications/Humanities Magnet, Dallas, Texas], and then that was another whole era of, that began the process of where I am now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My, my teacher there was my physical education teacher, and of course, she taught dance.  I was never that good in sports.  So, although we had to play sports in the gym, it was more important that I waited for the, the dance classes.  I was also a cheerleader.  And we had a dance club, and I was very active in that.  We also had a photography club, and I was good at photography.  I thought I was (laughter), you know.  And those were good days at, at high school, the, the basketball and the football games, and, and being their cheerleader was great.  And I carried that into the college years [at Prairie View Agricultural and Mechanical College of Texas; Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas], so.  Also, what was important about the high school and moving to Dallas was the beginning of, of private dance lessons at the Y.  We did not live that far from the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association].  And that's where my mother [Izora Coleman Ferrell] sent me like on weekends and, and after school some time for activities there, for extracurricular activities.  So on Saturdays I took dance lessons at the Y; was taught ballet and tap, and really became interested in that, which carried over back then to, to school, you know, each, each day.  But I was getting private lessons.  And while at Lincoln, we also had field trips through the school, so, which we had to pay for them, you know, had that opportunity to go to the symphony, to the opera, and to the museum.  And then I never will forget that while I was at Lincoln, the, we went to the opera, and that's where it was an operatic.  I never could remember which one it was.  People always ask me that.  I said I don't know, but I just know that that was the grandeur, and the glamour that I saw on stage, and the acting, and the lights, and the curtains and all of that, and those kinds of things I feel influenced a lot of the staging and seeing the big, the big productions.  And later on I had an opportunity then to see the Dallas Ballet [Dallas Civic Ballet], which was just getting started during those years.  And to see the dancers dance in the tutus and the costumes that they had on played a great influence in my life.
Speaker 1: You grew up during wartime also.  Did any of your brothers go off to war [World War II, WWII]?
Speaker 2: Yes, I had two--had three brothers in war.  My oldest brother [L.V. Ferrell], the one that passed over forty years ago, was in the [U.S. military] service.  And my oldest brother now was in the service, and also my baby brother was in the service.
Story_ID: 343715
Speaker 1: So now we are in high school [Lincoln High School; Lincoln High School and Communications/Humanities Magnet, Dallas, Texas], and is this the point that you're thinking about being a--are you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A dancer?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean, did you want to make this a career now or--
Speaker 2: I did, I did, and I--
Speaker 1: Did you want to perform?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.  In my junior and senior year I knew that I had to go off to school, you know, to college.  We knew that was important, and we were in courses and with counselors and, and looking at that, even with family planning.  My sisters all went to private universities, Huston-Tillotson [Huston-Tillotson University, Austin, Texas], Sam Houston State [sic.].  And that was mainly because they were church-related, and they got scholarships and funds from the churches that we belonged to.  And so I, I made a choice of looking at those and, and knew that they didn't have dance classes there, so that was someplace that I did not want to go.  And so, in talking to my dance teacher, the next place was Prairie View [Prairie View Agricultural and Mechanical College of Texas; Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas], which was the state university here in Texas, a black university here in Texas, and, and because they had dance classes.  And I remember making a visit there, or writing.  I did not make a visit.  I wrote to them and talked to someone there and asked about a dance major.  And they, I was told they did not have a dance major then, but they were going to, you know, in the next two years or the next year, or something like that.  And so I just said okay, well, this is where I would, would go, and applied, and enrolled, and went there.  And of course, and I always tell the story: the sad thing, went there for four years and never got the dance major, but (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Why not?
Speaker 2: It was a predominantly black university, and they never got the dance major, you know.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but that was to get me down there, you know.  They were telling everybody.  Just like they would say maybe we're gonna have this major, and next year we're gonna make it a major, you to come and take the classes.  But one of the things that was so great about going to Prairie View is the, the instructor that I had, Barbara Hollis, who had been a student of [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham, and immediately fell in love with her.  And her, her teaching was just great.  I mean--
Speaker 1: What did she teach you?
Speaker 2: She taught me dance.  Yeah, we had (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --all kinds of dance.  Yes, she was a dance teacher.
Speaker 1: Teacher.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Oh, so you had dance there.  It just--
Speaker 2: Oh, oh--
Speaker 1: --was not a major.
Speaker 2: --just it wasn't a major, no, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So you had to major in physical education.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You had to major in physical education, but you got all the dance classes, you know.  There were--
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this.  Let me just step back.  All the schooling that you went to was segregated in, after--did you ever go to a school that was desegregated?
Speaker 2: Yes, when I got ready to get my master's [at Texas Woman's University, Denton, Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay, that's when you went on to college.
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, so--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Story_ID: 343716
Speaker 1: Go back to Barbara Hollis (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: Tell us about her.
Speaker 2: Yes, she was, she was great.  She had just finished dancing with the company of [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham and wanted to go and teach, and so she was there at the university.  And I immediately became her assistant, you know, in class, and so I was hot stuff.  You know, I was choreographing, doing the, the Ms. Prairie View coronations, you know, doing all the staging for that, you know.  And that's where I got my hand really in, in choreographing and, and putting productions on and all those kind of things.  I had done some on a smaller scale at Lincoln [Lincoln High School; Lincoln High School and Communications/Humanities Magnet, Dallas, Texas], but mainly because I saw my teacher doing it, you know.  So, when you're in those kind of situations, you see everything that goes on backstage, you know, from pulling of the, of the curtains to the lights and, and, and all of the help that you need in the dressing rooms and all those kind of things.  So, it was never not knowing how to put on a production 'cause I was very wise I think with looking and seeing what, what needs to be done.  I mean, I guess that's one of my biggest pet peeve I have with people now.  You know, as they go in, they call themselves maybe--well, if you're a water boy and you go to someplace and you don't watch the other water boys, boys and see how they do things (laughter).  You know, I mean you just go in, you know, and pick up any habits, you know, because sometimes these things you don't get in the books; you know, you get by being aware and, and, and just, just watching.  I, I have the same problem with my staff when I can't get them to go to other performances to see all of the things that are in the lobby, you know, the extra materials that the dance companies put out, you know.  And then I come back here and I have to tell them every little thing, so they go and watch the show.  You know, they seem like they don't watch anything else, but that's beside the point.  But anyway, it was, it was great, those four years down at Prairie View [Prairie View Agricultural and Mechanical College of Texas; Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas].  I even taught at the, at their little grade school, the little feeder schools for, where the, the professors and the teachers' kids went.  So I taught dance there at those schools to make extra money.  But my major then was physical, health and physical education, and I had a minor in economics and also a minor in French, had a double minor.
Story_ID: 343717
Speaker 1: Leaving Prairie View [Prairie View Agricultural and Mechanical College of Texas; Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas] then, came back to Dallas [Texas], and in, began to teach at one of the middle schools then that Dallas had established, which was a seventh, eighth, and ninth grade.  That was the first year that they separated a lot of the elementary schools from one through nine, you know, or one through eight, and then nine through twelve.  So that was one of the first years then that they had the middle schools seven, eight, and nine.  And it was in a, a very nice African American neighborhood.  And I went in as the dance teacher and began teaching dance there, and I taught there for three years.  And at the same time, my husband [Nathaniel Williams] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, wait--
Speaker 1: --to be--okay, we're not ready to jump there yet (laughter), okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 343718
Speaker 1: I want to ask you about who are your friends during this time of high school [Lincoln High School; Lincoln High School and Communications/Humanities Magnet, Dallas, Texas] and, and college.  Do you have any good friends that you stay in touch with?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  Ironically, we're getting ready now for our fiftieth college anniversary.  So a lot of my friends at the time, at that time now, I'm back with them because a lot of us went to Prairie View [Prairie View Agricultural and Mechanical College of Texas; Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas] together.  So we are all kind of like working on this fiftieth reunion that's gonna take place in '09, 2009 (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who are some of your friends?
Speaker 2: Well, there's Daisy Taro [ph.].  She's Daisy Mays now; Sadie Robinson [ph.]; and let me see, Modean Fairfax [ph.] was one of my best friends in high school, but I don't get a chance to see her anymore.  I don't get--'cause she doesn't live here [Dallas, Texas].  But as we prepare for our '09 [2009] anniversary, we're also preparing for our ver- high school.  We just finished with the high school, '05 [2005] anniversary, too, of our high school.  And so that was great, and that's where I had a chance to come back with some of these friends that we had not been together.  But Daisy and Sadie and I have been together since high school. And let me see, I would say they're probably the only two--Frances Glenn [ph.], see her every once in a while.  And one of my very good friends, Barbara Parish [ph.] is ill down in, in Houston [Texas], but I keep up with her through her family.
Story_ID: 360599
Speaker 1: Fifty-five [1955], and you graduated from--
Speaker 2: College [Prairie View Agricultural and Mechanical College of Texas; Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas], 1960.
Speaker 1: Sixty [1960], college, okay. (Pause) Now we were talking about your, your friends.  And were you involved, or your friends, or family involved in any of the organizations that we talked about earlier like the Eastern Stars [Order of the Eastern Stars] or the Masons?
Speaker 2: My, my parents were.  My father [Lloyd Ferrell] was a Mason.  My brothers were Masons, and my mother [Izora Coleman Ferrell] and sisters are all Eastern Stars.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you never got involved?
Speaker 2: I think I was in the early--I think my mother had me in that when I was like in college or in high school [Lincoln High School; Lincoln High School and Communications/Humanities Magnet, Dallas, Texas].  I never kept that up, that part of it up.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did you pledge in college?
Speaker 2: No, I did not.  We didn't have fraternities and sororities when I was in high school--when I was in college (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was in college.
Speaker 2: --rather.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 360600
Speaker 1: So now you have graduated from college [Prairie View Agricultural and Mechanical College of Texas; Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas].  And when did you meet your husband [Nathanial Williams]?
Speaker 2: I met him in nineteen--had to be in 1961.  We both were teachers in Dallas Independent School District.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so you got married and you're still--
Speaker 2: In '63 [1963].
Speaker 1: Sixty-three [1963], okay.  So the climate in civil rights, were you active at all in, in the Civil Rights Movement?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were teach, you were teaching dance then?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was.
Speaker 1: When did the, the dream or the idea for the dance school come to you?
Speaker 2: That did not happen until '68 [1968] and '69 [1969].  That was after I got my master's degree from Texas Woman's University [Denton, Texas].
Speaker 1: What year was that?
Speaker 2: In '68 [1968] and '69 [1969].
Speaker 1: So you got your degree in '69 [1969]?
Speaker 2: Yes, I got my degree in '68 [1968], my masters of arts degree in 1968 from Texas Woman's University.
Speaker 1: So what gave you the idea then?
Speaker 2: Well, after I met my husband, and we got married, at that time husband and wife could not work in the same school district.  So I resigned, you know, quite naturally, so he could have a job.  And then I got on in a suburban area of Dallas [Texas], in the Richardson School District [Richardson Independent School District], and still was very much interested in dance and very close to Texas Woman's University, kept up with all of the workshops and things.  I had gone to New York [New York] to the Dance Theatre of Harlem that [HistoryMaker] Arthur Mitchell had just started during that time; had taken classes.  And then I really wanted to go ahead and get my master's because after graduating from Prairie View, I still had not had that real active classroom training and dance that I wanted to.  And I became very much interested in historical parts of it, like the famous dancers.  And when I went to New York, ran across so many of the and were in classes with so many of them--
Speaker 1: Like who?
Speaker 2: --at that time.  Well, like [HistoryMaker] Louis Johnson, [HistoryMaker] Donald McKayle, Alvin Ailey, had a chance to meet them, not really get to know them but met them or cross paths with them in one way or the other, or heard people talk about them, or saw their names somewhere, or went to a concert, you know, where they had choreographed and that sort of thing.  So going to Texas Woman's University gave me the opportunity then to really study and to learn more about the historical parts of dance movements from its early beginning, which I had not had in books.  And while there, the head of the dance department, Nancy Duggan [Anne Schley Duggan], had studied with many of them.  And she would bring them to Texas Woman's University in the summer for them to do workshops, persons that were the era of Martha Graham, Ruth St. Denis, Charles Weidman, and so--Doris Humphrey--took a lot of classes under them as they came down in the summertime.  And what she had done is brought them in because they had been friends of hers while studying dance.  And she, working at a, at a university, could afford to bring them in and pay them, whereas they were out without any pay in any, many of the other workshops.  And so that, that was very encouraging, you know.  You know, I saw, the, the pattern of what was going on.
Story_ID: 360601
Speaker 1: Then, after I got my master's [degree] from Texas Woman's University [Denton, Texas], I wanted to go into college then to teach college, so I started teaching at Bishop College [Dallas, Texas].  And they needed a dance teacher.  Well, they wanted someone to, to open their dance department there, to head their dance department.  And that's what I went in and did and formed a dance department there.  And what I found myself doing was just as Nancy Duggan [Anne Schley Duggan], bringing a lot of the, the choreographers and artists in to set works and to teach classes for me, as the head of the dance department, because I had a budget and because they had been friends of mine.  So I saw that going on like that.  And then as I would bring them in, of course being as head of the dance department, I also had a dance company, so they would work with the dance company that was there at Bishop College that I had formed.  And we had a chance to tour, so I'm also.  So that kind of got me interested in having your own dance company.  Years later, I left Bishop to open then my own dance school because while there, I had to apply for a grant, a major grant from the Ford Foundation [New York, New York] that the university had for bringing cultural arts to the City of Dallas [Texas].  And I worked in conjunction with the other arts organizations on campus there, the music department, the theater department.  So we had this million dollar grant coming from the Ford Foundation.  And through that we brought in people like Alex Haley, Nina Simone.  We brought [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou in.  We brought--she, she came in when she first wrote her book, 'I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings,' and we brought Alex Haley in.  And from the audience, he had just started working on 'Roots' ['Roots: The Saga of an American Family,' Alex Haley].  And then I was able to bring in the Dance Theatre of Harlem and co-sponsor the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater here through funds that came from the dance fund.  So then after the grant ran out, there, we had, we also had a community of continuing education class for kids that I had started there too for community kids.  So we had over about fifty kids that were coming in, and we were teaching them evening classes.  Some of my dance students were teaching them.
Story_ID: 360602
Speaker 1: So when the grant ran out, there was no continuation of any of this.  It just, the college [Bishop College, Dallas, Texas] was not able to continue with those programs, and so I had like these fifty something kids.  And the parents said, "Well, where are they gonna take dance classes?"  You know, my kids were graduating and all of that.  So I had been wanting to start out on my own anyway, so I said well, I'll just open a dance school, and that's what I did.  And the kids came on, and as they came, others came, and so for three years I ran a dance school.  And it was one day that one of the teachers said well, "Ms. Ann [HistoryMaker Ann Marie Williams], why don't you start a dance company?"  And I wanted to know for what?  (Laughter) You know.  And really it was because they wanted to continue dancing.  So, I had like six teachers.  And I always tell people that I think one of their things was that each year when we put on the kids' recital the teachers would get jealous 'cause the kids were still dancing, and they remembered how they used to do that.  But anyway, we, we, we did start; we started choreographing on each other, start getting performances for churches, and the community centers, sororities, and fraternities, and, and it just kind of grew out of hand, you know, because they were good.  They were talented teachers, and we were a force, and it looked good.  And that happened for like about two and a half years.  And so, after two and a half years, I saw that that was gonna stick, so then that's when we came together then to formalize and go in to our 501(c) and from then on started progress.
Story_ID: 360603
Speaker 1: What type of dance--
Speaker 2: Modern dance.  A lot of that, at that time, we were doing jazz, but we are a modern dance company.  And my dancers are trained in ballet and modern.  Ballet is a, is a major discipline and is a discipline that any professional dancer--whether you're a tap dancer, or a modern dancer, or a jazz dancer, you do need to be trained in ballet.  And that--since ballet is the one that gives you that great discipline, but we are a modern repertory dance company.  Many of our dances are in bare feet, leotards and tights.  The modern dance gives you freedom.  We're not like a Martha Graham company.  We're a lyrical modern dance company where we move very contemporary.  Some of the works that we have and music is by Ray Charles.  Some of the music is by Marvin Gaye.  It's timeless, very contemporary.  What you see us doing on stage if you're coming in from the audience and, and a sitter out in the audience, you will be able to identify, and you can easily, readily know what we're doing and what we're trying to portray from that.
Speaker 1: The choreography, explain to me about how you build your repertoire.
Speaker 2: Really, I, I travel quite a lot, and I see different choreographers, and I see their works, and read also about what they're doing and what their works are.  I'm not a choreographer now, and we don't--I do have two dancers that choreograph, but we are a repertory company, so I bring in choreographers.  And one of the reasons, because I think that keeps the, the rep fresh.  So when you see a company by Dallas Black Dance Theatre, you will not see all of the works looking the same.  And that's when you have a one-person choreographer like the Donald Byrd dance company [Donald Byrd/The Group] or the Garth Fagan Dance company.  And all of the works then would be by that same person, and they begin to all look alike.  And by the time you get to the third number on the program, you know, people are saying okay, well, I've seen those same movements.  But in a repertory company they are of different idioms and of different moves.  And you might have one that is a modern classical, or as I said, you might have one that is totally by piano, or you might have a Marvin Gaye.
Story_ID: 360604
Speaker 1: The one that we have now by Ray Charles is choreographed by Bruce Woods [sic. Bruce Wood], who has his own company [Bruce Wood Dance Company], in Fort Worth [Texas].  And he came to us four years ago, and he had said, "Well, I want to set something on your company."  I said okay.  I said, "Well, I need a Ray Charles piece," 'cause we had just had Ray Charles here as a fundraiser for the company.  And so he said, "Okay, let's choose the music."  So we sat down together and start looking at some of the pieces that we wanted from the whole rep of Ray Charles music and put together a suite, so it's a twenty-minute suite.  And Darryl Sneed [Darryl B. Sneed], who was one of my first artistic directors, my second artistic director, before he passed, I got together with him, and we did a Marvin Gaye suite ['...And Now Marvin'].  And that was the one that was commissioned by the Olympics in 1996 [1996 Summer Olympics, Atlanta, Georgia], that they wanted us to do a Marvin Gaye suite and then bring it to the Olympics in Atlanta [Georgia].  And that's a twenty-minute piece, and we have about seven Marvin Gaye pieces.  It's one of our, I would say, signature pieces that, and the Ray Charles, because now everybody know us for those two pieces.
Speaker 2: So when you have something in, that belongs to you, no other company can perform them or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well--
Speaker 2: --that were--
Speaker 1: --that's, it's according to the contract, you know.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: If I bring, for instance, Bruce Woods and his contract, that's, that's strictly Dallas Black's [Dallas Black Dance Theatre], you know.  He might come back to me later and say, "Ann [HistoryMaker Ann Marie Williams], will you give me permission to set this on so and so on another company," and the same way by [HistoryMaker] Donald McKayle.  I have some of Don McKayle's works, but he also have those works in the Dayton Contemporary Dance Company.  And they also have been set on the Lulu Washington Dance Company.  But I have seen them, and I said well, I want them here.
Story_ID: 360605
Speaker 1: We [Dallas Black Dance Theatre] are a regional dance company, and there are five companies like mine.  We--five--four other companies like mine, and we, we are all in different regions.  Ironically, all five companies were founded by women.  We all are deeply rooted in our own schools.  Our companies came out of our schools, so we serve a community and a region.  And all five of us were honored several years ago in New York [New York] for our accomplishments.  So they brought us in, and that was a great honor, brought all of our companies in.  It was a big gala there.
Speaker 2: That was, it's wonderful.
Story_ID: 360606
Speaker 1: How much of the idea that there was no place where youth to come to learn to dance allowed you to say yes to the school and to the company?
Speaker 2: Company.  That, that played a big part; it really did.  When, when my one--two teachers came to me and said, "Ms. Ann [HistoryMaker Ann Marie Williams], why don't we form a dance company?"  And that was the first thing I told them.  I said, "Why don't y'all go and join the Dallas Ballet [Dallas Civic Ballet]?"  You know, because I knew that they could.  It was an, an all-white ballet company then, and it folded; it is no more.  And their thing was yes, we're, we are proficient in ballet technique, but we don't want to do ballet, you know.  We don't want to do the Swan Lakes, and the Cinderellas, and the, the Peter Pan.  And so, what they wanted to do then was to do their own creation and to do the contemporary, because that, that was really coming into focus in '76 [1976], freestyle movement, as well as avant-garde modern.  So, I said, "Okay, let's try that."  But I think deep down the meaning was that I remember when I was coming up in Dallas [Texas] and could only take classes on Saturdays at the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association].  And later on we had a ballet company, and I didn't take classes at the ballet school, but I did later on take classes at Edith James' school [Edith James School of Ballet, Dallas, Texas], which was a private dance school where I really saw then the large dance classroom.  At the Y, you know, we were still in a community room where, after we would finish, they probably would play bridge or play checkers or whatever else, you know, they wanted.  But really being able to, to know that I could help provide that type of opportunity for minority boys and girls, and that was one of the reasons why even after the first two or three years, how hard it was, I wanted to stick with it, because the goal then became to provide an opportunity for minority boys and girls to have a place to come and take dance classes, and to take disciplined dance classes.  We had the street dances, and you had all the social dances.  But our kids had not had formal training and neither had many of them ever seen a black professional dancer.  And, and that was one of the things that I thought.  If, if I could provide that, and this is where it has come to.
Speaker 1: The classes, anyone could come to the classes?
Speaker 2: Yes, that--it was a fee.  We, we had its, its--there, there were like ballet classes, tap classes, jazz classes, modern classes, but it operated at a school.  I did operate it as a business, so there was a class fee, a monthly class fee that was very low, range--I remember the very--class fee we started out with was like fifteen dollars a month.  And you know, you'd come and take one class a week, so every Saturday we had lots of kids there.  And, and in the evenings was when the company [Dallas Black Dance Theatre], through the week, was when the company would rehearse.  A lot of my dancers at that time were, were students at the arts magnet performing arts school [Booker T. Washington High School for the Performing and Visual Arts, Dallas, Texas], which later was right across the street from the studio before we moved over here.  And they, after school at 4:00, where they came across, and at 4:30 or 5, from 5 to 9, then we rehearsed as a company.
Story_ID: 360607
Speaker 1: Who were the company members?  I know you, you said some of your teachers, but--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --there other students (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There were, I--
Speaker 1: What were the qualifications--
Speaker 2: Okay, the qualifications was that you must have had dance experience.  And as I said, some of the other company members that I had would have been a few of the seniors at, the senior students at the arts magnet high school [Booker T. Washington High School for the Performing and Visual Arts, Dallas, Texas], which was our performing arts high school.  One of the reasons is because my artistic director at that time was a teacher at the arts magnet high school.  In fact, two of the company members taught at the arts magnet performing arts high school.  One was in college at Southern Methodist University [Dallas, Texas].  And I've one male guy who was here in Dallas [Texas] because his mom is a friend of mine from San Antonio [Texas], and she had sent him up here just to dance with us 'cause he had just graduated from high school in San Antonio.  But all during his young years and his high school years he had always taken ballet classes in the summer, and he was a very good dancer.  And later on he was a principal dancer with the Dance Theatre of Harlem.
Speaker 1: So they had to have taken dance.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you wanted them on their way to college too, right?
Speaker 2: That's true.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: Definitely so (laughter), def- definitely so.  That was, that was in the early years.  They were not paid and we, they were not full time, so they were like, two or three times a week we rehearsed.  And that went on I would say the first, for the first five years or the first seven or eight years of, of the beginning of Dallas Black Dance Theatre.
Story_ID: 360608
Speaker 1: As I said, the artistic part ran away from the administrative part of the company [Dallas Black Dance Theatre], you know, when you're trying to do both of it.  People are saying come and perform here, and then you're kind of like you have nobody to do the administrative part, and it just kind of runs away from you.  And of course, we were trying to work in the evening, and that's what you really want to do anyway, is the artistic part.  You don't want to do the administrative part.  But I did have a volunteer board of directors who were really friends of mine and helping me to kind of run the organization.  But later on, after our tenth year, we, we really saw then that there was a need for much more structure.  And it was during that time that I was beginning the long-range planning of that, that I had a serious car accident and broke both of my legs.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  I had several operations (laughter).  So that, that, that really happened really like twenty years ago; it was 1986.  And coming out from under that, I had a school then that had over three hundred kids in it and the small company.  So, my husband [Nathanial Williams] and daughter [Angelia Williams Chancellor] were saying okay, well, you need to come home and leave all of that, you know, so I, I did.  After the operation, I really thought I would never walk again.  And, and the doctor had said well, I can, you know, with your help and with mine.  So I, I always say now that it was that discipline of dance that really did help that for--'cause for like three months I was flat on my back and went from the hospital bed to the wheelchair, and from the wheelchair to crutches--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --from crutches to the big shoes, the big (laughter) feet, learning to walk again.  And, but I also told--and in doing those three months, it was, just so happened it was in the summertime, which there was no school, made it a little easier.  Some of the company members came in.  But a couple of board members came in and just kind of disrupted the files trying to be helpful.  But things just really, really got pushed around, and some of the things were, were taken.  So my board president came to me in the hospital and said you know, well--'cause I had told her we, you know, was just gonna disband.  I'd probably sell the comp- the school.  So she wanted to know what would it take to continue because, you know, we were really getting pleas from everybody not to disband.  And so I told her, I said I will have to have a full-time administrator, you know, and the board would have to be ready to finance that, that part of the bill.  And so she went back to two or three board members.  And we had about twelve at that time, but then after my accident it really got down to about three that, that wanted to help make the commitment.  And so she said yes, well, we will do that.  So that was the only way.  So after three months, I gradually went back and we did hire an administrator who is Zenetta [Zenetta S. Drew], the one that you met in there now, who is now my executive director.  But she was, had just gone through a horrible divorce.  And she was an accountant at Arco [Arco Oil and Gas Company], had two small children, self-esteem kind of down, so bringing her in, and, and teaching her all about the dance company.  And she knew nothing about the arts, but a very good accounting and managerial head on her and wanting to get back out and get back involved.  So introducing her to the mayor and some of the activities and things that I had gone to and letting her take that slack of going, it kind of brought her self-esteem, you know, to meet the president of American Airlines and those kind of things.  So it was a good match, and I think that's one of the things why we're so close right now.  She's been with me now for twenty years--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and very good.  I tell her now she should run the--she runs the company.  I said if the lights go out it's your fault, you know.  It's, I, I gave her, and I, I, I'm really proud that I was not selfish enough, to give her that responsibility because that's what she needed. And sort of like help raise those, those two children of hers.  They, they followed (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Do you have children?
Speaker 1: --my daughter.  Yeah, I have one daughter.  My husband [Nathaniel Williams] and I have one daughter.  She went to Florida A and M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida].  She's a graduate there.  And that's where Zenetta sent both of her girls (laughter).  So they're graduates of Florida A and M, school of business and administration, and so they're both out in the business world, you know.
Story_ID: 360609
Speaker 1: Going back to, to the repertoire, and I noticed in something that I read about Chuck Davis.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you know him?
Speaker 2: --very well.  He's a very close--
Speaker 1: I danced with him.
Speaker 2: Oh, did you?
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: In New York, when I was a teenager.
Speaker 2: Oh, really?  Okay, very (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, very close friend of mine.  He'll be here next month.  He's coming in to do a workshop.  He always comes in every summer, does a, a two-week workshop of, of African dance.
Speaker 1: That's what I was gonna ask you about, the, the summer workshop developing.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he--
Speaker 1: --because--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --I know he's very good at that because--
Speaker 2: He's very good.
Speaker 1: --during the summer months in Harlem [New York, New York]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --we used to go (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes.  Okay--
Speaker 1: --and, and then went to--
Speaker 2: --to take, take classes under him, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: He's very much--he and I are, are so close.  When he comes down this summer I'll have to house him and feed him, you know, and, and get him his sweet potato pies; you know, he loves that.  But he loves Dallas Black [Dallas Black Dance Theatre], very good friend of ours.  And this fall I'm gonna get his Dance Africa, which is a festival that he goes around the country and works with.  So when he comes this summer, he's gonna start.  And not only is he gonna do the workshop here, but I'm gonna send him out to some of the senior citizens' homes.  He's gonna start working with the elders.  I'm gonna send him to the church.  He's gonna work with the Praise Dance Group there.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And so when he comes back then in the fall, in October, we're gonna have a festival.  And it's gonna be an outdoor festival of all of these groups now that he's worked with.  When he leaves, my company members will go and continue those classes and continue the dance that he set.  And so, then in the fall they'll come back in October, and they're gonna perform this, you know.  So it's a--that's what he does in communities.
Story_ID: 360610
Speaker 1: What are your past notable performances?
Speaker 2: I would say, the first summer we went to South Africa, great experience.  We went to Soweto, Johannesburg [South Africa] and just had a wonderful time.  What was so great about that performance is that we were not just in the cities, in the nice and the fine theaters; we were on the countryside where we were out in the rural, and we had to dance really with the people.  So it wasn't the, the dance floor, the wood floor.  You know, many times we were dancing on the grass, you know.  And, but what it was, it was so fulfilling for our dancers because they had a chance to see what they call the homeland, you know.  And all of the kids there fell in love with them.  All of them wanted to come back to America with them, you know.  It was, it was really, really fulfilling.  We danced in their schools, taught classes to them, and met the king of the village; you know, we ate with him.  It was, it was really great.  And then we came into Johannesburg and had an opportunity to then dance in some of the, of the theaters, but, and in Sun City [South Africa].  We were also able to see where Nelson Mandela had been.  I took that tour, you know, across the island there too, to see his sail and all of that.  It was, it was, I was most fulfilling.  We were there for like eleven days in South Africa.  That was one.  One of the others, we, we did a ten-day tour of, in Italy, and mainly on the island of Sicily, dancing in--(unclear)--theaters.  You know, as you go around the mountains, you, or going down the road, you see nothing.  You see a mountain.  You go around the mountain, and then there's a whole village sitting in that little valley there.  And so the Italians were so great.
Story_ID: 343731
Speaker 1: Let's talk about today and how the school has grown from a small school to a medium-sized semi-professional to a full-blown company [Dallas Black Dance Theatre] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure, true.
Speaker 1: So tell me what's going on.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, when I, when I do tell the story, we are in June, beginning June 1st, we'll, we'll start celebrating our thirtieth anniversary.  And we are the oldest continuous operating professional dance company in the City of Dallas [Texas], very much supported by the City of Dallas, the State of Texas, and the, and the Texas Commission on the Arts, and the National Endowment for the Arts.  I tell everybody that we started out those first five years was a community and that the next five years then were--the next ten were the pre, pre-professional years because the dancers then got paid per project.  And then in the last fifteen years we've had a full professional dance company where we've had dancers on contract for eleven months out of the year.  Their schedule starts at 10 in the morning.  They work from 10 to 5 daily; start off with class every day from 10 to 11:30.  It's ballet or either modern class, and the remaining of the day is in rehearsals, and, and we, we tour.  We have three seasons here at the Majestic Theatre [Dallas, Texas], three time a year, in the October, February, and in May.  And so in a couple of weeks we'll end this twenty-ninth season with our May spring celebration and get ready for exciting thirtieth anniversary, which we hope will also end with a, a tour of the Kennedy Center [The John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts, Washington, D.C.].
Story_ID: 343732
Speaker 1: One of the things that you can do, you can have all of this and do all the touring, have all the dancers, have them on good salaries with benefits.  But if you don't have a home, you still are not recognized to me.  You're not recognized as stability.  And six years ago we had an opportunity, two years ahead of our long-range plan, to purchase the former Moorland YMCA [Dallas, Texas].  It is also a three-story building that I learned to swim in and then later taught swimming there.  It was the hub of the black community during the '60s [1960s] where NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] met for the, for the underground meetings where Ella Fitzgerald, Muhammad Ali came because, and they stayed there because they could not or were not allowed at, at times to stay into the hotels and in to the, to the hotels in Dallas [Texas].  And so to be able to bring that back to the community, and we will be the only African American-owned dance company in the Arts District [Dallas, Texas].  We will be housed next to the Dallas Museum of Art [Dallas, Texas], the Dallas Symphony [Dallas Symphony Orchestra], the Dallas Opera, so that will give us that status that I feel we are much deserved.  A lot of people in Dallas look at us as the most--what do they call us--the most hidden thing (laughter) in Dallas, because we have millions of people here, and a lot of people still do not know about the Dallas Black Dance Theatre.  And that's mainly because you don't have a home.  For fifteen years we were housed in the Arts District, but we were given that, that facility by one of our leading clients in the, in the Dallas area, Lucy Billingsley, who is the daughter of, of billionaire realtor, Trammell Crow.  But she just let us use that building, you know.  She was never gonna give it to us, and it sat right across the street from the old Moorland.  So when I was at Bishop [Bishop College, Dallas, Texas], and I said I've got to go and find us a building because Bishop College, a black university, it started raining in there, and their funds had start going down.  So I said I've got to go find us a building.  So after mass one Sunday, I drove through the Arts District, and there was this building that says Billingsley Company [Dallas, Texas].  I said I know that lady.  So I called and asked her, I said you know, about the building, and she didn't even know where I was talking about she had so many buildings, you know.  I always tell the story that if I'd had the keys, I could have just gone in and been in there like the homeless, you know.  But she said yeah, hey, you can use it; y'all can fix it up.  And so for fifteen years, rent free, we had that building.  But right across from it and stepped out on the little, little balcony porch there and right across from it, then you see this big old Y [Young Men's Christian Association (YMCA)].  And it had so many memories to me, to me because where the Arts District is now used to be an old black neighborhood.  Like in most cities, it was the, it was the hub of the black community.  We had the black churches.  We had three--two and three-story homes.  It was like Harlem [New York, New York] in the '60s [1960s].  That's, that's what it was.  And then later on development came through, offered the homeowners the little money, and they all went to the suburbs, you know.  So now that is the richest area in the Dallas district.  Even the Y that owned the Y building, they wanted to go to the suburb, which it was rightly so, so that they could have the baseball field and the track field, you know, for the YM, because they did not have that property in the, in the building, in the Moorland building.  They only owned the Moorland building.  There was no land next to it where they could have what normal Y would have, you know, if you're in a, in a suburban city like Dallas.  So they sold the building for sixty-four thousand dollars at that time.  We saw it on the books.  We could not believe it.  And so when we moved into this building that Lucy Billingsley gave us, you know, I said, told my board, I said one day I got to have that building.  They wanted to why, and I told them the history.  They all said yeah, Mrs. Williams [HistoryMaker Ann Marie Williams], you got to have--I said that's gonna be our home.  They said okay.  So we stayed in this building for fifteen years, and every time I'd go in that door and come out that door and see that Y.
Story_ID: 343733
Speaker 1: One day I walked over, introduced myself to the owner [Pearl Forester] who was an elderly Anglo lady.  And I told her who I was and the history of the building [Moorland YMCA, Dallas, Texas] and everything.  She said, "Oh, yeah, I know, I know all about this building," you know.  She stayed up at the top because the building was a YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association].  And when I was in high school, a lot of my--not a lot--but two or three of my professors stayed there and drove down to Lincoln [Lincoln High School; Lincoln High School and Communications/Humanities Magnet, Dallas, Texas] to my school.  You know, they came from out of town, but they stayed at the Y and taught school here in Dallas [Texas].  So one day--no, I told her, I said, "Do you want to sell it?"  She said, "Oh no, it's my family.  I'm giving it to my children."  She said, "I'm old, and I don't know what they're gonna do with it, but I know they don't want to sell it right now."  I said, "Well, the only thing I would want to know is that if you ever want to sell it or give it away (laughter), we are the people that want it [for the Dallas Black Dance Theatre]."  I said, "I just don't want to wake up one morning and see a for sale sign, and it has Blue Cross [Blue Cross Blue Shield Association] or Blue Bell Ice Cream [Blue Bell Creameries] or something on it, it's been sold."  So she said, "Okay, I'll pass that down to them."  So, before she passed, one day she walked over and she gave me the blueprints to the building.  She said, "I was going through the building," she said, "and here are the old blueprints."  She said, "It's a lot of other things that they left in there too, you know, some of the first deeds, and some of the records."  She said, "They're all in a box, so if you want them, we'll bring them over."  I said, "Yes, I'd love to have them."  So she brought those kind of memorabilia things like that over and gave it to me.  And I have those old blueprints, and that's one of the first things we're gonna frame when we get the building renovated.  So then she passed, and her son--this was--'cause she was over there like about three years and then she passed.  But her son [Gene Forester] knew the history, and we would see him every day, you know, walking back and forward.  As he'd go in, he'd see us and got to know the dancers and things.  So he knew how I felt too.  So six years ago he walked across and said, "Mrs. Williams [HistoryMaker Ann Marie Williams], we're ready to sell this building."  Well, we had done our long-range plan, and we weren't gonna even look for a building until the two years after that.  And so I said, "We don't have no money.  Don't you want to give it to us?"  He said, "No, we got to sell it."  He said, "I wanted you to know."  He said, "I'm not putting it on the market," he said, "and we don't have to do it right now."  He said, "I just wanted you to know," he said, "because I knew what you had told my mom, you know, let you know."  I said okay.  So I told my board, and then I told them, I said we got to have that building.  So they wanted us to go back.  Me and Zenetta [Zenetta S. Drew], we called him back, and we sat down and started talking about how we could work out the terms.  So he said he would carry the note and all of that, and we ended up with the business plan, got that.  So to make a long story short, we paid for the building a year ago, carried the note, and last December we paid the note off.  The building and there are two other lots, cost us $1.2 million.  Now that was like six years ago.  That's what we signed the note for.  Now that, those three lots and that building is worth $5 million because it's in the Arts District [Dallas, Texas]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and it's next to American Airlines Center [Dallas, Texas].  That whole district, it is just--and so everybody wants our two lots.  You know, everybody wants our land.  You know, it is, it is just so amazing.  But to get to answering your question, we feel so good about having that opportunity and taking that chance.  And that's a board decision that my board feels so proud about making, and a commitment to me, and I feel so grateful for, to them for making that commitment.
Story_ID: 343734
Speaker 1: Right now we're in the midst of turning the building [Moorland YMCA, Dallas, Texas]--we paid for it.  Now we're turning it over to the city.  We're deeding it to the city so that it will become a city building, and we will forever be the tenant.  That is the way all of the other city buildings are.  Like the museum, they have a group of people that started the museum.  They paid for it, deeded it over to the city.  It becomes a city building.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: As long as it's city building, they'll always take care of it, and then you sign the forever lease to it.  So, all of that is in the making and has been finalized.  But we still have the rights.  We still have our two land--two, two lots that are adjacent to that, that is not a part of that, so that's Dallas Black Dance Theatre.  And we're gonna lease that out as parking lots, parking facility for the people in the Arts District [Dallas, Texas], and that will be an income forever for the dance company.  We're hoping to be in that building in the next eighteen months.  We've chosen the architect.  We are now in the, in the process of--they've done all the phase I and phase II of it, looking at the investors.  And in June they'll start gutting the inside and then making it into this state of the arts and building.  If you're familiar with the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater building that's in New York [New York] and in Chicago [Illinois] you have the--what's the Chicago dance company?  They have a gorgeous building too that I've seen.  So it will be a state of the art building for the State of Texas and especially for the City of Dallas [Texas].  We'll have four gorgeous studios.  It'll be our--it will house our administrative offices, dressing rooms, the academy with over three hundred kids, and of course, we'll start the Arts District.  So we're just thrilled.
Speaker 2: So will you be able to increase enrollment?
Speaker 1: Definitely so.  Right now we have probably three hundred students that come through at school a week.  When we get that building, we hope to have about a thousand.
Speaker 2: Wow, that is a, a, a big rise in--
Speaker 1: Yeah, it, it is, it is, it really is.
Story_ID: 343735
Speaker 1: How does this make you feel, all of this that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It--
Speaker 1: --you have done through your life and to, to--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --this point?
Speaker 2: --(laughter) it makes me feel like I'm ready to retire.  That's exactly how it makes me feel.  Now I'm ready to retire and, and really that is a plan.  We, we--I have a plan.  I have a very good a, assistant, artistic director, good rehearsal captain.  I have a wonderful dancers, and, and everybody knows where we're going.  You know, when they come in, you come on the staff or you become a member of the dance company, then you hear the story, and you know where we're going, so.  And we tell them that because in the, in the history, if you're here for one day, you're part of our history.  So you either help make it or you help break it, either way.  So, I, I do, I do feel very, very proud and, and very good of what we have accomplished.  And I never say what I have accomplished because there's nothing that you can do by yourself.  I came up members of Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.], AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority], Links [The Links, Incorporated], NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and my church, my friends, community.  All of those people and organizations contributed to the success of Dallas Black Dance Theatre at a very, very early stage.  We were a community group.  And one of the things that I've always said is that we started out as a community group, and as we grow and even become corporate and larger, I still wanted to bring the community along with us.  So, now that we're getting a lot of support from corporate, from foundation, one of the things we write grants for is that they can give us money so we can give free tickets out to the community kids to continue to come.  Because, you know, some of our biggest supporters are Exxon [Exxon Mobil Corporation], Texas Instrument [Texas Instruments, Inc.], American Airlines, but you do not get those executives and those peoples coming to your performances.  It is still the community people that come to our performance.  So if we didn't have that community, then we would be sitting in the Majestic [Majestic Theatre, Dallas, Texas] with empty seats.  And that's one of the things that we did not want to do.  When I was a member of the Dallas Ballet [Dallas Civic Ballet] I saw what was happening.  Their productions and things were very large and glorious and everything, but they depended on the funds coming from a lot of the oil and the millionaires in Dallas [Texas].  Where if the Dallas Cowboys were playing, they were at the Cowboy game.  They were not at the ballet on that Sunday or that Saturday night, and the, and the auditorium or the theater was empty, you see.  And so, and that's why they folded, because you do need people in the seats.  And you can sell--resell those tickets for like five dollars and keep your community going.  So that's one of the things that, that--the same way about the company.
Story_ID: 343736
Speaker 1: The company [Dallas Black Dance Theatre] started out as an all-minority, all-African American company.  It is no longer that now.  I, I choose, have auditions, open auditions, each August and have the best of the dancers chosen.  Some of my dancers now have been with me as long as twelve years.  Many of them have been here six, and last year I had quite a big turnover; I got four new ones in.  One of the things about the dancers coming in, they know what our standards are.  You can do so many pirouettes; you can be ever so good, but if you don't have that two or more years of education, I know then that you have not been out in a disciplined program.  You don't know how to get up and get to school on time (laughter).  You can't, you, you, you've got to get to the airplane.  You know, we live together; we travel together, so a lot of that is so important, because if the dancer doesn't have that head where it needs to be right now, it can break a company.  We do a lot of school programs, and so they need to know how to dress when we go into schools.  We are role models for these kids, and that education is so important, having been in that classroom and know half of the principals and the teachers and things.  And you know what they expect of the dance companies coming in and how they want the dancers or the artists to interface with their kids.  And so all of that is a part of our auditioning process.  After they go through the choreography and go through the technique, then there's a sit-down where I, you know, really get a chance to see and of course, comes with the recommendations, you know.
Speaker 2: Well, that's really just keeping up with the community also--
Speaker 1: Yes it is.
Speaker 2: --because the community has changed.
Speaker 1: Has changed.
Speaker 2: And minorities not only means blacks now.
Speaker 1: That's true.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: That is so true.
Speaker 2: To be able to--
Speaker 1: That is so true, yes.
Speaker 2: --to keep up with the community, to keep them involved, you have to allow everybody who's worthy.
Speaker 1: That's true.
Speaker 2: And that's--
Speaker 1: That's true.
Speaker 2: --that's a wonderful thing.
Speaker 1: And, and because we get funds from, from, from everybody too.  You know, we, we're not supported by the black community, you know.  We're not supported by any one community.  Our audiences are, are, are totally mixed, you know.  We said that, or I have said that I started the company to give inspiration to minority boys and girls.  That is no longer true now.  We give inspiration to all boys and girls and those that are interested in dance as an art form.
Story_ID: 343737
Speaker 1: Is there anything else you want to say about the, the dance school [Dallas Black Dance Academy, Dallas, Texas] itself?
Speaker 2: Other than, than I--by--I'm, I'm really looking forward to getting the company and the, and the school into the new building within the next two years.  And I would really love to work with them maybe one full year after that, and then to move on to the next phase of my life, which is--I don't know what.  But right now, you know, that, that is my plan and in other tenure, you know, trying to make that a succession that, that every day there's a piece that we're trying to put together so that when we get into this building [Moorland YMCA, Dallas, Texas] and it become a stability because of the facility, we also want to have our management in place and that kind of thing.  One of the things I'd always said I don't want to do is to leave Dallas Black Dance Theatre today and have it fold tomorrow, you know.  So, when it first started, like I said, the first five years everything was up here, you know.  Now I share.  I'm, I'm not a hands-on person.  I'm so glad that I wasn't brought up that way.  I get a lot of that from my mom [Izora Coleman Ferrell].  You know, if you want to come in, if you want to be a part of Dallas Black Dance Theatre, and if we have the funds, and you have the qualification, and we can fit you in, that is it, because we want to make sure that the company lives forever, you know.  The worst thing that I have seen with my other peers and the other companies is to see all of the problems that go on.  You look at the Martha Graham company and all of the corporate changes that was going on and, and even--it affects the choreography.  I went to chance--had a chance to see them a couple of, of months ago in New York [New York], and it's just not the same, you know.
Story_ID: 343738
Speaker 1: I got a lot of this from Alvin Ailey, who's a very close friend of mine.  And, and the last time he was in Dallas [Texas] and he saw the company [Dallas Black Dance Theatre], it was one of the first things he said when he saw them: what do you want for this company?  What do--I said to be as big as the Ailey company [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater].  And he go oh no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, please, you know.  And I'm going why?  You know, and I tell people, I said I'm thinking that this man's jealous of my company, you know.  And he's saying no, no, no, no, no.  I said well, we gonna--we want to be the Ailey of the Southwest, and I said and you stay in New York [New York].  We're gonna be--he go, no.  He said keep them small, and he said and never bring them to New York (laughter).  And I wanted to know why, and he sat there and told me.  He said I started my company off small, and I built my company for the people.  He said my company now has forty-four dancers.  My ballets are so big, I can never take them to my hometown and let my hometown people see them.  He said because, first place, nobody down there can afford us, then there's not a stage where we can, you know, perform on.  He said, you know, my company is just out of control, you know.  He said yes, I'm the artistic director, but you know, it's so big, I don't know what's, what's going on, you know.  He said which is, it's still a business, he said, but that's--we, we can't go.  He said you might want me to come to a little place.  I might want to take them out to a little place in Los Angeles [California] or out in a little place, the Bronx in New York, and there's no place for them; I don't, you know, nobody can afford them.  He said that's why we perform so much in Europe.  You know, the Europeans are the only one that have the money that can bring us in.  It takes $200,000 to bring them in.  And then you've got ballets that, where you've got to have twenty people or thirty people on stage, so you got to have the opera houses, you know.  And so then when you go there, the people are gonna have to charge so much for the ticket sales, so a lot of the community people can't come to see him still.  And, but you know, that, that didn't ring a bell to me at that time.  You know, I'm young.  I still want to be big, you know.  And so he said so keep them small.  Never get over sixteen.  Keep them in leotards and tights.  Roll up those leotards and tights.  Get in your vans.  You can drive across country.  You know, you can get out and perform here.  You can teach schools.  You, you can teach classes.  Then you can drive on to the next city, you, you know.  And I'll tell you, that is the most gratifying thing that, that we get.  We just came from Cheverly, Maryland, which is out from Washington, D.C., and we were there for four days.  And we taught liturgical classes.  We taught classes.  We had a performance just for senior citizens, had school matinees, and then had the public performance on the weekend.  That was one of the most gratifying residences we ever--'cause we touched the whole community, and, and it really makes a difference.  So I, I--you know, that was good advice for me.
Story_ID: 343739
Speaker 1: How do you want to be remembered?  What do you want people to say about you?
Speaker 2: I don't know (laughter).  I, I want them to, I want to be remembered as someone that was open to ideas but yet had meaning and convictions.  And I, I do know that I, I stick to--you know, the dancers know what I, what I, what I want, you know.  They, they know my purpose here, and they know exactly what I want.  But I have been open to ideas.  I'm, I'm glad that I've never been closed up from not being able to hear their ideas and to try some new things.  One of the things I, I think I will be remembered so much for is that I gave young people an opportunity to choreograph.  Although we have our master choreographers, [HistoryMaker] Donald McKayle, Chuck [Chuck Davis], [HistoryMaker] Louis Johnson and all of those, they never would have been master choreographers unless someone gave them an opportunity at an early age.  And so right now I'm really into giving young people an opportunity to choreograph.  I mean they're out on their own, but I do travel and see their works.  They do send me vido- videos of their works, and I do look at them.  I look at their processes.  And I'm so happy that I have, have, I would say, produced and encouraged some of the most talented young choreographers now that other companies are asking for.  And from Chicago [Illinois] there's Kevin Jeff [Kevin Iega Jeff].  He was one of my first choreographers that I brought in; Dahlberg [Sean Dahlberg] was one of the first that I brought in; Garth Fagan, I brought him in; Alonzo King.  And now these are people that have their own dance companies, you know, and, but they've set their first works on me, you know, on, on my company [Dallas Black Dance Theatre].  So, I tell them when they get grown, I say okay, you know I know you when--you knew, knew you when (laughter).  And so that's, that's, that's a good feeling that--and, and then some of them are very, very talented.
Speaker 1: Well, it's been an enjoyable road through your life.  And I want you to know that at The HistoryMakers we really appreciate your time to have this as a legacy for generations to see.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: And we're so, so pleased that, that you would take your time, because we know that you are a busy woman.
Speaker 2: Yes (laughter).
Speaker 1: And I just want to say thank you from The HistoryMakers.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Thank you so much now for giving me this opportunity, and it is, it is history.  So, you know, it's something I don't like to do that often.  I do get called in to do it, but it's, you know, and I know it's a part of--and I do want to leave that legacy for others to hear.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Story_ID: 341975
Speaker 1: That's 2005, December, and it's at a pre-luncheon celebration, Founder's Luncheon celebration, celebrating the tenth anniversary of our Founder's Luncheon.  And the persons are Yolanda Gills, G-I-L-L-S.
Speaker 2: That's fine if you can't remember (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay
Speaker 2: --person.
Speaker 1: Marilyn Mask, M-A-S-K and myself.  Lord have mercy.  I cannot believe I can't remember (unclear).
Speaker 2: This is at our tenth annual Founder's Luncheon where Pat [Pat Southall Smith] and Emmitt Smith were our honorary chairs.  And that photograph is Pat Smith and myself at the luncheon.  I'm presenting her flowers.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: At the same luncheon, tenth anniversary, Founder's Luncheon, Marilyn honor--Marilyn Mask was one of our honorees.  Also, she's been a longtime friend and a supporter of the dance company [Dallas Black Dance Theatre] since I started it thirty years ago, and myself.  We were giving her an award.
Speaker 1: That is a photograph at the women's--at the five women being honored in New York City [New York, New York].  And that would have had to have been in 1996.  And on the photograph is myself; the other person in the center is Jacqueline [sic. HistoryMaker Stephanie Hughley], who was in charge at that time of the Olympics [1996 Summer Olympics, Atlanta, Georgia] and also the Black Arts Festival [National Black Arts Festival] in Atlanta [Georgia]; next to her is Joan Myers Brown, the founder and artistic director of the PHILADANCO dance company [Philadelphia Dance Company]; and on the end is [HistoryMaker] Cleo Parker Robinson, the founder and artistic director of the Cleo Parker Robinson Dance Company.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Me and my dancers, we're on a tour of Italy and in Sicily at one of the restaurants, where after we had performed, the restaurant owner invited all of us there to his restaurant for dinner deep in a wine country of Sicily, Italy.
Speaker 2: That is a picture of Debbie Allen of the Debbie Allen dance studios [Debbie Allen Dance Academy] in New York [New York], Broadway musical and myself.  She is a friend of the company and has made two or three demo tapes for us.
Speaker 1: What year was this?
Speaker 2: No idea.
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, long time ago.  Both of us look young.  We don't never look like that now.
Speaker 1: That is a photograph of the executive board of the Dallas Dance Festival, of which I was a founding member, and this was a gathering of them.  They bought a table at our eighth Founder's Luncheon.
Speaker 2: That photograph was made in 2005 at a gala performance here [Dallas, Texas].  And in that photograph is myself, Robert Redford, and Zenetta Drew [Zenetta S. Drew].  We were invited to one of the performing arts centers' gala.  And Robert Redford was the guest that night and wanted to have photographs made with us.
Speaker 1: That is a picture that was taken in 1989 of myself and my husband [Nathaniel Williams], my better half.  And it was at one of the receptions that we gave for our daughter at her debutante party.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That is a photograph of my daughter, Angelia Williams [Angelia Williams Chancellor], receiving her Master of Arts degree from the University of Dallas [Irving, Texas] in 2003.
