Story_ID: 84946
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is the venerable Scott Stearns.  Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My name is Bennetta May Nelson-West.  Bennetta, B-E-N-N-E-T-T-A, Nelson-West.
Speaker 1: Okay, N-E-L...
Speaker 2: N-E-L-S-O-N, W-E-S-T.  Nickname, Bennie, B-E-N-N-I-E.
Speaker 1: Alright.  What is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: October 19, 1944, born here in Memphis, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am the Executive Director of the Memphis Black Arts Alliance.
Speaker 1: Alright.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is June 25, 2003.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at the Memphis Black Arts Alliance FireHouse Community Arts Center and Academy at 985 South Belleview, Memphis, Tennessee--
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: --38106.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 84947
Speaker 1: Alright.  Before we get into depth, there are five "People" Magazinish-type questions I'm compelled to ask.  The first one is... and they just require a short answer.  The first is, Ma'am what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Sushi and shoko, that's my favorite.  Oh God, I guess shoko.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Do you know what shoko is?
Speaker 1: No, what is it?
Speaker 2: Shoko is an African dish made of spinach, chicken, palm oil, dried fish, shrimp, lots of spices.  And it is delicious.  And I serve it over yellow rice with peanuts and raisins.
Speaker 1: Now, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I really like black.  Black is my favorite color.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: October, but I was born in the fall, when the leaves are so beautiful.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, without a doubt, Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, finally, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I guess... I know I do, and the kids could probably tell you better than I what I say all the time.  But one of the things is that I believe "Everyone has a purpose."  And that's one of my strong beliefs.  And so, I say that a lot to the kids in particular, "What is your purpose?"
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 84948
Speaker 1: Ma'am can you tell us something about your family history, your ancestry?  How far back can you trace your family?
Speaker 2: I can trace myself back to my grandparents, both of whom were born in slavery.  My grandfather was George Washington Nelson.  And he was born in 1860 in Kerrville, Tennessee.  My grandmother--this is on my paternal side with my father--my grandmother's name was Mary Frances Fitzpatrick Nelson.  And she was younger than my grandfather.  I'm not sure exactly of her date of birth.  However, the family story is that Mary Frances Fitzpatrick was raised by old lady Fitzpatrick, who was a Civil War Confederate widow, whose husband had died in the Confederate War.  And there had been a tornado up in Kerrville-Durhamville area, which is where my grandparents were from.  And Mary Frances was literally blown up on the porch of old lady Fitzpatrick, who had no children.  And she was living with her brother, old man Puss [ph.] Jones, was the name.  And she took her in and raised her as a daughter and gave her all the amenities.  And that's the family story.  And then she married my grandfather, George Washington Nelson, and she bore him nineteen children--four sets of twins.  One of those was my father, who was born in 1892.  And he was down in like about the sixth of those children, of the nineteen.  And then she died in childbirth with the 19th, and he re-married and had eight more children.  And none of those eight children had any children.  Can you imagine?  None of those eight children bore any children.  But so, that's on my father's side.  My grandfather was a minister and a farmer.  And also, my father learned--as a part of being part of a large family and a church--to play the organ and the clarinet.  They had a band back then in Kerrville, Tennessee.  And apparently, Mary Frances, his mother, also sang.  That's pretty much what I know going back, just with my grandparents on my father's side.
Story_ID: 84949
Speaker 1: My father, as I said, was born in 1892.  And if he were living, that would make him, what, 111 years old?  He was born May 5th.
Speaker 2: Your father?
Speaker 1: My father.
Speaker 2: Now--
Speaker 1: And I'm an only child.
Speaker 2: Can you give us his full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 1: My father was Benjamin Howard Nelson.  B-E-N-J-A-M-I-N, H-O-W-A-R-D, Nelson, N-E-L-S-O-N.  He was born May 4 [sic, 5], 1892 in Durhamville, Tennessee.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, well, tell us about, you know, what was he like, and what did he do for a living?
Speaker 1: Okay.  My father left the farm and went into World War I, he was drafted.  His enlistment record indicates he was a farmer.  He served in France, flew over in a plane and would never... said he would never fly again.  And I had a hard time getting him to visit me later.  But anyway, Daddy came back from World War I and became a porter in one of the black banks.  In Memphis [Tennessee], I think we had about three black banks around 1915.  And he was a porter in one of them, and taught himself to read and became very, very literate.  And he became one of the first black postmen, letter carriers, here in Memphis back in I guess the early forties [1940s], late thirties [1930s].  And so, he was a letter carrier.  He also was an entrepreneur.  And he, his hobby was making and repairing umbrellas.  So, people would come from all over the city, you know, and my daddy would make umbrellas.  In fact, he would order them from Dayton, Ohio, some of the parts.  And I think the place was called Chapelle, or Chapel, or someplace.  And people would come and pick out their umbrella covers and their umbrella handles and all that.  So, he was an entrepreneur in the evenings and on the weekends.
Story_ID: 84950
Speaker 1: In addition to being, you know, one of the first black letter carriers here in Memphis [Tennessee], Daddy [Benjamin Howard Nelson] loved to make umbrellas as a hobby.  And people would come to the house from all over the city and the area to him to make the umbrellas.  He even did some for some of the golfers at the segregated country club that was near our house.  You know, they would bring their golf umbrellas over to be repaired and stuff.  And Mommy [Jeannette Lauretta Brown Nelson] never liked that, you know.  She just did not like having white people come to our house.  You know, Daddy was... you know, he could handle it, but not my mother.  She just did not like that.  But that was who my daddy was in part.  And in addition to being a letter carrier, he was what we called a "race man," you know.  And he was very proud of being an African-American man and knew a lot about it, and studied a lot.  He also was a theologian.  And I think we had at least four books for every book in the Bible that he studied.  And he was the church secretary... he was the church Sunday School leader at his church.  So, he was very active in his, you know, in that way.  So, that's who my father was.
Story_ID: 84951
Speaker 1: And he [Benjamin Howard Nelson] was quite a raconteur, a storyteller.  You know, he'd have us laughing, telling stories about different things.  You know, he--
Speaker 2: Do you remember any good stories?
Speaker 1: Well, one I... one that I remember was the one that was so shocking, because I never thought my dad would tell a story like that.  (Laughter).  But it was, it was, it was sort of naughty in that he... well, it's really naughty, I'm not going to tell it.  Well, it's real simple.  I mean, he was talking about this woman who was all made up.  And you know, and this man married her, okay.  And when they were getting ready for wedding night, you know, she took off her wig and she took it and put it on the table.  Then she took off her eyelashes and put them on the table.  And then she took off her prosthetic devices on her breasts and put it on the table.  And then she pulled off one leg and put it on the table.  And she took out her teeth and put them on the table.  And then she got in bed, and the husband said, "Should I... I think I'd do better... more of you is on the table than in the bed."  (Laughter).  So, something like that.  And it was just kind of...  Daddy had never told anything like that, and for him to say something like that, I mean that was one thing.  Then the other thing he would talk about is when he was a young man, and how he used to make... he used to work at a brick-making factory... and how much work that was, and how they actually made brick from straw, just like back in the days of Moses, you know.  And I could just, I could just always imagine seeing people building the pyramids and my daddy making bricks.  You know, I could just see that.  (Laughter).  So, that's something else he would talk about.  And I, I don't remember all the stories because it was just, you know, it was more like jokes, or just telling a story.
Story_ID: 84952
Speaker 1: But he was quite a scholar, and studied the classics on his own.  He had finished third grade, so he was a self-made man.  He was a Republican back in the day when that was the thing to be, if you were a southern black.  And--
Speaker 2: Because of Abraham Lincoln.
Speaker 1: Right.  And he was a member of the Lincoln League, which was something that was organized here in Memphis [Tennessee] by a Lieutenant Lee, who is dead now.  But he was a Civil War officer--I'm sorry, World War I officer--a Lieutenant George W. [Washington] Lee.  He's long since deceased, too.  But Daddy was a good provider, and he bought the first brick house in Orange Mound [Memphis, Tennessee], which is a neighborhood here in Memphis where [HM] Fred Davis lives.  And Fred was our insurance man.  And he and Fred would... Daddy would love to see him come, because he was of the few people he could discuss the classics with.  So, that's kind of like who my daddy was, okay.
Speaker 2: He seemed like an interesting person.
Speaker 1: Oh, he was, he truly was.  And--
Story_ID: 84953
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now what was your mother's full name?
Speaker 1: My mother's--
Speaker 2: Can you spell it for us?
Speaker 1: Yes.  Jeannette Loretta Brown Nelson, J-E-A-N-E-T-T-E [sic, J-E-A-N-N-E-T-T-E], Lauraetta, L-A-U-R-A-E-T-T-A, Brown, B-R-O-W-N, Nelson, N-E-L-S-O-N.  And I'm not sure I spelled Lauretta right... L-A-U-R-E-T-T-A, Lauretta.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 1: Okay, she was born February 21, 1903 in Kerrville, Tennessee.
Speaker 2: How do you spell Kerrville?
Speaker 1: K-E-R-R-V-I-L-L-E, which was later changed under [President Dwight D.] Eisenhower to Millington, which is in the Millington area, used to be the Millington Naval Base.  So, it's changed.   So, Kerrville does not exist anymore.  Nor does Durhamville, either, my father's town, which has now been changed to Ripley, and Henning, Tennessee.
Speaker 2: Now, Henning, Tennessee is where Alex Haley--
Speaker 1: That's right, who was--
Speaker 2: Alex Haley.
Speaker 1: Right, who was related, somehow, to us apparently on my mother's side.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well, tell us about your mother.  And how was she raised, and what did she do for a living?  And what was she like?
Speaker 1: Okay.  Mommy was born on a farm with her father who had a fairly large farm up in Kerrville, Tennessee.  She was one of, I think twelve or thirteen children.  She was quite a caretaker.  And during the... not the Yellow fever epidemic... the flu... there was a flu epidemic back in the twenties or thirties or something.  And she was the one who was caring for a lot of her... because she was the fourth oldest child, the others were down.  And she contracted tuberculosis.  So, in her teen years... back then they would isolate TB patients.  So she spent, I guess, her years from like about sixteen to nineteen or thereabout in a sanitarium.  I learned that later; she never really talked about it.  But Mommy was a very sweet person.  She went on to Tennessee State University [Nashville, Tennessee].  First, she went to LeMoyne Normal College [now LeMoyne-Owen College in Memphis, Tennessee], which is a historically black college here in Memphis [Tennessee].  And she was there back in, when it was still a school where girls went and had one kind of teacher, and boys had a different teacher.  And most of the teachers were white.  And she was in those early classes, but she didn't finish.  She went on to Tennessee State and took some more classes there.  And after I was born she went back to school and finished her degree from LeMoyne, and she taught school.  But before... but she was teaching--
Story_ID: 84954
Speaker 1: When she [Jeannette Lauretta Brown Nelson] married my daddy [Benjamin Howard Nelson], she was serving as a secretary to a rice farmer, a black rice farmer in Arkansas, a millionaire rice farmer.  And they had met, yeah, met at my aunt's house.  Because my dad was a letter carrier on my mother's--on my auntie's route.  And my mother must have been visiting one time, and my daddy took a fancy to my mother, and that's how he met her.  And I learned after I was good and grown that they married April 1st, and I was born in October.  So, I'm doing some math, just knowing that about my mother just a little bit kind of un-nerved me, (Laughter) because my mother's very proper.  She was a nurse... not a nurse... not a trained nurse, but she was a Red Cross nurse.  You know, she was trained to do Red Cross work.  She was a volunteer, she did a lot of that.  She was very active in her church.  She was the Sunday School, children's Sunday School leader.  We were in a different church than my daddy.  We were in the C.M.E., which used to be Colored Methodist Episcopal [now Christian Methodist Episcopal].  My daddy was a good, old-fashioned Baptist.  Are you a C.M.E.?  (Laughter).  I'm sorry.  (Laughter).  But at any rate Mommy was a C.M.E., and her grandfather, her father, her grandfather Boyd [Richard Boyd], was one of the original founders of the C.M.E. church too.  But anyway, we went to the C.M.E. church and Daddy went to the Baptist church.  But she was active, and was the children's church superintendent for many years.  And then after she-- was in kindergarten... not kindergarten... I was in nursery school, four years old, at a church, and I developed pneumonia.  And I guess having her experiences, she was very fearful.  So, she organized a kindergarten that operated out of our home for many years, and it was called Nelson's Kindergarten.  So, from the fifth grade... I mean from five years old up until I was in the fifth grade, Mommy had a kindergarten.  First, it was in our home for about three or four... about five years, five or six years.  Then she bought a house down the street from us, and converted it and had the kindergarten there.  And a lot of people from Memphis [Tennessee] went to that kindergarten.  And people even today say--saying--[telephone rings]
Story_ID: 84955
Speaker 1: Your mother [Jeannette Lauretta Brown Nelson] and your father [Benjamin Howard Nelson] were--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Mommy and us in kindergarten [Nelson's Kindergarten].
Speaker 1: Yeah, kindergarten.
Speaker 2: And right, the kindergarten.  And Mommy was a very sharp dresser, too.  I mean, that was something about both of my parents, they really liked to dress well.  And Mommy would go...  Of course I, at an older age now, I feel that we spend too much time in consumerism.  But still, back for her time and period it was important to look good and to be, you know, look well.  And she did that very well, and Dad did, too.  One of the other things about my family that, to me, is unique is that my folks never owned a car.  And it wasn't because they couldn't own one, they just never did.  And they rode public transportation everywhere.  And so, I got to know the city pretty well.  That was pretty different.  But going back to my mother a bit... she, when Daddy retired from the post office in '55' [1955] when I was in the fifth grade, then she went back to teaching in public schools.  So, she gave up the kindergarten.  And so I had to change schools again, and went with her to school where she taught.
Story_ID: 84956
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, tell me about growing up.  What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, some of the early things that I remember--and the good things were going up to the country where my mother [Jeannette Lauretta Brown Nelson]--particularly her family farm where she grew up--and visiting my grandmother [Lois Ophelia Boyd Brown] on that farm with my cousins or going to an aunt--one of her sisters who had a large farm up in Covington, Tennessee where all the cousins would converge every summer--those cousins from Detroit [Michigan] or from you know, from here in Memphis [Tennessee], or from around in the rural areas.  We'd all come together and pick peas and, you know, just do all the kind of things kids did on a farm.  And that was just really something that I really remember and enjoyed.  At home, I was an only child.  So I had some playmates on my street, but I always wanted a sister and brother.  So, I was pretty... what's the word I want to say?  Um, I did a lot of reading because of that.  I remember reading all of the encyclopedias from the beginning, from front to the back.  I mean, my mother sold Childcraft.  Do you remember those Childcraft books and World Book Encyclopedias?  We had those, and my father was, you know, a great reader.  And so, reading was just something we did, although we had a TV before most people in the neighborhood did.  We had an old Dumont TV, a huge monstrosity that I wish I'd kept.  But at any rate--
Speaker 1: They're worth a lot of money now.
Speaker 2: I'm sure they are.  I just, I think about that.  I mean, you know, when I sold my folks' house I just sold a lot of stuff that probably in hindsight I should have kept.  But at any rate, but I did a lot of reading.  And we had a great street in Orange Mound [Memphis, Tennessee] growing up.  And the city... as you probably know, Memphis was a very segregated city, and still is somewhat racially tense; it is extremely so.  But I grew up in a really very safe environment, I feel.  That street that we grew up on in Hamilton...  I grew up in Hamilton, and we had a mixed neighborhood of people in terms of income and experiences--from doctors and lawyers and preachers to janitors--a drunk, you know, construction, carpenter, you know, and everybody--maids, you know, everybody.  But you know, that's one of the things that I think made our neighborhood strong--and made most neighborhoods strong back during segregation--because people lived together, regardless of their education or income pretty much.  I mean, there were some people who lived in other places.  But by and large, back in the fifties [1950s] when I grew up, we were, we were diverse within our own community, and accepted people with differences.
Story_ID: 84957
Speaker 1: Now, what did your neighborhood look like, basically?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, I mean, you know, tree-lined.  My father [Benjamin Howard Nelson] owned the oldest brick house in Orange Mound [Memphis, Tennessee], which was a, one of the... they say one of the largest black homeownership areas in the country back for many years.  I don't know where it is now.  The houses were relatively small.  But you know, it was a street, it was the neighborhood street.  You know, people had... they parked either... drive up in their little garage or--not garage--but into the little driveway, because most people didn't have garages here.  We played marbles and, you know, made mud pies with china berry tree berries, and had just some great fun.  I mean, my yard attracted a lot of kids because we had a fairly large yard and had a swing set.  And we'd play circus on the trampoline and all that other good stuff, you know.  So, it was I guess just an average childhood in that regard.
Speaker 1: How many siblings do you have?
Speaker 2: None.
Speaker 1: None?
Speaker 2: I'm an only child.
Speaker 1: You're an only child, okay.
Speaker 2: And my dad was fifty-two, my mother [Jeannette Lauretta Brown Nelson] was forty-one when I was born.  And I'm the only child.  They attempted to have one more, but didn't make it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 84958
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Alright.  Well, tell me about school.  Where did you go to grade school?
Speaker 1: Well, I started out at Lutheran Cooperative [School] which was over here in South Memphis, which was a private school.  And I was not able to stay, because they had a policy that we had to be out by a certain time, and my folks not having a car, couldn't pick me up that quickly.  So, we moved... I came back to Melrose High [School]; Melrose which in those days went from first to the twelfth grade.  And I stayed at Melrose until third grade--no, I'm sorry, until fifth grade--to the fifth grade when my mother [Jeannette Lauretta Brown Nelson] got a teaching job at Hamilton [High School].  I transferred to Hamilton School and stayed there six, seventh and eighth grade and then went over to Melrose, back to Melrose, in the ninth grade where I graduated from Melrose High School.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, when you were in grade school, who were some of the teachers that made an impact on you?
Speaker 1: Oh, Miss Cornelius Sanders [ph.], Miss Pickett; oh, Miss Silver who was a, who was quite a dancer I recall, and that impressed me.  Also, I loved art.  And I got a D in art, and I will never forget this lady for giving me a D, Miss Graham.  And she gave me a D in art, and that just hurt, I remember that.  But those, that's, that's, those are some of the people I remember.  Who else?  Miss Clanton, Irma Clanton, in high school.  She was a real influence on me, and is even to today.  Because I was in a lot of plays, both at church and at school, and she gave me an opportunity to do a lot of that.  And that was very, very, very good for me.
Story_ID: 85534
Speaker 1: How did you get a D in art?
Speaker 2: You know, I still don't know.  I mean, all I know is that in some kind of way it must have inspired me to move on past that, you know, in spite of it.  You know, it might have been just one of those challenges; I needed to do what I needed to do, because I did later become an artist without a medium until I bummed around in New York [New York City, New York], which is another chapter.  But it really... I don't to this day know why, because I think I was doing pretty good work.
Speaker 1: So, you were an only child?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you were still reading.  Did you get good grades in school?
Speaker 2: Oh I did.  I got excellent grades except for that one D.  And one thing about me is that... I was very proud of it; I never missed a day out of school in twelve years.  The only time I missed school, and there were three occasions, they were all for funerals every one of the times.  I mean from the first grade to the twelfth grade, I know of no one else who can say that.
Speaker 1: You had a healthy childhood, I suppose?
Speaker 2: Well, either that or I made a whole lot of people sick.  (Laughter).  My folks [Benjamin Howard Nelson and Jeannette Lauretta Brown Nelson] were old-fashioned.  If I told my daddy I had a headache, he'd say "You're too young to have a headache."  If I said somebody got on my nerves, or somebody... "You don't have any nerves, because you're too young."  (Laughter).  And my mother, you know, you know she was old-fashioned, too, you know.  Again, they were fifty-two and forty-one when I was born, in the forties, late, mid-forties [1944].  So they were, you know, pretty disciplined.  And I guess they were farm people.  They grew up under adversity, so, you know, it was nothing.  So, I did what had to be done.  And my mother was a hard worker.  And I remember every year in the spring, we'd do that routine spring cleaning--taking the mattress out, airing it in the backyard, taking down all the window blinds and washing the window blinds and, you know, cleaning everything out; and you know, cleaning out the closets, did all of that.  We had a fig tree in the yard; we'd make figs sometimes.  And our neighbors would give us grapes, and we'd make canned grape jelly and all of that other good stuff... or jars of grape jelly.  So, we did that kind of stuff.
Story_ID: 85535
Speaker 1: But one of the things that my mother [Jeannette Lauretta Brown Nelson] also did that my daddy [Benjamin Howard Nelson] didn't approve of... my daddy, as I said, was a religious man.  I would rather think now that he was spiritual, but he was religious, and he didn't believe in dancing.  But my mother wanted me to have some cultural experiences, so she snuck me to ballet classes.  And that was my first experience with a white person, a French woman, who apparently was married to someone who taught at the LeMoyne [Normal] College [now LeMoyne-Owen College in Memphis, Tennessee].  And she taught us dance, taught us ballet.  So I took ballet there.  And that gave me an exposure to dance, that I really enjoyed.  But it was... you know, it wasn't long-lived.  Because I guess they moved on or whatever, or either my mom and daddy disagreed about it at some point; but I didn't take dance for long.  But it certainly sparked an interest.  And as I said, also I really enjoyed the theater experiences I got, either at church, and all the church plays... playing Mary to Joseph.  Or one of the plays I was in, I played the wife of a blind man whose daughter was trying to break up the new marriage because, you know, the blind husband couldn't see what the little girl was doing, you know, and that kind of thing.  (Laughter).  So, that was one of my other starring roles as a high school student, or junior high I guess it might have been.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 85536
Speaker 1: What other activities?  Did you run for class office or anything?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I was of course in the National Honor Society.  I was in a group called Psyche Bi Five [ph.], which was a science, biology, chemistry, and physics club--Psyche Bi Five Science Club.  I was also the editor of our high school yearbook.  I created something that has become quite an on-going thing... well, not anymore because schools don't do that anymore.  But I started something called the "Twelve Year Club."  Back when I graduated, it was possible to go from the first grade to the twelfth grade at one school.  And there were a number of people who did, so they would be featured in our yearbook.  So, that was one of the yearbook things that I started.  Of course that's not possible now, because most of the schools stop at different grades and what have you.
Speaker 1: Yeah, in high school [Melrose High School]--
Speaker 2: In middle high schools and all of that, and elementary schools.  But that was one thing that I started. So, I was editor of the yearbook.  I also was editor for a year of "The Buzzer," which was a newspaper.  So, I was writing a lot back in, you know, in my high school days.  And I enjoyed writing.  And as I said, I enjoyed reading.  And I did have an experience with another teacher, Mr. Winfrey, who was a wonderful artist.  And he, you know, turned me on to some art stuff, too; you know, I liked that.  I took, I was in the band for a little while.  And then I decided instead of being a majorette, I thought I wanted to be a cheerleader, so I was a cheerleader.
Story_ID: 85537
Speaker 1: So, I was pretty active there.  I was a Girl Scout, and I was very active in the Scouts.  And we did a lot of work on Beale Street back in the day.  And my Scout leader was very much an influence on me, Miss Thigpen, Arvon Thigpen.  Miss Thigpen could pass for white.  In fact, Walter White was her cousin.  And she--
Speaker 2: The famous NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] lawyer from New York?
Speaker 1: That's right.  Right, the famous NAACP lawyer.  And she was one of the ones who inspired me, from a civil rights point of view, back in the early fifties.  I mean, she would take us to different activities.  And we went to the, to a Scout round-up meeting one time here in Midtown where the major headquarters was for the Girl Scouts.  And she went to the front door to, you know, just check things out.  And they told... and then when we came up, she told her to take us around to the back door, okay.  And of course she refused and a big brouhaha ensued, you know, and we didn't do that.  And she made us very proud of being black.  I mean, she preferred the word "colored" to black, you know, back in that day.
Speaker 2: Or Negro.
Speaker 1: Or Negro, yeah, yeah.  She didn't...  I think she... or was it she didn't like the word "colored?"  One of them she didn't like, I can't remember.  But the point is, she still made us proud of being who we were, and to never feel less than who we were because of being black.  We... she was the kind of woman who would go downtown and talk to the mayors and tell them, you know, stuff that, you know, that she thought was going on that was wrong.  You know, and because she appeared white, they listened to her until they found out she was black.  And back during the days when we were segregated, rather, when we were boycotting the stores--downtown blacks wouldn't go shopping--she would go into the stores and find black people shopping in the store, and approach them and say, "Well, why are you in here?  You should be out there with your people, shouldn't you?" (Laughter).  And shaming black people into getting out, you know.  So, she, she was quite a person.  And she was our Girl Scout leader, and I will never forget her.  And she really made... she was one of the first people other than my father [Benjamin Howard Nelson] who kept books and introduced me to, you know, figures-
Story_ID: 85538
Speaker 1: Yeah. Now, did your family follow the Civil Rights Movement and the actions in Little Rock [Arkansas] and Montgomery [Alabama]?  Any of--?
Speaker 2: Well, actually, I went to Tuskegee [Institute, now Tuskegee University in Tuskegee, Alabama].  And one of the reasons I went to Tuskegee was not because of the Civil Rights Movement.  Because it was pre-Civil... pre... it was pre-King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], in the sense of--
Speaker 1: You graduated from high school [Melrose High School] in what year?
Speaker 2: Sixty-Two.  [1962].
Speaker 1: Sixty-Two, [1962].
Speaker 2: I graduated--
Speaker 1: That's after like Little Rock, and it was after Montgomery.
Speaker 2: It was after Little Rock.  But the pivotal, the pivotal turning point for real discussion of issues in my family was the killing of Emmett Till, the murder of Emmett Till [August 28, 1955].  I think that more than anything else really kind of had more of a fiery kind of thing going on.  We didn't... I don't recall my family talking about much before that.  You know, I don't know if it was my age and being involved in other stuff, or whether or not... being aware.  But I, myself, in 1960 though was very active.  I forgot to mention was active in the NAACP Youth Council.  And in August... I'll never forget this... August 4th, yeah, what am I talking about?  August 4th, 1960, I got arrested for going to the zoo on the wrong day.  It was a Friday, and blacks' day at the zoo was on Thursday, which was colored day.  So, that was... yes, absolutely, I don't know why I'm blanking that out.  Plus, again, with the NAACP Youth Council, one of the things that we also organized to boycott about was, there was a farmer in Fayette County [Tennessee], Mr. John McFerren, who had organized something called Tent City.  And he was trying to get oil for their farms.  And Exxon would not sell them oil.  So, we boycotted.  It was Esso Gas Stations then.  They had somehow... someone had gotten Esso not to sell Mr. McFerren oil.  So, we organized a boycott against Esso stations.  And so, I was active in that.  And then later... that was before the zoo incident... and we were arrested and taken to juvenile court.
Speaker 1: How many of you were there?
Speaker 2: There were about five of us. [sirens] There were about five of us who went to the zoo, and another four or five got on the busses and sat in front of the busses.  The date was August 4, 1960.  And it was, the senior leaders of the NAACP were not happy with us, because we did it without their prior approval.  But you know, back then, you know, we wanted to make a statement.  And we felt, you know...  We were tired of it.  Of course, with me being a bus rider, you know, I guess I should have been on a bus.  But instead, I went to the zoo.  And our parents got us out.  And [HM] Russell Sugarmon was one of the lawyers who took care of our cases, you know, on that.  Because he was active in the Civil Rights Movement then.
Story_ID: 85539
Speaker 1: It seems as though there were Youth Councils of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] all over the country.  Wichita [Kansas]... and here [Memphis, Tennessee] and in Ohio and other places, you know, took chances--
Speaker 2: That the older people weren't willing to take, that's right.  Well, we did it.  And then later, college students and others became more active, I guess.  But again I went on to high school in '62' [1962], to graduate from high school [Melrose High School] in '62' [1962].  And but, again going back earlier, I think certainly the fact that my parents [Benjamin Howard Nelson and Jeannette Lauretta Brown Nelson] were very proud people and accomplished in their own ways--and Daddy being proud of being--you know, considered a "race man"... and the accomplishments that black people could make.
Story_ID: 85540
Speaker 1: We were talking about the NAACP youth group.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And the activities of--
Speaker 2: Um-hum, yeah.  Well, yeah, and that [NAACP Youth] Council...  Now in that Council, Carla Thomas was a part of that Council.  And Carla teaches here, too, by the way.
Speaker 1: She was a singer, the famous singer, Stax recording artist--
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hum.  But anyway, yeah, we were pretty active.  And I guess... you know, as I said, if you've talked to people all over the country... maybe Youth Councils were...  I think it probably was the Youth Council in North Carolina that did the sit-ins, too.  Was it not?
Speaker 1: Ah, well--
Speaker 2: Oh, those were high school... those were college students.
Speaker 1: I heard the Youth Council did something, but then the college students did something that was separate.  But it was... the Youth Council in North Carolina was active, too.
Speaker 2: But anyway, so, yeah, so all of that influenced... had influence on me.
Story_ID: 85541
Speaker 1: Okay.  In high school [Melrose High School] did you have a sense of what vocation you were going to pursue, or where you were going to go to college?
Speaker 2: All I knew is that I did not want to be a teacher.  I did not want to be a nurse, which is what my mother [Jeannette Lauretta Brown Nelson] wanted me to be, either a nurse or a teacher.  And I was, you know, a very good student and had gotten most of my classes done.  So, I had these electives.  And the, my senior year in high school I took Home Ec [Economics].  I did not want to take Home Ec, because back then, you know, we considered Home Ec classes were the classes that dumb girls took.  You know, if you were going to college, you didn't need to take Home Ec, you know.  I said, "Oh, what the heck, okay."  So the first semester I took Home Ec, and we were doing sewing, okay.  And I'm a lousy sewer, trust me.  But I made this gorgeous skirt, because my mother bought me this great material.  It was red, which was my other color next to black.  Red is my favorite color.  A great skirt, but zipper lining was terrible.  But anyway, I did this red skirt.  And the last semester I had Miss Doris Bodden, and we did cooking.  And Miss Bodden was a graduate of Tuskegee [Institute, now Tuskegee University in Tuskegee, Alabama].  And I enjoyed cooking.  And my mother was a lousy cook.  My daddy [Benjamin Howard Nelson] did better cooking than my mother. That's another thing I remember, my dad was a great cook.  And my mother, she would just cook the same thing.  I knew we would have pot roast one Sunday, smothered chicken another Sunday, baked ham maybe one Sunday, fried chicken the next Sunday, back to pot roast.  I mean, it was the same thing all the time, you know.  And by her teaching school and stuff, she would come home and grade papers.  And so Daddy retired, like I said, when I was in the fifth grade [1955], so he did a lot of the cooking.  So, I enjoyed his cooking better.  And my mother cooked on the weekends and Daddy cooked during the week, which I guess was something different, too, for black families back in the fifties and the sixties.  I think daddies didn't do too much cooking.  But my daddy did, and he was a great cook.  But anyway, back to high school.  So, Miss Bodden, you know, saw that I really liked to cook.  And I... and she was asking me what I wanted to do.  And so I said, "Well..."  She said, "Well, you know, you could own your own whole restaurant, you know, or maybe a hotel or something."  And I said, "Yeah."  You know, that was something different, you know.  And I liked the arts, and I thought, oh, maybe I'll own my own hotel and restaurant and club and stuff like that.  And that just sounded real exciting.  So, she told me she'd gone to Tuskegee.  Well, of course everybody knows about Booker T. Washington and George Washington Carver and, you know, it was a historical black college.  And Mommy wanted me to go to either Knoxville [College in Knoxville, Tennessee] or Bennett [College in Greensboro, North Carolina], you know.  And I wasn't going to an all girls' school.  And Knoxville College was just too small, in my mind.  So, when she said Tuskegee, I said, "Yeah, that's it, okay.  And I'll, you know, I'll go down there and I'll take Foods, and became a, you know, own my own hotel and restaurant."  And that's what I decided I was going to do.  And, but I got down there my freshman year and Professor King said, "No, daughter, we're not going to let you waste your mama and daddy's money.  You know, no colored girl's gonna run a hotel and a restaurant."  This was in '62' [1962].  "You can't run no hotel and restaurant.  And besides, you know..."  See, because Tuskegee also had an exchange program with Cornell University [Ithaca, New York].  And Cornell still today has one of the best hospitality management programs in the country.  And that's what I wanted to do.  And he said, "No, we can't let you do that.  We've got only so many slots, and we're going to put our veterans..." because Vietnam veterans were beginning to come back and stuff, and the Korean... "and we're going to put them in those slots and let them go up to Cornell."  So, he said, "Just go ahead and be a dietician and work in a hospital and marry yourself a doctor or something."  That's what they said, oh yes, he did.  (Laughter).  And I said, "No," I said...  But you know, so I just went ahead and I tried to start taking the courses.  So, I got channeled into these courses.
Story_ID: 85542
Speaker 1: You know, and so, between my freshman and my sophomore year [at Tuskegee Institute, now Tuskegee University in Tuskegee, Alabama], I worked at the Hotel Chisca Plaza [Memphis, Tennessee].  I wanted to prove to Professor King that I was serious about pursuing it.  So, I went downtown... and this is a segregated town still now, in 1963.  This was the summer of '63' [1963].  And I went to the back of the Hotel Chisca and I you know... I wanted to...  I told them I was in school and I wanted to work in the hotel and restaurant business.  So, I went in and I became a salad girl.  So, I learned to make all these great salads.  Then they let me out of the kitchen into becoming a bus girl.  So, I was the first black bus girl that was out there.  And this was on the lunchtime circuit.  Because in the day, the waitresses in the southern restaurants, during lunchtime, in exclusive places like hotels, white women were the waitresses at lunch.  At night, they would put cloths on the table, and black men in tuxedos would serve food at night.  That was, that was the way it worked in most, you know, elegant hotels and stuff.  So, I went out and I became a waitress.  And I was the first black waitress at the Hotel Chisca Plaza, which back in that time was as famous as the Peabody [Hotel in Memphis, Tennessee].  And they're about to renovate it again and open it back up again.  So, so, I got a lot of experience.  I went back after working that summer and showed Professor King what I had done.  And so he said, "Okay, okay, okay.  You can get into institutional management," which was the name of the course that would allow us to get training to own your own hotel or restaurant.  So, that's what I started doing.  But in the end I never did finish in that, and I came out.  And I just hated being a dietician, I didn't like that at all.
Story_ID: 85543
Speaker 1: I hear you. I was wondering, when you were in Memphis [Tennessee] here, did you know any artists, any visual artists, when you were--
Speaker 2: Not a one.  Not a one, other than Mr. Winfrey, who was my teacher, you know.  And so therefore, I wasn't even channeled into the arts.  I mean I felt... you know, not until I went off to graduate school.  And I can skip on and get on to that part of my life.  Because that's what I really decided to really pursue, and find out what it was I was interested it.  Because I went on to Tuskegee [Institute, now Tuskegee University in Tuskegee, Alabama], I graduated [1966].  I realized that was not what I wanted to do.  I did work as a dietician briefly, and I hated it, okay.  And while I was still working at Tuskegee after I graduated, a woman there told me I could go on to New York [New York City, New York] to get a degree in public health and maybe I would enjoy that better.  And that's what got me to New York.  So I got a full fellowship to... a National Institute of Health fellowship... that took me to Columbia [University in New York City, New York].  And I majored... and got my master's degree in public health nutrition.
Story_ID: 84969
Speaker 1: Okay, Columbia University, New York City [New York].
Speaker 2: Yes, New York City.
Speaker 1: The Big Apple.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You were there for the first time?
Speaker 2: Well, no.  Actually it was not my first time.  I got married my senior year going to college [Tuskegee Institute, now Tuskegee University in Tuskegee, Alabama].  And I was... went there to visit a cousin, you know.  But anyway, after deciding that being a dietician was not what I wanted to be, I learned about the possibility of getting a fellowship [National Institute of Health fellowship] to go to Columbia and pursue a degree in public health which would get me back out in the community and things that I enjoyed doing.  So, that's what I did.  So, I went to Teachers College at Columbia, stayed up on 110th and Amsterdam in the dorm first, and then got my first apartment around the corner at 112th Street, paying seventy-seven dollars in a two and a half room walk-up.  And that was during the days of rent control, and Columbia owned the building.  And back then you couldn't charge but a little bit of the percentage above the previous tenants.  And the building had been empty for so long because the people who lived there before, first of all, were old and had been there a long time, and hadn't paid much... you know,  rent, much rent.  And they had died, and the building had been vacant.  So, they couldn't go but so much, so that's how I got it so cheap.
Speaker 1: What year was this?
Speaker 2: This was in '68' [1968].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In '68' [1968] I went to Columbia right after the Columbia riots and all of that, and just the beginning of the cultural revolution and all of that.  So-
Speaker 1: In the fall--
Speaker 2: Fall of '68' [1968], I arrived in New York for the second time.  But the first time--but to live.  Because I was, I was, you know, I was going to school and--
Story_ID: 84970
Speaker 1: Now, this is after...  I think we might be skipping past something that we need to talk about.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But were you in Memphis [Tennessee] when [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was killed [April 4, 1968]?
Speaker 2: No, I was at Tuskegee [Institute, now Tuskegee University in Tuskegee, Alabama].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was at Tuskegee.  Because as I said, I got married my senior year.  And my husband at the time was pursuing an engineering degree, which was a five year program.  So, I stayed a year after I graduated and worked for the Head Start teacher training program.  And I was the assistant administrator of that training program for the whole region, for Head Start, back in '67' [1967] I guess it was, '66' [1966], '67' [1967].  So I did that for about a year and a half through the dean of my department.  And she was actually the administrator, but I did the day to day work, because she was busy "deaning."  Dean... Miss Dean Queenie Shoots [ph.].  At any rate, so I left.
Story_ID: 84971
Speaker 1: And I was in California for a while.  And I just have to digress a minute to say that, of course, as I said, I was married.  And I just did not enjoy sitting at home, which is what my husband then wanted me to do.  He did not want me to work.  And I found an opportunity to go to work at Disneyland.  And I went out to Disneyland and they had, they were going to have me work in the, on the New Orleans Creole Cafe, or the Creole section of whatever it was that they were doing.  And they were so racist.  I didn't last a day.  I mean, it was just horrible.  This was in 60--
Speaker 2: What happened?
Speaker 1: Oh, I mean it was just what they wanted me to do, and didn't want me to do.  And I couldn't... I was just... I don't remember the specifics.  All I remember is that I am not going to demean myself as a black person to do this job, which is what they...  And I'm sorry, I don't remember... I may have blocked it out, or whatever.  But I just said no, and I did not go back the second day.  So, then I did something else that I really enjoyed, and I was still going back to this dietetic stuff, if I may digress a minute.  And I was a consultant for the Civic Homes Corporation [in California].  And I got to travel to Laguna Beach, La Jolla, San Diego, Claremont.  And what I did was, I would go around to these retirement homes... very rich folks, obviously, and just find out if the food was good.  You know, if they liked what they ate, and you know, if they didn't, you know, what new menus would they have?  And I'd collect recipes and we'd, you know, take them back and have the people begin to incorporate recipes into the menu that was being offered in these retirement homes.  And these were homes where you had like hotel situations where people lived.  You also had assisted living.  But you also had couples who lived in like little condos on the property.  But they didn't cook; they'd go to the main restaurant cafeteria to eat.  So, it was really quite luxurious surroundings.  So, that was a chance to see some different kinds of things.  But this was in '67' [1967].
Speaker 2: In the summer?
Speaker 1: Sixty-Eight [1968], '68' [1968].  I'm sorry, this was in the summer of '68' [1968] in Southern California, that's correct, excuse me.  And so, it was, it was not a good time in this country.  But you know, I was doing that kind of work, which was an interesting contrast for me.
Story_ID: 84972
Speaker 1: But anyway, I left.  And that fall [1968], in August, I arrived... or September... I arrived in New York City [New York] and pursued the degree [at the Teachers College of Columbia University].  And I got introduced very early on to the New York cultural scene.  And even though I was pursuing a degree in public health, I began to start trying to find out about the arts in New York, because of course I knew that that was the place for the arts, you know.
Speaker 2: Those were the days when the Negro Ensemble Company--
Speaker 1: Absolutely, all that was--
Speaker 2: (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: [HM] Barbara Ann Teer, who was affiliated somewhat with Columbia.  And you know, we were doing civil rights things, too.  Because you know, there was the whole thing about the park, Morningside Park. And--
Story_ID: 84973
Speaker 1: I guess I could go back to some things at Tuskegee [Institute, now Tuskegee University in Tuskegee, Alabama] with [Samuel] Sammy Younge [Jr.], too.  I don't know if you know that name.  You do know the name?   Sammy Younge... Sammy Younge was killed back in Tuskegee.  I was active... I guess I skipped a lot.  Back at Tuskegee, we were still organizing and doing things, and tried to do a march in Montgomery [Alabama], and [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] wouldn't let us use his church.
Speaker 2: I thought that... you know, I wondered about that.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I know the students at Alabama State [University in Montgomery, Alabama] were very active.
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, yes, and that was--
Speaker 2: And, like, Selma [March from Selma to Montgomery in 1965] and all of that was going on when you were there?
Speaker 1: Right, exactly.  And although we tried to do some things... you know, the Black Panther Party started in Lowndes County, Alabama, and I was somewhat involved.  I kind of I guess walked a little bit of the tightrope as a sorority girl and a civil rights activist, which was kind of not the same path back in that day.  I don't know... you know.  So, I tried to walk in both paths, so to speak.  And but my heart... because I guess my early training with Miss [Arvon] Thigpen... you know, I was always a civil rights warrior in my heart, in terms of our people.  And I was, I blocked out some of the particulars of Sammy's death.  But I know we were all very moved by it, because he was murdered in Tuskegee by, we assume, the police then.  But then shortly after that, the black guy became the sheriff.  I can't remember his name... but anyway.
Speaker 2: It was not Ford, was it?
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: It was not Ford?
Speaker 1: No, no, James Ford... no, Ford was... Johnny Ford, he was the mayor.  No, no, no, no, no...
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: No, no, this preceded Johnny Ford, because Johnny Ford was mayor after I left Tuskegee.  I can't remember the man's name.  But at any rate--
Speaker 2: Were you in Alabama when Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Toure] proclaimed Black Power in '65' [1965], in the sixties?
Speaker 1: I must have been, but again, I was in Tuskegee from '62' [1962] to '67' [1967].  And in '67' [1967], I was here.  That was the year I worked at the... let's see... '67' [1967]...  Was it... King was killed in '68' [1968].  But I was at Tuskegee in '68' [1968], and he was killed in April of '68' [1968].  Okay, that's right.  Alright, what happened was that '67' [1967] was when my husband was doing an internship... or extern, whatever it was called.  And he was working at the Core of Engineers here in Memphis [Tennessee], and I worked at St. Joseph's.  So he was still a student, but I had graduated.  But then we went back to Tuskegee and that April, I was in Tuskegee.  Because I remember I was doing somebody's hair when King was killed.  I was... it was in the afternoon, and we were watching TV and it came on, yeah.  And then it was that summer that I went to California.  And then that fall, in September of '68' [1968], I went to New York.  So, I was kind of like moving around in '67' [1967] and '68' [1968].  And again, I was married.  And my husband at that time was very much a young... gung-ho to be, entrepreneur, businessperson, who had no time for helping other people.  And I was too busy as far as he was concerned... being concerned about civil rights issues that were not his issue.  And he, he did not... he didn't support it, so we didn't, we didn't stay married.  But part of the issue was the fact that he was too committed to money than to being of service to the community.  And he made his mark; he did become very wealthy.
Story_ID: 84974
Speaker 1: Okay. So, when you go back to New York [New York City, New York], you tapped into the cultural scene in New York and--
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Can you remember when... or a moment when you noticed that we were calling ourselves black, and not Negro?
Speaker 2: Really, I don't remember that moment.  I guess maybe because... you know, I worked in Newark [New Jersey], you know, for a number of years.  And I just don't... you know, I remember... I remember the black theatre movement, I remember the poets, and I remember going over to Brooklyn to the... what's the place over in Brooklyn?
Speaker 1: The East?
Speaker 2: The East, yes, the East, you know.  And experiencing that and--
Speaker 1: And [Amiri] Baraka--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and Baraka would be there, and the Last Poets.  And of course Baraka's mother [Anna Lois] and I worked together.  And part of what I learned to do through my public health work was... my fellowship experience of working... or internship... was in Newark.  And that's when I, you know, I learned to walk the streets of Newark.  Because I worked with a woman who was with the welfare office.  And my job as a public health nutritionist was to go out and work with welfare recipients and, you know, try and help make sure that they were using their food stamp money properly and to buy the proper nutrition and stuff like that.  And I said, hey, these folks are doing better on this money than I could ever want to do, you know.  And I knew that that was not the thing that I should have been doing.  So, I quickly moved from being a nutrition advocate.  Even though I had worked for about a year with teenage pregnant girls in the Maternal Infant Care program, I was able to move over to Model Cities where I could make more policy changes and decisions, and that was very helpful.  But all of the ten years I worked in New Jersey, every evening, every moment, I'd come home... I was in the arts, you know.  And I first took dance and... because that was my first love... and I studied dance.  I think I even had classes with Debbie Allen and from a woman named Thelma Hill who has since, who died a tragic death in New York.  But I realized that those girls were just way too serious for me.  I kept hearing my mother's [Jeannette Lauretta Brown Nelson] voice, you know, about keeping a job.  (Laughter).  And but I did.  I studied dance, then I studied theater.  I was down at the Henry Street Settlement with [HM] Bill Duke for a number of years.  He took over for Dick Anthony Williams at the Henry Street Settlement.  And Bill and I were together for a while, and I was always around the theater watching him direct and doing things, and really enjoyed that experience.  And then I started going to Killens' Workshop, John Killens' Workshop up in Harlem [New York City, New York], trying to see if I wanted to get into writing. I met one of my homies, David Earl Jackson, who has since passed on, and helped me re-start the Alliance [Memphis Black Arts Alliance].  David Earl was from Chattanooga [Tennessee], and he was working at the Studio Museum in Harlem.  And we ran into each other and became just good buddies and did some book fairs and things together up there a little bit; working with him and just with Studio Museum in Harlem.  It was just getting started, and moved from one location to another.  No, it hadn't quite moved yet.
Story_ID: 84975
Speaker 1: And then what else did we get involved in, I get involved in?  Oh, my love, my pottery.  But before I did that, I really... I did do a lot of moving around trying to find out... because I wanted to do painting.  But I didn't really, it didn't really gel with me.  And I just happened to take a class at the 92nd Street Y in clay.  And that was just... it was like this is it, you know.  And clay became what I did.  And so, I set up my own studio in my apartment.  I worked at a clay crafts place called Clay Works, and helped monitor that place and helped set up... doing production pottery and all that, and started creating my own line of work.  So, clay became the thing that I most enjoyed doing.  And that was quite an experience for me, okay.  And in doing it, though, it took me a little bit away from black folk.  Because there weren't many black folk at that time except for Yvonne Tucker and her husband, who were really into clay.  And I hadn't had that, you know.  And so the other folks that I was learning from were not African-American.  So, I learned clay in a predominantly white environment.  And, but I soon found some other folk who were doing it, and started working with a girl out of Washington... the name escapes me.  But anyway, so I started doing clay work, and that's what I decided was my medium, was working in clay.  And--
Speaker 2: That's like firing the clay?
Speaker 1: All of it.  Hand... I was doing hand building; I was doing wheelwork, you know, building wheel... you know, wheelwork.  I was making little boxes, and doing raku firings and all that kind of stuff.  So, I really learned, you know, to do clay.  And I enjoyed it, because the whole process was just--you know, from shaping the clay to seeing it go from a very malleable point to, you know, the firing and what goes on in the fire--just somehow symbolically it was what I really enjoyed doing.  So that's what... that was finally my last medium.  And so I became an artist with a medium finally, because the others just didn't stick with me.
Story_ID: 84976
Speaker 1: In the meantime a lot of my friends continued to be in the arts--you know, Pepsi Charles who was a WBAI radio personality and I became friends.  And I was around a lot of writers, Doc Long... Doughtry Long, I don't know if you know that name.  We spent a lot of time together, and I learned a lot about writing and living and understanding who we are as a people, you know, and beginning to absorb being an African-American.  Because in Memphis, even though I was black, I mean I grew up in a segregated society.  So everything was... you know, it was not...  We didn't go into any kind of connection to Africa, let's say.  I mean it was just... you were black.  You know, we didn't... when I was growing up we didn't go beyond that.
Speaker 2: Where did you get your cultural content?  Who were some of the people and groups that provided substance to the cultural instruction?
Speaker 1: Well, I guess, you know, again, having experienced...  Well, Babatunde Olatunji in New York, who showed me the parallels--the music, drumming, the parallels in African music to African-American music; the writings, you know, working with the John Killens' Workshop, and that was part of it; going to the Negro Ensemble Company and seeing the plays and being forced to come to terms with some of the issues that were raised in some of those plays; seeing [HM] Bill Duke and Garrett Morris do "Slave Ship," you know, all... just being around people, you know, helps you to begin to see and develop a sense of the importance of your cultural heritage.  I mean it wasn't something that somebody sat me down and said this, that, and the other.  It was not like that.  It was just a matter of living experiences and living the history of the moment.  I'm trying to think of some other things...  I mean, going to parties and hearing people just spontaneously read poetry and just--I mean just a number of things that happened, you know, that just kind of makes you say, "Ah ha, this is who we are," you know.  It's no one thing.
Story_ID: 84977
Speaker 1: I know there's a discussion going on in the black world--
Speaker 2: Um-hum--
Speaker 1: --black scholarly publications--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --whether or not there is such a thing as a black aesthetic.
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely, oh yes.  Now that--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah.  With- from [Amiri] Baraka to Chuck... not Chuck Hamilton.  It was, was it Chuck Hamilton?
Speaker 1: Charles Hamilton?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Charles Hamilton.  I'm not sure... it was, well, Charles Hamilton was one.  But there was someone else who I had some dialog with when we were doing that conference.  And I guess... when I really did some research for the first National African Crafts Conference and Jubilee that I really delved into the parallels and the survivalism of African culture in America, and began to see the connection that we have had to our African... our culture, and how it survives today in so much of who we are.  You know, it's not something that you have to... you know, it's like I say.  It's in the way we walk, the way we talk, the way we sing, you know, dress.  You know, all those things are things that are passed down, and we don't have to go through trying to copy African symbols.  Because our forefathers... and that was the significance of this conference that I did.  I'm kind of jumping around.  But one of the things was that being a craftsperson, as a potter--when we decided to do the conference we wanted to bring African-American folk artists together with the contemporary artists so that they could begin to see the parallels, and that it still exists in the folk artists' work.  Whereas a contemporary artist, many of them were just copying what they had seen in terms of African symbols, because their academic training did not prepare them to see the survivalisms.  So, when we brought together basket weavers and quilt makers from the Delta who were right here near us, here in Memphis, together with these contemporary artists they could begin to see the African aesthetic at work, particularly in the visual arts. Okay, so they could begin to see that.  And that's when I really became more understanding of the impact that Africa has had on how we image the world and ourselves, and project it to others.
Story_ID: 84978
Speaker 1: What are some of the African survivalisms that we consciously or unconsciously practice?
Speaker 2: Well, the one that is the most obvious to me, and is probably the one that's probably--the controversy hasn't really been let out yet--is our spiritual faith.  You know, the fact that we are a deeply religious people, to me, is directly related to our African spiritualism.
Speaker 1: But in what sense do you mean?  Because one can argue that Europeans are spiritual, too.
Speaker 2: No, I'm not talking... they're churchgoers.
Speaker 1: Oh, church, yeah.
Speaker 2: I'm not talking about churchgoing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm talking about the emotionalism that we experience in the churches of... African churches.  I mean, there's a great deal of quote "emotionalism" that--
Speaker 1: Now, you mean the difference between say, a Puritan church?  I mean (Laughter)--
Speaker 2: You know, well, like... like the C.M.E. [Christian Methodist Episcopal] church I grew up in was very staid and on a European model, okay.  My mother [Jeannette Lauretta Brown Nelson] would loathe to see the music going on in the churches today.  Because she was of following the tradition of the European way of Christian... of following Christianity.
Speaker 1: Usually people don't get happy in a C.M.E. Church?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  There was one lady, Miss Beckton [ph.], who used to run down the aisle hollering, "Help, help, help" you know.  And everybody would look at, you know, Miss Beckton.  And everybody just overlooked her.  But no, yeah, no, that was not acceptable.  But in the Baptist churches, and the Church of God in Christ, and the sanctified churches, people freely let whatever they felt by their spiritual or religious experience, come out.  And I think that's one of the survivalisms that hasn't been explored, and what that means to us.  I mean, I know back in the sixties [1960s] and later, some people began to look at what that meant.  I mean I'm not a theologian, so I'm not able to speak on it from any biblical, whatever, thought.  It's just that I feel that that's one of the most ingrained and subconscious elements of our survivalism, that is still very much present in this community.  And the reason it's so strong in this particular community is because so few of the people in this community... and there are so many--who have never left.  So, you have people who have... maybe their folks have moved off the farms which were on plantations, who may or may not have been educated.  But they still are right together, and haven't gone very many places.  They may go off to a trip here or there, but they still are here.  So, whatever values and traditions and aesthetics--as you mentioned, have passed on without being integrated and assimilated and lost.  So every... almost every Memphian you find here that's black is a member of some church, and very much active in it.  And of course the church is another community part of it, too, which is something that is also survivalism, aside from the spiritual part.  We're communal people, I believe.  And I think the community of the church is something that also attracts people, you know, to it.  My husband [Leonard D. West] and I went to a Unitarian church here, because we enjoy some of the intellectual discussions and what have you.  But we couldn't stay; it was just too cold.  (Laughter).  It was too cold; there was no warmth, you know.  I mean, great thoughts, beautiful view.  But you know, it just... it was just cold, you know.  So, that's something that's just survivalism.  I think that most of us have to have something that keeps us warm, you know.  I used to have a little sign.  And I don't know what happened to it.  It was built, it was made by my supervisor in Newark [Jew Jersey] right after the riots.  And it was pictures of all of the... some of the riot scenes and stuff.  It was torn... a collage kind of picture.  But it said, "Keep your warm," as opposed to keep your cool.  And I liked that.  So, we have to keep our warm.
Story_ID: 84979
Speaker 1: That's one way.  The other way is obvious... I mean the music, you know, the rhythms... our polyrhythmic ability, you know.  There are a lot of young whites who were learned and will appreciate that--from the blues, etc.  But that's something we always appreciated.  But that's a survivalism.  And certainly Babatunde Olatunji shared that with Charlie Parker and many others.  And you know, he influenced them.  And the visual arts, again, I mean you know, we're known for our colors.  We're known for our colors in our clothing and our houses.  And again, if you drive around in Memphis [Tennessee], you'll still see people who're decorating their houses in the old ways with lots of color.  And if you go out here, you'll see I've got some bottles turned upside down in the garden.  And that's a tradition, a folk tradition from Africa that still is done in the South.  Now, I'm just doing it because I learned what it was.  I didn't know, my folks didn't do it.  But I learned that that was a tradition, to turn the bottles upside down so that ancestral spirits could come out and see up into the light from the ground.  Because as I teach the kids here, you know, our ancestral spirits are still here, are still very much with us, and we must honor them, you know.  So at any rate, I think that's something that is a survivalism.  Our faith, our hope... I can't say that it's something... I can't say where it comes from... out of... necessarily out of Africa.  I think that that's something African-Americans have developed--a sense of hope to be able to continue to struggle against whatever it is that's out there.  We've done that, you know.  And it's important that we continue.  I mean, a lot of people do struggle against the odds.  But certainly as a people, we've had a tremendous amount to overcome, and we still, you know, are working through it.  And in spite of how hard it gets it seems like some of us will say, "Well, you know, it's always been hard, so what's new, you know."  So, that kind of persistence is something that I think is very special about us.  And I don't know that another people--maybe there are.  I'm sure the Jews are that way in some ways, because of their oppression.  But people who have been oppressed probably more than others have a persistence about them.  And I don't know if I can necessarily ascribe that to African survivalism, but it's a thought.
Story_ID: 85544
Speaker 1: We were talking about black aesthetics--
Speaker 2: Um-hum--
Speaker 1: --and some of the ways that we express ourselves.  And context is another... there was a lot of discussion about context in the late sixties [1960s], early seventies [1970s].  And what we said during the break, Addison Gayle [Jr.] wrote--
Speaker 2: Um-hum--
Speaker 1: --a definitive essay on the black aesthetic--
Speaker 2: Um-hum--
Speaker 1: --that appeared on Black World for Negro Digest.
Speaker 2: That's what it was.  It was Addison Gayle, that's right.  That's the one I was referring to.
Speaker 1: Addison Gayle, you know.  But there's also context.  Paul Robeson said at one point that a black artist... it's through the black artist that the black community expresses itself, because that artist is a part of the community.  And unless they consciously choose to cut themselves off, they naturally want to express those aspirations of their people.
Speaker 2: Absolutely
Speaker 1: In their work.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  And that's very true.  And you do have to make a conscious...  And part of what I have felt... called to do is to help our artists stay in touch with who they are, and be able to share that information with as wide a public as possible.  Because as I said earlier, so many of the people in this community [Memphis, Tennessee], which is where I'm back home to, don't know about their history, don't know about the African aesthetics and don't know the pride of the contributions of what we've made to society and to the world, you know.  Instead it's, you know, people too often think in terms of "I haven't been able to get a job because I'm black.  And I'm not good enough to do this, that, and the other," because that's what they've been taught.  And it's broader than that.  But if you don't get the media exposure to see that on television or in the movies; if you don't have that in your schools and books and what have you... and which they don't.  You know, who's to tell you that but an artist, or someone else who's trying... who has a way of getting to your psyche.  You know, and creative people can do that--through the visual, through music, through lyrics, through poetry, you know.  In fact, I mean just in terms of rapping, I mean some of the worst... I say worst... some of the most negative rap I think that I've heard comes out of Memphis.  And I don't know if you listen to different kinds of rap--
Speaker 1: Who are some of the artists?
Speaker 2: Three 6 Mafia is one.  Gangsta Boo, and what's the other one?  I've forgotten, I don't know.  I've got teenagers who... some of them passing through it.  I don't know all of the names.  But some of the stuff that I've heard them saying is just, you know, very, you know, all the things we don't want rap to be.  But I mean I listen to it, and there are some good, you know, rap artists out there and stuff.  But back to the aesthetic, I think that that's another aesthetic.  I mean, we have the capacity to take something and just make it ours, you know.  Or, to take words and just go on with them.  Because rap... I mean because bebop and all of that was the earlier rap, I guess you might want to say.  But I just find it wonderful that we're able to do all those kinds of things, you know, with our body--whether it's singing, or dancing, or creating, writing, art... doing art. I mean we...
Story_ID: 85545
Speaker 1: How powerful are artists really?  I mean, some have suggested even in the black community that it's a political science--you know, not that art expression makes a difference, you know.
Speaker 2: I think you can do both.  I think that people do respect... or I guess the word I would say is that the commercial value too often decides for too many people what's worthy and what's not worthy.  And I'm not sure that we have gotten to the point where we can...  I'm getting lost in my own thoughts.  Go ahead, ask the question again.
Speaker 1: Well, I was just asking if the politicals can be separated I guess from art, in the sense that you can have some sort of political power without art.  I guess that's my question.
Speaker 2: Is there political power without art?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: You know, I think from an African-American perspective, I'd say no, you know.  If you're going to... I mean if you're going to appeal to African-American people, you're going to have to draw on some level of creativity.  And whether it's how you express yourself visually or verbally--to get to the mind you have to use...  Look at [HM Reverend] Jesse Jackson and [HM Reverend] Al Sharpton.  And one of the reasons they're so appealing to the masses is that they know how to communicate.  And they communicate not only on a European level, but very clearly out of an African-American aesthetic in the way they put their words together.  And so, to that extent they can be politically effective I think in getting to the black person.  Now, whether they take that on and get people to move to action, which is really the crux of what happens with political power--when you move to action.  We've not always taken it to that point.  We've not always used our power to affect the kind of change that I think artists can make in a society; that somewhere we've stopped either because we've gotten a nice buck for the work that we've created... whether... you know... or you know... or we just don't go that extra mile, you know.  And, but I think it can.  And I don't think that you can reach people effectively without drawing on some of that aesthetic.  Certainly our former Congressman, even the current one, Congressman Harold Ford, Jr., and his father [Harold Ford, Sr.]... very eloquent men.  And the way they speak is somewhat out of that black theological manner, which comes from a black aesthetic.  But they also use reason and some other things to make their points.  But how you, again, move people as a group to affect change is something that we have, as artists, haven't done as effectively as I'd like to see us be able to do.
Story_ID: 85546
Speaker 1: In the period of time, late sixties [1960s], early seventies [1970s], that's coming down to be known as the "black arts movement."
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Do you see it as that?  And what kind of things did you actually move with?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean clearly we made people proud of being African-Americans during that period of time.  And we... you know, black is beautiful and, you know, the black symbolism through the hair.  And as one of the poets said, you know we taught... you know, had the new hair and all that other stuff, you know... and names... and naming ourselves.  I mean, that was very important.  But now we're getting back to teaching people the old ways and the old names and the old faces, so that we won't go back to being a slave again.  And so, I say that to say that yes, there was a black artists' movement.  And it was important in providing a kind of warmth, as I spoke earlier about the movement and what we were doing, and making us feel good about what we were doing.  But we've got to go back again and bring that back again--to helping people focus in on the importance of working together from a communal point of view as artists and as people--to have a change I think in what goes on in this community and the community of the country.  And I think we can do that.  And I don't know, I don't think we've begun yet to do it.  I think working with young people and helping them to understand the importance of who they are, and that there is some survivalism of African aesthetic and African-American aesthetics... because we are an amalgam of people--but still bringing that together to the point that we have these children begin to say early on that they are proud of being who they are, and that they can do something, and that they have a purpose--that they should come back to the community and serve in some form or fashion.  That's where we've got to start using art.  Because up until recently, we weren't coming back.  Now of course black kids are coming back to historically black colleges.  They're beginning to get that kind of reinforcement of the importance of the community I think, or because they were either disappointed with the experiences they found when they went into an integrated society... I don't know.  How the art plays with that now, I just... you know, in this little world that we operate in here, my concern is to help all of these artists to a very--most of whom are very accomplished in their own experiences--be able to share what they've learned with the young people, and encourage these young people to dare to be creative, to dare to be unique; you don't have to be like everybody else, and that we all have a purpose, you know.  And that's something that in some way transcends the African-American experience.  But at the same time we want to build on the African-American experience, and the importance of the community in what we do.  And that's kind of how I see it.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: I don't know if I'm addressing completely some of the questions you're raising.  But that's--
Speaker 1: You are.
Story_ID: 85547
Speaker 1: Who are some of the artists of that period?  Artists, musicians, writers, that influenced you the most, or are there any specific works you can cite that moved you?
Speaker 2: No.  I... you know, certainly I was a big Nina Simone fan.  I mean, I really enjoyed Nina musically.  I enjoyed Aretha [Franklin] for her sincere emotions, you know.  I love [Patti] LaBelle for her flair and her theatrics, you know.  She's got a great voice, but she's generally very theatrical.  You know, I enjoy that just on a musical level.  I was married to a jazz musician, so I do enjoy just straight ahead jazz.  I'm not into the fusion or anything else--just plain old straight ahead jazz, you know, of the bebop era; you know, I like that.  So, there's not any particular artist that I like.  The, in terms of dance, clearly Don Quayle... is it Don Quayle?  Alvin Ailey for sure.  But there's an artist and I think its Quayle, who does the "Bucket Dance."
Speaker 1: Garth Fagan?
Speaker 2: Garth Fagan... Garth Fagan... Garth Fagan... love his work.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: I love Garth Fagan's work.  I've seen several of his pieces, and I do enjoy that.  And, because he uses our body so much to show what, you know, we can do with it.  And so, the uniqueness of our bodies... so I like that.  And of course Alvin Ailey just brought, you know, all of our history to bear with his art... on dance.  Visually, I guess Catlett would be my favorite, [HM] Elizabeth Catlett, as an artist.  And she works in so many mediums, and all of it is very strong and very clear about its focus.  And I just like her work a lot.  I like Joyce Scott's beadwork and fabric work; she's another craftsperson.  From a literary point of view, I've got to say my friend Doc Long [Doughtry Long] is my favorite poet.  He's really quite good and under-stated.  I don't think he's gotten the due that he should get.  He happens to be Nia Long's daddy, too.  He's a great poet.  Theatrically... we were talking about great actors and actresses the other day, and I named several who I thought were horrible (Laughter).  Their names easily come to mind.  And I won't name them.  But clearly Cuba Gooding, Jr. is an excellent young actor, I think he's excellent.  Ivan Dixon was one of my favorites.  Abbey Lincoln is another artist I enjoy.  Laurence Fishburne has been quite good I think.  And on a female level, as an actress, clearly I mean Halle Berry's a young actress.  She's shown her scope.  I'm sorry she's had to do the things she's had to do to get her due, but she's a good actress.  I'm trying to think of some of the older actresses that I have enjoyed.  I'm sorry, some names escape me.  But--
Speaker 1: Do you remember Beah Richards?
Speaker 2: I started to say Beah Richards, yeah.  I thought of Beah.  She's from Mississippi, and died not too long ago.  I remember her piece that she did on "The Practice."  I thought that was quite good, I enjoyed that.  Oh, and a young man that acts in that movie, in that TV production...  I can't recall his name [Steve Harris].  He's on The Practice every Sunday, and I love his work.  And I've seen him play a gangster... and then he plays a lawyer.  He's quite a good actor, and he's got quite a range.
Story_ID: 85548
Speaker 1: Let me just try to catch up with Memphis [Tennessee] here.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now you were, you stayed in New York ten years?
Speaker 2: From '68' [1968] to '78' [1978].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what, did you come back to Memphis?
Speaker 2: I came home, came straight home.  My mother [Jeannette Lauretta Brown Nelson], as I said, I'm an only child.  My mother was sick, and I came back to take care of her.  And but before I came--I knew I was going to have to come--because I'd been coming back and forth since '74' [1974] before my father [Benjamin Howard Nelson] passed, rather frequently.  And I realized my mother was getting up--I was going to make some changes.  So, I started trying to look at what I would want to do.  And as I said, while I was doing the arts scene in New York I was working professionally in New Jersey, and became a lobbyist over there and all of that.  So, I was doing a lot of writing and proposal development and that kind of thing.  And I decided to try and marry the two, through arts administration.  So, I started taking classes in arts management at the New School for Social Research in New York [New York City, New York] before I came home.  And one of the jobs that I got was as a consultant to The National Black Theater Alliance; pulling together a directory that they were working on.  And I was doing writing and collecting data for that.  And I'm working with them on it, and I got to understand how that organization worked.  And then as I would come home I'd meet some of my friends from high school, or new people that I met, and discovered they had quite an arts community here in Memphis, but they weren't getting funds.  They didn't have a place to rehearse.  They were getting, you know, they didn't schedule their stuff well when they did have things.  There were no kinds of clearinghouse of information.  Many of them were still lacking in some professionalism in their work.  So, that was something that was obvious to me.  But one of the things that happened that was quite serendipitous was that when I came home, I met a young woman who was organizing a crafts exhibit at the Brooks Museum of Art [Memphis, Tennessee].  And she had gotten a NEA [National Endowment for the Arts] grant to do it.  And it was going to be an exposition of African-American contemporary craftspeople.  And in it, she'd had a two day sym- or a half a day, a morning symposium on bringing together the black craftspeople talking about their work.  And being a potter--and this was a young white woman--and this was a black conference.  And I said, "Wait a minute."  I said, "You know, let me help you with this, you know."  And so I said, "You know, I'm going to be moving back."  I said, "You know, maybe I can start trying to get some funds to expand the symposium, and I'll take over that piece of it, if you don't mind."  I basically volunteered to do this through the community college [Shelby State Community College].  And she agreed.  So, I went after two grants.  I got two NEA grants and I got an NEH [National Endowment for the Humanities] grant, to expand this to now a five-day symposium and jubilee [First National African American Crafts Conference and Jubilee], which was like a festival combined together.  And the theme was towards artistic and economic self-sufficiency.  And to me, that is still the crux of where we need to be--artistic and economic self-sufficiency--and I saw them going together.  And craftspeople I felt could do that.  Because craftspeople, for the most part, generally can make a living out of their art.
Story_ID: 85549
Speaker 1: So, I, I moved on home [Memphis, Tennessee].  And the first project I had was that I was hired by the college [Shelby State Community College] to put on, to help put on this conference and jubilee.  And in doing that, I became more intimately involved with some of the artists, and knowing who the artists were in Memphis.  Because although my main concern was on this national conference, where we brought people from twenty-eight different states together here to Memphis, I felt I couldn't do a national conference and have a national committee of people from this region and that region, and ignore the people right here in the city.  So, I helped them form something called the Memphis to Memphis Black Artists Guild.  And this was a primarily visual arts group that was modeled after some of the NCA, National Conference of Artists, by-laws and organizational issues, and helped them get started.  Then there were already some other theater groups and some dance groups and all of that.  And after the conference was over, I asked them about whether or not they wanted to maybe form an alliance.  So, we had an exploratory group talking about it, and everybody said yes.  And so I knew [HM] Ossie [Davis] and Ruby Davis' [sic, Ruby Dee] son, Guy [Davis] from New York, and I knew that they were coming to town.  And so, I asked if they would help us inaugurate the existence of the alliance.  So, I got sixteen arts groups to get some money together.  And there were a number of individual artists, and we had a reception and an inaugural address at LeMoyne College [LeMoyne-Owen College in Memphis, Tennessee].  And I gave the five reasons that, based on what they had told me, was the reason that we needed to have a Memphis Black Arts Alliance.  So, Ruby and Ossie Davis spoke to that, and they elaborated on it. And the organization kicked off on that day, May 7th, 1982.  And then that summer we spent pulling together our by-laws, looking at what other organizations in other cities were doing.  And by December, we had elected--the first board had been chartered.  And in January we pursued our--began to pursue our 501(c)(3).  And I guess in '83' [1983] or '84' [1984], we got our 501(c)(3) tax exemption status.  And by then we moved on to talking to the mayor [Richard Hackett] at the time about this building that had become vacant.  It had been used as a one-truck fire station up until '82' [1982], and it was no longer operating.  And I went to the mayor and said, "Well, can we have it?"  Well, we couldn't at the time, because the city charter didn't allow the city to sell property to private entities, but we could lease it.  So, we got a long-term lease, and we were paying equivalent to property taxes.  Because there was a body shop company that really wanted this property, so we had the city--and we worked with people in the neighborhood and they agreed that we should have it.  So, we politicked for it and we got it.  And then we went to the County government and got $48,000 to help us renovate it.  And so we put in these floors here and took out the brass poles and put in a dance floor downstairs; put the mirrors up and you know, carpets--began to do stuff to turn it into a multi-purpose art center.  And that's the way we began to function out of here.  And we began to do a lot of different things for the artists first, because that's how we were started--as an alliance to help provide them with information and resource sharing and technical assistance and advocacy and marketing support.  Those were the basic reasons that we existed.  We were not existing--we did not exist to raise funds for the artists.
Story_ID: 85550
Speaker 1: So, we had workshops for them.  We brought in Benny Andrews, and he would do critiques of the visual artists.  [HM] Nikki Giovanni's come through here; we've brought her here to do workshops with the writers when we brought the Negro Ensemble Company to town with the Soldier's Play.  We had the director work with the writers in town... and so the actors and the workshop.  When Alvin Ailey came... we brought Alvin Ailey here.  And we were the first to do all of this.  I mean, there had never been a national black drama in Memphis [Tennessee] in the eighties [1980s], so we brought them here.  So, the dancers did dance workshops with the dancers.  So, all those things helped to reinforce our work with the artists.  But as we began to grow, we also wanted--again, as a part of marketing, I encouraged the arts groups to begin to offer classes to the community.  So, some classes were held here by some arts groups.  Some were held in the community at different locations.  And then we started doing Men Who Cook as a fundraiser.  I took it from the Children's Carnival out of New York, and we did that successfully.  But our board became more interested in doing that fundraiser than in supporting the artists and working with stuff.  So, we started having this kind of skewing of missions--from really servicing the needs of the community and artists to more of a social kind of thing.  And I left the organization and continued to work at the community college [Shelby State Community College] where I had been working even after that first conference.
Story_ID: 85551
Speaker 1: And then we... about... so I left there in '88' [1988]; I left the organization in '87' [1987], '88' [1988].  And besides, you know, I was having a family.  I was just really too busy.  But more importantly, I just didn't like the way...  They'd just kind of gone back to the party, you know... just weren't on task with being about our folk, really.  And plus the other issue was that the funding--the major funding organization was directing the board to do more presenting--bringing in local and out-of-city people to perform and showcase, and using our organization to be a feeder to the mainstream organizations for audience development--for their audience development as opposed to developing local artists as opposed to developing a market, etc.  I totally and absolutely disagreed with that, and that's where we had a break... you know, a difference of opinion.  So, I... all of those reasons...  I said hey, I'm out of here.  So, that's what happened.  Then about six, I guess six or seven years ago now, I ran into a young man who was then the president of the board.  And we were... this building hadn't been used for two years.  It had been, they had been re-located to an office building.  They were providing no services to the artists or to the community, except for they brought in Sweet Honey and the Rock, and I think they had something they were doing with some writers for a while.  But that was the extent of the services that were going on.  They were about to lose the building.  They had two board members, and I was no longer working at the college [Shelby State Community College].  So David Earl Jackson, the young man I mentioned earlier who was from Chattanooga [Tennessee], had moved to Memphis.  He and I worked together as consultants to help revise the alliance, or revitalize it.  So, we created a consulting firm, Creative Community is what we called it.  And we proposed some things to get it back on track.  And one of the things that I did was in helping them to bring more people onto the board.  We also brought in a guy by the name of David Steckel [sic, Richard Steckel], who was the former director of the Denver Children's Museum [Denver, Colorado].  And he wrote the book, "Filthy Rich and Other Non-Profit Fantasies: Changing the Way Non-Profits Do Business in the Nineties."  That was the title of the book.  So, he did a two-day... two and a half day consultancy with our board.  They went through all the different possibilities of things that were needed, and tried to look at the mission and all of that.  And we concluded that we needed to have a school that focused on the arts, but provided it from an African-American perspective, using people who were well-qualified.  And so, that's what we're doing now.  And we've been doing it since '96' [1996].  And that's just one of the primary, that's the primary service that we're currently providing.  So, but we... we wanted to become the, a premier center.  So, we're just beginning to go where we want to go.
Story_ID: 84988
Speaker 1: So, where do you see--I mean, what are your future plans for the [Memphis] Black Arts Alliance [in Memphis, Tennessee]?  And where are you right now with your future--
Speaker 2: Right now, we are at a point of institutionalization.  And we've been around since 1982.  That makes us twenty-one years old.  We have a facility [FireHouse Community Arts Center] that's inadequate.  But fortunately, the city has given us some nice money to begin to do some renovations.  We intend to use that money to leverage to get some additional planning dollars to look at acquiring additional space and property nearby, so that we can build a really representative regional African-American arts and cultural center.  You know, I envision us not only being able to have a school that is staffed by highly professional and experienced performers and writers and visual artists--but also to be able to have a museum that celebrates all of our different accomplishments in the arts--to also have a place where we can come and see films or theatrical productions.  We've had... at the time we started, there were sixteen different performing art groups in the city.  Now, there is only one, and that's us.  And the theater--
Speaker 1: There's only black performing black arts group?
Speaker 2: There is not... we're not... we're primarily a school.  There is no organized 501(c)(3) black, African-American--
Speaker 1: Not a--
Speaker 2: --cultural center, I mean cultural organization in Memphis.
Speaker 1: Not a theater?
Speaker 2: The last theater... dance company--
Speaker 1: Dance company?
Speaker 2: No.  The black... the Memphis Black Theater Company, Repertory Company, was formed as an, was incubated about three or four years ago out of a predominantly white theater company.  And it was around for about four years, and it's gone.  The, prior to that there had been a number of theater companies who were doing good work, but for different reasons, of course most of it funding, or funding related, didn't last.  So, but there's still good people in this city who have skills, and have an interest in sharing what they know and producing good work.  So, we're working with some of those people.  And we intend to try to help them either re-start their own or start another organization that we would help support... back... like sort of in the early days, in terms of providing some support.  But the point is that I believe it's important that we help create a venue for theater, for the visual arts, for even media arts, which is something that our younger people are more into than us older folks.  But we definitely want to be able to get into that, particularly, into the graphics and digital industry.  So, that's where we want to go.  And being located where we are, we feel that there is ample room to grow, to do that.  And we'd like to be a catalyst for additional development along this stretch of Bellevue, which is also known as Elvis Presley Boulevard which is between a major medical center and Graceland, which is Elvis' mansion down the street, if you haven't visited it.  But the fact is that we see ourselves providing that kind of catalyst for the region.  Because Memphis is, you know, it's surrounded by Mississippi and Arkansas.  So, we have a huge, we have one of the highest concentrations of African-Americans (unclear) in the country.  You know, one of the highest.
Speaker 1: That's true.
Speaker 2: And it is criminal that we don't have a cultural center that represents all of who we are.
Story_ID: 84989
Speaker 1: Now, the Civil Rights Museum, that's a whole other thing.  And I'm sure if you talk to D'Army [HM D'Army Bailey]--or when you talk to D'Army--you'll learn something about the Memphis [Tennessee] experience with that, in terms of us having our own institutions.  But this is the only... for a long time this was the only facility that I knew of that African-Americans owned in the city that was non-profit.  The rest of them were either nationally based organizations, like the Urban League or the NAACP, or they were organizations that were started by predominantly white church groups, or whatever.  But this was started by us, and we're still holding on.  We now own this property.  The city... it was deeded to us in '98' [1998], because the city changed its charter.  So, we no longer lease, we own it.  So we intend to use it to improve the school and expand what we do.  The, there is a similar institution which was created last year, the Stax Music Academy, that we, that works to primarily focus on music of that era, of the soul era.  And initially we were thinking they were going to do more... be more like a finishing school for people who wanted to go into the professional recording industry.  That's what I thought they were going to do.  But they're doing more general training with children and what have you, which is what we do.  But the difference, again, is that we're focusing on the whole family.  We're very family oriented in what we do.  Our students range in ages from... the youngest is 83 to 3.  We average about three to four hundred people a year that we service in this space.  I mean, it's amazing what we can do here.  And we attract people from all over the region.  We've got people coming from Arkansas, Mississippi, you know, north of here, and rural, West Tennessee... coming through here to classes.  So, if we're able to attract the kind of dollars that we feel that we should be able to do, it's going to require us hiring some additional people, which we're looking to do. We can, you know, hopefully generate enough funds to sustain our vision.  And that's what we really feel is important for this community.
Story_ID: 84990
Speaker 1: Okay.  What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: Well, first of all, that we feel empowered, truly empowered.  I think that too often we feel victimized and don't realize the power that we have, particularly given the strength in numbers that we have.  I think that we, our power is under-estimated.  I'd like to see us be able to use our resources to build our community, and not just the structures in our community.  You know, I feel sometimes that we've gotten to a place where we've become somewhat commercial, even in our churches.  And I see resources that could be used to strengthen the community maybe being diverted somewhat, and that's a concern.  That's, that's something that I think we have to be careful about.  I think that we, people, you know, in this community are very... you know, how can I put it?  It's just that I think that we have to try and keep our eye on the larger prize, and not be so caught up in the kind of lack of group empowerment that I think comes out of the church.  I think the church is great for empowering individuals, because it is through individual salvation, individual action.  But I'd like to see us use the church to promote--if we're going to use the church for anything, it should be to help promote the community, like it was during...  You know, I think that even though there were personal agendas back even in the--in all of the earlier days of the Civil Rights Movement--everybody had their own agenda--the church was still a force for bringing people together for some kind of action for the general good of everybody, okay.
Speaker 1: You're hearkening back to the struggle between [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] and Joseph [H.] Jackson in terms of the church just being able to save your soul, and that it can be a facility for change.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  To that extent, even going back to...  I also feel that we have to--and I think artists can do this, particularly for those people who have achieved a higher level of education and exposure in a mainstream society.  If we can somehow get those folks who have quote, "arrived" to understand how important their future is to the future of the least among us--that they... you know, it's like they can only rise only so high--and that there is a need to come back and do something to help out, I mean in some meaningful ways.  You know, I know we have major CEO's.  I know businesses are... people are doing wonderful things in business.  And we subscribe to Black Enterprise.  So, I'm pleased about that.  And I know some people are doing that, and they're beginning to develop the markets that exist within the inner city.  But you know, I see in this community too often we... you know, everybody's going out to the suburbs and forgetting about what's going on in the inner city.  I'd like to see us be more concerned about that, and not be so caught up in our individual survival.  I think we have to continue to reach out for a larger tent.  I guess as more and more people talk about how great America has become this multi-cultural place, I hope that we don't get caught up in this foolishness that color doesn't matter.  It does matter, just as sex matters.  It's a difference...  I mean we... that was one of the things you asked me early on, about my sayings.  To me, one of the things that I often tell people is that, you know, diversity... and that word is overused to me.  But you know, the Creator made, you know, daisies and cactus and orchards.  And all of these different plants, they require a different culture, different medium in order to survive.  And if all we had were daisies in this world, it would be a very dull world.  So we have to maintain the differences, and I think artists can do that, and help bring out the uniqueness and the special purpose in everybody.  I think that's one of the things that the arts do that nothing else does as well.  Sports... I mean nothing else does it better than creativity.  And to me there's no more creative people in the world than African-American people.  You know, we've had to be creative.  So, I think that's part of it.  I think that understanding that we are different, and accepting our differences, and being proud of the differences.  Even within our community--there is diversity within our community.  And I think that too many of us want us all to be the same.  And we're not, you know.  So, I think that that's another concern that I have, that we appreciate the differences within our community and not try to make everybody the same, on any level.
Story_ID: 84991
Speaker 1: You know?
Speaker 2: Have you had a chance to really develop your own work, in this struggle to establish this center?
Speaker 1: As an artist?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: No.  I feel like I'm doing it through the kids that I work with, particularly during the camp.  Because as I told somebody, the reason we have camp is not just because it's good for the kids, but I love camp.  (Laughter).  You know, I get to go to camp.  And so, working with the young people, that's the chance that I get to do more teaching, you know.  When I was in New York [New York City, New York], I did teach clay at the Museum of Natural History.  And I enjoy teaching.  But I enjoy seeing, awakening these little minds to the possibilities that they have to be creative and unique people.  And a lot of faculty here are just wonderful.  We've got people who've traveled to Europe, lived all over the world.  And my one of my favorite teachers is a white brother who, who, who played... who passed for black in order to learn to play the guitar.  And it's so funny.  I'll tell you the story about Ed.  When I... I sent a brochure about our program to the faculty and to one of my high school friends who lives in New Jersey.  And she went to school here, and there was a club here called the Big M.  And when she saw... she said, "Is that the same Ed Finney that used to play at the Big M, and would put cigarette lighter fluid in his hair to give himself an Afro?"  (Laughter).  And I confronted Ed.  I said, "Ed, did you do that?"  He said, "Yeah."  And they said that he had this huge Afro.  And you know, because his hair was thin, when he'd play his guitar the hair would just flow.  So, that was my story about him.  And then the other was that he played over at a club called the Plantation Club over on West Memphis where only whites would go, but all the musicians were black, right.  And Ed played over there for about two years as a regular gig.  And then Ed's daddy ran into the owner at a garage somewhere.  And he said, "Yeah, my son works over there."  "Doing what?"  He said, "He plays in a band."  "Oh, I don't have nothing but niggers playing in my band."  (Laughter).  Ed was passing as an albino.  (Laughter).  So, but, the point is that one of the reasons Ed teaches here is because he learned so much in his musical career from black folk.  And so, he, he's giving back.  So most of the people here, regardless of their backgrounds--and we have a woman from Turkey who's teaching jazz violin.  We have people of all kinds.  But we do have predominantly African-American faculty and staff.  And they are sharing what they've learned with these kids and with the adults, and teaching them that you can be different; you can be unique.  You don't have to, you know, be the same.  And that's I think what artists, most artists, strive to be, is unique and have their own way of doing things--their own way of writing or expressing themselves, or singing, whatever.  And that's, to me, important.  And certainly, I look for us to bring the best of our African-American experience to that art form.  And I want to show, you know, help kids and people know how to do that.  So through... not so heavy-handed ways, but through subtle ways, we want to help people keep their warm.
Story_ID: 84992
Speaker 1: Now, what would you see at this point as your legacy?
Speaker 2: Well, I think the fact that we've been able to sustain this organization, although was gone for part of years that it was in existence, I think it's important that I created the Memphis Black Arts Alliance [in Tennessee].  I think the fact that I helped to organize the first national African-American Crafts Conference and Jubilee is important.  Because for the first time, we brought together aestheticists, folklorists, African-American art historians, practicing artists, and folk artists together, along with ethnomusicologists, and that was... and we had a festival, which I think... we had a symposium.  It was about all kinds of things, including the business of art, which later became, I think, the Atlanta [Georgia]--you know, the National Black Arts Festival came up later after that.  I think that was an important beginning.  And I'm very proud of that, because it brought people together talking about survivalisms in our art forms in ways I don't think it had been talked about in a group before.  So, those two things.  And my children, I trust, Joshua, Jacob, and Sarah.
Story_ID: 84993
Speaker 1: Ma'am how would you like to be remembered? This is slightly different from legacy.
Speaker 2: How would I like to be remembered?  I guess as someone who cared deeply about her people, who felt that everyone has a special purpose, and that I tried to help people discover their own gifts, whatever they are.  I'd like to think that I helped people discover that about themselves.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you very much.
Story_ID: 84994
Speaker 1: Go ahead.
Speaker 2: Okay, this is a photograph of my mother, Jeannette [Lauretta Brown] Nelson.  That's me in the middle and my father on the right, Benjamin Howard Nelson.
Speaker 1: About what year is that?
Speaker 2: It looks like it might have been about '54' [1954], '55' [1955].  That one says... okay, that's what that one is, okay.  That one says 1962, doesn't it?  On the side?
Speaker 1: I have '59' [1959] right here.
Speaker 2: Fifty-nine {1959]?  Okay, good, okay.
Speaker 1: I don't know what that one says.
Speaker 2: No, that one doesn't say.
Speaker 1: Is this the same period of time?
Speaker 2: Uh-uh, it's different.
Speaker 1: Okay, next. Now this is July of '59' [1959], right?
Speaker 2: Uh-uh.
Speaker 1: Say it in the mike.
Speaker 2: Okay, July of '59' [1959].  It's a picture of Jeannette Nelson, my mother, and me.  This was taken at the corner of our house.  It was on the corner of Hamilton and Douglas [Memphis, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Okay, next.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my grandmother and grandfather.  And on the left, seated is my grandmother, Lois Ophelia [Boyd] Brown, her husband, Martin Van Buren Brown.  On the back is my Aunt Berutha.  To the left next to her is Aunt Blanche.  That looks to be Aunt Zora [ph.] and my aunt Addie Ophelia.  Those were--
Speaker 1: Okay, next.
Speaker 2: These are pictures of my mother and father taken in our yard.  With my mother, again at the top, Jeannette Nelson, my father, Benjamin Howard Nelson at the bottom.  And I would say that you could see... if you could possibly see that little wrinkle in his forehead, you'd know that he was about to tell a joke.  (Laughter).  Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, next.
Speaker 2: This is a picture at a Sweet Sixteen party of one of my good friends, Regina Thigpen.  Her mother [Arvon Thigpen] was our Girl Scout leader.  And I don't know all the girls.  But the girl next to her is her cousin who had flown in from somewhere, and I don't remember her name.  But that's Regina to the left, her cousin, then I'm the third person, and my good friend Mamie Shields [ph.], and then another friend, Gwen Fife [ph.], and another friend, Marilyn Isabel.
Speaker 1: Do you know what year this is?
Speaker 2: That would have been Regina's Sweet Sixteen.  So, let's see.  It doesn't say on there.  She's a year older than I am, so we'll figure that out.  She would be born in '43' [1943], and 16 and 43--
Speaker 1: That's '59' [1959].
Speaker 2: Fifty-nine [1959], I guess that was also '59' [1959], yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, next.
Speaker 2: Okay.  This is a picture of my grandmother, Lois--I'm sorry, my Uncle Pete we called him.  His name was Willie Royster Brown [ph.], but we called him Uncle Pete, and my grandmother, Lois Ophelia Brown.
Speaker 1: Do you have any idea what year this was?
Speaker 2: I have no idea.  That's the same picture, I believe, isn't it?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's--
Speaker 2: Don't use that again, okay.
Speaker 1: Go ahead.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my dear husband, Leonard [D.] West, and me.  And that was taken in the winter of probably '98' [1998].
Speaker 1: Very good, next.
Speaker 2: Okay.  These are my three children, Jacob Aaron Ford, Sarah June Parks, and Joshua Parks.  And that was taken... and that's Bro, our little puppy at the time.  And Sarah must have been about three.  So, that was taken... she's 16... 13 years ago, that would be 1980.
Speaker 1: Ninety [1990].
Speaker 2: Ninety [1990], yeah, right, 1990.
Speaker 1: Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 2: Oh, that's another picture of me and my mother at the house, 793 Hamilton Street.  And that must have been in 1962.
Speaker 1: Okay, next one please.
Speaker 2: That's a picture of me in my kitchen in my New York City [New York] apartment at 790 Riverside Drive.  I was preparing, I was entertaining.  And I guess you can't see Smoke, my cat, on the floor.  Maybe he wasn't in that picture.  But at any rate, I was entertaining.
Speaker 1: Do you know the year?
Speaker 2: Nineteen Seventy-Six [1976].
Speaker 1: Go ahead, next.
Speaker 2: Fishing off of Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts].  I love to fish, that's me.
Speaker 1: What year was this?
Speaker 2: Nineteen Seventy-Eight [1978]... '73' [1973], '73' [1973].
Speaker 1: Okay, go ahead, next.
Speaker 2: That's Rudy Smith, my escort at the prom.
Speaker 1: The year?
Speaker 2: Nineteen Sixty-Two [1962].
Speaker 1: Go ahead, next.
Speaker 2: That's not a good picture of... you don't need to use that one.
Speaker 1: Okay, next.
Speaker 2: This is a picture... and I'm sorry I can't name everybody on the picture.
Speaker 1: That's alright.
Speaker 2: On the front row that's me, Bennetta Nelson.  Next to me is Francetta Estes--
Speaker 1: Are you going left to right?
Speaker 2: I'm going left to right.  Me on the left, Francetta Estes, Cathelia Barr, I've forgotten the young lady's name on the right.  On the rear, I don't know that lady's name.  Behind her is Miss Hassell.  Then that's... I don't remember the rest of the names except for this Mrs. Estes, Francetta's grandmother, on the back.
Speaker 1: And the year or date?
Speaker 2: That was, we were going... we were getting ready to go to Girls State.  And that must have been my junior year in high school which would be '61' [1961].
Speaker 1: Okay, next.
Speaker 2: Okay.  This was a tribute to people who had made a contribution to the arts.  And left to right that's Mrs. Ernest Withers representing her husband, and that's Mr. Walter Guy who was a visual artist.  Miss Erma Clanton, who was my mentor, and then I was honored as well.
Speaker 1: And approximately the year?
Speaker 2: Oh that, 1989.
Speaker 1: Very good, next.
Speaker 2: Okay.  That's my mother and father.  On the left is my father, and on the right is my mother.
Speaker 1: The year?
Speaker 2: I guess this was '72' [1972].
Speaker 1: Okay, next.
Speaker 2: In 19... and what does it say on there, 1950?  And this is my mother's... Nelson's Kindergarten graduation class.  I was five years old.  And I can name some of the children on there.  I won't name all of them.  But I--
Speaker 1: Where are you?
Speaker 2: But I will point to--I will say that I am on the back row, the tallest girl on the back row, that's me.  Yes, that's me.  And that's my mother on the far left.  That's me, I'm going to point... that's me and that's my mother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's Miss, what was her name, Miss...  Oh, Lord... I can't remember her name.
Speaker 1: Go ahead.
Speaker 2: That's a picture of me with my first born, Joshua Benjamin Nelson Malakebu.
Speaker 1: What year was this?
Speaker 2: Nineteen Seventy-Nine [1979].
Speaker 1: Go ahead, next.
Speaker 2: This is Rev. George Washington Nelson, my grandfather, my father's father.
Speaker 1: About what year is that?
Speaker 2: He was born in, I need to see...  I think it says when he died, I don't know.
Speaker 1: About how old was he?
Speaker 2: He was born September 17, 1860.  He died July 26, 1936 in Ripley, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Next.
Speaker 2: This is Mary Frances Fitzpatrick Nelson.  She is my father's mother.  And I do not have her date of birth.
Speaker 1: Go ahead, next.
Speaker 2: My mother's grandparents.  I'm sorry, my mother's--
Speaker 1: Parents?
Speaker 2: Wait a minute.
Speaker 1: Can you give me the identification?
Speaker 2: Okay. These are my mother's grandparents, Richard Boyd and Susan Gracie Boyd.  And they were the parents of Lois Ophelia Boyd Brown, who was my mother's mother.
Speaker 1: Okay, great, next.
Speaker 2: Okay.  That's me in the office of Federal Liaison.  I was a lobbyist for the state of New Jersey.  And that's a photograph of and blacks and women in New Jersey State government.
Speaker 1: Do you know the year?
Speaker 2: That was in 1976.
Speaker 1: Next.
Speaker 2: Okay.  This is a picture of the FireHouse Community Arts Center of the Memphis Black Arts Alliance at 985 South Bellevue.
Speaker 1: Alright.
