Story_ID: 15022
Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson.  I'm the interviewer.  Scott Stearns is the videographer.  Larry Crowe is the observer and Peggy, Peggy--
Speaker 2: Wortham.
Speaker 1: --Wortham is the observer.  I'd like to have you start out by stating your name and spelling it for us; and giving your date of birth.
Speaker 2: My name is WELLINGTON E. WEBB. W-E-L-L-I-N-G-T-O-N  E. "capital" W-E-B-B.
Speaker 1: And the "E" stands for what?
Speaker 2: Edward.
Speaker 1: And your date of birth?
Speaker 2: February 17th, 1941.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: June 20th, 2002
Speaker 2: (laughs) June 20th, 2002.  I know that part.
Speaker 1: And, the location where we're at?
Speaker 2: Room 350, City and County Building, Denver, Colorado, City Hall, Mayor's Office.
Speaker 1: And, your profession?
Speaker 2: Mayor of city and county of Denver
Speaker 1: Would you say, you say your profession also would be that of a politician?
Speaker 2: No, I would say I'm a public administrator.
Story_ID: 15023
Speaker 1: I'd like to know what your favorite food is.
Speaker 2: My favorite food.  It depends on my weight.  But I'm really kind of a "meat-and-potato" guy--so, fried chicken, potatoes, green beans, corn.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Favorite time of year, fall.
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Hawaii.
Speaker 1: Favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Favorite phase--
Speaker 1: Phrase, phrase or saying, if you will.
Speaker 2: Favorite, phrase--
Speaker 1: Or saying, yes.
Speaker 2: I don't have one.
Speaker 1: No problem.  Okay, do we want water?
Speaker 2: We want water.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite phrase, Peggy?
Speaker 1: 'Stay in your lane'. No. (laughter)
Speaker 2: (laughter) that's--
Speaker 1: (laughter)
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's the one for this quarter.  Stay in your lane.
Speaker 1: (laughter)
Speaker 2: 'Someone else is working on that'.  'Don't come in here telling me about who-shot-John'.  'Stay in your lane'.
Story_ID: 15024
Speaker 1: Then, can I ask you about your father, again?
Speaker 2: Okay.  My father's name was Wellington Marion Webb.  Actually, his name was Marion Wellington Webb.  And he didn't like the Marion, cause he said he got teased.  'Cause he thought it was a girls' name.  So he changed it, and made his, first name his middle name and his middle name his first name.  He went to high school in Englewood, in Chicago [Illinois].  But his roots were actually in Birmingham and Brighton, Alabama.  His mother, Gertrude was part Cherokee and part black.  And the man she married, William Webb, was a tailor, in Birmingham.  And a graduate of Tuskegee [Institute, Tuskegee, Alabama].  And I had a chance to read some of his love letters to my grandmother, and he was a very eloquent Booker T. Washington-trained spokesperson.  And it was one of the prized possessions of my dad.  My dad worked-worked odd jobs through high school.  Then he went to work.  Left high school and joined the Civilian Conservation Corps.  And naturally, with the Civilian Conservation Corps, he got a job working for the railroad.  And I think he got a job working for the railroad cause he fit the mold of what the railroad wanted at that time.  They wanted brown-skinned men, not too dark, with straight hair that were articulate.  That were willing to be adventurers and ride the rails from one part of the country to the other.  And he certainly fit that, in terms of handsome in nature and a, and a hard worker.  And what he did also was to work his way up from working in the dining car to where he eventually ended up working in the club car.  Matter offact, that's how we ended up coming to Denver [Colorado].  He was a--Chicago & Northwestern has a railroad that used to go from Chicago to Los Angeles.  The Chicago crews would come to Denver, and lay-over in Denver.  And then a Denver crew would get on the train, in the city and county of Denver, and then the name would change to the "City of Los Angeles."  And they'd go to Los Angeles [California].  There would be a Denver crew, and then they would go to Los Angeles.  The train would turn around, the train would come back, and then the Denver crew would get off and then the Chicago crew would get on, and then they would go back to Chicago.  And so after my parents divorced, I'd take the train every summer.  So the train leaves at five, gets into Union Station in Chicago at about eight o'clock in the morning.  And then it leaves the other way as well.  My father had a sister, who died when he was about eight.  He was born--his mother was approximately forty years old before he was born.  And so he was really an only child.  And he was a warm-spirited, friendly, liked people, semi-gregarious, very likeable, very humanistic, very compassionate, real sensitive.  And he retired from the Chicago & Northwestern after forty-one years of working on the railroad.  By that time the railroad had changed, because then the Chicago & Northwestern had basically become more of a commuter rail system going up primarily through Wisconsin and Michigan.  And I had done some of those routes with him, as a kid, remembering the names of the towns that he'd call off, in terms of:  Oshkosh, Racine, Madison, Milwaukee, and then go on up to Green Bay [all Wisconsin], and then he'd turn around and come back.  Later, it was obvious when trains were losing money, they started cutting positions.  So that most of the black employees were let go and they put in vending machines, because the vending machines were cheaper than hiring help.  Then he ended up finishing his last few years as a janitor, working for Chicago & Northwestern.
Speaker 1: Through what--how old were you when he died?  When he--
Speaker 2: I was actually; I was auditor for the city [of Denver].  It was about 1988, 1989.  So he had a chance to see me progress the political spectrum.  He was a kind gentleman, but not real book-educated.  But he was one that knew a lot about, kind of what was going on in his own world.  And he also had certain traits that we still marvel at, and my brothers and I would joke about:  no matter what the weather is, or was outside, he had to go to the, down to the corner to get a Chicago Defender, a Chicago Tribune and a Sun-Times.  And we would always wonder why he never had the papers delivered?  And he said that the guys down there needed to have a job too.  And if everybody has the paper delivered, they can't get--he doesn't work.  But he was a true Chicago person, loved the city; would never leave Chicago.  And for him Chicago was big city, big buildings and he was very proud of the city.
Story_ID: 15025
Speaker 1: You know the name Wellington Webb, it's such a rich, sort of classical sounding name.  Do you know its origin?  I know he had the Marion, but--
Speaker 2: No, I think, I think, I mean, you know this is certainly conjecture on my part.  I think that from descriptions of my grandfather and the few times I met him, he was a very educated person.  He was a graduate of Tuskegee [Institute, Tuskegee, Alabama].  From reading his letters, the vocabulary indicates he was well-read and well-educated.  And I think when he thought of the name, "Wellington," he thought of a--it was a special name.  Now when I was growing up, I detested the name.  Because it also would denote teasing, from other people, until I got big enough to not be teased.  And then when I played sports people never called me by my first name.  Because it was much too long to say, "don't shoot that shot from that far out," or, you know or "go rebound" or "do this or that," it was easier just to call me by my last name.  But, of course, now, I love the name.  It's special.  And it, and we write it everywhere we can.  And were making people remember it.  And it's something that--it's a gift; a gift from my father who saw his son exceed what he never dreamed would be possible.  I was struck by looking at a birth certificate that, even on birth certificates when from Cook County Hospital [Chicago, Illinois], because it--not only did they write either "colored" or "black," but then they also write whether the birth's legitimate, and they have a box that says "yes" or "no."  And then he had a part-time job working at a drug store.  And so they mentioned the part-time job, but they didn't mention the part where he worked for the railroad.  When I shared that with him before he died, I remember how crushed he was.  And I asked him, because I was just talking to him about the railroad, and how it was.  And he was talking about how difficult it was and how sometimes some of them felt like they sold out because they didn't do more.  That even when they went to work, even for those that worked in the dining car, when it was time to eat, they had a black curtain that they'd put up in the dining car and they'd pull it across.  And the black employees that would--even the ones that cooked the food would eat on one side.  And the white employees, and the conductors and others would eat on the other side to keep them separate; building the hierarchy, of who's in charge on the train.  But the traits I picked up from him was his ability to get along with people.  Both, for he and my mother both were that way.
Story_ID: 15026
Speaker 1: Now let's talk about your mother.  Give her name and, you know, what you know about her.  Where was she from?  Her--
Speaker 2: Well, my mother's name was Mardina Williams.  She was the youngest of three daughters.  The oldest was named Vernadette and the one in the middle was Frances.  They were the daughters of Helen Brassley-Williams and George Williams.  Their lineages goes back to my grandmother.  The grandmother is the matriarch of this family, to this day even though she's not been around since '78 [1978] .  The references all go back to her.  She was a graduate of Dillard University [New Orleans, Louisiana], back in the early 1900s.  As my wife would say, she had a type of Southern gentility, with arms-distance, of what was allowable and what was not.  A very strong disciplinarian, a very strong believer in education.  After graduating from Dillard, went to Mississippi, met my grandfather, and they married.  Educationally--married beneath herself.  They moved to Chicago [Illinois] after giving birth to two girls, Vernadette and Frances.  Vernadette was older, sickly, always thought she'd die of a heart condition.  She actually died of lung cancer from smoking cigarettes.  The second girl in the middle was Frances, who was "fire and brimstone," who was in the middle and fought to protect the older sister, as well as fought to protect the younger sister.  They were both born in Moss Point, Mississippi, which is a town right next to Pascagoula.  Which is where Ingalls Shipyards is, which builds ships out of Mississippi for the United States Navy.  Mardina, my mother, was born in Chicago [Illinois].  And I love the fact that she was born in Chicago.  Stunningly attractive, eye-stopper, and since my grandmother was an educator and also a seamstress, and when she couldn't get a job teaching school, she made all their clothes.  And having three girls in the household, it was not unusual to have young men coming by, so, on any given weekend, John Johnson was there, which he'll attest to, to this day.  Also, Nat King Cole would come by.  I mean it was just, what young boys in high school did.  They go to the house where there are young girls.  And so my mother was very gregarious, very pleased with herself.  And my grandmother sent her to Pasadena Junior College [Pasadena, California].  And at the time she went to Pasadena Junior College, the person that was there--obviously, was Jackie Robinson--was in college there.  Because they were from Pasadena.  And his older brother was a track star, and so was he.  So she was accustomed to being around athletic stars, and this and that, and with the thrill of Chicago & Northwestern railroad cars brought her back to Chicago.  In which, Mardina and Wellington were then married.  And then, and then along came this Wellington.
Story_ID: 15027
Speaker 1: Now how many siblings do you have?
Speaker 2: I have four brothers.
Speaker 1: Can you give the birth ranking?
Speaker 2: The brother next to me is Joseph.  And his name is Joseph Webb.  Then next to Joseph, in the middle, is Ron Crowell.  And the two younger brothers are Charles Devereaux and Michael Devereaux.
Speaker 1: All boys?
Speaker 2: All boys.  She always wanted a girl.  And after the fifth, she quit.  She said it wasn't meant to be.  And my grandmother always wanted a boy and had all girls.  And so, that's kind of how fate works.  There's a ten year difference between my brother Joe and I.  And so with a ten-year difference, for ten years, I was the only child.  And so, and I have those traits as well, of being spoiled.  Being the only child on both sides of the family.  Both on my father's side as well as my mother's side.  And, and so I had the best of everything.  We lived at 62nd & Prairie [Chicago, Illinois], we lived in Morgan Park [Chicago neighborhood].  So if my father and mother couldn't afford what I needed, my grandmother would make it.  And so I was always well-dressed, well-groomed.  And did pretty well in school.
Story_ID: 15028
Speaker 1: Now, when you were, you were twelve, right, when you moved?  From Chicago [Illinois], but I want to go, I want to get before the--
Speaker 2: Well, I actually moved, I moved twice.  We moved twice.  The first move, which, the first move, was to Denver [Colorado] to spend a--spend some time with my grandmother, which I did.  And as I look back on it, obviously, I did that because my folks were having trouble.  And I spent a semester here, and then went to school in Chicago.  The elementary school was named Oakland Walk.  It was down right around, at the time, right off of Ellis.  Because at the time we lived around 33rd, 35th & Ellis, somewhere.  Around there where, you know, the hospital now is.  Michael Reese has taken over a lot of that--Michael Reese Hospital has taken over a lot of that property at this point in time.  So my, my mother and dad decided that, because my mother was also very conscious of wanting material things.  So she said, "We need a house."  And my grandmother said--told my dad, "We need a house."  So my aunt, who, who went to DuSable and Wendell Phillips; had joined the service, and dropped out of school.  Joined the service, came back, was married and both her and her husband (unclear) GI Bill.  So a lot of people in Chicago during that period of time, decided to move to Gary [Indiana], where they were buying-where they were building all these little houses in Gary for the GI Bill, for all these veterans to come back.  So my mother then-my aunt gave my mother her GI Bill for my mother and father to buy a house which they did, on 17th--1711 Carolina Street, Gary, Indiana.  And then they bought one at 2211 Tennessee, in Gary.  And so then we lived in Gary, and I stayed there for about three years.  And then one night I woke up, my father was on the road, and I couldn't breathe.  And my mother held me in her arms, propped up, sitting between her legs, until we could get to a doctor.  And then we got to a doctor, and they started giving me shots about ten minutes apart, and then they said I was asthmatic.  And then after that it was the "trips."  Then she took me to the Mayo Clinic; then she took me to Arizona; then we went to Mexico, and then we were trying to find the right climate for me.  Because it was clear I couldn't live in Gary.  It was also clear I couldn't live in Chicago, because, during that time period, in the summers--and it still affects me some to even this day--this time period, with the high humidity and pollen count.  In those days they used to repeat:  how many polio cases they're going to be; and how bad it's going to be for ragweed/pollen; if you got any kind of respiratory diseases.  So then, then I just finished the sixth grade in Gary, at Pulaski Elementary School [Gary, Indiana] and did very well there.  At that point in time, my folks divorced.  And so it was a question of who was going to Denver?  My grandmother had left Chicago to kind of start her own life.  She said, "My kids are raised; they have their own families; and Wellington's gone to this place where he changes trains, and says it's a nice quiet town; be a great place to new start."  And she was very active in Chicago at the Liberty Baptist Church, and Reverend Jackson.  She talked about she headed up all these programs and so she moved to Denver.  And said that she wanted--going to have a new life by herself.  And then, so then all of a sudden, here I came-and my mother.  And later my aunt, and then, you know, and then we kept coming.  So she didn't exactly get what she had planned on.  But--so then we came to Denver, and then I started the seventh grade in Denver.  And I didn't particularly like the transition.  And at that point, not only was I still sickly, I was real thin, I had doubled--I had skipped the fourth or fifth grade.  Because my mother thought I was so smart, if I took some test, I didn't have to go to some grades.  And so I skipped one grade, so then that-so I ended up graduating from high school, I think I was sixteen-and-a-half or something like that.  Which was not good.  But to make a long story, short: it--then I came to Denver, I was twelve.  And then Denver became home, except school is out in June, you pack your bag and you go to Union Station.  You take the train to Chicago, that leaves about four in the afternoon it gets into Chicago the next morning, my dad would meet me at the--my dad would meet me at Union Station and we'd go to his place.  And his mother lived on 64th & Champlain.
Speaker 1: Do you have many memories of the Chicago/Gary years?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I have more memories of the-obviously of the Gary years than the--I have memories of the Chicago years, the Chicago years in the summers--less growing up.  But I have memories of the Gary years.
Speaker 1: Can you share a couple of memories?
Speaker 2: Like, like what?
Speaker 1: Any you can choose.
Speaker 2: We lived at 1711 Carolina.  The family that lived across the street was named the Thornton family.  My best friend at the time was named Dudley Thornton, who now lives in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].  And his older brother was named Gene Thornton who lives in Milwaukee [Wisconsin].  The Thorntons had, it was either sixteen or seventeen kids.  And I never worried about getting beat up, because Dudley was my best friend.  If you beat me up you had to beat Dudley up, and he had sixteen brothers and sisters.  They were the largest family in the neighborhood.  And I remember going to the-we went to a church on Virginia Avenue.  It was a Baptist church.  I remember going through, learning all the things about cub scouts and what cub scouts do, and that kind of thing.  I remember the sand.  And, and I remember the games were different.  Baseball was the sport, and that's primarily what we played.  When we came to Denver, we played basketball.  So it was kind of a different deal that was kind of a transition.  But I just remember traveling a lot with my mother and my father.  Because when my father would be running on the railroad I'd try to go with him, sometime when he'd go out.  And then my mother, when it was discovered I had asthma, she was always trying to find a cure, for the asthma.  And so we'd do-we were always trying-she said, "I think we're going to have to move to Arizona."  So we'd spend time in Phoenix. Then she'd say, "Oh, we're going to go to the Mayo Clinic to see if we can find a cure for this."
Speaker 1: She was pretty aggressive with, with your care.  I mean she was willing to take you and do anything.  At this point you're still the only child, right?  Sort of?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, at this point.  Now do you remem--
Speaker 2: No she was--no, she was aggressive with all of her boys.
Speaker 1: Do you remember your first asthmatic attack?
Speaker 2: Yeah, real clear.
Speaker 1: But the--it was frightening though, wasn't it?  No?
Speaker 2: It was like someone sitting on your chest, you can't breathe and you think you're going to die.  And you don't know what's going on.  And I remember--what I remember is my mother holding me in between her legs, because I could breathe a little better if I was sitting up: because I could not lay down and breathe; because I'd choke to death.  But it was--and then I remember going to the doctor the next day, and getting shots.  And then, later on in life, when I would-when I was in my teens-well not quite my teens--when I would come to Denver and come back to stay with my dad, sometimes I'd get so sick, that one summer he sent me back to Denver early.  Because I couldn't--I couldn't take the humidity and the pollen and the, I guess the soot and dirt from the steel mills.  It was just not healthy for me.  And the view was always that you'd outgrow it, and in Denver was the best place.  And so people here in Denver said, "Well how'd you get to Denver?"  I said, "Health, respiratory problems."  I had two choices, Arizona or Denver, and I didn't know anyone in Arizona, and my grandmother lived in Denver, so it was an easy choice.
Story_ID: 15029
Speaker 1: Your grandmother played a very special part in your life.  Helen.  What?  I--
Speaker 2: Helen Gamble.
Speaker 1: Gamble.  What you-was her other name Williams?
Speaker 2: Well, her first husband's name was Williams.  And, when she came to Denver she married a gentleman by the name of Gamble.  And so most people in Denver refer to her as "Mrs. Gamble."  And she was a stickler on that.  She didn't--we were often struck by, when we first got active in politics, if someone younger--and normally they were white--would come and say, "Helen could you--"  And she would turn to me and say, "She just lost my vote, and every other black person my age."  Because she said, there's a familiarity, you don't speak to people older than you are without refer--giving them the dignity of calling them Mrs. or Mr. or--and she was--and so basically, I mean it's clear in hindsight.  Basically, all the dreams and aspirations that my grandmother had for her three girls, she put in me.  And that--and so--and since I was here, then she forced me in doing the things I didn't want to do.  So she'd force me into being in oratorical contests, that the American Woodmen would have; or she'd force me into going to a Sunday school I didn't want to go to; or she'd force me into singing in the junior choir, that I didn't want to go to; or she'd force me into all these things I didn't want to d--go to.  That was, frankly, training me for experiences that I could use later.
Story_ID: 15030
Speaker 1: Yeah, to do a lot of detailed research work it takes time-you know for some families it's like--
Speaker 2: And then some things, you find things you didn't know--you didn't want to know (laughs).
Speaker 1: Or the old folks tried to keep away from you (laughs).
Speaker 2: That's right.  That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I found out my grandfather's name had been changed.
Speaker 1: From what to what?
Speaker 2: Well, his name was George Williams, but his grandfather's name was Hubbard.  And they changed the name--he changed the name because he didn't like the name of the white person that had given him the name Hubbard.  And so when they--so it got to a certain period and he said, "I don't have to have this name, 'Hubbard', I'm just going to change it."  And he changed it to Williams.  And so then his son became a Williams. And then my grandfather was George Williams.  But when we started tracing it, we ran into--I ran into barriers, in terms of, trying to trace it.  Because it just kind of dropped off.
Speaker 1: And how did you find the story out?  Someone told you?  Or no?
Speaker 2: Talked to some of his relatives, that were elderly.
Story_ID: 15031
Speaker 1: I wonder what sort of sights, smells and sounds you think back to what your childhood would remind you of that.
Speaker 2: That's an interesting question.  Sight.
Speaker 1: Sights, smells or sounds, yeah, all three of them.
Speaker 2: Sounds of Chicago [Illinios].  Sounds of the 'El'.  Sounds are of getting of at 35th & Shields, to go to the ballpark, to see the White Sox play.  Sounds are getting off on Addison Avenue, but make sure you get back on the South Side before dark.  Sounds are, as a teenager then, going to the Regal; to see Lee Morgan and Wayne Shorter playing after a movie.  Sounds are trying to sneak in the Persian.  Sounds are trying to go to the Tivoli Theatre.  Sounds are the noise, traffic.  The sight is flower pots, with flowers on small window ledges where people don't have much of a front yard, but they're all sitting on the porch because it's too hot inside.  Sight is, you're either on the porch, or you run with your group.  And do silly things, as young boys will do.  Sounds are knowing when to pay money, and when not to pay money, if you get stopped by a group larger than yours.  Sight is, not seeing any white people, except police.  Occasionally, maybe in a grocery store, but not many.  Smell, don't have a lot of sense of smell.  The sounds are visiting public places--museums, aquariums; and go to every sporting event, every sporting event; and sounds of the crowd, and the cheering; and the sounds of waiting for Ernie Banks or Gene Baker or Minnie Minoso, to get an autograph after the [Cubs or Sox baseball] game.  Sounds are  the Kansas City Monarchs are in town and I'm wondering why Satchel Paige runs so slow. I didn't know he was ninety years old.  Smell, on occasion--being in a small kitchenette.  And my younger brother and I helping my grandmother pull up the--take all of the bedding off the bed.  And, and then putting the mattress over here, and then putting paper on the floor, and then putting the mattress on top of the paper, and then getting the spray out so you wouldn't get bit by bed bugs.  Sight is if you go down to the bathroom, that's shared on the second floor; make sure you bring back the washcloth, the towel and the toilet paper, which I forgot to do the first day, and it wasn't there when I went back.  Sounds of watch--sight is watching my father learn how to drive a car, because he didn't need to drive one earlier because everywhere he went, he took a-the el or the bus.  Crowds of people getting off work, with big bags that have been doing domestic work all day--going home tired.  And the sound of getting the best malt shake you can get, from 63rd & Cottage Grove, at Walgreen's.  Or going into Union Station and getting celery or carrot juice; because my dad thought that was kind of unique.  So when I'd come during the summer, before we'd get to go to his place, we'd always stop and get juices.  Because he thought nobody else had that.  He said, "There, see you're in Chicago now, we've got everything."  So you'd get carrot juice with celery juice or any kind of juice, now, that you get at these fruit juice places; it was kind of before its time.  Smell, I'm not big on smell.  I'm pretty observant, though.
Speaker 1: That was wonderful! Mayor, that was nice.  And it's so, it's so strongly Chicago.  That was--
Speaker 2: It's, it's going to somebody's house, and, and you can tell in the first minute:  whether they're close or not.  Because if they're close, they give you everything.  They don't have much, but, whatever they have you have.  And they'll take you in the back and you can always drink more than you could eat, though.  Whatever there is to drink, you could--drink with you all day long.  But they might go out in the kitchen and eat one-at-a-time.  And then going to church on Sunday and some of the most peculiar looking people have the greatest voices you ever heard.  And then I remember the evangelical tents, down near the lake, where the Oral Roberts types would come in, and I remember then, my grandmother and my father's mother was gone take me to see if they could "pray" the asthma out of me.  And I ran before it was my time--for that man to grab me, and pray for me, because I was scared.  But it's--and I remember hearing stories about where you don't want to be caught, or you don't want to go.  "Don't be caught in Cicero!"  "Don't get caught on the North Side, late at night, by yourself."  But you could get anywhere you want to go on the 'El', or the bus.  So I have--I mean, I have lots, strong--I guess those are strong visions of Chicago coming up, it's--Gary, I remember more sand.  And it was-and everyone in Gary works in Chicago, but they live in Gary.  And you take the South Shore Train, and you go from, go down on Broadway, you get on the train, you go over to Chicago, and then you get off and then get the El, and you go to work.  But mostly they're all veterans, and-I have less personal memories, except some memories of-cause after high school, I went back.  Because my grandmother also had another rule.  Once you turned-once you left high school--you got three choices:  you went to work and paid her, rent for staying there; 'cause she would tell you she's a widow; or you went to college, and she would help you; or you went in the army; or you got out.  And my attitude was, "Nobody's going to tell me what to do."  So she put my suitcase out.  And I knew what I was supposed to do. So I decided to go to Gary and--or Chicago, and stay with my dad and my aunt.  And that was interesting, cause then I ended up doing odd jobs, working at filling stations and stuff like that.  And going out, getting paid on Friday--broke by Monday.  Looked at people going to work in the steel mill.  Matter-of-fact, I even went and applied for a job.  Naw, take that back, I went to take someone else to apply for a job with the steel mill.  I just wanted to observe to see what it looked like.  When I looked at people coming out of there that were aging before their time, I said, "I don't want to do this."  And, and I said, "This is a rough way to live."  That's when I decided to go to college.
Speaker 1: Now, I have one question.  When you came to Denver, to live, it must've been a start-a stark contrast to the Chi-
Speaker 2: Right and I was very quiet and introverted when I came.  People were different.  Kids were different.  The different community, kind of the outsider coming in.  Kids here were, you know, they'd gone to elementary school together, and so it was a different, and then if you don't know anybody, and then you're staying with your grandmother, and you're taller, your clothes don't fit right, you're skinny, you, you know.  So you look funny in your clothes, and that, it was, the transition, I think, was very difficult for me.  And I was pretty much a loner.  And then I started palling around with the folks that lived in our neighborhood.  Which was kind of a mix of "working poor": German, Polish, Black and some Hispanic and some White.  And, because at the time, I didn't understand that Denver had Black neighborhoods too.  But they weren't defined as clearly as they were in, in Chicago it's like, we're two neighborhoods.  You lived on the South Side or you lived on the West Side.  And relatives on the West Side didn't have a lot to do with the ones on the South Side, and vice versa.  Here, it was like, this group, 32nd Avenue going this way, they were perceived as more, a little more poor.  This group here was perceived a little closer to manual.  And this group over here on 22nd, 23rd, where Wilma grew up, were really the kids that were kind of doing better.  You know, both their kid-both their parents normally were working.  Down here, maybe one's working, or there's one-more single families, a lot more poor.
Story_ID: 15032
Speaker 1: So, I didn't really particularly care for school, and my grades showed that.  They--from coming from the East, where they were like all As.  So then they dipped, and each year they got worse.  To the point, I practically considered dropping out of school when I was a senior, in high school.  A couple of teachers kept me in.  Well two teach--well a couple of--three things kept me in one, I didn't know where I'd live, because my grandmother would put me on the street; one--two, I wanted to play basketball; and three, I had a couple of teachers, that kept--they were encouraging.  And never gave up on me.  And to me, those are the real kinds of teachers.  Because they're the ones that see something in kids that other people don't see; and they're just not trying to push them through.  'Cause I'd go to this one teacher's class and do very well, and go to other classes and I'd either sleep through it, or I'd join boys in the back of the room, that were either shooting dice or, or playing the dozens, or whatever was appropriate at the time, in that particular class, where the teacher didn't care.  Because she'd just tell you to read a book report and turn it in at the end of the month, end of the week or something like that.
Speaker 2: Did you--were there other people influencing you, in high school, besides your friends?
Speaker 1: No, no, primarily friends.
Speaker 2: Now.
Speaker 1: And primarily, just people based in the neighborhood.  And I think that was always the, that was always the pull and tug.  Between my grandmother and my mother.  Because now I had two or three younger brothers.  And my grandmother was always insistent when I went to Chicago to see her side of the family, who were all on a track for education, to become either architects or lawyers or this or that.  And my father was saying, "I got to pay this money to court every month, and this is my time, and we're going to the ball game, or we're going here, that, and I'm going to spend that time.  I mean--you know, conversely, they both were correct, in terms of trying to do what they do--wanted to do.  Because life sorts itself out.  And it was, and so for my dad, it was, he was able to see his boys do more, and to supercede what he was able to achieve.  And they carried some of his traits with them.
Story_ID: 15033
Speaker 1: Now when you, you said that you basically, you know, you graduate.  You're not--you decide to come, to be with your father in Gary [Indiana], that's not, you know, it's not what you think it's going to be.  Right?
Speaker 2: No, Chicago [Illinois] was awful.
Speaker 1: (laughter)
Speaker 2: I was eighteen, I was eighteen years old and I thought, you know, I'm going here and-- You know, and, and my grandmother knew, she, she, she had a great sense of what was, what life was about.  And so, she was never opposed to me leaving.  Matter of fact, I think she even encouraged it.  She was hurt, and very disappointed.  But she encouraged it.  Just to get me away from my own environment.  Because she knew when I got there, my father runs on the road, so he's gone, you know.  So what am I gone do?  So then obviously I gravitate to Gary, and my aunt--the one that was the flamethrower, she's just like my grandmother.  So you can stay there a week or two, and then, she owned a filling station and another little business.  You know, you wake up and you've got coveralls on the end of the bed, and, you know, expect to be at work at 7:30 in the morning.  And pay for the food you already ate.  So I mean it wasn't a lot of--and there's no debate about it.  But liberal in terms of when you get paid it's your money, and you can either bank it or spend it, and put some money away, will help you buy a car.  You know, the goal is, your grandmother wants you to go to college, your mother wants you to go to college, but your moth--you've got four younger brothers and can, you know, and over time, all of us--three out of four--you know, and Joe superceded us all, by going to law school; and becoming a lawyer.  Michael was studying to be a doctor.  He had a double-major in biology and chemistry.  And Charles didn't like it, and he chose what he wanted to do was to be an electrician.  But, you know, all five of us did okay.  But after seeing the steel mills, seeing, seeing, seeing how quickly people were aging, I decided I wanted to go to college.
Speaker 1: And how long a period was that, you think?
Speaker 2: That I lay out?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that you lay out.
Speaker 2: Two years.
Speaker 1: Two years, okay.  So at twenty-so what makes-
Speaker 2: So when I went to college, I was actually only a year ahead of the class that--because I had already--because I doubled in elementary school.  So I actually ended up going with the class that I just about would have been with, age-wise, anyway.
Speaker 1: Now when you,you also had said that it wasn't good that you were promoted.  Was it just the whole thing--?
Speaker 2: The social adjustment.
Speaker 1: --or just too young?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was too young.  I was too young and too protected, and, you know, and I came from a family where my--there weren't any other kids around.  So my conversation was what adults talk about.  I didn't, I mean it's, the conversation that my mother and father talked about.
Speaker 1: So you were one of those, you know, old, older young people?
Speaker 2: Right.  Right (simultaneously)
Speaker 1: Right, right.  Okay, I understand.  Now what were you thinking you want to become, though?  And did do you want, do you want, did you--
Speaker 2: What did I want to become?
Speaker 1: Yes, because it's, you know it says that you had thought about teaching, or I mean, but--
Speaker 2: Well, early on I had no thoughts about what I wanted to be--at all.  I mean, what you tend to want to be, is what your parents tell you, what you want to be.  And so my aunt, she lived in Gary, so you wanted to be an engineer.  Because you're supposed to go to Purdue [University. West Lafayette, Indiana] or Indiana [University, Bloomington, Indiana] or something like that.  Or my grandmother thought it'd be great being a teacher, or something in higher education.  And my mother wanted me to be successful, whatever that was, my father wanted me to be successful, because they weren't demanding, that way.  Their big deal was, don't treat people--don't think you're better than other people.  My grandma's deal is, you are better than other people, and you better act like it.  You come from certain, a certain kind of stock, so you're gone be--even if you don't want it, it's gone make you do what you're supposed to do.  So you get all of that pull, you know, that push and pull.  But my grandmother's real interesting because, when I needed one class to graduate, and I asked her to go up and talk to the teacher, and she did.  And she came back, and I said, "What do you think?"  She said, "You should've went to summer school last year."  So she, so she would not take my side.  She made me go to summer school, to graduate, which I hated.  But then she would also bribe me.  She'd say, "Well, you know if you go to college, I'll give you a brand new car."  Or something like that.  And so, I said okay.  So I went, before I went to Gary, I went to CU [University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado] , went in the front door and went out the back door.  And go hang out with my buddies during-then after a while she said, "You know, you don't really have to go through this charade, I know you're not going."  So I think that's about the time I decided to go back East, and see what it was like living there for a while.  Because I wasn't happy in Denver [Colorado], and I didn't enjoy high school at all.  Everybody I was interested in, socially, the girls were older, and they appealed to me, and I appealed to them.  And then the people that I hung with weren't really on an academic track.  The saddest story is, one of the people that wanted me to drop out and take a job, working for the city and county of Denver, he said, "I can get you on,"  and, "making seventy dollars a week."  Then I thought about it, and I said, "I better stay in, because my grandmother would kill me.  Plus, I think I still might want to go college," because I want to play basketball, because I really didn't get what I wanted to do in high school athletic-wise.  And, but I felt I still could do it.  So ironically, when I was sworn in as mayor, I saw that same person, here.  His job was sweeping the floor, on the third floor.  Here in the city and county building, right outside my office.  And when I came up the steps, I was saying to myself, how fortunate I was, that I didn't drop out.  And I waved to him.  Because I didn't want to--I didn't want--I was always worried, worried about not embarrassing him.  And then later, we hugged each other.  Later, at a private setting.  But, but I never decided what I wanted to be.  Until, I think it was my junior year, in college.  And then I decided, I think I want to be a teacher.  I said, "It's probably about time--"  No, I think it was my senior year.  "I think it's about time I decide what I'm going to-what I want to be."
Story_ID: 15034
Speaker 1: Did you play basketball when you were in college?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I had, you know, a fairly successful career in junior college, and played well, and after transferring to a four-year school.  And so, I enjoyed that.  But then I was also married at the time, and then that-to my first wife.  And then that took away some of the joy, of-because now, life is a lot more serious.  So it's, so it's going to college, but now you're going to college because you have to work. And it's no longer the you know, not as much frivolity as it was before.  And, and I didn't expect two children.  So, but I always worked hard.  I mean, I mean me working hard has never been, I've always worked sixteen-twenty hours all the time.  So I would work in order to make money during the summer.  Before my kids were born, I worked as a hospital orderly at the university hospital.  And then I'd work as a janitor, at the Hilton [hotel].  To make money to go to, to pay for our place, and then the twins were right behind each other.  So when the doctors, in those days, they'd just do the heartbeat.  They only heard one heartbeat.  And so one kid came out twenty minutes, and then all the fathers looked around the waiting room, and everyone had a kid, and then they s--the doctor said, "Well somebody's got two."  'Cause he ran back down the hall.  And then we figured out it was that my first wife had just given birth to a second child.  And I already pre-programmed myself, intellectually, that god would not do that to me, because I couldn't afford it.  You know I said that, "I'm going to college, I can't afford two kids.  I can't afford one."  And, and two kids came.  One slept in the daytime, one slept at night.  And they had two different formulas; so it was a rough time for awhile.  But then I went back to school, and I was determined to graduate, and I did.  And that was my goal, and, and I achieved it, and my grandmother was there to see me graduate.  And she achieved her goal.
Speaker 1: That's--so you grew up a lot in that period of time?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And I--and, and she knew that if, if, if the first one graduated, the likelihood is the others will follow in the older brother's footsteps.  Which they did.  And, and then the desire's always been to, we're very competitive.  We're very competitive, and we're very clannish, and there's a lot of us.  And so, whatever it is, we are, we're very supportive, even though we're competitive.  And so I knew that, I knew when I graduated, I knew Joe was gonna graduate.  And then Joe graduated, I knew Ronnie was gone graduate.
Speaker 1: And did you ever think you were going to be sidetracked during that period?  You know have a, you know being a (unclear) newlywed with two kids and, I mean 'cause that, that took a lot of motivation to do, at that point in time.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I never thought anything was going to stop me from doing what I wanted to do.  I mean it was just, it was just another brick, to carry.  But it was not that it was going to deter me from-- I'm not real compassionate about people telling me what they can't do.  If one job doesn't do you get two, if two don't work you get three.  You do what's necessary to be successful.  You do what's necessary to win.  And so, and, and I did the things I had to do to achieve-to graduate.  And then after, after my divorce, when I was working on my master's.  Wilma remembers, I would drive, I would work in Denver, and I would drive to Greeley, three times a day--no, three times a week.  During the morning to go to class, which is sixty miles.  And then come back, and go to work, and then had a night class--one day a week.  And so I did that for a year.  Because I was determined to get my master's that year, which I did.
Speaker 1: Now look, did you go straight from your bachelor's to your master's?  Or did you rest in between?
Speaker 2: I, I--I took a break in between, and, and that was kind of a finding myself, too.  Matter of fact, no, that, that, that part is, upon graduation--nineteen, in December of 1964 to 196--probably '66, '67 [1966,1967]--was probably the biggest growth spurt for me.  Because people that you would talk to that knew me in high school, would tell you, "He was quiet, shy, never said anything, sat in the back of the class."  And then when they saw me in 1972, I was a different person.  Nineteen, Dec--I graduated in December of '64 [1964].
Story_ID: 15035
Speaker 1: I had a tough time getting a job.  I thought I was--I thought that I was cursed.  Because I was taught that if you go to school and get an education, that there'll be a job waiting for you.  There wasn't.  And then the jobs that were waiting, I either didn't have enough experience.  They said, "Well if you had more experience, we'll hire you."  And then other jobs I'd apply for, they said, "you have too much experience."  And then some jobs I applied for, I couldn't get.  And again, my grandmother came to the rescue.  She did two things.  First thing she did was-she cut an ad out of a paper.  And it said, "Apply if you're interested in being a neighborhood aid training worker.  Denver University [Denver, Colorado] will pay you X amount of dollars, and train you to work in a poverty program."  And I said, "I got a degree, I don't want to work in a poverty program."  She said, "You don't have a job.  You go out there and apply anyway, and see what happens."  So I applied.  And they took me in.  And they paid us like five dollars an hour.  And we had black history classes, and, and how to work with government, and this and that.  And they were all community activists.  And I never told anyone I had a degree.  But they liked me, because I came from the neighborhood.  And I never told anyone I had a degree until it was time to graduate.  So that program, so while I was doing that, then my grandmother called the mayor of Denver.  She was a committeewoman, and the mayor's name was [Thomas] Tom Currigan, and he--she said that, "You should go down there and apply--tell him you need a job."  I said, "But I don't know him," she said, "It doesn't matter.  I know him."  And I said, "I'm going to feel uncomfortable doing this."  So I came down, met with the mayor, and told him, said I felt real uncomfortable being here.  And I told him I'm trying to find a job, and he said well, you know, he'd see what he could do, and--
Story_ID: 15036
Speaker 1: She was the vice president and class president, you know.  Yeah, honor roll, this and that.
Speaker 2: (laughs)
Speaker 1: I wouldn't--we've laughed and said, "You probably wouldn't have talked to me in college either."  And I said , "Probably wouldn't have."  I was a jock, and then I was doing well, an I was a, I hung out with jocks.  And you were with all the goody two-shoes people, over there.  We wouldn't, you know, no we wouldn't have talked to you.  We wouldn't have invited you to the party either.  (laughs)
Speaker 2: But she looked pretty good when you, when you (unclear) (laughs)
Speaker 1: That's right.
Story_ID: 15037
Speaker 1: Okay, when you were saying you went to the--
Speaker 2: I went to see the mayor and I was trying to explain to him what I had been through.  And I said, you know, "You s--you folks talk about, you go to these schools and tell people to get education.  And I did that.  And then, after I got my degree, I couldn't find a job.  I said, "I applied to Denver public schools--twice."  And I told him they wanted-I wanted to be a social studies teacher and I wanted to be the basketball coach at Manual High School.  I knew exactly what I wanted to do.  They told me, "You got to wait until you're forty years from now, before you can be a coach."  And I, and then they, and I said, "Hell, I may not even want to teach then!"  That was the wrong answer.  Because they want you to l--sign up, 'til you end--'til you get your pension.  And I was so naïve and honest, I was just being truthful.  And I said, so then, I went to the district, where I student taught, and then started substitute teaching.  And, but they only pay once a month.  And I couldn't live from check to check.  So I quit my teaching job.  And a friend of mine, that was my roommate in college, was working at a potato chip factory.  And that's when I applied, went out there, and I had my suit on, and I applied for a job at the potato chip factory.  And then they put me on this assembly line, checking the potato chips--or something.  So then I figured that out pretty well.  I said, "Well, hell, if I want to move up, I got to get someone else to do this job."  So another friend of mine was teaching.  And he was starving to death too, Sam Beatty, so I told him that this job we get paid every Friday--$175 a week something like that.  So he came out in his suit and applied for a job.  So they gave him my job, and then they promoted me to drive the forklift truck.  So I could drive around in the truck all day.  Which was--and I--and I told [Denver, Colorado mayor Thomas] Currigan, I said, "It's embarrassing.  I got a college degree, and the best job I can get is driving a forklift truck, at a potato chip factory.  Matter of fact I got mad and quit once.  Then told some lie and came back to work, and the man felt sorry for me.  Took me back to work and fired the other guy that told me about the job; because he had done something else.  But he didn't think, he, he saw something in me that he didn't see in any other kid.  So I said, "This is awful."  So then he told me--he didn't have anything to do with the school board.  He had nothing to do with that.  And I saw him on a Wednesday, he had a contract to teach at Sparta Junior High School, then with public schools on Friday.  And I told my grandmother, "I don't know what happened, but his politics must be something."  And, but I was humiliated by the experience.  I thought, "Well I ain't sure I want to do that."  So she said, "Well, you need to talk to some more people."  So I went down and I spoke to the head of the civil rights division.  He told me-said, "You grew up in Denver, if you had grown up down South, you'd known better.  Just because you get a degree don't mean you get no job."  And he was hard on--you know--Jim Reynolds was hard on me, Warren Alexander.  So then they sent me over to see the head of the labor union, Eric Roth.  And he was interesting.  And we've been friends ever since that day.  He said, "I'm going to show you how power works."  Says, "You want a job?"  He picked up the phone, he called the guy that was over a poverty program, said, "I got a young man sitting in my office, I want him to start work on Monday."  They said, "We don't have a position."  He said, "You create one."  And I want him to be paid the same salary as everybody else.  And on that Monday, I went to work.  And he says, "The power--there's a difference between perceived power and power.  Power is you can pick up the phone, or you can tell somebody to do something and it happens.  All these other people are perceptions.  You go talk to them, they give you a business card, but they can't get you a job."  He said, "You remember that."  And he says, "And I've helped you get a job because I used to want to teach, and they didn't let me teach either."  And then finally, they made me a teacher.  And then I made, and then I was the head of the teachers' union for the schools, until I got elected as president of the union.  And so then I went to work at this poverty program.  And then from the poverty program, then I left there, and that was a good experience.  My first five cases were a cop burglar.  I was the counselor.  Now I'm twenty-something years old, and the cop burglar is forty.  A woman on AFDC [Aid to families with dependent children], who told me her boyfriend stole her check, and I was so stupid, I went over there to get it.  Somebody else didn't have any food, and I went there and went and took groceries out of my apartment--my house, they had more groceries in their house than I did.  And so, and then I started going to these community meetings with all these activists.  I started hanging out with some other folks that would become life-long friends that were running some of the Hispanic employment programs.  And we'd be eating jalapeno peppers and drinking beer, and I started getting a sense of--much more of a sense of their culture from a different, different perspective.  And, but then I also knew that's not where I wanted to end up.  And this program was a forerunner of the Neighborhood Youth Corps.  Because the labor department used this as a training ground for what they later turned into the Neighborhood Youth Corps.  So a friend of mine said they're hiring at Fort Logan Mental Health Center.  So I said, you know, that might be something decent.  They said, "The problem is, it's a twelve month a year job, working with the state.  So you don't get a summer vacation."  So I went out and applied, and during the interview.It was kind of strange because one kid jumped up to hit this woman teacher, and I jumped up and grabbed him, and pushed him back.  And he was about a twelve, thirteen-year-old.  Then the woman teacher was angry with me.  She said, "You know he was just seeking male affection."  And I said, "Well, I guess he got it, but maybe--so you're saying I should have just let him hit you?"  And I said, "Well I don't understand this, but, I might be interested in working here anyway."  And so it was a very therapeutic, open community; where we were dealing with domestic, we were dealing with mostly disturbed kids.  So they took me on as a teacher.  And I stayed there three years, and really enjoyed it.  And then, Denver Public Schools called me, while I was there and asked me--they said, "We called your name, you were supposed to report to work today."  And I guess that was one of the first real forks in the road I had to take.  And I said, "I decided I'm not coming."  They said, "You mean you're not coming to this--this job after you've gone through all this to get this job?  You're not even in elementary school.  They done already promoted you to middle, middle school, you're in junior high.  High school is the next step."  And I said, "No.  You really didn't want me.  And if this is what it takes to get a job in the public schools, I don't want it.  I'd rather work here, working for the state for less money, with no vacation; where I'm wanted, as opposed to going somewhere where I don't think you really want me."  And so that was my f--only opportunity to teach in the Denver Public Schools.  I passed it up.  But I wasn't--I felt good about it.  And I sent the mayor a note telling him, whether he interceded or didn't, I appreciated him for the time.  But I also said if I was ever in a position to help people, I'm not going to just shift them off.  Because you never know what's going to happen to them, or who they're going to be.  But I didn't, I didn't like that experience at all.
Speaker 1: What did your grandmother, what did she say about that?  When you turned--
Speaker 2: Right after the decision?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Kind of proud of it.  Yeah.
Story_ID: 15038
Speaker 1: So, out of that experience, working, you know, with the poverty program and with the, the emotionally disturbed children.  Did you find that you felt your life had a meaning at that point?  That it was sort of--I'm just--  Because you said (unclear) I grew up--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was trans--yeah, I was transitioning.  Now I was a dad.  I was raising two kids.  I suffered the agony of losing a daughter.  There was three, I one night, woke up with convulsions, and died the next morning.  And no one knows what happened.  I went through working at the poverty program and the mental health center.  And that's when I decided I also wanted to get my master's degree.  And then I was really into black consciousness, as well.  Now my grandmother was worried she was going to lose me again because now the wardrobe has changed.  Joe was wearing black corduroys, with black glasses, black leather coat.  We all know we was in the [Black] Panthers.  Of course he won't admit to it, right to this day.  I was wearing blue jeans, and a black sports shirt, with a medallion around the neck.  We were all wearing big afros.  And she said, "Well we're about to lose him."  And then Reverend Nathan Phillips--I'm still working at Fort Logan during the day; but again, now I'm looking for a night job.  They advertised, 'they're going to create an ORC here'.  So I go over and apply because they said they're looking for teachers.  And so, Reverend Phillips gets up and says, "Well we need teachers today.  We got Dorothy Wiggins is going to take English, but we need someone to teach history."  And nobody's hand went up.  So I raised my hand.  They said, "You taught history before?"  I said, "Yes."  "You taught African American History?"  "Sure have."  "Well, we need you.  You start in--the program starts in two months."  And so I, so I said, "How much does it pay?"  So I figured out how much it paid, so now I can work at night at ORC, and Fort Logan during the day.  And I got, now two and a half months to teach-learn black history because it wasn't a lie, because I taught history in social studies.  But I didn't teach African American History.  So then I decided to go down to the library, and I asked for the black history section.  They had none, because in the '60s [1960s], there was no black history section.  So they sent me to the sociology section, where all the books by E. Franklin Frazier and Jesse Bernard and all the black sociologists, marriage and family, Franz Fanon.  So I checked--started checking them out; and started then compiling notes.  And I started going to black Bookstores, and then, I started reading everything Malcolm ever wrote.  Then I started reading everything that Baldwin ever wrote.  And I started reading Franz Fanon.  Then I started reading [W.E.B.] DuBois, and the debates between DuBois and Booker T. Washington.  And during the course of the summer, I must have wrote--read a hundred books.  And then, time September came, I was ready to teach black history.  And then I started bringing in guess speakers. So then, I brought in members of the black Panthers; I brought in black School Teachers; I brought in employment specialists--and all of that started adding to the repertoire of being able to teach this subject; but not as well as I thought I could.  But I was better than I thought I was.  And so, then Wilma and I were going, going together and I took a-and I guess I've also been, very much, a risk-taker.  I guess if there's one thing, I've always taken a lot of risks.  So I decided I was tired of Fort Logan; I was burned-out.  So a guy said he's starting a program at CSU [Colorado State University, Fort Collins, Colorado] Manpower Laboratory.  And I said, "Now that's a good program for me to go to work for CSU, work on my master's; but I also need some extra money."  So a friend of mine said that they were looking for an African American history teacher, at the University of Colorado [Boulder, Colorado].  So then I took all my books, and asked my girlfriend if she would type--help type up my syllabus. And so Wilma typed up my syllabus.  And then I submitted my syllabus.  And then--that was about 1969, 1970.  They had just hired a professor from Chicago [Illinois], named Roosevelt Hill.  And he had hired a deputy named Cecil Glenn, who was from Chicago, who preceded him by two weeks.  Roosevelt Hill took a group of black students to Canyon City [Colorado] to visit with black inmates.  And on the way back from Canyon City, they stopped in Colorado Springs [Colorado] for gas.  Roosevelt Hill took out his state credit card from the university, and gave it to the white attendant--who was a soldier at Fort Carson, he was about twenty-two years old.  He said, "I can't accept this credit card.  I think this card is stolen.  You're going to have to pay in cash."  Roosevelt Hill said, "I'm not paying in cash," and walked to the car.  The attendant took out a gun, and shot him in the driveway of the gas station, and killed him.  Police come, students all converge in Colorado Springs, it's a Mobile oil station.  Make a long story, short--Roosevelt Hill had only been on the job a week, Cecil Glenn had only been there--I think--three days.  Cecil Glenn was then promoted to the--be the director of the black Studies Program.  I then took over as the Counselor for the black Studies Program--which was the job Cecil had--in addition to teaching African American History classes at night.  And then, Wilma worked at Mobile Oil company.  And then we began a boycott of Mobile Oil company.  And the--and the soldier from Fort Carson was exonerated, because Roosevelt Hill walked away--as opposed to waiting for police to come to sort out the shooting.  And so, all this stuff is now happening in a real short period, everything is converging at one time.  I'm teaching black history.  I'm teaching--I'm a counselor, at the school.  I'm working on a master's degree, and I'm working for Colorado State University.
Story_ID: 15039
Speaker 1: And something else is now transpiring--five of us now, began meeting on Saturday mornings to figure out how we can take over the city.  Four young lawyers: Dan Muse, who had just graduated from DU [University of Denver, Denver, Colorado] Law School, from Columbus, Ohio; Ray Jones, who had just graduated from the University of Colorado, Law School--no, from Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], who was from Pueblo [Colorado].  King Tremble, who had just come back to the city, set up a law practice, who was from Denver, who graduated from Washburn University [Topeka, Kansas]; and Norm Early, who had just moved here from Washington, D.C., and had-was taking a job in the District Attorney's office.  And so we all thought we needed to get involved politically.  So we decided to:  one, we should go to the National Black Political Convention in Gary, Indiana--that was 1971 [sic. 1972].  And, in 1971, I came back from the Black Convention, told Wilma [Webb] that I was going to run for state representative.  So in 1971 we got married, and I ran for [Colorado] state representative.  And we merged two families--her two kids, and mine.  And I ran for political office and Dan Muse--who, in 1991, I appointed my city attorney.  In 1991, Norm Early and I ran for mayor of Denver.  In 1991, King Tremble was one of the supporters of my campaign.  In 1991, Ray Jones was now Colorado Court of Appeals judge.  We--everyone talked about their long-term ambition.  And mine was to only be elected state representative.  And so my campaign was based upon kids coming out of CU [University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado] from my black studies class; the four people around me--Wilma helping, helping type and draft up speeches, and make sure they're grammatically correct, even though they may be rhetorically correct; and my grandmother was still a committeewoman in the Democratic Party.  So, I ran for state representative, and six of us were running for the office.  And it took twenty percent--you had to have twenty percent of the delegates to get on the ballot.  And, so I figured, with five or six of us running, if I got 85 percent of the vote, I ran unopposed.  So they went out making speeches all over town, and I targeted all the delegates.  Norm was the district captain, Dan was campaign manager, and King was--did the strategy, and we went, and I spoke better than they had anticipated and won the crowd over.  And we shot for 85 percent , and I missed it.  I got 82 percent  so I ran unopposed as a freshman.  And no one in the city or community knew who I was, except all of a sudden there was a whole gist of--I'm not sure how they-we were perceived as semi-militant, but not all the way.  But we were also intellectual, because we all had degrees, and we were very uncompromising.  And so, yeah, that was great fun.  Because I had only been to the state capitol twice in my life, before I ran for office.
Speaker 2: You know that's pretty meteoric--the whole thing.  I mean, I know that you're involved-that a lot of people get involved in activism, you know, around issues.  But to have that, I mean, you decided- what did you discuss it with Wilma?  Did you discuss it with her?  Because she--
Speaker 1: Kind of.
Speaker 2: Because it wasn't like that was what you had started out being when you guys got together.  I mean, you were active.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was a activist.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: She was actually more active.  'Cause she was active, (simultaneously) with schools.
Speaker 2: With schools?
Speaker 1: And, I wasn't really into that.  Cause I-we were-I was t-we were talking about economic power: giving people jobs; and boycotting banks; and going after police.  And half the things they go after me for now, as mayor.  But it was, it was a different, it was a different era.  And, and so it's like we came out of nowhere.  Yeah, I guess it is, if you kind of look back on it.  Because actually, I guess, I think my divorce was final in 'six--'68 [1968].  In less than three years, I went from just working as a teacher, to teacher/community activist/elected legislator.
Story_ID: 15040
Speaker 1: That's what I'm saying.  There were a lot of activists out there, that didn't necessarily--even anywhere get near that route.  Your grandmother, I'm assuming, was helpful, though?  Would she help?
Speaker 2: Aw, she tied up all the old people.  She said, "This is my grandson, and you've known him."
Speaker 1: Did you learn anything from campaigning that first time?  That has stood you throughout your, you know your--
Speaker 2: Well, I learned things campaigning from my grandmother, who was a committee woman.  She--we all had to do literature.  You know what that would mean--means, right?
Speaker 1: (unclear) Tracts?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Right.
Speaker 2: But she does it the old-fashioned way.  I mean you don't just take the stuff and put it in the door.  You knock on the door, and you talk to the people.  And she was elected committeewoman, and she had me elected--you know, because I was staying with her.  And, and she didn't like the way I did it; she fired me, and then appointed Joe.  And I didn't know she couldn't fire me.  And then she fired him, and appointed; she didn't like Ronnie doing it.  Then she appointed Michael.  So, I mean, she had always had one of her grandkids with us.  And then, matter of- fact, Eldwin Caldwell, the senior [Denver, Colorado] city councilman, who was, was prominent in the day; Charles and Michael were always passing literature out, and working his campaigns.  So we grew up working campaigns.  And when she got dumped once, when it was a Hispanic period, that they were trying to take over parts of the city, where they had a lot of Hispanics, and they beat her in the caucus.  I watched her go door to door.  And in the primary election, she beat somebody:  two hundred and twenty, to thirteen, or something like that.  Because everybody knew her.  Because in her neighborhood, she was the one--if you wanted somebody to stop the liquor store; or if you wanted someone to s--to put up the stop sign--all the neighbors called her.  And she'd organize a meeting with all of her little sewing buddies.  She'd be on the sewing machine, and then she'd be on the phone, talking to people.  And she knew 'em all--knew their kids, knew their grandkids.  And so I was around that, so they all knew me, but I wasn't political.  I mean I didn't, you know, so when I started going to meetings, I think she was relieved when I ran for office.  Because initially, I said I was going to run for State Senator.  And she said, "Well, I think that might be a little pushing it."  She said, "I think you ought to just come down a little bit, and run for the lower office.  Then you can work your way up."  And so I said, "Okay."  I said, "I'll bow to your--your wisdom."  But I was a good organizer, cause I always knew how to count.  And I knew where the numbers were.  And, and so, they were going redistrict, and so we had another legislator that was going to move into the area I wanted to run in, so I got all the committee people together--most of them were over sixty, and said, "This guy is an incumbent.  He's important, he's smart; so he should run in the new district; and you should allow someone that doesn't know the ropes to run in this district.  Why not give someone new a chance?"  Obviously, I was talking about myself.  And so all the committee people said to the incumbent--Jerry Rose--they said, "Jerry, we think you should run in the new district.  And leave this district for someone in the district to run from."  Which I did, and, and won, and so we all had a big celebration.  And it was--so it was interesting.
Speaker 1: That must have been pretty fantastic.  Only probably beat out by you being-winning your election as Mayor.  That must have been--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, when you--so you, you know, in Chicago, when someone, they have to go down-state.  And I was thinking here, at least it's in the--
Speaker 2: Right.  It's in the--Right.
Story_ID: 15041
Speaker 1: But you--what is that experience, what was that experience like?  In, in your--in the House, how many seats are there?
Speaker 2: Sixty-five members in the [Colorado] House of Representatives, thirty-five in the Senate.  And you get tested real quick.  And they didn't know me.  I mean, I was thirty years--I mean I was thirty years old.  Thirty or thirty-one, I had just gotten elected.  And so, I was a young kid.  You know?  And I, you know, and I'd wear a bowtie.  And then I had, but my afro was still out here.  And so, but I was kind of awed by it.  But I'm a quick learner.  And so I learned-you know, I sat, and I watched.  Where people lined up, and who lined up behind who, and why.  And so I was there three weeks, and George Brown, who was a state senator, said that--we were talking about Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.], and he said--I said, "Well, I ought to do something."  And he said, "Well put in a resolution, to make it a holiday."  So I did.  And the last paragraph said "go on record as supporting, those groups that want to make Dr. King's birthday a holiday."  And so I introduced it.  And the next thing I knew, the Republican floor leader came over and said, "Take that out; or else I'm going to kill your bill--your resolution."  And I turned to the guy next to me, I said, "Can he do that?"  He said, "Yeah, he can do that."  Because what he'll do, he'll g--he'll do like this, and all the Republicans on his side will vote "no," and your resolution will go down.  I said, "To hell with him.  If that's what he's going to do, let him vote it down.  I ain't taking out nothing!"  And I got very ethnic--quick.  And so, then I got up, and I gave this great speech.  And there was a friend of my grandmother's, named James Chappelle--he was about eighty years old, who always wanted to be a professor--worked as a librarian.  And he sat upstairs, and he watched me.  And he asked could I come by his house that afternoon.  I went by his house.  He said, "That was probably one of the greatest, one of the best speeches I've ever heard by a freshman legislator.  Given at the wrong place, at the wrong time, on the most ill-timed occasion I've ever seen.  And I'm so embarrassed; I didn't know what to do."  And I said.  And then I just looked at him, and he looked at me.  He said, "That's a speech for the neighborhood, that's not a speech for the legislature.  You're supposed to carry them up above, to another level, to make them want to vote for it.  But you can't be talking about:  the pains of--with the fangs of racism have reached into the appendages of this chamber, and all that."  I mean, I was rhyming, and I thought it was a great speech.  And Chappelle told me how bad it was, and I was embarrassed.  And I think they--I don't know if--I don't think they killed my resolution either.  I think it passed by one vote.  And I learned something then:  just because somebody tells you they can do something, doesn't necessarily mean they can.  It's about how much--it's about your will, it's about how much will you have to win; and whether your will is going to be stronger than somebody else's.  And, and so I only carried three bills that year.  One was on the, the King Resolution; the second bill was to eliminate achievement, what achievement test.
Speaker 1: Standardized?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Standardized achievement tests.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Because I said they were culturally biased.  And the third bill I had was to provide insurance for buses that were carrying kids, for the purpose of integration.  And, and I didn't say nothing else the whole session.  I was quiet.  And then, one day a reporter did a-wrote a big piece on me.  Because I got up, and lectured the legislature on the death penalty--opposing it.  And I guess what they were struck by, is, I hadn't said anything, for like, thirty-five days at the microphone.  And then I got up on the death penalty and spoke for about thirty-six minutes.  But I enjoyed it, but I was starving to death.
Story_ID: 15042
Speaker 1: And I didn't realize at the time, because I was pretty naïve, I questioned tenure for teachers.  And I kept wondering, being a teacher, why I didn't get the teachers' support.  And because I said, "There's some bad teachers out there.  And they shouldn't have protection, they ought to be fired!"  And, you know, the Republicans liked it, Democrats hated that I was going against the grain.  Because I never--I was just going based on gut instinct, of what my experiences were.  And, and so, when, so then I created this Tuesday Night--I said, "Most of the people I'm trying to serve are people that don't know nothing about politics; they've never been to the state capital, and they're not going.  What we do, really, they don't know what that means."  So I opened my office on Tuesdays, from seven to nine p.m.  Next door to a real estate company, (unclear) my campaign office.  But it was for anybody that came by that would have a problem.  And, and I was really proud of that.  Now I do that as mayor, too.
Speaker 2: On Tuesday nights?
Speaker 1: Once a month.  We call it "First Tuesday."  From five to seven [p.m.].  Anybody who wants to come in can come in and see the mayor.  Don't need an appointment.  They line up in chairs out there.  And I have two staff people in here, we take their issue, we write it down, we work on it right then.  We have people from the Congressperson's office, we have agency heads, and their issue is to deal with them.  So if somebody comes in and, and we've had some--all kind of people.  We've had people come in with domestic violence problems, where we find them a place.  We've had people that are homeless, we found them places.  We've had one person, woman, young Hispanic woman--came in and said she was Jesus Christ.  Had another man said, I hadn't seen him, since he did his speech on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial, in August, of '63 [1963].  And I asked him, "Where has he been?"  He said, well, he's been back in many forms, but he wanted to come by and visit me, and I said, "Well Martin, I thank you for being here, but your ten minutes is up."  And so then he walked out, and I figure everybody gets ten minutes.  They can come in and pray.  They can come in and sing.  They can come in and do whatever they want to do.  And after their ten minutes, they gotta go.  No one gets more than ten minutes, 'cause I got other people lined up out there.  But that, but what we've done here, comes out of the experience of when I was a [Colorado] state representative.  Because to me, government has always had to be accessible.  If it's not accessible, it's not worth much.  The reason most people don't vote is because they can't touch it--they can't feel it.  Half the people that support me, they don't vote for nobody else.  They vote for me because they're voting for Wellington, because they know where he is, they know where he lives.  They know, on Friday, they can see him in Pierre's.  They know where they can see him at a jazz concert, or a ball game.  They might see him trying to play basketball, with people younger than him.  They know where he shops.  I mean, it's, it's not a--they'll see him at some society things, but they also know he's touchable.  And to me that's what politics was about--and is about.  And so the whole issue of, of opening the office on Tuesdays, as a freshman, was, it was to me very important.
Story_ID: 15043
Speaker 1: And then, and--but there it was difficult because, the only salary, then, I had coming in, was my legislative salary.  Because I couldn't keep another job.  Because I, now I have my master's degree, but I'm not working at it.  And so, so now it's 1974, and Watergate's taken place.  And I think we're gonna take control.  So me and my friend, Rubin Valdez, who I met during the poverty program, is now running for Speaker of the House.  If he would get elected.  And so then I said, "Well I'm going to be-I want to chair the Democratic Caucus, and I also want to chair the Health Welfare Committee.  Because I want to do healthcare.  I don't like education anymore."  So I said, "Now I want to become an expert in health."  And, and so then, in 1974, we took control of the Legislature.  The Republicans had control of the Senate.  I went over to the Senate, and I went to my counterpart, Ted Strickland, a conservative Republican, and I said, "I've got a offer--a deal for you.  There are some bills that aren't going to be controversial, you put your name on it, and I'll put my name on it, and we'll pass those automatically.  That way we don't have a fight.  And then the ones you-that I pass out of my committee, that you think are controversial, you tell me.  And then the ones you want passed, that are controversial, you tell me.  And then we can kind of protect each other.  And we'll also get bills passed without being obstructions in the process."  So I got about twenty-five bills passed through the Legislature, that year.  But I also learned something.  Everybody doesn't come from the same area.  Because there was a legislator I couldn't stand, from Arapahoe County.  I said, "He's right-wing, he's bigoted, and I think he's crazy."  And I was telling that one day, and I said, "You know what?  I bet he thinks the same thing of me.  I think he thinks I'm a communist, I'm left wing, and I'm crazy.  But I represent the district, from which I come.  And he represents the district, from which he comes.  So what I've got to do if find some common ground, that we can work together on.  And, and see if that works for both of us,"--which it did.  So we agreed to disagree on ninety-five percent of the things, and five percent, we were able to agree on passing some stuff together.
Story_ID: 15044
Speaker 1: And then, in 1976, a peanut farmer [ref. to President Jimmy Carter] came here.  And he invited--so, some kind of way, I got an invitation.  And I went down to meet Jimmy Carter, at a hotel.  And I came back, and I told Wilma, I said, "I think this guy is gone be President."  And she said, "You've got to be kidding.  Nobody heard of no peanut--ain't no farmer, from Georgia, gone get elected president."  I said, "I got a hunch, he is."  And so, I wrote out a check, for fifteen dollars, and sent it to Georgia.  I--unbeknownst to me, they were just starting to computerize campaign finances, So if you're running a national campaign, every check that comes in, is noted--the date and time, of who the supporter is, in that particular state--the first check Jimmy Carter received, from the state of Colorado, was mine.  And so then I started getting all this other mail, now.  And so, so to make a long story, short, I ran as a Carter Delegate and then there was another decision that had to be made.  Jimmy Carter's family came out, and the governor [Richard D. Lamm] had supported somebody else, but now he was supporting Carter.  And I said, "Well, you can't stay at the governor's house, you'll stay at our house; and watch the debates."  And so his aunt and daughter stayed with us.  And the governor wasn't happy.  But I said, "If I'm in charge of this, I'm in charge of it.  Can't be no confusion about this."  So I was chairman of the Carter Campaign Committee.  And so then I contacted Hamilton, and Tim Craft, who were running the campaign.  And they said, well, they were going to send someone in from South Dakota to run the campaign.  And so I said, "Well we don't like outsiders here."  I said, "I'll drop out of the campaign, because you don't need me."  So they said, "Well we got a deal for you.  You run the campaign, or we'll send someone from South Dakota."  I said, "That's a deal, I'll do that.  I ain't never done it before, but I'll do that."  And then I asked my brother, Joe to run my campaign, for re-election as [Colorado] state representative.  So then Joe ran my campaign, out of my office.  And then I went down, and ran Carter's campaign, simultaneously.  And obviously, Carter got elected President.
Story_ID: 15045
Speaker 1: We [Democrats] lost the [Colorado] legislature.  And then I had a decision to make--do I want to take a job in Administration or do I want to stay in electoral politics?  And, and so they asked me, what-did I want to come to D.C.?  And I said, "No."  "Absolutely not!"  They said, "Why?"  I said, " 'Cause I'm not sure you're a two-term deal.  I'm not that comfortable; and number two, I don't want to leave my political base.  I want to stay here."  And so I decided to stay in Denver.  And they asked me what Cabinet Post do I want?  And I said, "HEW [Health Education and Welfare]."  And they said, "You don't want HUD? [Housing and Urban Development]"  I said, "I want HEW, because I chaired the Health Committee in the Legislature, and now I know everything there is about health."  I introduced legislation to provide for treatment for alcoholism and drugs, group health insurance policies, everything that Medicaid, Medicare, all these programs--so then I went to HEW.  Which, again, was good for me.  Because I ended up working for Joe Caulifano; who, I think, is probably the best damned Manager there was in the federal government.  And I didn't know at the time, all of the times I just about got fired--for not listening.  He was coming to Denver, and he said he wanted a military person as the driver of the van.  And I said, "Okay."  But I didn't do that.  I put this college professor, that I had working as an intern, as the driver--because I wanted him to report back to me, what they were talking about in the van; as if they were going to say anything in front of him.  Given the fact, he's black; so that was kind of stupid.  But I, but I hadn't turned forty yet, so I was-could do that.  So then, when it was time for Joe Califano to do his speech, he did his speech, and came down--out another exit.  And where was the professor?  He was upstairs, listening to the speech.  Califano comes down, gets mad, pissed off.  So he gets in a taxi and drives off.  And then the staff with him calls, and says, "Boy, you in hot water!  The Secretary came down and there was no driver with the van."  And I said, "Aw, Lord!"  I told Wilma, "I'm in shit!  I--I'm messed up now!"  Why the hell didn't he stay with the van?  So the next day, when I had my meeting with the Secretary, he came in, and I said, "Now he's either gone jump on me, or I'm gone jump him first."  And so, I said, "I know you're upset about last night, about the driver not being with the van, but I didn't know what that was all about anyway."  And then he said, "All right.  Don't--you don't need to go there.  But I wanted a military person with the van because they--by training--don't leave their position."  I said, "You know I learned something today.  I didn't know that, but you should have told me."  So when I give instructions to my staff, when I say, "Stay in your lane" and "you do such-and-such," and "the reason I want you to do it is because of this."  Because sometimes, if you tell them to do something that doesn't make sense, they're going to do something different.  And he says military people are trained, if you tell them to stay with the vehicle, they're not going to leave the vehicle.  You get somebody with education, they all inquisitive.  They think they go--they want to go hear what you've got to say.  And so, and so, and so then I went to work at HEW, and while I was at HEW, two political things took place, in the city, that were very significant.  The first one was our group had a meeting.  If I go to HEW, who takes my place?  Dan Muse said, "I can't do it, because, my attitude--people won't vote for me."  Norm Early said, "I can't do it, because, I'm--I want to be District Attorney."  Ray Jones said, "I can't do it, because, I want to do-go in the Judicial System."  We asked Wilma to do it.  She said, "Naw, I'm not doing it.  I didn't get into this to run for nothing."  So we said, "King Tremble, you're the only one left.  You got a private practice, so you have to do it."  And so then, King ran, to replace me, as state representative--who was my campaign manager.  And he got to the legislature, and he hated it.  Didn't like nothing about it.  Talked politics all the time.  But he was a "organizer" outside; he wasn't a "server".  So he, he didn't want to do it.  So after he--  But then there was a vacant-a potential vacancy on City Council.  We heard Elvin Caldwell, the senior citizen statesman, was going to leave--resign from the Council.  And all the Whites, who had now moved in the district, wanted Wilma to run against him.  And, I don't know if she told you this--because she's pretty modest about, when people wanted her to run for stuff.  So she said she didn't want to run.  I said, "Well tell them you want to run anyway.  And let's have a meeting with the council."  So then, we had a meeting in Pierre's.  Are you--I don't know if you're familiar; Pierre's is--every city has a black place, where everyone meets.  So the Councilman came out, and we said to Elvin, "This is the deal.  We think you want to run-get re-elected and resign as Councilperson, and the Mayor is going to appoint Hiawatha Davis to take your place.  We think, that democratically, the public should pick who your successor should be, not the Mayor.  Now if you're willing to agree to a Charter Amendment, that allows the public to vote, we've lined up all these young people to work for Wilma, to run for City Council--against you.  And you just got out of the hospital, you got a hip operation, and you know you don't want to run, against her, because you might lose."  Now we knew Wilma didn't want to run anyway.  But then Wilma said, "Well Elvin, I really don't want to run, but I got all these people.  So Wilma--so then Elvin says, "Well if all you want is a charter changed.  I'll go in to ask the Mayor."  And the mayor was--Mc Nichols said, "Why should I give up my power?"  And Elvin said, "Because I've always supported you for the last fifteen years."  So then Elvin--they put it on the Charter Amendment, and it passed.  Now I never knew I was gone be Mayor.  Because if I had known I was gone be Mayor, I wouldn't have taken that position.  Because I would've appointed five council people by now.  So then Wilma, then doe--goes and endorses Elvin, for re-election.  Caldwell wins a s-his election, and then resigns, as was predicted.  His staff-person, Hiawatha Davis, announces he's running for his seat.  King always has wanted to run for City Council; he wants to lead the Legislature.  King now announces to run for council.  And then we recommend and suggest, and coerce Wilma into running for King's seat, for the Legislature.  To keep the--to keep the power in the family.  And then the political base, so that King gets elected to the Council, Wilma gets elected State Representative and I'm at HEW.
Story_ID: 15046
Speaker 1: And then I get sent to Chicago [Illinois].  Carter calls me, and asks me would I go to Chicago to run the campaign.  And I said, "Naw, I don't want to do that.  And so then Tim Craft calls back and says, "What will it take to get you to go to Chicago?"  I said, "Rosalind calling Wilma."  And say, "My husband needs your husband in Chicago."  "And then I'll do it."  And Rosalind called Wilma, and asked if she would let me go to Chicago.  And so then I was sent in to Chicago to help organize a community.  Because they needed someone from the outside.  Because no one inside got along with each other.  And so my first two weeks was spent with coordinating the support of Harold Washington, who I knew from being a former Legislator.  And I said, "Harold, just give me the people you want me to hire."  And I got Sam Patch from Harold, I got Norris Washington from Roland Burris I got somebody from Jesse, who didn't show up for work; a person had just graduated from law school, name Judy Byrd--we made her over a specific part of the campaign; Maggie Williams, who just came in, who ended up being chief of staff for Hillary Clinton--came in as the press secretary; I was the Deputy State Campaign Manager.  And then I had to meet with George Dunne, Jane Byrne, Herbert Mohammad, Jesse Jackson, Harold Washington, South Side Democrats, and the West Side Independents.  And then I coordinated, and then the f-and then the first, then the first big activity was the Mercy--it was the Morgan Park Baptist Church speech, by Jimmy Carter.  And we did it as kind of a "let's try something different".  A Deacon wrote in and said, "Wouldn't it be nice if the President visited our church."  And we said, "Yes."  But the deacon didn't know, when you say "yes," the Secret Service comes, in and takes out the pastor's phones, and put in the red phone.  And that, and that, and so now that--the deacon's now wondering if this is a good idea.  Because now, the pastor has moved out of his study--the Pastor was fine.  The choir loft is now where the press risers are gone be.  He said, "Now you about to get me run out of here."  But when we moved them deacons, and the trustee board--for all the Secret Service staff and other people, in there; he said, "I don't want him here.  Let him go to another church."  We said, "It's too late now.  This thing is signed, it's signed up for, for--to be here at the, be here at the church."  And then, and then we brought a-and then I brought in Coretta [Scott King], to go do the Liberty Baptist street--Liberty Baptist Church; I brought in Muhammad Ali, and he was-that's when he made the quote:  "Carter is the right white to vote for."  And then I brought in--after Ali, and after Coretta--then I figured it was just about time for us to get out of dodge, and get back to Denver [Colorado].
Story_ID: 15047
Speaker 1: Because Wilma [Webb] was running for her own full-term, as a Legislator.  And some people didn't want her to get elected because they perceived her just as a 'wife'.  And they perceived her as a wife, and an extension of me.  And they didn't think that was-they thought it was too much power in one family.  And my view is if you didn't have a problem with the Kennedy's [ref. to the relatives of John, Robert and Edward Kennedy], you shouldn't have a problem with us--it's just a different color.  And then, so then [President Jimmy] Carter loses, and I learned another rule about politics: when you lose, no one calls you, but your wife, you get one phone call.  And then I went home.  [Colorado governor Richard] Dick Lamm called, and Lamm called and said, "Would you take a job with my administration?"  And I said, "Well, I just want to be clear, you know I walked out on you the first time, because you couldn't find the black--  We bought a full-page ad and put in the paper.  And then, the second time, I said, "Well you know I walked out the second time, we boycotted you as well."  So he said, "Well, would you take a job with me?"  And I said, "Give me a number between one and ten."  So I said, "Five."  He said, "Okay, I'll get back with you."  So then Wilma said, "You don't have no job, do you?"  I said, "No."  I said, "You right, I ought to call him back."  So I called him back and told him, "six."  But I told him, I would not take a traditional job.  And he says, "Well, what would it take to get you there?"  I said, "Well, I don't want to do Healthcare anymore.  I've done that Health and Welfare stuff--I already done that.  And education, I done-I don't want to do that.  But you do have a cabinet position, called Regulatory Agencies.  I don't know anything about the business community.  I'd be willing to bet, if you offered me the department of Regulatory Agencies, I would accept that job."  He says, "Well, I have someone in it."  I said, "Well, I guess you have to make a choice."  And so then he called me back, and told me that the person in that job was going to move to personnel, which is a job he offered me.  And I said, "Well no, I'll do the job at the Department of Regulatory Agencies, cause then I can learn about banking and I can learn about insurance, and real estate, and securities, and horse racing.  Because I wont take a job that doesn't allow me to grow.  And he s--so he said, "okay."  And so then I went to work for Dick Lamm, for eight years-seven years.  And learned everything there was about banks, and insurance companies, and security fraud.
Story_ID: 15048
Speaker 1: All of that builds up on a--and then Wilma was still in the Legislature.  And has developed her own reputation of being strong and fiery, and, and after the three occasions, I tried to get the [Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] Bill, and failing.  King tried it once, and failed.  No one else introduced it, until she got elected.  And so when she got elected, she tried it four times.  And she's leery of her own historical importance with the King Bill.  Because she wants to be known for more than that.  But she doesn't understand the importance of it.  Cause she wants to talk about, she was on the Joint Budget Committee.  Well everybody, a lot of people have been on the Joint Budget Committee.  Well I introduced a bill, 'full-day kindergarten.'  Yeah, that was nice.  Well I introduced a bill to give 'subpoena power' to the Civil Rights Commission.  And that's important.  But nobody, got a King Holiday bill passed--the way you did.  And the significance of the bill she passed was that, she didn't compromise on it.  If you look at other King Holiday Bills around the country:  in Georgia, the legislation says, "we will adopt Federal Legislation that passes, making Dr. King"-no, "We'll adopt any federal-any holiday that is adopted by the Federal Government."  Because they couldn't get King's name passed, if it was in the Legislation.  The state of Virginia says, "We'll have a holiday honoring Dr. King, and Robert E. Lee--who was also born on January 15th, and one other person--for our war veterans, of the Civil War."  California passed Legislation that says, "We're going to let all of the kids out on school.  But nothing will close."  Wilma's bill said, "I will accept no more and no less.  I want it the same as what we do for Lincoln, or for Washington, or for anybody else."  And they said, "Well, we don't want to add an extra holiday.  So we'll merge two.  Which ones do you suggest?"  And then they suggested Kenned--they suggested Lincoln and Washington.  And then she said, "I can't think of a President that would want, more than Lincoln that would be happier to have a holiday after an African American.  So there's no increase in holidays.  And then the Republicans said, "Well, we still--it's costing too much money."  So they said, "Okay, we're going to take away: public employees being off on Election Day."  Said, "Fine."  So then it went to the House, and she--we brought Coretta here, and Wilma said, "I want to introduce Coretta Scott-King to the body, and would like her to speak."  And they said, "No."  And then, Wilma took her over to the state senate, and the senate chambers let her speak, and the house chambers did not.  And then in the house, then they passed a bill that says, "We'll vote for Dr. Martin Luther King, only after a state referendum."  And then it passed the House, and went to the Senate.  And then Regis Croft got that amendment off in the senate, and it came back.  And after five years, each year--one year she'd play Dr. King's voice, so that's all you heard; and then she'd call for a vote.  The next year, she brought kids in to testify.  The next year, she had only white people testify.  And then the final year, she had, people from all walks of life come in and testify.  And the people that kept voting "no" just got tired of voting "no."  The same way, that in Birmingham [Alabama], they got tired and-after a while they couldn't take the dogs and the hoses no more.  They got tired of doing it.  And so, it came back to the House, and they called--and then she did-used a Parliamentary Procedure to accept the, to accept the Senate version of the King bill, and call for its re-adoption--before the Speaker could get to the microphone.  And the person that helped her, on the parliamentary procedure, was a-this house Republican floor leader, who supported the bill, and had to take his name off of the bill because the Speaker of the House threatened him.  That if he supported the bill, that they would strip him of his majority leader status, and he would not carry any committees in the Legislature.  And the Speaker said, "King's a womanizer and a communist, and is a disgrace to the American people"--in private.  And so then, when Wilma called for the parliamentary procedure, the Speaker looked to the Majority Leader, who he had already threatened, and the Majority Leader turned and said, "Her motion's in order.  You have to call for a vote."  And that was his way of getting back to the Speaker.  And the bill passed, thirty-nine-with thirty-nine votes, needing thirty-three for passage; and it passed, in 1984--closing down state government; closing down schools; closing down liquor being delivered; with the same rights as, as everything else.
Story_ID: 15049
Speaker 1: So now, so now I'm getting bored with [Colorado] state government.  And--
Speaker 2: Are you bored with, you know, we're gonna have to change tapes.  But are you bored with state government?  Because you're not really at-you're, well, the senate.  You-you were still--
Speaker 1: I'm still at Regulatory Agencies.
Speaker 2: --Regulatory Agencies.  But you are--but you're very act--your--you were working, sort of in tandem with Wilma.  I mean you are as--
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Right.  I'm a Cabinet person.
Speaker 2: You're a Cabinet person, right.
Speaker 1: And, as a Cabinet person, I'm the point person for the administration, on all issues dealing with banking--whether it's branch banking; I'm dealing with securities loans; I'm dealing with savings and loan institutions.  That's where I met Bill Daniels; he wanted to create a children's bank, and I helped him do it.  Now it's a different group of people, I'm in contact with.  I learned about ski lifts, because there's a Passenger Tramway Board.  We had an accident in the mountains.  And I went up to the mountains, and inspected the ski lifts.  I went with bank examiners to banks, to see what they do 'cause I'm not the kind to sit in no office.  I want--when the people go in the field--I want to see what they do.  Civil Rights Division of the legislature cut funding for the Civil Rights Division, because they didn't want to have hearings on civil rights and affirmative action.  And Dorothy Porter, who was a-is the first cousin of Bob Johnson, of BET [Black Entertainment Television]--so Dorothy says, "Well, what should we do?"  I said, "Well,since they cut your funding, we're gone buy some gas, and travel around the state, and talk about: they cut your funding."  Because my view has always been, if you attack us, we attack back, we never retreat.  And so, and so then we went around the state.  And they cut Dorothy's budget some more.  She said, "Well, now what are we going to do?"  I said, "Well, we're gonna go around the state again."  And then they started putting the money back; because they got tired of defending their actions, in some of their small towns.  Because I would never make it ethnic.  I'd make it civil rights cases against the disabled, civil rights cases against seniors; civil rights cases against women--I never mentioned minority one time.  But no, I started getting bored with the executive side.  It wasn't my--I wasn't in charge.  And so then I thought about running for city council.
Story_ID: 15050
Speaker 1: --Constituencies on the West Side.  So, so I, I decided I wanted to do something different.  So a member of the Denver [Colorado] city council said, "You should run for council."  And I said, "That's a great idea."  Even though I hadn't really been here long, in city government.  So I said I was going to run for city council, hadn't even been to a council meeting.  So Wilma suggested, "Have you ever been to a council meeting?"  I said, "No. That is a good idea."  So I went to a council meeting, I sat in the back of the room.  It took about thirty minutes, I came back, I said, "I'm not running for council."  I said, "They talking about trash and they talking about how long it takes to--dog leashes, I said, "Naw, I ain't doing that.  That's a waste of time.  My--I couldn't sit there, with twelve people, eleven people or thirteen people, doing that.  So I said, "Well I still need to figure out, I do want to get back into electoral politics."  So then an Hispanic lobbyist, woman, who used to work for me, and is a friend of ours said, "You ever thought about running for city auditor?"  I said, "No."  I said, "How would you link that?"  she says, "Well it's very similar to what you did at Regulatory Agencies.  Your stint at Regulatory Agencies--the white community is comfortable with you, because they know you're fair.  And if you carry your own constituency, and if you get out of the blocks quick, you might win that."  And so I said, "That's interesting."  So we went to the mountains, and had a meeting, with our political family, it was: Wilma, and Dan, and King, and some of the others--Joe, Vanita and I decided to run for auditor.  But I was helping Roy Rohmer in his election for [Colorado] governor.  And he say, "Well you know you have a cabinet spot, any one you want."  But I decided it was time to leave.  It wasn't anything against Rohmer, I had worked for [Governor Richard] Lamm too long.  Lamm was laissez-faire, Rohmer is a lot more "hands-on", much too much, like me.  We was gonna clash.  So it's best to leave early.  So I decided to run for auditor.  Didn't have nowhere to go if I hadn't won--if I didn't win, it's just, I thought I'd win.  And so we put our campaign together, and, and started campaigning around the city.  Used all of our state contacts from banking divisions, savings and loans, securities, all these different groups.  And got elected auditor, with 64 percent .  And, and put in our Cali--my [Joseph] Califano [Health, Education and Welfare Secretary] management style, of some of the things I learned from--gleaned from him.  Some I gleaned from Lamm.  And some that I developed on my own.  And the auditor was a good training ground to learn the basic infrastructure of the city.  Other people that came into the Office of auditor, they never learned the job.  What they did, they went out and started polit-doing politics.  When I became auditor, the first thing I did, was sit down with the Audit Section:  determined what audits they're gonna do; what's the level of the staff; where'd they go to school; how much experience they had.  Then I went through the voucher section.  Then I went through the payroll section.  Then I went through the computer section.  So I knew every job in the auditor's office.  And then I started replacing people.  And some of the people I brought in, in the auditor's office, are career-service people, and they're still with me today in the mayor's office.  They're still career people.  People think they're political.  But they've been on a extended assignment for fifteen years.  And so what I learned in the auditor's office is: I learned the issues, and then what I did is, I also defined--most people don't want the government not to work; I already knew they-that.  But what they want is if there's gonna be a disagreement, it needs to be issues brokered but not personalities.  And so me and [former Denver, Colorado] mayor [Frederico]Peña differed on hospital policy, and on some cost stuff.  But I never attacked him on things that his predecessor--the previous auditor did to him.
Story_ID: 15051
Speaker 1: And, and so then, I was--went to Detroit.  [Detroit, Michigan mayor] Coleman Young had a fundraiser for me, in Don Barton's building.  And Coleman Young doesn't have fundraisers for anybody.  But he liked me.  Because we--I met him--Coleman Young was one of the people we brought in when Harold Washington was running for [U.S.] Congress.  And I spent time with Coleman and Harold.  And then, I did a fundraiser for Coleman in Denver.  And so, I was going to Detroit, and then [then Denver, Colorado mayor] Frederico Peña announced he wasn't going to run for re-election.  And so then the question was: "Do you run for mayor?"  or "Do you run for re-election as auditor?"  And I said, "Well I don't know how to make the checks out."  Just make the checks out: 'Webb for Auditor', cause we can transfer them.  And then I flew back to Denver.  Wilma was at a--I don't know if she told you this.  Did she talk about the mayor's race, at all?
Speaker 2: She didn't, no.
Speaker 1: She was at a black legislative conference, in St. Thomas [Virgin Isalnds].  And I said, "You need to come back to Denver.  You need to leave there, quick as you can get out of there.  Because I need to make a decision on whether I'm going to run for mayor or not.  Frederico just announced he's not running, and they're trying to get support for Norm Early."  Who was a part of our original group, right.  And she said, "Aw my God!"  She said, "Okay, I'll get out of here in the morning."  And I said, "You can tell Ari too."  And so Wilma told Ari.  And it's about black legislators were all across the country.  And so Wilma tells Ari, tells her not to tell.  The first thing Ari does, is go into the meeting and said, "Got-darn [Denver, Colorado mayor Frederico] Peña's leaving!  And we're going to run for mayor!"  And so, of course, that lasted--that, that's Ari though.  If you tell her, you know you're gone hear it.  So, so then I get my staff--I only have seven political appointees in the auditor's office.  I said, "What do you guys think?"  So six of them said, "Run."  One said, "Run for re-election as auditor."  And I said, "Well we'll discuss it when I get back."  And I said, "The first thing we need to do is put together a campaign staff and try to figure out, who can run the campaign.  So we kept looking for people, and no one would run my campaign.  And a guy came over and told me, he said, "You know I'd vote for you for governor; I'd vote for you for Congress, I'd vote for you for senator, but I cannot support you for mayor--because mayor affects my money.  Because the mayor controls every contract, every bond deal, every thing that goes through the city in Denver, the mayor signs off on.  And with the wink of an eye, or the flick of a head, I could starve for four or eight years if you don't win."  And I said, "Oh, okay."  So then I called this white banker I knew.  And he said, "I'm going to support you.  And I don't think it's a problem with you and Norm Early running, but if that third colored fella gets in there, three of you running is too many.  This town is not going to have three colored fellows running for mayor at the same time."  And I said, "Walt, I don't know what Bill Roberts is gonna do.  But I can't worry about that."  So then, a friend of mine said, "Mandy Grumwall just ran the [U.S. Senate] campaign for Harvey Gant, North Carolina."  So we brought her in.  We brought Mike Donlin, who, she suggested, would be the polling person.  Paid her about thirty thousand dollars to do a poll.  And now I'm looking for a campaign manager.  And the guy that ran my campaigns earlier, Mike Stratton, said, "I got a kid that's a deputy."  So he ask-I asked him how many campaigns he had run.  He said, "Two or three."  Which I later found out, he didn't have--run any.  And then he told me how-and then he asked me how much money I was going to raise.  I told him a million dollars, and I didn't have any.  And he's six foot four, and a graduate of CU [University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado], former basketball player.  And he's an Italian kid from the North Side, and we hit it off immediately.  After we figured out that neither one of us were telling the truth, about his experience, nor my money.  And so they did a poll.  And Mike and I went to one of these 'fix-up' places, where the woman told me the first three things I should do is: get my teeth bonded; I should speak like Jesse Jackson and I should cut off my moustache.  And that's when I left and said, "Jesse speaks his way, I speak mine.  I'm not getting my teeth bonded, the gap in my teeth is me.  And the moustache has always been with me, and I'm not shaving my moustache."  She said, "No person that's ever wore a moustache got elected mayor since 1928," or something like that.  I said, "Well there's always a first."  So then we walked back--Mike and I drove back to my house.  And I walked in--the auditor's office also enforces Davis-Bacon wages, which creates a close relationship with all the unions--so my union guy was there, over the building trades.  Building trades are plumbers, and carpenters, and all of that.  And I looked at him in the eye--cause we would drink together, and I could tell it was bad news.  And I walked in, I said, "Boy seems like somebody died in here, and I think it was me."  So Mandy and Mike Donlan started and they said, "Well, they just finished the poll,  you registered seven percent, and if you're paying us for advice, the best advice we could give you is not to run, you just run for re-election, chalk it up, your time has not come."  And I said, "Any other advice?"  They said, "No, that's about it."  I said, "Well--"  And then the union guy gave me a hug.  And I felt, boy that's like the hug of death, they about to bury me now.  So, they all left, and we waved goodbye, and then [wife] Wilma [Webb] and I went upstairs and didn't sleep much.  And I thought about it, and she thought about.  And the next morning, we got up.  She said, "You know, if you don't run, you can't win."  I said, "Yeah, you know I was thinking that same thing, shit, we ain't got nothing to lose, we ain't never had nothing anyway.  What's the worse thing that could happen?  If we lost?"  Then a police car drives up.  And my brother jumps out of the car--shirt unbuttoned, holstered gun, thrown over his shoulder, parks on the wrong side of the street.  And he comes up to the porch and says, "You've got to run.  We've never run from a fight."  And that's when we decided to run.  Three of us.  So the first thing we decided to do, was get the family together.  So then we started bringing all the uncles, cousins, nephews, kids, and say: "It's gonna be us against the world."  And so then everybody gets on board.
Story_ID: 15052
Speaker 1: So then everybody starts getting on board, that--the family all says, "Yeah, we're gonna do it."  Then we started calling our friends.  And our friends said, "You can't win.  Because you don't have no money.  Norm's [Norm Early] already got all the [Former Denver, Colorado mayor Frederico] Peña group.  He's got more than a $500,000 dollars, in the bank.  And you only got 7 percent  in the polls.  And Wilma says, "I can't believe that he's only got seven percent in the polls."  I said, "I believe it.  Because right now, if all the papers are saying Norm's already won.  What would you do?  He's got the money, he's got everything in his favor.  And the--who's the second person running?  The second person running is a white lawyer, Don Bain, who's a wealthy Republican . All the Republicans are going to vote for him, except the women because he just got a divorce from his wife."  And I said, "The women will never vote for him."  So I said, "Now the trick for me, is to come in second."  So I said, "So then we got to just assemble our people."  So then, so then, I said, "How much money we have?"  They said, "We got about $50,000 total, we spent $20,000 on the poll, so we're down to thirty."  Well, I said, "Okay, so take every dollar we got, rent a campaign office and get telephones.  So at least we know we'll be here for the duration.  And we'll take all the auditor staff--because they're gonna work--because they know that if someone else is auditor, they don't have no job anyway--and then the first thing we'll do is we'll go to the unions."  And we went to the building trades.  And they got all of their retired building trades guys to start making yard signs--for beer, 'cause they didn't have nothing to do anyway.  But sit at home and be mad.  So they'd come over, and they'd make yard signs--with a case of beer, and they'd make signs all day long--we'd buy the lumber.  But we still weren't getting any traction, cause the Persian Gulf War was going on.  And then, some people were saying, "This is a pretty slow race, pretty predictable."  So we did a couple of things  we started drafting what we call 'The Webb Plan'.  And it's pretty boring, monotonous kind of auditor kind of thing, it says, "If you're elected mayor, this is what you're going to do."  And then two things happened that's changed everything--three things really: Ari Taylor, with all her faults, as lucky as there is.  I'd give her $50 to go to a dog track or a horse track, Blackhawk any day.  I says, "First thing, Ari, you're gonna be the person that goes up to pull the name out of the box.  Because it's-the ballot position is determined by pulling names out of a box--hat.  Ari goes out, and pulls my name, number one, so my name appears first on the ballot.  Then the second stroke of luck happens, the Denver Post decides to do a informal quiz.  They called everybody, wherever they are, including the mayor.  We've go questions, how many cabinet departments are there?  What was the size of the budget?  Who's the acting mayor, if the mayor is not in the city?  Now what are those questions?  Every question they ask is what I did as auditor.  I got nine out of elves-nine out of eleven; something like that.  Peña got eight.  Norm and Bain got three or four.  So then the next day, a headline in the paper: "Webb wins 'pop quiz' for mayor".  Now all of that equates to, now we're starting to get some traction; but we still don't have any money.  The other campaigns called every investment banker in the United States, and said if they gave us a dime, they'd never get any business in Denver.  And only two investment banking firms contributed to our campaign, in the United States.  Pryor, McClendon, Counts--a black firm out of Philadelphia, and Bernard Beale--a black firm out of New York.  And so, and so, by now, we're trying to figure out what to do.  So then the young ones, so my son says--Keith, the oldest one--says, "You've got to get out South, people don't even know you're running.  They don't know there's a campaign going on.  And this other kid, Kevin Smith comes in, says, "We got a, we,we--we got to start walking."  And Dino's--now I got another group of business supporters, who've been with me all this time, they criticize us every Monday.  So Dino makes a pledge, if I don't have to go to any more of those meetings.  I said, "You know what, I don't need to go to those either.  They don't believe we can win.  So, I'm gonna fire all the old people, and we're just gonna keep the young ones."  And then, someone--unbeknownst to us--made a overture to one of my campaign workers, to make a overture to me, to drop out of the race, and endorse Norm.  And the papers picked it up.  And I said, "I'm not going anywhere, this election is going to be about the last man standing."
Story_ID: 15053
Speaker 1: And so then we came up with a,a plan, to walk the city.  And I said, "The walk is not new."  I said, " [Illinois governor] Dan Walker walked Illinois; [Florida governor and U.S. Senator] Lawton Chiles walked Florida; [Coroado governor Richard] Dick Lamm walked Colorado."  They said, "Aw this is a different walk.  You ain't going home.  We just don't know if you can do that.  If you can walk that far, and never go home."  I said, "Well, explain it to me?"  And they said, "We'll plot the route, we'll get a couple of mobile vans, we'll start at one end of the city, we'll walk this neighborhood, and then, you'll get to a certain spot, and then that's where you'll spend the night.  And then Wilma [Webb] can find you, and we'll tell her where you are.  And we'll--we'll find a home to stay with.  We got to find--"  I said, "Okay.  Well you find a home, but they got to be either for Norm, or not be for me.  They can be Norm [Early]or neutral.  We don't want to go to supporters."  And so, we said, "Okay."  So they said, "Can you walk that far?"  And I said, "Hell, you don't know how competitive I am."  The question is can you, young ones, keep up with me?  Because this is now about a quest.  And I'm not going to lose.  So we went to the furthest end of the city, and then we started playing the theme from [motion picture] "Rocky".  And we started walking Southwest Denver.  And so for twenty-one days, and twenty-one nights, we stayed in a different home each night.  So one morning, we'd stay-we'd sleep with an Hispanic family, the next morning, we'd get up, we'd eat green chiles and burritos and tacos and tostados and the next morning, we're staying with a Jewish family and then we'd eat lox and bagels. And the next morning we'd stay with a black family, and we'd eat pork chops and grits.  The next morning, we'd stay with--we'd get up and the family, there was a middle-class family--bacon and eggs.  And then I said--and then they said, "Norm's getting ready to go on TV."  So I said, "Well, he's getting ready to do a media buy of four hundred thousand dollars ."  And so, Dino said, "Well, let's do something different.  Let's stay in a shelter.  And we'll carry our own bed, and talk about how much money goes into campaigns and how little money there is, going for the homeless."  And so, that was the only night we didn't let Wilma stay with us.  So then I--we slid a cot in, up against a wall.  And then I stayed in there, with homeless folks.  And some of them would be saying, "Yeah, don't I know you?  I seen you somewhere before.  Yeah, I saw you on--you work down there at the store, on the corner.  Don't you?"  And I said, "Yeah, that's where I work."  And, cause they thought they knew me, but they didn't know me.  And so we would then show a parallel, between him spending money.  And so, then, we started walking to the debates.  And so, for twenty-one days, and twenty-one nights, we kept walking.  And then, at the end of twenty-one days, and twenty-one nights: we had walked two hundred miles; stayed in twenty-one different homes; and we've gone from now 17 percent  up to twenty-seven, and finished second and that's the night I cried.  'Cause I figured, now we really got a chance to win.  Because, it was always my belief, if I met Norm, one-on-one, I would win; if I met Don Bain, one-on-one, I would win.  But I was always fearful of coming in third, and never getting the opportunity.  And so then, Wilma asked Dino, she said, "Well, now we're in the run-off, now what are we going to do?"  He said, "Well, we're going to walk another twenty-one days."  And then the press said to Mike, "Well, what's the strategy?"  He said, "The strategy is we're going to walk right into the mayor's office."  And so then we went to the furthest end of the city, the second time around, and started walking.  Except this time, other things started happening.  My knees started swelling, blisters on my feet--but then God is mysterious, in how you end up places you don't anticipate--'cause by now, we figured this is all ordained.  We end up stay--going to a home, and the guy says, "You're limping."  I said, "Well my feet hurt."  So then, he said, "Take your shoe--let me take your shoe off?"  And then my socks were bloody, underneath, and he was a physician, I didn't know he was a doctor--cause I didn't even know where we were staying half the time.  And so, he said, "I'm not supposed to do this.  I work at the HMO."  He said, "I'm going to lance the blisters, I've got some other stuff, and I'm going to give you some pills. And he wrapped my feet back up, so we could get out the next morning.  So now, we've pretty much got a routine going.  Two vans, with college kids in it, they flyer the neighborhood; I walk, knock on doors, and then knock on merchant areas--where there's traffic, 7:00 a.m. in the morning, we're on the street corner, waving signs, people going to and from work; lunchtime, we hit the merchant areas, 2:30 [p.m.], they go and stand in front of the schools--elementary schools.  They invite the kids, from the elementary school, to a picnic in the park--closest to where I'm going to stay that night.  And we tell the kids, bring their parents to a picnic ro--hot dog roast, in the park.  The kids take the notices home, and then the parents come, cause the kids done harassed them about going to a free picnic, where there's hot dogs and ice cream.  And some of the parents now are curious to see who this tall guy is, that's still walking, after thirty days, and no money.  So then, they come to the park.  And then it gives me a chance to convince them why they should vote for me, for mayor.  And then, after that, after the picnic shuts down--about six thirty or seven, then I walked to the house.  From about the fifteenth night on, the crowds have gotten bigger.  Because before when I'd go, the people that would let us use their bedroom, they were in the kids' bedroom.  After the third house, we're in the family bedroom.  About after the eighth house, now they're calling their neighbors to come over, because, the next mayor is sleeping in their house.  And now the crowds are bigger outside.  And so then, I go in, then either Dino or my w-or Wilma talks to the folks--the neighbors.  And I go in there and go to sleep, and then get up the next morning.  Six-thirty [p.m.], we're standing on the street corner, waving again.  And then, we'd walk to the debates.  And then, when we would have a debate, they would find a place for me, prior to the debate where my opponent would be trying to study the issues, I'd be laying down, resting.
Story_ID: 15054
Speaker 1: And Dino, and Ari, and others would have music-in a boom box--just like a boxer.  And they got, you know, Gap Band, Commodores, rap music--and I'm sitting there resting, waiting to get ready to go on to the debate.  And then the debates take place.  We win the first one, handily. And that's the only one--debate people normally see, is who wins the first one.  The second one was about even.  The third one--no, I think it wasn't the second one, the third one was about even.  And by then, Norm's [Norman Early] now slipping in the polls.  And then now the papers are predicting it's a dead-heat.  He brings in Yaphet Kotto, goes everywhere Norm goes.  I take Ari everywhere I go.  Ari's telling Yaphet, "You know I think I could take you in the third round, one-on-one."  And so, so everybody's hyped up.  Dino's now sending a fax a day, to Norm's campaign.  And at the end of the day, the fax says "We're still here."  'Cause they always thought we were going to drop out.  The black community is getting close to Juneteenth, right before the election.  The ministers, in the beginning, three ministers were for me:  Reverend Ethan Phillips, Reverend Paul Martin, who came to Denver from Los Angeles [California].  And Paul takes me to L.A., to meet Bradley.  Because we're both Kappa's [Kappa Alpha Psi fraternity].  Bradley has a small fund-raiser, that helps infuse some money in the campaign.  Once we're in the run-off, now, they sense that, "We might have lucked-up on something."  The next fundraiser is at [attorney] Johnnie Cochran's house--bigger crowd, more infusion of out-of-state money.  And so they're not-they're trying to figure out how we're staying alive.  Once we're in the general run-off, then it was--we're telling the black community--now it's no longer about having a black mayor, because both of us have a moustache; now you get to choose the one you want.  And we knew, if they had a choice between me and Norm, who had been district attorney--and most of their interactions with the district attorney is negative--they're going to go with us.  And then we found out the election was on June the eighteenth.  And you know that's a famous day.  So the papers say, "Who's going to win?"  I said, "It's already written.  June 18th is election day.  It's the same day Wellington defeated Napoleon at Waterloo."  I said, "We can't--it's already written."  And so, now the, so then they said, so then he went negative.  And so then we went negative, and I stopped the negative ads.  And I had asked--they said, "Well how are we going to communicate to the public?"  I said, "The way we've done everything else.  We're going to hold a news conference, and we're going to ask the public, "If you want me to go negative, honk your horn, twice.  If you want me to go neg--if you want me to stay positive, when you see me walking on the street, honk your horn, once."  And so, now we're getting people just driving in cars, and getting engaged in the campaign.  And then the Teamsters endorsed us.  So in the beginning of the campaign--now we still have no media.  We haven't been on TV at all.  This campaign has never been on TV.  I take that back.  We had one little spurt of ads, right at the beginning, but we've not been on TV since.  And we had no money for radio.  And so, but everything we're doing is-we were creating free media.  And so then, we go through, and we say, "Today we think we're doing better, because we notice most of the people that drive Chevrolets, Dodges, Hondas have endorsed us."  "And now we notice the Teamsters have endorsed us," so the big trucks.  And when the BMW's and Mercedes endorse us, the election is over 'cause we've run the economic gambit of people driving automobiles, and that's the same as doing a poll.  And then when the-and so, then when election day came-started--early voting, then Don Bain, the Republican, endorsed us.  We carried 452, out of 462, precincts citywide.  And we won the election with 58 percent  of the vote.  And so, some of the people that you see walk around here, like Denise, Peggy--some of them--their claim is that they are all "seven-percenters".  Because there is a small cadre of people that were there, when no one else was there.  And so, even some of our friends, that didn't believe, and that's how we--and as Mike said, "We walked right into the mayor's office  Three hundred and about 350 miles later.  I walked forty-two days, forty-two nights, stayed in forty-two different homes--stayed with forty-two different families--including the Samaritan House, a shelter and got elected mayor.
Story_ID: 15055
Speaker 1: As Ari would say, "You know, we may not give the biggest party, but we'll win the fight."  And because that's part of our constituency.  I mean, cause we represent everybody.  Some people just represent some people.  And, and, and then in 1991, then when we got elected.
Speaker 2: Okay.  [Defeated mayoral candidate and District Attorney] Norm [Early] was, he was hard to like.  He wasn't, but I mean--but I was thinking about although--
Speaker 1: And then, and then--but to Norm's credit, to Norm's credit when we got elected June 19th, we were supposed to be sworn in July 1 the papers were saying, "Whoa, you know, who's going to be in the cabinet?"  I said, "Man, I don't know who's going to be in the cabinet.  We had to get a job first.  It'd been precipitous on our part to say who's going to be in the cabinet without knowing who we were going to--whether we were going to win or not.  And now that we've won, we just want to go home and go to bed and get some rest.  And then, we'll try to figure out who's going to be in the cabinet."  And see, June 18th through July 1st, that's less than two weeks.  And now, everybody that gave to Norm, now is pouring money, they're sending checks to us--left and right.  They're sending, the last three days, during our campaign--from December to about June the 5th--we had raised about, maybe two hundred thousand dollars .  From about June the 10th to June 18th, we got maybe a hundred and fifty thousand dollars in the mail.  And then we also brought in a new fundraiser or two, and, and Donna, Donna's call, Donna called and said, "I have the next mayor, Wellington Webb, on the other phone.  I know you've already given to Norm, but a check from your wife and kids will be fine and I thought you'd want to speak to the mayor."  And they'd say, "Well, we can't do that."  She said, and she'd say, "So do you mean, I should tell, who's going to be the next mayor that you're not willing to give an equal amount of what you gave Norm?"  And then they'd say, "Well, oh, well sure I'll say something.  And maybe we'll have my s--I'll write a check out for my son, or my wife," or somebody like that.  And money started pouring--it came in so much, that we couldn't, we didn't ha--we didn't have-it came in so fast, we didn't have time to put it--to buy a TV ad.  We used all the money for the Inauguration.  That's how we paid for the Inauguration, on the money that came in, at the last minute.  Norm spent about a million, three.  And I think we spent three hundred and thirty thousand dollars .
Story_ID: 15056
Speaker 1: But then the community, now, the black community is still kind of mad, and split, and angry.  During the fir--so now we're in office, we're new.  We don't quite know what we're doing, in some cases.  And the '95 [1995]campaign allowed us to reassemble the black community.  Because now both newspapers came out against us.  Because of our position on, what they perceived as, crony-ism.  Because I would not disavow people, that I've known all my life, from applying for jobs, or applying for work.  I said, "If they're confident and qualified, they ought to be allowed a job, or a contract, like anyone else.  But if I knew them, they said it was cronyism.  If they, they changed the, they changed the standard.  It was like, give jobs and give contracts to people you don't know.  That way, you can avoid any conflict of interest.  My brother, who I made chief of security, had been on the police force fourteen years.  I made him chief of security.  I said, "Who better to look out for me, than my brother."  And they made it look like he was a brand new city employee.  Even though he was a sergeant on the police force.  Cause the head of your security team has to be a sergeant.  And, it was painful.  Airport didn't open on time--three delays:  the construction manager for the airport died of a brain tumor--three police officers shot in the line of duty, people making jokes about the airport, questioning my ability to manage the project.  It was summer violence of '93 [1993], Bloods and Crips shooting it out driving down the street, shooting at each other; wounding two kids.  And we still stood our ground.  And I told our staff--by now it's a lot of political appointees--we'll run for re-election, only on the condition we can open the airport.  If we open the airport.  February 29th, no, February 28th, the night I won, three aircraft land at DIA [Denver International Airport] --two United, one Continental.  I announced re-election ten days later.  And this time, we have a different opponent, a white female, on city council who's opposed to affirmative action, supports small business.  Starts off on the attack that Webb has no ethics,cronyism is the nature of the day.  They paint the city treasury as a candy store for the Webb family, 'cause they go to the Nugget Games.  Everything anybody else has done, now it becomes a--the issue of the day.  And she puts out a piece of fifty-five ethical lapses in judgment, she says.  And the Denver Post comes out with a article, says, "We think the mayor will be elected without a run-off."  Two days before the election, it comes out on a Sunday, election is on Tuesday.  black community stays home.  We come in second, out of five.  Denver Post  is against us, Rocky Mountain News is against us, and a large part of the white community is against us.  And so, and two of my closest friends: Ben Jeffers, from Louisiana, who came up to help organize the campaign.  He was supposed to go back to Baton Rouge [Louisiana], then he came back, and said, "I ain't leaving until the election is over."  Paul Sandoval came back, and said, "Take a couple of days off, and go talk to your grandmother at the cemetery, and come back, and we'll kick her ass."  And so then we reorganized the whole campaign.  And the first thing--and then a miraculous thing happened.  All the black people, that were for Norm Early--and the black people, that were for me--that hadn't spoken in four years, came together and opened their own office, in Park Hill, in Northeast Denver.  And they came together as a community, and said that Mary DeGrotte has done something that no one thought was possible, she has united the black community.  And, and then, [President Bill] Clinton wrote us off,  Ron Brown wrote us off; the White House wrote us off.  Because no incumbent has ever-in office, has ever finished second, in an election, and then come back to win.  And so, Dan Muse, who was one of those names from the early years, said, "The issue is clear, they're not listening to Mandy's TV ads, they think we're not honest."  And he says, "I think you need to write a letter."  So we composed a letter, and sent two hundred thousand copies of a letter--a personal letter from me--to every household south of Colfax, which was primarily aimed at a white audience.  Blacks and hispanics didn't have a problem-did not have a concern about blacks and hispanics getting jobs.  Because their view is if you get elected, that's what's supposed to happen.  White people were concerned that it was happening in a degree that was not acceptable.  And that was not above board.  Which it was, because the council voted for all of it.  But because DeGrotte was on council, she made everything look illegal.  And even some of her own supporters were talking about, "Well how'd so-and-so get a contract?"  We said, "He didn't."  They were reporting the process, they weren't reporting the fact.  And so, to make a long story, short DeGrotte started interviewing for who was going to be the next police chief, and come election day, they had the highest turnout of African Americans in Denver's history, in an election and they had a higher number of hispanics turned out to vote for me than they did for [Frederico] Peña, when he was mayor and whites, and conservative Republican areas came out, and voted for me.  Because in Denver, the-primarily people say: "If you carry Southeast Denver--which is liberal and moderate Republicans and liberal Democrats and Northeast Denver, which is liberal democrats and black community--and Northwest, which is hispanics and Irish and Italians, which are democrats--you win.  Mary Cain is from the Southeast side, which we were losing.  And she was really focusing in on white women.  We had a press conference, with every woman contractor we had at the airport, more than a hundred of them--all white and the press wouldn't carry it.  Didn't have a picture, didn't have a article, didn't say anything.  So I started campaigning in Southwest Denver.  And I found out, conservative white males, many of them, would rather have a male than have a woman--as mayor.  One of them got mad at me.  Said, "I don't like the way you handled the airport, I wouldn't vote for you if you were the last man running."  I said, "I am the last man running, so what you gonna do?"  He said, "I guess I'm gone have to vote for you."  And I said, "It's all about perception."  I said, "The newspapers have said that they want me out, but we're not going out without a fight.  And if we win, not only did we defeat this one political crowd, but we defeated both newspapers."  And so, come election day, and I wa--and there was a-so I had to go on back to the streets walking, and knocking on doors.  And I had this little African buddy, named Sam--Samuel, and Samuel--during the primary--he was out on the street corner, waving, holding his "Webb" sign, and he came in election night, and he said, "Mayor, I don't think we doing too good today.  They--I do the sign, and they don't wave back."  And so then, the next election, I said, "Samuel, how are we doing?"  "They smiling mayor!  They smiling, they smiling!"  So I said, "I think we gonna be okay.  But, I'm going to wait, and I'm going to stay at home, and watch the returns."
Story_ID: 15057
Speaker 1: Returns started coming in, and the first returns had her ahead--forty-eight/forty-six [percent] .  And I said, "I don't know where those votes are from."  And then it had-and they had her ahead fifty to forty-six [percent] .  And then the media had started changing.  Because then the next returns came out, it showed: me ahead, fifty/forty-eight .  Then it was fifty/forty-nine; then it was fifty-one/forty-nine; then it was fifty-two/forty-eight and then it was fifty-three/forty-seven, then it was fifty-four/forty-six ; and I think we beat her by fifteen to twenty thousand  votes.  And it was all because our base came out, both Hispanics and blacks, and whites were unwilling to, to believe the allegations that she made that the papers really did a disservice.  And that's part of the role that the black media can play, and, in some cases, it doesn't do enough.  When the papers raise a issue of why minorities get contracts at institutions, the debate should be about why they didn't have them before as opposed to why they are getting them now.  So they were criticizing us, for opening up the system for capitalism, when they should have been reporting on: why the capitalistic system wasn't open to them before.  And so then, when we got elected in '95 [1995], then we had a real bad attitude towards a lot, a lot of--I had towards--Even though, I came on, and I said, "We're one city, we're not North and South."  Because most of the revolts came from the southern part of the city.  And I said, "We're going to do it just the same way we're going to do with North and South, we're going to unite this city, once again."  And even when we did our Inauguration, the music was from that TV mini-series, I think, North and South.  And we did a lot of stuff about Lincoln.
Story_ID: 15058
Speaker 1: And it was, and then when I met with my staff, I said that the first time was exciting the second time was satisfying, because they tried to take it from us--but we're still here and in the third election, there was nobody left to run--cause we done beat everybody.  Except, people said, "Well, are you going to run again, for a third term?"  And I said, "Yes, cause we're not done.  There are things we want to do, and we haven't finished yet.  So now we've beginning to accomplish many of those things."  The greatest sculpture--[Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], and Frederick Douglass, and [Mohandas K.] Gandhi, and Rosa Parks and Sojourner Truth--United States is located in City Park, here in Denver [Colorado].  We created ten and a half miles of new parks along the South Platte River.  Every sports venue in this city is brand new.  Crime's been down 40 percent  in ten years.  Unemployment dipped to 2 percent until the 9/11 issues.  We've--Denver had no direct flights to nowhere.  Now people in Denver can go to the airport, and get on a plane, and fly directly to London [England]--which I negotiated.  Fly directly to Frankfurt [Germany]--which I negotiated.  And if I pull off the next deal, I'm working on now, they'll be able to fly directly to Paris [France], and come back without having to go through Chicago [Illinois], or Washington [D.C.], or New York [New York].  And so, my goal was always, to make Denver a city where people don't--yeah, we live in the mountains, and we got a little extra swagger 'cause now we know we're good at what we do and we work hard at it.  We try to take care of providing opportunity for everyone, so that they can succeed, or fail--based on their own merit.  And that process will be open to anybody, and we'll defend people that want to take advantage of it.  And we won't waste a lot of time with people that don't want to do nothing, to benefit themselves or their community.  And so, when the issues came up, about running for the United States Senate, from a personal-ego point of view, I wanted to do it.  But from a duty and obligation point of view, it was not the right thing to do.  Because you can't do two things, that take a hundred percent commitment, equally well--you can do it, but you can't do it well.  So you either have to leave being mayor, to run for the Senate full-time.  And I would have loved doing it, because no one believed an African American could win the Senate Race.  And that's all we've been about.  First African American mayor they said we couldn't win, we did, and we were successful.  First African American auditor said we couldn't win--we did and we were successful not only winning the election, but winning--how well we managed the office, and the same thing with mayor.  So I mean, the juices, on the one hand, were up.  But the flip-side of that is are you walking away from an unfulfilled obligation, and a contract you had with the voters--that gave you a third term, for a four-year commitment to finish what you're supposed to do?  And, and so then, for me, the question was easy--I can't do that.  And I have too much a sense of duty, and obligation.  And so, and so then, to opt out of the [U.S.] Senate race, on the one hand was, hurt.  But then on the other side, there's always other opportunities. But we also, would have give us an opportunity to finish what we started here.  So that people won't think that, we left them just to run for something personal.  Because we've never been about that either.  And that, many of the people that follow us and some that have benefited from us, kind of know real well in the end, kind of, where we end up.
Speaker 2: Mayor Webb, when you were elected, the first time, were you and the-wh--what happened with the airport?  What, you know, when things--you fell under tremendous pressure, I guess.  I was thinking about you just describing the night of the election.  'Cause that had to be, you know, a--a very terrible high.  I was just thinking, you know, cause I was sitting here when your--when your wife said what was being done and I was looking over at the [mayoral] seal on the wall, and I thought, "I bet he felt really good sitting in the chair."  You know. --I bet he felt really good, but, I want you to des--sort of describe that.  You know, that--
Speaker 1: I've never been awed by where I ended up I've always been more awed by how I got there.  I had sat in the chair once before.  I had-I picketed the mayor--[William] McNichols was mayor, and we were upset.  It was a police brutality case, and a bunch of us stormed the office and came in here and Lauren Watson was head of the Black Panthers, at the time he sat in the chair and then he got up, and I went and sat in the chair, and--it was cute.  You know, I think the mayor was playing golf.  He didn't care nothing about us being down here.  I talked to him about it later, and we had a big laugh about it.  Because McNichols endorsed me, because he thought I was a lot like him.  It's that, I've never been awed by the job.  Cause I always know, one--no one's gonna out--work me and number two--I've always had the ability to find good people, and surround myself with them and thirdly--the group is always so eclectic that they can't work for nobody else. Because the only commonality they have is me.  But they all are part of something special.  All of them will be able to say that, the last decade of the twentieth century, and the first part of the twenty-first century, they worked for the mayor of Denver and we did unbelievable things.  And, and they'll be able to tell their grandkids about it.  They'll be able to tell their grandkids about how the mayor, on impulse, gets these impulses and all of a sudden, we're off doing something.  It may be sending twelve of his staff to try to help bail Al Gore out of Florida [ref. to 2000 Presidential election dispute].  And I flew in, and we went from Pensacola to Gainesville, to Tallahassee, to Orlando [all Florida] we didn't a--we didn't ask Gore for no money, no nothing.  I said, "We're a self-contained unit.  We bring our own press people, we'll bring our own food, we bring our own vans, and we pay our own way."  We sent people to Atlanta [Georgia], to help [Atlanta, Georgia mayor] Shirley Franklin; we sent papers and "how to do a walk", we sent to Shirley; we sent papers to [Detroit, Michigan mayor] Kwame [H. Kilpatrick] in Detroit. We sent five people to help Doris Warden, in San Francisco. I went, along with two other people, to help Lee Brown in Houston [Texas]; Ron Kirk in Texas.  We've become institutionalized around the country.  I got some of the best campaigners in the country, here.  And they've been molded, out of campaigns.  But they doub--they doub--they do double-duty, because--not only are they good at political organizing --each one of them, substantively has a technical area.  Because I make them all go at some point in time.  Just because you're an architect, doesn't mean you can't go pass out literature just because you're planner in parks, doesn't mean that you can't go out and, and, and talk to Hispanics, in support of somebody or just because you work in this department, doesn't mean you can't talk to gays and lesbians about supporting this candidate.  Because we're all one country, we're one state, we're one city.  And all of these people make up the whole, of what we are.  And that's why our constituency is broad.  And also, somebody's always mad at me.  Because I always fail to meet all of their expectations.  Because you can't meet everyone's expectations simultaneously.  But in the final analysis, they all know, if their back is up against the wall, they can't have a better friend.
Story_ID: 15059
Speaker 1: So mayor, what--what, you know, what is amazing about this story is, it's so counter to modern-day politics.  You know, it's not, you know, there's-right now it's--usu--typically it's who has the largest campaign checks--who wins and the rest sort of get, you know--
Speaker 2: Well, we can raise money with the best of them now.  We can now.  We couldn't then.
Speaker 1: That's what I'm saying.  I'm saying, th--the,the story was like the Rocky stories.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: (chuckle)
Speaker 2: Yeah, but once we won, our second election, we spent about a million five, to win re-election.  And we needed every dime of that.  Because both papers made a concentrated effort, to never put me in the paper, in a nega--positive way.  They made a purposeful effort to never put Wilma in the paper, in a positive way.  When she would raise a question--and she's so innocent on some of the questions--she raised a question: If six million dollars was spent on, art at the airport, I mean, how much did black people get?  And then they said, "Well, $25,000.00."  And then the article is, "Wilma Webb tries to polarize arts program."  Well hell!  That ain't fair!  The only problem we had, is, we should--we should have defended her more aggressively.  But we were still so new, because unlike, in other cities, where you have a black population of 40-50 percent .  At the max, our numbers are twelve.  And so you're always trying to maintain the balance, of the 12 percent  black and 22 percent  Hispanic and the gay-lesbian unions; moderate Republicans; women; moderate white males--I mean it, young.  So it's always a balancing act.  So we had to be very careful, in terms of, picking and choosing our issues.  And it's not always a easy judgment and sometimes we miss, on some of them.
Speaker 1: So, Mayor Webb, has it been worth it?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  It's b--it's been, it's been painfully--it's been worth it painfully.  It's been worth it from the stand-point of: a couple of my kids, we talked about it, I said, "I don't expect you to do what I've done."  It's not doable.  No one can replicate what we did here on this walk.  Everything was aligned, the planets were aligned for that.  It takes too much, first you have to have a level of comfort with people, that you can be in any setting and be comfortable.  Number two, you have to have allegiances with ev--groups that didn't start yesterday.  I've taken thirty years, building on this story.  And so, it's not like someone can just go out and start walking, and I--and fe--some candidates have.  But they didn't get it, and they lost.  It's not about the walk, it's about the character of the person in the walk and defining what they want and what they want to do for you and making you a part of their quest.  And, and so when I had--tell my kids, "I just want you to be successful, at what you want to do.  It's not about being like your dad.  I don't want that."  I never dreamed I'd be here.  I think my grandmother might've.  She was always the visionary.  So for us, it's, it's about taking what you've given and molding that to be something special, something, you know. When I was running for mayor, I could campaign in white areas, because Wilma [Webb] could campaign in black areas, and you got two-for-one 'cause some people like her better than they like me, 'cause she's much nicer.  'Cause I mean, I'll get in a mood, and my staff knows, if you catch me on the wrong day, don't ask me nothing where she's always much kinder.  Even though, in some cases, some people think, she's the more aggressive one, and the one that's harder to deal with but everybody know-all of the insiders know, that's me.  And so, she, she could campaign in the black community.  Because that was also her base.  And I could concentrate on campaigning in other areas, and so, it was easier, then, to bring those two together.  That--and I've told her, I couldn't have got elected mayor, without her--wasn't doable--it couldn't have been done.  And other candidates didn't have that advantage.  But then it was about, the Ari Taylor's, and all of these other people we fought for over the years, that were out there working.  And, a lot of all--union guys,  that we fought to get paychecks for, that were willing to fight for us.  And I think that's still doable for some campaigns.  When Kwame Kilpatrick was at 20 percent--13 percent , I told him he could win if he wanted it bad enough.  But you got to want it.  And you got to convey to people that you want it, and that you-if you get elected, that you will be a great mayor for everybody--the ones that voted for you, and the ones that didn't.  Because you have an opportunity to demonstrate to them that they made a mistake, in voting against you the first time.
Story_ID: 15060
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: I don't know. I just don't want it short-changed.  I don't want it--and I want it more for my grandkids, and my kids--my grandkids definitely.  I've already had a ride, that, I wouldn't change any of it.  But I don't want someone to--as Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] used to say, those people that want to maximize your deficiencies---no, minimize--yeah, "maximize your deficiencies, and minimize your successes" I don't want them to take for granted, I mean this job is a hard job.  You know, to build all the things we've been--that we've built, and still have a positive surplus of a hundred million dollars.  And for me to also be elected by my peers, president of the U.S. Conference of mayors, president of the National Conference of Black Mayors, president of the Democratic mayors. I've been president of every mayoral organization there is.  It's--I don't want anybody to minimize what we've been able to accomplish.  And we've always done it through a non-selfish point-of-view.  I've never done anything where I haven't taken people with me--even other mayors.  And so, when people, whatever they write, I just want them to be fair in their analysis.  Here was somebody that came from a fairly average, working-class family out of Chicago [Illinois] his daddy was a high school graduate, and his mother was a high school graduate she was a homemaker, and he was a forty-one  year veteran of the railroad.  That--whose grand--and their parents were educated--academically, col--collegially--that invested, through their parents and their grandchildren, the ability to define who and what they're going to be.  And that-and then that we can do it, others can do it.  But you got to want it, and you got to work at it, and you can't be afraid to take risks.  I didn't know nothing about the legislature when I ran I didn't know anything about being mayor before I ran I didn't know anything about being head of Regulatory Agencies I didn't know about Securities and Insurance--until I got in there, and I learned it.  I didn't know about administering-being Administrator of over two thousand people at HEW [Health, Education and Welfare department] until I went there.  But I've never been pre-judgemental.
Story_ID: 15061
Speaker 1: I said I never tried to be pre-judgmental.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: 'Cause I think you can learn from everyone.  The problem with most people--what I learned in the federal government--they only talk to people their level or above them.  And I talk to people above me, but I also talk to people below me.  Because in many cases I've always believed, that there are people that may have been in a job fifteen to twenty years, that know a lot about it, they've seen people come and go.  And in many cases, all they want to do is be able to do a good job, and someone to ask their opinion, and to be respected, and to be given their dignity.  And so, I'll try to make sure that I ask people, and to try to treat everybody the same.  Even though they may have different stations, they may have different, different levels.
Story_ID: 15062
Speaker 1: So what are your feelings about the black community?  This community saved you, in many ways.  Right?  It was splintered, but it came back together.
Speaker 2: In '95 [1995], it's no question, the black community saved me.  The highlight for me, was before '95 [1995], is when the ministers came together.  Because they were split, and I was taking a beating on the airport.  But you know the amazing thing is, even though I took a beating in the airport, my poll numbers never dropped below fif--never dropped below forty.  Because people, cause they see me all the time; you could barely find a person, when they did focus groups, that said that they didn't know me personally, or they hadn't seen me, or hadn't met me.  And I try to do that, cause I think that's important.  I never wanted to be like the politician that didn't go to the grocery store, and know how much bread and milk costs. I didn't want to be the person that didn't have a sense of what it looked like, you know, going to a rec [recreation]center.  So, so the ministers, one day, called me up to one of their churches and all of them were there--even the ones that didn't like each other.  And they prayed for me, and all of them put hands on me, and said, "We're gonna--" and they prayed to, to God to get me through the airport debacle.  And--
Speaker 1: Now what happened with the air--what--would you have done things differently, with the [Denver, Colorado International]airport?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: But a lot of that had been started before.
Speaker 2: No, no.  It was none of that.  It was, a saying we've learned around here, "You don't know what you don't know until you don't know it."  It was--when you imagine, and if you have all these major international corporations, like [M.A.] Mortenson [Company], and Bechtel [Corp.] and Hensel Phelps [Construction Company] and BAE [Automated Systems Inc.] and all of these great corporations, managing this airport--that someone would have asked questions about a computer system.  The computer system for the baggage system didn't work.  And the baggage system was requested by United Airlines, to get their baggage from check-in to the aircraft faster than any other luggage system in the country.  And the test models worked, because it was on a small track.  But when they programmed it, it didn't work because the computers had trouble reading the bar codes.  And so when you put a programmer in there, you couldn't add another programmer to do what this other programmer did--they were burning out programmers left and right.  So they kept wanting to make this baggage system work, until finally it got to a point, I told them I was gone build another baggage system.  And they said, "Well, you can't do that without ours."  And I said, "Well, yeah that's true, maybe we'll just shut the airport down, we'll all go bankrupt together, or something."  And to make a long story short, they finally agreed, and we opened the airport with the alternate system, the one I built.  They didn't know what the answer was.  They don't, they still don't use it.  I sold it back to them, cause they said they could fix it.  I said, "Since the private sector is smarter than government, you fix it.  It's not working yet.  It's not gonna work."
Speaker 1: So, that system never worked.
Speaker 2: No the system never worked.  The airport is too big for that system.  But was it painful, I said, "I'm mayor, I'll take the hit."  They said, "Do you want to blame the previous mayor?"  I said, "No.  That's not the way we operate."  It's like a football team, nobody cares what, I mean, you're the coach of the team, you either win or you lose--nobody cares what the previous coach did.  You're the coach of the team now.  They just want to know if you win.  Getting the airport open wins-we win.  The airport doesn't open, we'd lose.  So what do we need to do to get it opened.
Speaker 1: But that airport, then, has allowed these---eventually these direct flights.
Speaker 2: The air-the airport is a economic lifeline for Denver [Colorado].  And, but I brought a lot of business people in, cause I told them since they're uncomfortable some of them don't think we know what we're doing--"I want you to come in, take a few weeks off, you can help me.  You're the president of this company, you go out and see if you can figure out the baggage system; you have a median."  And after they went out to the airport--after about a day--they came back, and said, "You're doing fine."  And the business community then solidified behind me, cause they found out, it's different managing in the public sector, where every decision is under scrutiny, and the press looks at every decision as opposed to managing in a private sector where you can go behind closed doors and thrash out these issues. And have a city council, that's trying to undermine your efforts, as well, because they want to run for the office that you hold.  So after a while, they decided, that it's--yeah, you're doing fine.
Story_ID: 15063
Speaker 1: So, mayor Webb, what do you want to do next?  Have you, I mean, you know--
Speaker 2: I have twelve months and twenty-one days to go.
Speaker 1: I know, but you have a lot, you still got a lot of vitality to you.
Speaker 2: Twelve months and twenty-one days, and we do a 'state of the city' speech July the first, you know, and July the first, we'll outline what new issues, and new agenda items we're going to accomplish in that last twelve months and twenty-one days.  We'll remind the council, that they also have a contract, that they're not lame ducks, they took a four-year contract--not a three.  Matter fact, I like that line, (aside) Peggy write that down.  They have a three--four year contract, not three.  And that we still have work to do.  And we're gonna address the issues of the day.  And when we leave here, people will know that we're here, and we will leave it better than we found it.
Speaker 1: But you're still very vibrant, is what I'm saying.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, so you still have politics in you.  Or wait, wait, wait--no public administration.
Speaker 2: (laughter)  Well, I have all of that in me.  I mean, I have, you know, I have great interest now in looking at areas in business.  I have great interest in the political arena.  I have great interest in--yeah, public administration.  I've really come to believe there's not much difference in public and private.  The authorizing and environment is slightly different public environment--your authorizing environment of the voters of the constituency, private arena--authorizing environment is the board and the stock holders.  It's not much different.
Story_ID: 15064
Speaker 1: And, in terms of the political environment today, do you have any thoughts about that?  And, you know, and, just sort of a whole political landscape--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --the Barney's, the, you know.
Speaker 2: If I'd run for the U.S. Senate, if I had run this time, and I was elected to the United States Senate, I'd do very well, representing the interests of every citizen in the state of Colorado.  And I think it would be a very special highlight, to be the--about, the fourth African American elected to the Senate following Carol Mosley Braun, following [Massachusetts Senator Edward] Ed Brooke, following [first black US Senator] Hiram [R.] Revels, and B.K. [Blanche Kelso] Bruce.  I mean it's, it's a very selective club. It's very difficult to get in.  The problem most mayors have, is by the time they finish their tenure as mayor, they're so tired, that they don't have the energy to run statewide.  It's also interesting, that by the time they retire--done, that they have so much animosity against them from other parts of the state because no other part of the state wants a mayor from that particular part of, part of the state.  So we've spent a lot of effort, supporting candidates and going into other parts of the state, so that there is a familiarity with me.  But since Denver [Colorado] dominates the news anyway, they still see me as the "tennis shoe" guy.  They see, they still see me as the guy that walks neighborhoods.  They still see me as the kid that played basketball, that came to their town, forty years ago, that weighed a hundred and sixty pounds.  So I mean there are a lot of connection points.  And many of those individual legislators that I served with, are still alive; many of the individual legislators that Wilma served with, are still alive.  So I mean, I don't rule anything out.  And I think it all depends on my energy level, and what my desires are at the time.  I think I've also been kind of unpredictable.  No one saw me running for auditor--came out of the blue, no one saw me running for mayor--even though that was a little more predictable, since I was auditor; no one saw me going to Regulatory Agencies.  I mean, I'm not ever like doing the typical; and I don't have nothing against doing the typical, jobs that only deal with ethnic people--I've done that.  But I've also said, "I have an obligation to do all of it."  And I have great--I'm real curious, and my curiosity always is a-I want to know what, how that works, or can I run that, or how well it would be.  That's why I wanted Regulatory Agencies; that's why I wanted HEW [Health, Education and Welfare department].  So in the legislature, I specialized in one area, and then I went to federal government--specialized in another, went back to state government, I specialized in another.  But it also has all made me well-rounded.
Story_ID: 15065
Speaker 1: Now, you know, I was almost remiss about the tennis shoes, cause you're famous for the tennis shoes.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: You know.  So how did the tennis shoes--was that a conscious decision, or it was just a practical one?
Speaker 2: Practical, practical.  Tennis shoes were blue.  Blue tennis shoes go well with normally blue pants, and any kind of colored shirt, and a light blue jacket and, and kids started looking for me in the blue shoes.  I wore some white shoes, and, and I'm superstitious.  Nobody kind of caught it, some kids waved at me when I was in the blue tennis shoes, and so I told Mike Dino, I said, "Well I'm not tr--I'm not gone change shoes, I'll just stay with these."  And, and those shoes were-walked us right in here.  And so normally, anytime I wear the tennis shoes with a, with a fairly expensive suit, people know it's about campaign time.  That's our symbol, and that also is our gauge, to let people know we're coming.  And it also puts me in a mental state, that, we're back on the street and I'm comfortable there.  You meet people that you don't see in a car.
Story_ID: 15066
Speaker 1: So you like campaigning as much as you liked serving?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  Yeah, yeah, I'm one of those odd creatures, I like the campaign, I like the quest.  I like the, I like going into towns, and different cities.  And, and turning it up.  And convincing people that this is a better idea, or this is a better candidate, or this is a better program.  But I only do that for things I really believe in.  I can't, I can't sell something I don't believe in, so I'm not like a hired gun that would do it for anybody.  'Cause I have to believe it if I believe it--I can sell it, if I don't believe it--I won't sell it.  Doesn't work, it's transparent, people can tell.
Story_ID: 15067
Speaker 1: Just, you know, I, I'm, I'm struck you're talking about your grandmother, who, saw you through the--being the auditor.
Speaker 2: Umm-hmm.
Speaker 1: But don't you think she was up there, aligning those stars?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah.  She's still the, she's still the matriarch for the family.  If you talk to any one of the--any one of my brothers, they all will talk about her in very reverent terms.  Cause everyone was also scared of her too.  'Cause she was very demanding, and loving at the same time.  But, 'cause like one of my brothers told me, he stayed out too late and came in, and she had the light on the porch--no, the light was out and he rang the doorbell and she turned the light on and looked outside, saw it was him. And Ron said, "Grandmother can I come in now?"  She said, "No.  I told you to be in at a certain hour, it's past that hour, go back to where you came from."  And turned the light out, and went to bed.  He said, "What if I get hurt out here?"  She said, "That's the way it goes.  Maybe next time you'll get in early."  Very uncompromising, but everyone knew what the rules were.
Speaker 1: And you've carried on a legacy she'd very proud of.
Speaker 2: I try to carry it, for the young ones to pick it up.  Her other rule was regardless to how much money you have, you act like a millionaire.  And I think that was kind of a old-fashioned black edict anyway.  Is that, you carry yourself with a certain dignity.  No one has to know you're poor, unless you tell them.  She said, "Don't act poor."  And she would teach you what fork to use, what spoon to use--common graces.  And she said, "This may sound silly, but you may find this helpful."  And so, on occasions, Wilma [Webb] and I joke that--how our parents and grandparents came out of a generation where that was important, on the assumption that some day their kids might get to the white House.
Story_ID: 15068
Speaker 1: That's--and I was struck by the fact that when--on the one hand, I'd kid [President Bill] Clinton about--he had the mayors there so often, we didn't take any towels.  Because it, it was no longer fashionable, because we were there so co--it was such a common thing.  But I remember the first time we were there, and I was saying to-how fast this has become.  Here you got, we're sleeping in the [Abraham] Lincoln bedroom [in the White House], and across from this bed is a table that Lincoln began to scroll the Emancipation Proclamation on.  And we've been free fewer years than we were enslaved, and we're here.  And my father was a Railroad Porter, for forty-one years;and he only--he never dreamed, he didn't even have the capacity to dream about the white House.  It's like, somewhere that you read in a book--and we're inside here.  And so I, I always get kind--would get kind of melancholy about it, and, and then I'd get a kick out of it.  Because some of the black ushers that have worked there for years, and they'd come in and I'd get out of the bed, and I said, "I know you're not supposed to smile, but looks good seeing a black man lay in that bed, doesn't it?"  And then they'll try and hold the smile, you'll see them start to grin, then they'll get that poker face back on.  I'd say, "That's alright, you can laugh when I'm gone."  Tell them, "Yeah, that crazy one from Denver [Colorado] said--."  Yeah.  Got black people sla--sleeping in that bed, using the bathroom, taking towels--when they can.  It's, It's okay.  'Cause you got to enjoy the moment, you got to enjoy the ride.  So no, I've had a, I've had joy w--in all of these accomplishments.  But it also has been very painful, for our kids it's been very painful for my wife.  So that if my children do well, they don't get recognition if they don't do well, they get, they get castigated for that and if they have a problem, it gets to be a public discussion.  And it's not hard--it's not easy being married to a mayor.  And I mean, it's not easy for any woman to be married to any body that's powerful.  And it's very s--tough, and it's very stressful.  And it is a--because it's a demanding job, that requires a-that the spouse pick up more than what is ordinarily accepted or because in many cases they hold the family together--while you're holding the city or the state or a congressional district together--and that's very difficult.  And normally, only people in the business understand that.  It's very, it's a very difficult deal.  And so when I say, "I enjoy it, and I wouldn't do anything different," probably wouldn't, although I'd probably try to take the kids more, with us in some cases; but in some cases I don't know.  In most cases, I think people would repeat the same decisions and make the second time around, they did the first time, cause it seemed like the right thing to do at the time.
