Story_ID: 71295
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  And ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Yes, my name is Heloise Westbrook, Heloise, H-E-L-O-I-S-E, Westbrook, W-E-S-T-B-R-O-O-K.
Speaker 1: And you have a middle name too.
Speaker 2: Demoin, D-E-M-O-I-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what does that mean?  It's sort of an unusual middle name.
Speaker 2: Well, actually, it is French, "en francais".  And I guess if you broke it down into two words, "de moin" means "of less".  Now, a lot of people have Americanized Demoin, capital of Iowa, Des Moines.  I'm just not sure what my--I guess my parents wanted to develop or add a middle name to have it go with my first name, because if you're in France, you would say Eloise.  If you're in America, you might stutter a little bit and say ah, ha, Heloise, "Eloris" (ph.).  Ah, what was--another name I frequently heard was Louise.  But to me, in France, you don't add the "H", so Eloise, in America, Heloise, 'cause you use the "H".
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and when were you born and-
Speaker 2: I was born July 1, in 1954, in Buffalo, New York.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: My occupation, I'm an anesthesiologist and a pain management specialist.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date, August the 14th, 2002.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: Present time, we're in the conference room at the Avera St. Luke Pain Management Center in Aberdeen, South Dakota.
Story_ID: 71296
Speaker 1: All right, now, before we go into depth, there are five "People" magazine-ish-type questions I am compelled to ask you.  The first one is, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is tofu.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is burgundy.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite season of the year?
Speaker 2: My favorite of the year is Christmas.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite vacation destination.
Speaker 2: Yes, my favorite destination is Hilton Head, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: "Ask not what you can do for your country but"--let's backtrack that. Okay.
Speaker 1: 'Cause I can't remember it.
Speaker 2: Okay, well, if you remember it, can-
Speaker 1: Okay, it's--I think it's--it was phrased like this: "Ask not what you can do for your country," but--I forget it.
Speaker 2: It's the [President] John Kennedy one?
Speaker 1: It's the John Kennedy one.
Speaker 2: I know it.
Speaker 1: Oh, come on.
Speaker 2: "What your country can do for you."
Speaker 1: "But, but what your country can do for you."
Speaker 2: Ask not what you can do for-
Speaker 1: For your coun--no, ask not what you-
Speaker 2: Not what your country can-
Speaker 1: --can do for your country, but ask what you can do for your country.
Speaker 2: Ask not what your country can do for you but-
Speaker 1: But ask what you can do for your country.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's it.
Speaker 1: So it's ask not what you can do for your country-
Speaker 2: (Unclear)--(laughter)--(unclear)-
Speaker 1: "Ask not what your country can do for you, but ask what you can do for your country."
Speaker 2: Yes, that's it. Okay.
Story_ID: 71297
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Okay, let's talk about your beginnings, and can you give us the names of your parents and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Sure, my father Quinton Westbrook, Q-U-I-N-T-O-N, Westbrook, W-E-S-T-B-R-O-O-K, and my mother is Mary Lue, M-A-R-Y, L-U-E, Loveless, L-O-V-E-L-E-S-S, Westbrook, W-E-S-T-B-R-O-O-K.
Speaker 1: Okay, and when was your mother for--born, your father born, and where were they born.
Speaker 2: My mother was born June the 14th, 1916, and my father was born January 6th, 1912.  My mother was born in Mason, Tennessee, and my father was born in Ellendale, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Did they pass on to you a story about how they met?
Speaker 2: They were classmates, and once they had completed high school, they had decided to marry.  And they took their honeymoon to Niagara Falls [New York].  It was fini--fascination of both my parents to take a honeymoon to Niagara Falls.  And from there, they settled in Buffalo, New York, which is very close to Niagara Falls, so they must have really enjoyed it.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: I have five siblings.
Speaker 1: And, and where do you fit into the--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: I'm next to the youngest; I'm number five.
Speaker 1: Can you name 'em for us?
Speaker 2: Sure, Quinette, Shirley, Elaine, Theresa, myself, and Jolette.
Story_ID: 71298
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, did--does your family have stories about your family ancestors from slavery days or Reconstruction, or any stories about, you know, the family struggles through the Depression or anything like that?
Speaker 2: Well, my father's family did a lot of farming.  And during the times of Depression because of the, the poverty and the limited amount of resources, it, it forced their family to kind of separate and go where they had money or go where they could find work.  So, as a result of that, the mobility kind of breaks up the extended network.  And because of that, people become fragmented, and you really lose the cohesiveness as a family unit.  I think that's one very remarkable thing that's happened to my family despite that mobility.  And despite not having a close relationship with all my father's brothers and sisters, we, as a family unit, were able to stay together.  And my family, my, my siblings all were born since ni--the 1940s, so that was kind of after post-Depression and there, therefore, we were fortunate and employment was plentiful.  We were very fortunate to stay together.
Speaker 1: Okay, but your father's family was basically split up.
Speaker 2: My father's is very split up, same way with my mother's family.  They were primary farmers, and they stayed on the farm.  But then when my mom married, then she subsequently moved further North, whereas both of her siblings stayed in Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Okay, did either side have stories about slavery that came down through grandparents and great-grandparents?
Speaker 2: No real stories about slavery from grandparents.  I actually knew my grandmother.  I, I think she passed away when I was like eight, at the age of ninety-six, my paternal grandmother; whereas my maternal grandmother, she was very ill and didn't have--I didn't have the opportunity to share many stories with her as I was growing up.
Speaker 1: Okay, so there's nothing that they, they passed along about, about that that youkan remember-
Speaker 2: No, and the--but I do--I distinctly remember my father stating while--because of slavery he did not have the opportunities to maybe excel or develop his education like he desired.  And he had to work to support his, his family, brothers and sisters and his parents.  He just felt the need to turn the situation around with respect to his family, his, his offspring, where I, I, I think that because of the--because of his plight, he wanted to make sure that each of his children had the opportunity to have as much as education as they desired and as much of an opportunity at life as they desired.
Speaker 1: So your father emphasized education?
Speaker 2: I think his greatest emphasis, sometimes over-emphasis, was education.  And the--I, I can remember probably from maybe age five that he stated that he didn't--really wasn't concerned as to necessarily what we wanted to do, but he wanted to make sure that each of us had at least completed undergraduate school.  And then if we wanted to do something else, we could.  And then that developed into a little more--it was more detailed than that, because as we got older, then you had a mother that wanted a doctor, then you had a mother that wanted lawyers, and then you had a mother that wanted a schoolteacher.  And it turned out just fine, because now she has a schoolteacher, two lawyers, a doctor, and a programmer.  So she, she, in essence, she got her wish.  So that was, that was kind of nice that she imparted that information, and we were able to actually execute her wishes.
Story_ID: 71299
Speaker 1: Okay, so your, your, your parents honeymooned in Niagara Falls [New York], and-
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --they decided to stay in--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: They decided to stay in-
Speaker 1: --New York area.
Speaker 2: --Buffalo, New York
Speaker 1: In Buffalo?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what did your father do for a living in Buffalo [New York]?
Speaker 2: My father was a law enforcement officer in Buffalo, New York.  And he also owned a news distributing business.  In New York, the--it was--it wasn't a lot African-American publications, so he had spoken and developed a relationship with the [HM John H.] Johnson Publishing Company out of Chicago [Illinois].  So he was the main distributor for all the African-American publications, such as Ebony magazine, Jet magazine, other magazines-
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: --such as Black Enterprise magazine.  So those, those two, those were like his two primary jobs, and he was the main distributor not just for the Buffalo area, but for the Western New York area.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, what did your mother do?
Speaker 2: My mom was at--has education in nursing.  However, when she had her first child, it was a decision made by my parents that they needed to--that she needed to be at home.
Speaker 1: So she was a-
Speaker 2: So she was a homemaker.
Speaker 1: She was, she was a nurse before she was a-
Speaker 2: So my mom was a nurse before.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right--(unclear)--can you just--so you, you, you grew up near Niagara Falls [New York] in a--is it in, in, in Erie [New York]?
Speaker 2: No, in Buffalo, New York.
Speaker 1: In Buffalo?
Speaker 2: In Buffalo, New York.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay
Story_ID: 71300
Speaker 1: And so tell us about, you know, some of the sights, and sounds, and smells of growing up in Buffalo [New York] in, in the community that you grew up in, you know--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: Well, the community was a predominantly African-American community.  It was a ma--major city.  And it was where you were kind--you were very near a lot of industrial plants, so you--I think it was a Ford stamping plant was very near, Chevrolet was very near, so you smelled a lot of industrial smells like rubber, car making.  And also, and not far away was Lackawanna, New York; you had Bethlehem Steel.  So you had a lot of--it wa--definitely this area was quite industrialized, so you had a lot of smells of rubber, steel, a lot of coal burning.  And if I'm not mistaking, there was also a granary there, Archer Daniels; now I think it's called Archer Daniel Midland [ADM].  And basically, you--again, this fit the needs of the, the people in this area.  They were primarily laborers, so you had to a, a--there were a lot of jobs that would attract a lot of laborers there, so you, you had a lot of flour, grain, flak, soy, and then your in--industries car--primarily your car industry.  I think it was Ford and Chevrolet were the two largest industries in the area.  Also you had Niagara Falls, the electricity, you had Love Canal, and so you had a lot of smells related to the Love Canal, related to the electricity.  You were on a very large body of water; you had Lake Erie, so you also smelled a lot of water and comes along with water--a, a body of water that large, a lot of fish.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 71301
Speaker 1: So I was asking you-
Speaker 2: Smells.
Speaker 1: Yeah, sights, and sounds, and smells of--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: And then you had Niagara Falls, one of the seven wonders, so you had the Falls, the Maid of the Mist; that was very nice.  We had--at the time, initially when I was in, well, growing up in New York, you had big, very large avenues, and we had a very large park, Humboldt Park; that was primarily in the urbanized area.  Buffalo [New York] was very--definitely very segregated.  You had an area where it was primarily for African Americans, and then you had other areas of various different cultures.  And the way Buf-Buffalo [New York]'s kind of interesting in the sense that, you know, you had an Italian section.  You had a, a section where it was German and you had your various groups.  And I did--I guess it was one thing.  I, I never realized the segregation existed because I--and, and this, this is very interesting.  The--my parents always provided a very heterogeneous type of environment for us.  I mean I was always with a lot of people of various cultures.  I really didn't think--I, I knew who I was in terms of I, I was African American and those--there were people of other cultures, but as far as the ability to communicate with other cultures, very easy.
Story_ID: 71302
Speaker 1: I think my father was--that's one thing I do attribute to my father, is his gregariousness.  My father can meet anybody in a crowd, and before the conversation was over, they, they fall in love with him.  He just had that type of charisma that you would definitely fall in love with.  And if you didn't, he wouldn't like be offended.  He was a very patient individual, and he--and either you were--you really liked him, or you just got--you felt so sorry for him that you had to just say something to him.
Speaker 2: 'Cause he would keep on--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: 'Cause he was, he was just so persistent, you'd say can't he go away.  But he's like no, he's there; he's this presence.  So that was very--I, I thought that was very nice.  I actually had the opportunity to go to a school that was a little bit heterogeneous.  Also, in a--and in a way, my grade school was predam--predominantly African American; however, when I went to high school, it was primarily--I was in the minority then.  But it was kind of interesting because the goal there was not so much that I was in the minority; the goal was what educational environment would provide me with the greatest skills that would allow me to excel in whatever I wanted to do.
Story_ID: 71303
Speaker 1: But I knew for a fact that by, by five that I was gonna be a physician; I knew absolute.  I thought I was gonna be a neurosurgeon, so--I mean there was no question.  Because my, my father and mother said that they wanted a doctor, and so I-
Speaker 2: Why a neurosurgeon--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: No, because I just--it must have been I must have saw a neurosurgeon.
Speaker 2: Did-
Speaker 1: I must have saw like-
Speaker 2: --did you think you--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: --'Ben Casey' or-
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: 'Dr. Kildare' or something, and I said, "Oh, definitely I'm gonna be a neurosurgeon."  But my--it was so funny my father says--and my, my father and mother said, you know, "I'd appreciate just one doctor."  And so my father said, "Well, you can be any kind of doctor you want."  So you know, it's really funny, because I ended up getting my Ph.D., and I ended up getting my M.D. degree, and I don't know why.  I, I, I mean, I mean the opportunity was there, and I took advantage of the opportunity.  But it--you know, sometimes I sometimes think, I said, "Well, I wonder if it's related to the fact that they told me that they wanted me to be a doctor, but I'm not--and I told them that I wanted to be a neurosurgeon."  And I, I didn't feel bad when I didn't select neurosurgery when I was in medical school.  I just felt that anesthesia was for me.  I was either gonna do surgery or anesthesia, and I just felt that was more--I just felt comfortable with that field of study.  But I just knew for sure.  And it was so funny because when I realized that I wanted to be a doctor, and I kept saying it, I just knew every--when I was six, seven, I would just do activities that were all centered around medicine and becoming a doctor.  And even when I got older I would try to shadow doctors; I'd try, try to talk to doctors, African American--I knew practically all the African-American doctors in Buffalo, New York.  And then when I went to--and then I knew some Caucasian physicians that also I had developed a rapport through my parents.  And that was--it was an impetus for me to continue my pursuit to become a doctor.
Speaker 2: So you really thought it a long time when you were this young.
Speaker 1: A long time.
Speaker 2: Did you role play as a doctor a lot or-
Speaker 1: I did a lot of--I had a lot of doctors' kids when I was growing up.  I gave a lot of injections when I was growing up.  And when people in my family became ill, they were would always call me and they'd ask me questions.  And I--it's just, I was there.  And I--and when I did--took courses--when I was in high school I took some college courses.  It was always courses that involved like biology or some dissection, because I always wanted to dissect things like rabbits, frogs.  I said oh, this will be so good because I just knew I was gonna be a surgeon.
Story_ID: 71304
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so did you--what kind of books did you read when you were coming up?
Speaker 2: I did--oh, this was, this was very interesting.  I always read Time magazine.  We had an allowance system in our house.  And twenty dollars a week was a lot; it was--that was a lot of money.  And so my dad said you could get twenty dollars a week if you read an article in Time magazine and give me a little--write me a little book report and tell me about it.  Oh, I definitely would get my twenty.  I, I would say okay.  I would say I would have my twenty dollars, because the reason why I wanted my twenty dollars was I had a school savings account.  And if I got twenty dollars, I could put it all in my school savings account because my parents never made me by anything on my--(unclear)--out of my own allowance, and that would just be money for college.  And believe it or not, when I was thirty, I finally went to that account to utilize some of the monies for school.  And I was surprised at how much I had accumulated.
Speaker 1: How much was in there?
Speaker 2: I think it was about twenty-five thousand dollars in that account.  I was shocked.  I was shocked.  You know those pic--I hadn't--I had several banks, little metal banks from the Buffalo Savings Bank [New York].  They were--one of them was for pennies, one was for dimes, one was for nickels; I had all those.  Then I would--my mom--when I was about five, I had this coupon book from the Erie County Savings Bank [New York].  It was my school savings.  If I put--if she put in--if I put in twenty, she'd match it twenty.  And she said, "Well, if you spend your money on candy, then that's less money you would have, and less money you'd have for school.  And ever since she would match it, I'd always put my twenty in, twenty dollars in.  I would always talk to a sister or a relative if I wanted some, something other than what my parents would buy, like candy, or an extra pair of clothing, or some shoes.  I didn't have the money, I'd, I'd always talk 'em into buying it because I really wanted to put my twenty dollars in the bank.  And I would never fail.  I was very religious about that, my twenty dollars in the bank.  And I, I'm so glad because it really paid off.  And as I got older I got a little bit more for doing various activities.  And then I would help my dad once in a while with his news distributing business, and the all those monies I would always put in my savings account.
Story_ID: 71305
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, tell me about school.  What school did you attend, and did you like school--I, I, I assume you did.
Speaker 2: I loved school.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: I went to Public School 74 [Buffalo, New York], which was a public school in the area for-
Speaker 1: What was the name of the black section of town in Buffalo [New York] that you lived in?
Speaker 2: Hamlin Park; it was called the Hamlin Park neighborhood [Buffalo, New York].  And I went to Public School 74 for kindergarten.  And then I guess it must have been zoning that occurred, and then I had to go to Public School 93 [Buffalo, New York] for just a very few grades, maybe until the fifth grade.  Then I went back to [Public] School 74 for the sixth, seventh, and eighth.  And then I went to Mount St. Joseph's Academy [Buffalo, New York] for ninth, tenth, eleventh, and, and twelfth grades; that was my high school, and that was a private high school.  And then after high school, then I went for a year at Canisius College in Buffalo [New York].  And then I went to Boston College [Massachusetts], where I graduated with a B.S. [bachelor's] in biology.  Then from there I did graduate studies at Southern Illinois University in Carbondale, Illinois, and I received a master's degree in health services administration.
Story_ID: 71306
Speaker 1: Okay, now I wanna stop and backtrack a little bit and go back-
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --to grade school, 'cause we're getting-
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --all the way through.  But what--how did you like grade school?  What, what did you do in grade school?  I mean-
Speaker 2: Grade I did a lot of--I, I read a lot.  We did, we did a lot of reading, a lot of grammar, English.  Math and science were pri--very important.  We'd also had quite an extensive music program.  I learned how to play a violin.  I took private piano lessons.  I also learned how to play a guitar, and I really developed a love for the symphony.  I, I loved classical music.
Speaker 1: Did you ever perform?
Speaker 2: I--every year we had piano recitals, and I would always perform, and then I was in the band.  I'd always perform, do a violin duet or a violin solo.
Speaker 1: Okay, were, were there any teachers that stood out as mentors or, or, or role models for you?
Speaker 2: I had it in my first grade teacher.  Her name was Ms. Darskey (ph.).  She probably thinks I'm the worst student she ever had, but I learned a lot from her.  It took us awhile to get to know each other, because for a about the whole two months I would never speak to her.  And she had to have my mother come in to school because she'd call me by--she mispronounced my name, so I really never thought she was talking to me.  So she would look at me and say this name, and so my mom got this letter that she needed to come to school.  And so my mother would say, "Well, why don't you talk to your teacher?"  I said, "She never calls me by my right name."  And it was--and then once we established the rapport, I would--she, she really taught us very good social skills.  She taught us how much fun it was to learn.  She was very instrumental in developing my love for astronomy and for the sciences.
Speaker 1: Okay, any, any, any other teachers that stand out?
Speaker 2: Any other teachers that I had?  Oh, I had this one eighth grade science teacher, Ms. Cohen; she was very nice.  She just really devoted her whole life to biology and the study of biology, and she knew it so well.  And it was so much a part of her life that you could learn vast amounts of information from her if you could just sit down and just realize the importance of biology, it's relationship to life; and everything in life kind of revolves around the study of biology.  So that was important.  It just furthered my interest in medicine, and it was an impetus for me to continue with my studies.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you get pretty good grades in school?
Speaker 2: I would have had A's and B's throughout, throughout my entire education.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what about high school?  What, what, what was high school like?
Speaker 2: High school?  I was in a private school.  I actually was in the minority.  But at the time-
Speaker 1: Was it an all-girls school?
Speaker 2: It was an all-girls school.
Speaker 1: Okay. And I think it was two African Americans.
Speaker 2: Was it outside of Buffalo [New York]?
Speaker 1: It was in Buffalo, New York, Mount St. Joseph's Academy.
Speaker 2: Okay, did you-
Speaker 1: I was Buffalo, New York.
Speaker 2: --have stay there overnight or any-
Speaker 1: No, we did not have to stay there overnight.  And it was very interesting.  The mix of people were entirely different, people I did not--and I wa--I was not used to at all, but I--it was very easy for me to adjust to my classmates.  My--I, I, I, I can only relate it to the very good skills that my father lent to me.  And they would--it was very easy for me to establish friends, very easy for me to understand the differences, and I just used it as a time for me to develop my educational skills.  Yes, these people pra--had different, entirely different lifestyles than I had in terms of what--I'm sure their economic status was probably three or four times mine, but at the time, I did not even think about that; that wasn't even a factor.  I knew I was gonna go to school; I knew I was gonna have a good time; I knew--
Story_ID: 70852
Speaker 1: So we're talking about high school, and you're talking about the differences in some, some of the students.  And that you, you didn't really let it worry you.
Speaker 2: No, I mean it wasn't even a worry.  Actually, I, in retrospect, I only knew that may--that we were very different.  I knew that when I was in high school everything that I needed to accomplish what I thought was important, which was to receive a good education, I had.  I had friends.  I had the support of my family.  I didn't have to work.  There was no problem in terms of financial resources.  And surprisingly enough, even if it were, I would have never known it, because my father would never, ever say anything about it would be a financial struggle to do anything that related to my education.  I went to Europe for--when I was in high school.  I went to Italy; I went to France; I went to Germany.  It was all of a part of a travel study international.  I had no idea that me--it didn't even occur to me that maybe my parents couldn't afford it.  My father just asked me did I wanna go, and I said yes.  And I knew for a fact--I always relied upon him--that definitely I was gonna go no matter what.  And it, it didn't even--I didn't even occur to me that maybe it might be too expensive, and he never gave me that impression.  Never in my did he give me the impression that, oh, it might be too costly or that we were even living on a budget, or even with six children he had would he slight one for the other.  I never had that impression.  But now, in retrospect, I know that to have children it's very costly.  But I, I had never-
Speaker 1: So you think it was a struggle for him?
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sure, I'm sure it was.  I mean we, we were able to go to private schools.  All of us went to college.  None of us had loans for college; it was all paid for.  We all were able to--if we, we desired to get married, it was weddings were paid for, my parents.  We, some of us went to graduate school.  I mean parents were there to provide the resources.  Very few loans were taken out.  And now, when I think about it, my father was on a very limited income.  He worked very hard.  And his two jobs, he needed those two jobs.  But he--I guess it was an attitude and his approach to life and the purpose as to why he was doing it.  It never seemed to him to appear as if it was a burden, nor was it too difficult, or financially we would never make it.
Speaker 1: That's something.  So-
Speaker 2: And he never wanted us to work.  So I never got the impression that maybe we, we might need the money.  So it was just that my job was to develop an education and to, to get, get a sound education.  So what my father was able to give to me I could give back at a later date, whether it be to my family, as well as to my community, I could give something in return.
Story_ID: 70853
Speaker 1: Were your parents real involved in the community?
Speaker 2: My father was very involved.  Interestingly, my father was a Republican.  Everybody thinks that African Americans are not Republicans.  And that was--and, and a lot of people tell me that now.  I don't know why, but they do.
Speaker 1: Well, it's pretty much true that most of them are Democrats-
Speaker 2: And I guess-
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: --the reason why I'm a Republican is my dad was a Republican.  But I--my father was a Republican.  He did a lot in his community of--for campaigns for Republicans.  My father was very instrumental in having the first African-American representatives elected in the area. And he was a--is very support--he was very supportive of his community.  He was very involved with our neighborhood block club for as far as various holidays, as far as planning both educational, as well as social activities.  My father was very active in his church.  My father spent practically ninety percent of his free time of doing a community service.
Speaker 1: With two jobs, there wasn't a lot of free time I guess.
Speaker 2: And it wasn't a lot of free time, but when my father wasn't--when my father was off, he--ninety to ninety-five percent of the time he was doing something for community.  He did well on the little sleep he received.  I would say my father probably never slept more than five or six hours a night.  And he liked to do sports; my father liked to run; my father loved to play tennis; and he loved to play basketball.
Speaker 1: It seems like he was busy (laughter).
Speaker 2: He was very busy.  He was very busy.
Story_ID: 70854
Speaker 1: Okay.  So in high school you still, you know, you still had de--decided that you would be a doctor, right?
Speaker 2: And that--it was no question; I knew I was gonna be a doctor.  I was gonna--I enrolled in premed courses.  I was ready.  I geared, geared my college preparation toward medicine.  There were certain requirements I knew I had to fulfill with respect to languages, with respect to the English.  I'd completed those, but my focus was medical school.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what was it like when you graduated from high school?  I mean what, what did you--did, did you know where you were going to-
Speaker 2: Well, I wasn't sure.  I wanted to go away, but I think I wasn't sure where I wanted to go, so I decided to, for a year, stay at home and go to a local college, which I selected at Canisius College [Buffalo, New York], which was actually right across the street from my high school.  And I stayed there a year.  And then I was talking with friends and relatives in Massachusetts, and they were telling me about Boston College and that they did have a good nursing program.  They had an undergraduate program, good premedical program.  And if I decided on medicine or I choo--chose another field, the opportunity would be available if I went to Boston College [Massachusetts].  So I received a partial scholarship to Boston College [Massachusetts], and I enrolled in Bos--at Boston College [Massachusetts].  And I did my sophomore, junior, and senior years and graduated in 1976.
Speaker 1: Now when you were in high school in an--in ki--college, you know, were you socially active and active with clubs and at-
Speaker 2: I planned-
Speaker 1: -and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: I liked--I loved to ski, so I did a lot of skiing, so I was involved in the ski club.  I liked to horseback ride, so I was involved in the riding club.  I worked with the policy development Student Government, so I participated in the Student Government.  I was also--I had a love for music, so I played my violin; I played the guitar; occasionally I played the piano.
Story_ID: 70855
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so when you graduated from Boston U [sic, Boston College, Massachusetts], what was next?
Speaker 2: Well, I left Boston College [Massachusetts], and I wasn't sure what I wanted to do.  I had--I a--applied to medical school, and I did not get accepted to medical school.  I--it was--I was told that I'd probably needed to go to graduate school to just develop my background in sciences, a little bit more depth in the sciences.  I wasn't disappointed.  Initially I probably was disappointed, but it wasn't a deterrent to say that I wouldn't go into medicine.
Speaker 1: What med school did you apply to?
Speaker 2: I applied to Howard [University, Washington D.C.]; I applied to the University of New York at Buffalo; and I applied to New York University.  So after receiving that information, I decided that it was time to enroll in under--into graduate school.  And I wanted to do something related to healthcare, so I enrolled in health services administration, and I also took a lot of courses in biology, biochemistry, and courses I knew that would increase my depth and appreciation for the sciences, and augment my knowledge base, and to make me a better candidate for when I do apply to medical school.
Story_ID: 70856
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that being done, and what, what, what med school did you, you actually go to?
Speaker 2: I eventually went to the Chicago Medical School [Finch University of Health Sciences, Illinois].  I actually got accepted to thirteen medical schools the second time around, and I couldn't believe it.  I said, "Wow, got none, now I got thirteen."  So it, it was--then I, I had decided on the Chicago Medical School [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Why did you choose Chicago Medical [School, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Well, I liked the curriculum it had to offer.  I've--Cook County [Hospital, Illinois], it just--when I went down to Cook County [Hospital, Illinois], it was just such a large institution.  And I felt that if I went to this medical school, it would definitely be an opportunity for me to see a variety of disease processes, which would help me as a clinician once I was out of formal, formal education.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, what was it like?  Did it meet your expectations?
Speaker 2: Medical school was interesting.  It makes you very humble; it makes you understand that you really have to budget your time, that you can get stressed out, and you have to keep everything under control.  And it was the first time in my life that I really had to say, all right, I can only exercise for a few minutes; I have to pick this time to eat; I have to pick this time to sleep, and I--and the other time, I have to study.  This was a--'cause it was a ongoing process.  Then I realized, as I was getting as--the more I--as the years progressed and the more medicine I studied, I kind of realized that this was gonna be an ongoing lifelong process, that I would never actually stop learning, that it will be continual.  And if I wanted to be a good clinician, I had to know what I needed to know to pass my exams.  But I also needed to realize that once the process was over, I still need to continually read to gain knowledge so that I grow and keep up.
Speaker 1: Knowledge is always growing in the medical field I guess.  And if you stay still, you're gonna be passed by--(unclear).
Speaker 2: I guess it's kind of like you, you develop a certain type of stagnancy, and learning is very dynamic.  It's a kind of continuous two-way process: you give something, you take something.  And while, as now, as a clinician, I'm not in a formal institution of education, but through meetings, through professional magazines, through various textbooks that I read periodically, it's--I, I realize that there's always knowledge I have to gain.
Story_ID: 70857
Speaker 1: Okay, was--were you ever in a, in a crisis where you thought you wouldn't make it?
Speaker 2: Not really a crisis where I wouldn't make it, but I realized that sometimes things were more challenging when I did certain courses.  You tell yourself, "Oh, you can never get through"--you would never get through, you'd never memorize this vast amount of material.  When I settled down and just realized that it was there, I either sank or I swam, I'd always manage to get a job.  The worse course in my life was statistics.  I couldn't believe that they wanted me to do statistics in medical school.  Why would I need statistics?  It would nev--I'd never need it, and now I use it quite a bit.  But at that time I didn't think I'd need it.  I said, "Oh, this is very boring."  I took the first exam I think it was like my first C.  I was heartbroken.  I was really heartbroken.  I said I can't believe I did all this and I, I had earned a C.  And it was, it was just the approach I had.  So I find--I found a colleague.  I found this colleague of mine, and I remember distinctly her name was Pam.  She would just study nonstop, and she needed a partner, and I needed a partner for study.  And I said, "Now if I can just hook up with her, I'm sure I could get through."  Interestingly enough, it was very--it was quite interesting.  The final grades were out, and everybody says, "Did you go see what you, you had on your exam?"  I said, "No, I don't even wanna see it," because it was so hard.  I got the highest grade.  I just couldn't believe it.  I was like, me?  And it was, it was really funny.  We were kind of laughing as a group, 'cause everybody says who got the--because I didn't know I had it, but you can kind of count because it was I.D. numbers, and everybody knew that I was like the sixth one from the bottom.  They--so everybody came to me and they said, "Westbrook, what did you get on the exam?"  And so I said, "I have no idea what I got on the exam."  And so everybody was smiling, so I kind of figured they kind of surmised that I had gotten the highest grade, and, and quite naturally I did so that was kind of quite interesting.  And I--from that day on, I think at that point I realized in my career that it was nothing too difficult that I could pursue.  And it was enough for me to just apply myself and do a good job.  My biochemistry, which everybody dreaded in medical school, was actually quite fun for me.  All my other courses were fun.  My physiology, because I could apply it to everyday living, and the disease processes that exist, and I actually saw patients in the hospital that had those processes, or had a physiologic dysfunction, that it was, it was very easy for me.  And when I went to my clinical, it was very easy.  I had no problems.  It was just getting over the initial fear, and the first year realizing that you--life is not--you're not gonna have all the free time that you normally have.  And once you realize that, it's okay, because now I even have less free time than I've had.  I've probably worked fourteen to sixteen hours, but it's okay, because I will have time in which I will take time out to do some of the things I want to.  But in essence, I'm very fulfilled because I'm able to do what I prepared--I've spent a lifetime kind of preparing for.  I wanted to help people, and I wanted to be able to deliver quality health care.  I think as an anesthesiologist and a pain management specialist I'm able to do that.  I kind of like the fact that colleagues call me and ask me what I--what are my opinions. I--
Story_ID: 70858
Speaker 1: --Before I went to medical school, I did have the opportunity to get my PhD, so I learned a lot about writing and dissertation writing.  So because of that, like I'm able to write in professional journals; I developed that skill, and, and that, and that's--for me it's very rewarding because now I can give something back.  And it kind of relates--I can distinctly remember when your parents tell you, you now I want you to go to school because I want you to do something or, or be something.  And it's--you know, now it's: you can see it; you're doing it; you're seeing patients; you're doing something for them; you're trying to make your community a better place by delivering health care, the skill, or the, or the education that I've received, now I can actually deliver.  Sometimes I can even see where it's been beneficial.  Sometimes patients can come back and say, "Oh, well, Dr. Westbrook, thank you very much," and sometimes it's very rewarding.  Occasionally when I administer anesthesia, and I participate and help patients that are very ill, that--sometimes it's, it's very difficult for them to undergo a certain surgical procedure.  It's very reward, even though sometimes they don't even come back and say thank you.  It's just very rewarding that you know you could help them.  You can make their life better.  They were able to get through this particular procedure, and it was with your help.  And, and that is, is, is very rewarding.  It's like when you start--when you're ini--when I initially started medical school, no.  Did I kind of see where life would lead, or did I see where I would be?  Not necessarily.  I thought I would deliver health care at--when you first start medical school you really--I mean I could say when I was five I wanted to be a neurosurgeon, but as time developed in medical school, there were so many opportunities.  Did I wanna go in surgery?  Did I wanna go in obstetrics?  Did I wanna go into pathology?  All of them were very interesting to me.  But then as time progressed, and as I was able to focus on certain areas in medicine, then your focus narrows.  Then I wanted to be more specialized.  And then when I chose anesthesia, then when I did my residency, I also wanted to be more specialized, which I developed, became involved in pain management.  So it's kind of the two, the anesthesia and the pain management.  These are my specialties.  This is what I have to offer.  This is my expertise which I can offer to my community, and it, it--to me it's extremely rewarding.  I don't even have to have someone say thank you.  I just need to know that based upon the knowledge and the skills that I have, I can do something to ease someone's pain.  I can do someone--something--to make their quality of life better.
Story_ID: 70859
Speaker 1: Okay, now, most people may know, but what, what, what is an anesthesiologist and what is pain management?
Speaker 2: All right, an anesthesiologist is that it--well, you--okay, anesthesia is like a free of sensation, meaning in, in a very general sense.  And anesthesiology is the study of anesthesia, but it's through various methods that you can free someone of a sensation.  It can be a conscious type of--and they can be unconscious.  They can be awake, but you can still make them free of, of pain or free of a sensation just by giving them medication; whereas, if it's a very detailed, very long surgery such as a lung transplant or a heart transplant, they are unconscious and you can maintain their vital signs; you can maintain the patient by using anesthesia.  You use inhalational gas, as well as to--you use an inhalational gas to maintain their functions while they are unconscious.  You are actually breathing for the patient; you are actually ventilating for the patient if they are unconscious.  So it's--anesthesia is just say, loss of sensation.  It can be conscious, unconscious, and basically you are taking over for that patient while they are undergoing a surgical procedure.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, pain management, and what, what would you do?
Speaker 2: Pain management is you are utilizing various skills to provide relief of pain an acute basis, as well as a chronic basis.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And managing pain can be as simple as providing a prescription for someone or can be as detailed as implanting an intrathecal drug-infusion device for a terminal cancer patient.
Speaker 1: Okay, so your, your job there is to reduce the pain--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: It's to reduce the pain to make the quality of life better.
Story_ID: 70860
Speaker 1: Okay, now, yeah, I'm gonna ask you--this just, just popped into my head here, but, but what amount of acupuncture--is that--I mean, Western physicians don't study that, but don't.  Is there any, any--does acupuncture actually work?
Speaker 2: Acupuncture has its role in pain management.  It can be utilized in conjunctions with medication.  It used to be reserved for a lot--a lot of Chinese, oriental physicians utilized acupuncture; however, there ac--schools of acupuncture within the United States now.  And basically, there are certain points and lines, meridian lines, which can be simulated through very fine needles to provide relief of pain.  I think it does have its place in Western medicine.  It does have its limitations.
Speaker 1: What are the limitations of acupuncture?
Speaker 2: There are certain procedures you cannot do with utilizing acupuncture.  I have seen acupuncturist try to do an internal podalic inversion [sic, version] where, say for instance, this--what I mean by that is where a patient is pregnant, and they are--the, the fetus is in the breach position.  And they've actually tried through acupuncture to change the position of the baby.  I have not seen that work.  It's--and it's very difficult for--I mean that--there, there has to be some kind of manipulation, physical manipulation, or just occur spontaneously.  But I've never seen the version from a breach to a normal presentation done using acupuncture.  Surgeries, depend--if it's an open heart surgery, I've not seen open heart surgery done under acupuncture.  I just think the--your depth of anesthesia, the depth at which you need to be insensate needs to be much deeper than what could be provided utilizing acupuncture.  So it's just certain procedures you can do with utilizing acupuncture, and certain procedures require more a deeper state of unconsciousness.
Story_ID: 70861
Speaker 1: Now, what are the limits of anesthesia?  I mean right, right now as when--is there, is there certain kinds of--are there certain kinds of pain that really are--or a certain type of pain that's resistant to most-
Speaker 2: Well, there's various types of pain.  There's neuropathic pain; there's visceral pain; and then there's somatic pain; and there's also phantom limb pain; there's acute pain; there's chronic pain; and--I mean while types--well, somatic, visceral, neuropathic, phantom limb pain--they can overlap.  They can be both acute and chronic, but you use different drugs to treat different types of pain.  Some are very resistant.  And there are also reflect sympathetic dystrophy.  It's sometimes--it, it, it's very different--difficult type of pain to treat because it's persistent pain, but it doesn't have to be related necessarily to a traumatic event, but it can be the persistent pain.  You can actually see some physiologic changes in skin color and some--with RSD or reflex sympathetic dystrophy it's sometimes very resistant to just taking a narcotic medication.  I have utilized other treatments.  I've utilized neuropathic medications.  I've also utilized a modality called a spinal cord stimulator where you would implant an electrode into the epidural space, you know, implant--internally implant a generator so they can turn it off and turn it on so that this electrode can provide stimulation to the painful area and hopefully diminish or modify the pain.  It's--phantom limb pain, when a person has an amputation, is sometimes very difficult for them to be pain free.  Sometimes there's a sensation that the limb is still on, attached.
Speaker 1: And it actually hurts--(unclear)-
Speaker 2: It, it can be, it can be pain, or they'll feel like they have foot pain, but their foot is not there.  It's--there's a lot of research that's available now that basically states that if these patients do present to hospital, present for surgery, and you are actually able to block the pain receptors prior to the amputation, the likelihood of phantom limb pain may be significantly diminished.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there, is there any--are there any particular differences in how most black people perceive pain and, and others or, or are most races or--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: I think it's a cultural--I think it's definitely culture.  It's how you're trained.  I also think it's a function of your environment.  My parents were never sick; both my parents were very healthy.  I was never ill as a child.  I think I'd come--I had one laceration as a child.  I really--my reaction to pain is very limited.  I have seen--but the amp--fortune--the fortunate thing, I have seen people in pain, so I have seen a variety of pain types, so I know how to treat those.  But me personally, my response to pain is if it's there, let's get rid of it, fix it so we can move on.  Sometimes you don't have that opportunity, and sometimes that is very perplexing for me.  And I try as much as I can for my patients to--if the pain can't be completely eradicated to at least minimize it so that they have a good quality of life.  There are certain cancer pains.  There are chronic pains you just--there's no cure for cancer, so we kind of have to treat these symptoms.  We have to treat the pain, and it may necessitate large qualities of medication, as well as different types of medications, depending upon the different types of pain.
Story_ID: 70541
Speaker 1: Okay, we're rolling. Let me ask you want I just asked off camera, on camera.  Do--I know there are--in--individuals approach pain dif--differently.  And I just wanna ask you, does one's world view or approach to life affect how they could view-
Speaker 2: Oh-
Speaker 1: --themselves in pain-
Speaker 2: --I'm sure.  You are a function of your environment.  There's no question about that.  You learn from your environment.  There are certain roles that people play, and you--there's a certain amount of self-esteem, a certain amount of importance with each role.  I'm sure you'll find in certain communities, and it's across all types of cultures, individuals that have been very sick or have received a lot of attention from the sick role still, despite the fact that they're feeling better, they'll even--they'll always be something wrong with them because they--if they're not sick they lost their identity.  Now you're asking a person that's been sick all their life now to be well, and they won't receive the attention that they received before.  Unless there's something in their environment to replace that type of attention or another avenue where they can direct their energies, then it's very difficult for them to be satisfied that they're okay.  They're very disappointed.  It's like nothing is satisfying to them.  So when I treat patients, I do that into consideration.  My young patients have particularly--I love to get--see what's the problem, treat their pain, get them back into the mainstream of their activities so that this is not so debilitating.  Because if it is very debilitating where they have to spend a, a lot of time away from the workplace, a lot of time away from their family, it can be very depressing.  They can develop a very--a despondency, and it can really affect their livelihood.  It can just affect their outlook on life.  And if--I've seen people lose jobs, seen people lose families because of illness.  And if the illness is not treated appropriately in all aspects of the illness treated, I--a, a person can really lose their self-identity.
Story_ID: 70542
Speaker 1: Do you have a--do you have some sort of psychological approach?  Do you have--is there a psychological approach that it is deep down just has to people who are, are constantly saying they're in pain, but may not necessarily be suffering from a, a real physical problem, or is there, there--or, or is there a way to make people feel better psychologically rather than-
Speaker 2: Well, you--I mean-
Speaker 1: --using anesthesia?
Speaker 2: When I, when I approach patients I always talk to them about their pain.  I ask them to describe the quality of their pain.  I ask them even to rate their pain.  I use a visual analog scale - zero being no pain, ten being the worse pain.  If they can rate it, then I ask them what would--with the treatment or without--the relationship they've established with me as the pain management specialist, what would be their goal.  What would be an acceptable pain level?  People that--patients that have had pain for twenty years sometimes very difficult to eradicate their pain, but they might have a level which they feel comfortable with that will allow them to engage in other types of activities than just focusing on their sickness.  So I kind of try to establish rapport, look at some of their social factors, look at some of the psychological factors.  I have--they--I feel that there are a lot of psychological facts which hinder their treatment, then I will recommend a psychological evaluation, maybe to be followed by a psychiatrist for a certain period of time, because if there's not a balance between the psycho social and physiologic well-being of the patient, then it's very difficult for you to see progress.
Story_ID: 70543
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, now what about--I know there are those who warn against physical activity because it's gonna cause pain in them.  There's a--I mean (unclear)--initially people who haven't exercised in a long time do feel some pain after exercise.  But do you, do you think that, that the best course is to be still on, (laughter) or do you think that pe--people should try, try to move as much as they can, you know?
Speaker 2: Well, I'mma, I'mma big--I'm, I'm a proponent of exercising.  I actually like to engage in exercise myself; however, I, I think as we get older, we--if we don't exercise on a daily basis, then we kind of get--we become stagnant, your joints, muscles become very stiff.  We kind of per--kind of help or perpetuate the aging process.  I mean there are certain things that we can avoid.  I mean we're, we're gonna get older.  We could have--break down the tissues.  We have certain environmental exposures which we can't control, but it's our ability to exercise and to take charge of our own health so that we maintain and de--kind of diminish the rate at which we degenerate.  And I think through daily exercise, through well-balanced diet, and through good social interactions, then we are able to live a more wholesome life.
Speaker 1: Have you ever had patients come to you with the hopes of being anesthetized who really didn't--I mean who are--who wants--who want the medication?  I mean it, it--where the--well, let me put it like this, the, the medication is the mo--the motive for them coming to you to treat?
Speaker 2: Yes, I've patients who want medication for other purposes than for pain.  It could be for recreational purposes.  I'm sure there's a lot of news press regarding drug abuse, drug misuse, and drug addiction.
Speaker 1: s it easy to spot that kind?
Speaker 2: It some--it sometimes it's very easy.  There are individuals that have--this is a business.  They, they do this as a way of life, and sometimes it is not always easy.  However, I utilize a physician/patient open agreement.  I also do random uring--urine--testing for drugs.  And if my patients--if the urine doesn't detect the medication that they're receiving, then their contract is void, and that's explicitly stated in the agreement I have with each patient.  There are some patients actually, unfortunately sell their medication, and this is a behavioral or practice that I try--I'm very cautious, I'm very cognizant of it, but I'm very cautious.  And if I ever sense that that is occurring, then I will discuss it with the patient.  Patients had frequently lose their medication, or the medication is eat by a dog, or it fell down the toilet, these are big red flags for me that maybe there's--the medicine is being used for purposes other than what it was prescribed.  And you might laugh, but I think it's quite funny, but it does happen and you don't want it to happen.  But there--there's a lot of misuse of drugs in the United States.
Story_ID: 70544
Speaker 1: Okay, tell, tell me this, though, what has been I guess the--can, can you think of a particular case, or, or, or cases, that have been more challenging than others.  I mean where, where you really had to, you know, stretch a little bit to figure out what's going on?
Speaker 2: Certain types of pain is sometimes very difficult to treat.  Atypical facial pain is very difficult to treat.  Some--as we--another illness which-
Speaker 1: Is that--I'm sorry.  Is that the, the, what they call, TMJ that, that-
Speaker 2: That could be-
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: --Temporomandibular joint pain is atypic--is a, is a type of atypical facial pain.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--horrible pain.
Speaker 2: It's a horrible pain-
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: --sometimes surgery, sometimes medication, it can be a combination, but in spite of that, it's still very difficult.  I do have some patients that have TMJ [temporomandibular joint pain].  It's very difficult.  Another illness that is very difficult, and it happens among the elderly quite often, is shingles, herpes zoster virus.  And if it's pain that's persistent after a patient contracts the herpes zoster virus, it's known as postherpetic neuralgia.  I've read of historical accounts where elderly patients had this pain.  It's very debilitating.  It's a neuropathic pain.  They developed what's known as tactile allodynia, where a normal touch on, on the skin will just--it's, it's so excruciatingly painful that, that they're unable to put clothes on.  They're unable to even put a sheet on a particular portion of their body.  I--and, and because it's so painful, people will commit suicide because they, they just can't live.  They, they find that this pain is so debilitating it destroys their normal life.  And if they can't have their normal life, they don't wanna live.
Story_ID: 70545
Speaker 1: Okay, now, is there anything else that, that you need--that, that, that you wanna tell us about, about your, your, your work that we haven't asked you?
Speaker 2: I, I find pain management and anesthesia very rewarding.  It's, it's a way to help people function and improve their quality of life in spite of their illness.  And in many situations this illness can be very chronic, and if it is chronic, you are able to participate in improving their quality of life.  Acute pain in many instances is easier to treat because there's a temporariness to the pain; there's a period of time which the pain is going to be there, and then there's a period of time in which it's gonna go away, but you still can participate in that process.  I often had the opportunity to provide anesthesia for women that are in labor.  Childbearing is a very wonderful time.  Along with the process there's some pain.  There are modalities that can be utilized to help diminish the pain so that this experience is very pleasant.  I do enjoy participating in that process.  There are individuals that have back pain and are completely debilitated, and they have had years of back pain.  The fact that I may be able to help them, that I can change that process, kind of turn things around so that they're able to enjoy some of the things that they are used to enjoying, it is very gratifying.  It doesn't necessarily mean to me that when you reach your golden years you just break down.  A lot--I've heard a lot of my patients say that their golden years are not actually the best years.  And this is where I try to emphasize to my patients the importance of a proactive approach to life.  It's not necessarily where a pain pill is gonna make the critical difference.  It might be that you may need medication, but I think it's a combination of your outlook, your ability to help yourself.  And this may mean that okay, I might have to walk a couple of miles a day; I might have to cut back on certain foods; I might have to make modifications in life.  But to make those modifications and to improve the quality of life, I think that's a gift that we just can't ignore.
Story_ID: 70546
Speaker 1: And we need to think about it every day.  Every day that I wake up I kind of say, oh, great, it's a new day; it's new challenge.  And I usually wake up in the morning probably a little bit earlier than the average American.  I get probably about four o'clock [4:00] in the morning, but I need that time because I run four to six miles every morning.  And I need that for me, because I like--I, I think exercise is important.  I think it makes you function better.  A day for me can be very stressful, but I think it's the fact that I do take time out to exercise.  I do take time out to take care of myself that allows me to handle whatever may occur.  And I think not only is that applicable to myself, but I try to impart that upon my patients, that it's very important.  You have to feed your body.  You have to provide it with the exercise.  You have to provide it with the rest.  And you can't--if your body is resisting or saying no to something, or there's some signals that there is something not quite right, it's a reason for that.  Maybe there's a need for you to change something.  But to ignore it, I, I, I feel that's when we get in trouble.  That's when normal physiologic processes begin to break down, when, say for instance, as simple as our diet, smoking.  I don't smoke.  Is it--I, I just have--thought it's very detrimental to your body.  There are actually patients I have that can't live without it.  And you, you think how could let one little white stick control your life?  Well, it's--for some people it's not that easy, and it's just to throw the white stick away and say, "Okay, I'm not gonna smoke anymore."  Through certain practices, whether they're good or they're bad, if you practice it enough it becomes habit.  Sometimes it's very difficult to break a habit.  I know myself I used to be obese, morbidly obese.  I just made a decision.
Speaker 2: How much did you weigh?
Speaker 1: Probably about two hundred, a little over hundred pounds.
Speaker 2: That doesn't sound morbidly obese, two hundred.
Speaker 1: Well, for my height and weight it was definitely fifty--greater than fifty pounds over my ideal body weight.  That's more--that's, that's obese, morbidly obese.
Speaker 2: Now how, how, how long were you that, that, that big?
Speaker 1: When I was growing up.  When I was growing up I was definitely obese.  And I, I just liked to eat and not exercise.  And then I realized that there's certain things I liked to do.  I liked to play tennis; I liked to go out, certain things.  And I just one day just took a long look in the mirror and said if--it's no way that you're gonna be able to do the things you wanna do and maintain this lifestyle.  There's just certain things you have to change.  My parents were pretty healthy, and I was probably the heaviest one in my family, and of course the fact that you're not attractive and you're overweight, it kind of makes you self-conscious.  And those are all things that affect you as a person, and I think some of those things did affect me.  And it was kind--it prompted me one time--one, when I was in graduate school, I told myself I just wanted to run a mile.  All I wanted to do was to walk and run a mile.  If I could do that I would be all right.  Now, I wanna run ten miles.  So it's, it's--so it's, it's, it's--once you start something, you kind of develop it.  And I just told myself, if I could just lose a little weight.  Now, oh, sure, I could always lose a little weight, even now.  But I know I, I, I--through the process of just modifying certain lifestyle, I know when things are kind of not on balance.  I kind of know what things are healthy for me, what's good for me, and I try to focus on those things.  Sometimes, sure, everybody wants to go out and have dessert, but is that necessarily healthy?  No--I mean, so, eat tofu (laughter).  Some people say, "Oh, I hate tofu."
Speaker 2: Are you a vegetarian?
Speaker 1: No, but I would say about ninety, ninety-five percent of my diet consists of vege--vegetarian, legumes, grapes.  I really am not a very big meat eater.  I have not--I say I think you do need meat at certain times.  I actually have no problems, but I do like the--I, I do like to limit the amount of meat that I do have in my diet.  I wanna limit the amount of fats that I have in my diet.  I'll--and I do like protein.  I think that's why I eat a lot of tofu, and I focus more on not, not meat protein, not like animal protein.  I will do more soybeans and tofu.  Soymilk is just soy, soy nuts--eat and--eat those as a, as a form of protein, as opposed to just a lot of animal, animal fat.
Story_ID: 70547
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let me just switch gears here a second and just ask you--now, you're, you're, you're in Aberdeen, South Dakota.  I know you worked for a na--number of places.  You've been in Maryland and been--you, you were in Chicago [Illinois] in school, and how did you wind up in Aberdeen, South Dakota?  And it's, it's not easy to find black people in Aberdeen, South Dakota, if you're not from around here, so.  I know we, we had some difficulty finding people to interview, so--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: It's, it's, it's interesting.  I actually--I, I, I think the reason why I ch--select the places where I live I think is a function of my lifestyle.  It's probably a function of my educational background.  I did--I grew up in an urban environment.  Then my college experiences were totally different from an urban population.  And the activities I do are so away from the mainstream of an urban population.  I like to hike; I like to run; I like to ski; I'm a big hunter now in my older age.  And so now since I like to do those things on a social level, I try to--since I'm working more so--more than doing anything else, I've decided that for me, it's very important for me to be in an environment where I can engage in those social activities, as well as be able to work and do what I like best, which is practicing medicine.  I spent some of my training in New Hampshire and Vermont.  And I really enjoyed the (unclear)--it was more, more tranquil, less populated environment, and I was able to--I, I never ran and, and saw so much beauty as I did when I lived in Vermont.  Some days I could get up on a Sunday or Saturday morning and run fifteen miles and not even realize I ran the fifteen miles and feel so refreshed.  Some days I could just canoe down the Connecticut River and just say--just think about really all the beauty that God created.  And, and I--from that point on, I said I never wanted to be far away from that type of beauty.  And then I actually had the opportunity to work permanently in Vermont and New Hampshire.  It was a very hard choice.  And then the opportunity for me to practice in Aberdeen, South Dakota, came along.  I went to Aberdeen, and that was the first thing all my friends would say: you won't like it; it's not very populated.  But they don't realize where I had lived in Vermont and New Hampshire.  Actually, I lived in--the population in Vermont was eight thousand people; that my house and the next house was about a mile and a half or two.  I lived on a big farm, one hundred ten acres, a big farmhouse with some horses and some dogs.  I fell in love with it.  And I was able to hunt ducks, hunt deer, muzzleload[er] turkeys; I loved it.  And what I've learned about myself--and I think I developed this from my parents and through my educational process--is, you know you say adapt, migrate, or die.  I, I just learned to adapt.  I've learned to find the beauty out of the most simplistic things.  And if I had my choice, I'd like to be as close to nature as possible.  I'm a big runner, whether it's in the wintertime or sweating in the summertime, I need to be outdoors.  When I came to South Dakota I just saw all this prairieland.  I said, "Oh, I've gotta be there."  And then when I talked to a lot of the physicians in the area who are hunters, sports people that really enjoy the outdoors, and I just fell in love with it.  I, in whatever free time I have, have two marvelous hunting dogs, a chocolate lab and a black lab, and they're like my best buds.  We do--we go hunting together, and I've enjoyed it, not so much just the killing for the sake of killing something, it's just I enjoy the sport, and I enjoy the nature; I enjoy being out with nature, and it's my--I just feel very natural; it's, it's my element; I just, I feel very comfortable.  And when I came out here initially, I sensed that very comfortable feeling.  And because of that, I really wanted to move to South Dakota.  Now after being here like two years, I still feel that comfort zone.  I feel that closeness to nature.
Story_ID: 70548
Speaker 1: It's not densely populated.  The number of African-American people are limited in this area, but my zest for life is just to meet people, to practice medicine, to give back to whatever community I am in the skills and impart knowledge to that community to make that community better informed.  I see African Americans, not as many as you would, say, in a particularly urban setting, but I feel that I still am making a contribution.  You say how could--I mean it's very cold here.  How can you stand the cold weather?  I grew up-
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) On Buffalo, New York--
Speaker 1: --in Buffalo, New York.  It's cold.  (Laughter) I mean we had a lot of snow.  I did a lot of skiing when I was in Buffalo, New York.  I loved it.  I--it--to me it's basically no different.  In essence, with respect to practicing medicine, health care delivery, people--I mean you're helping people.  You're helping people when they can't help themselves.  That's no different for me whether I'm in an urban area or whether I'm in a very remote area.
Speaker 2: Now, now is there--is the black community here a community as such?
Speaker 1: I think the community--there's a very small number of African Americans, but there is networking within the group-
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --of you--the, the, the ta--the networking ties are not as strong, because the numbers of people within the community-
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--there a sense-
Speaker 1: --are not-
Speaker 2: --of, of unity and continuity or something-
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: --in the community.
Speaker 1: There's a sense of continuity.  There's a sense of belongingness, and there is that communication, or the camaraderie between us that, "My door is always open if you need me."  And sure, let some--let's go the extra mile and do things together.  And it's not even an extra mile.  It's just a matter of friendship.  Let's get together.
Speaker 2: Okay, we're gonna pause, change tape right here.  We'll probably try to wrap up I guess.
Story_ID: 70549
Speaker 1: We're rolling again. I wanted to ask you about--now you're in the [U.S.] Air Force Reserves.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, now tell us about that.  Now what do you--'cause we were off camera when we talked about it (laughter)--just as a-
Speaker 2: Well, in the, in the--I'm a flight surgeon [sic, anesthesiologist] in the Air Force Reserves, and I--we are out of Andrews Air Force Base [Washington D.C.].  And basically what we do is we maintain the health of the unit.  And if in, in, in--peacetime mission is to just maintain health care within the unit.  But in a wartime mission, wherever we're called to serve, we want to deliver health care to victims in need.  We also fly C-141s.  Those-
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: --are the car-
Speaker 1: So you actually pilot a C-
Speaker 2: 141.
Speaker 1: --141?  This was a cargo plane?
Speaker 2: It's a cargo plane.  And that--why I did that?  Why I wanted to do that?  I just wanted to, I just wanted to learn how to fly, and I, I did.  I volunteered to join the Air Force Reserves.  It's been a very gratifying opportunity for me.  And I look forward to one weekend out of a month flying from Aberdeen [South Dakota] to Andrews [Air Force Base] to participate in the Unit Training Assembly had--in Washington [D.C.].
Speaker 1: Okay, and you, you said before when we asked you about your favorite phrase or saying, you, you indicated that you--you quoted [President] John Kennedy, you know: Ask not what your country can do for you--
Speaker 2: But what you can do for your country.
Speaker 1: --country.  And that's--it's interesting that not, not--(unclear) that--(unclear)--well, that kind of say that there are African Americans even in the Air Force and, and who've been with the Tuskegee Airmen and been awarded medals of honor and all that sort of thing that don't, don't have quite the same approach.  They, they feel that they, they had to fight on two fronts.  Can you--do you, do you--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: I think you do-
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: I think you do fight on two fronts.  I see that when certain educational institutions--you do fight because you want to be recognized, you want to be given the opportunity, and there are certain barriers, or people will say well, I'm not sure if you have the aptitude, and I'm not sure if you are suitable for this position.  I try very consciously to approach life with a very--I have a very good attitude.  I, I think whatever I do, I know I can do it, and I see--I, I do thank my, my parents for that, for that development of self-esteem.  There's nothing that I can't do if I want to do it.  But having other people perceive that and giving you the opportunity sometimes is very difficult.  The first time I got rejected from medical school it was devastating.  I was like, come on.  What could happen?  What am I gonna do?  But, I, I, I took that as a very good learning experience.  I took it as like, okay, this is something you need to do.  You need to refocus, go to graduate school.  You'll be fine.  You'll be the best doctor you can be.  Don't give up.  And I--even when I went for my interviews--(unclear) the first time I was in medical school I--a lot of people said maybe you would benefit from going to graduate school.  But I would not give up my pursuit for medicine.  I--regardless of what they said, I knew I wouldn't give up my pursuit for medicine.  I wanted to become a doctor.  I knew I would become a doctor.  I knew I would become a good doctor.  And just going--once I got in the door, I mean that was the barrier, getting into the door.  Once I got into the door, I would be okay.
Story_ID: 70550
Speaker 1: I, I understand a personal mo--mo--motivation to, to succeed and, and to do your best, but I, I think I was getting at the perception by a lot of people that America has really kind of let black people down in a lot of ways.  It--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: They have.  I can't say that I saw there's that feeling in America that okay, whatever you wanna do we'll help you do it.  No, it's not that.  It's not even that now.  It's like, if you want it, you have to show us that you want it.  And I--it's very tough for me to get tired.  I'm a very persistent person.  If I wanna do something, I'm gonna do it.  It might not happen when I want it to, and, and I really can't say that I don't take this with some reverence.  I, I, I have very, very, very strong religious beliefs.  I do think that when you do--when I do something, it's in--it's my decision, but it's also in relationship to--it's, it's tied to my faith.  And for me to do something, there's only three things that will happen if I do something: I will--or if I wanna do something: I'll be granted the opportunity to do it, so it'll be affirmative; it will be negatively responded, where I'll say no; or it might be a situation where, wait.  When I do receive something negatively, and it may not be the response that I want, I might sit and evaluate and more closely analyze it to see what I can do to kind of make something happen, to make it make--come to fruition.  And I--there's many things in America that are speci--specifically designed for white America.  A lot of people say, "Well, this is for white America."  I don't necessarily think that that's the situation.  I think it's for the person who is the bravest one to take the challenge to do it.  And I think it's, it's a double challenge sometimes for an African American, because not only do they have to be--have the strength to do the activity, I think sometimes they have to also overcome some ver--some institutional barriers, some cultural barriers, as well as barriers that they are African American.  And there's a lot of people that, that, that may think that this is an activity that African Americans shouldn't pursue, that only white American can do, and I think I tend to be a little bit more, more holistic in my approach to life.  Sometimes I'm, I'm sure that it has backfired on me, but I think overall it has served me very well.  I know who I am as an African American, but I tend to envision my depth, my contribution as more global than that, and that, yes, I am African American, but my contribution is gonna be a more global one.  I can say, "Well, yes, I can treat you, and I can treat you," and I'm not necessarily looking at the fact that you're African American, but I wanna help you as an African American.  But I'm not gonna exclude someone else just to help someone African American.  My role here is to say that the community where I am, I'm here to help you.  I wanna always foster, particularly to African Americans, that--particularly African-American youths--that if they wanna do something, they can do it.  They have the skills to do it.  And in a way, I, I, I sometimes feel that African Americans are even better equipped to handle more stress than, say, certain other groups in American, because they've had to go--they've had this constant barrier or this constant threat that they can't do it or they're not good enough, and they always have to prove themselves, and because they have to--they're always continually on this proving ground.
Story_ID: 70551
Speaker 1: Well, it certain is, is true that those who accomplish a great deal can certainly handle stress better 'cause they're, they're, they're gonna get it, you know, trying to accomplish certain things.  But we, we, we live in a community in--far as--in the African-American community we have highest infant mortality rate, highest rate of high blood pressure, highest obesity rate-
Speaker 2: I remember the--I mean those things exist.
Speaker 1: --got the highest glaucoma.  I mean this--we can go on and on. They exist.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But some of them--I, I, I take a real different view about this.  Some of them are institutionally perpetuated.  I think that some of-
Speaker 2: Institutionally or culturally?  I mean you think-
Speaker 1: Well, no, I think-
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: --that in--there-
Speaker 2: --institutional?
Speaker 1: --there institution.  I think that sometimes the institutions sometimes place certain barriers on pati--on people or have them do certain jobs that are just not healthy and that they might have--there might be a certain degree of some genetic predisposition, say, the high blood pressure.  There might be a genetic predis--just a (unclear)--predisposition to obesity, but--for instance--say for instance you're on a limited income.  You have to work, say, in a fast food restaurant.  That's all you have to eat is fried foods.
Speaker 2: Yeah-
Speaker 1: What are you gonna do?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's a stressful job (simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: I mean-
Speaker 2: --eat fried foods.
Speaker 1: Right, that means you have a stressful where you eat fried foods.  And myself, I mean I can say easy, well, I just take my tofu and cottage cheese.  That's, that's what I would say, but that's not necessarily that easy.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it, it--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: If you're on a limited-
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous)--education has something to do with it too--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: Right, we-
Speaker 2: --know what tofu is--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: If you're on a limited income, or--I mean you have to eat what's--you get free food.  You're on a limited income.  You might not know what tofu is.  Nobody introduced it to you.  You're not all of a sudden you just gonna say oh, give me tofu; forget make--Big Macs.  No, you're not gonna do that.
Story_ID: 70552
Speaker 1: And I think just certain educational opportunities come your way.  Sometimes you really have to take advantage of them and learn from them.  I'm not saying that you should just--I mean that there's just one path to follow.  There's many ways.  You know, a lot of people say there's a thousand ways to skin a cat.  There are; they're a thousand ways to skin a cat.  There are certain approaches that you have to take; however, in the scheme of things, to be able to help and do the greatest good to the greatest number of people, I think sometimes you have to--just as a person, no matter what institutions do, you kind of have to put yourself through a test.  You kind of have to say, in order for me to do something I have to prepare myself.  And that means sometimes I have to expose myself to a variety of situations so that you learn about people.  You don't--I mean, you, you know you learn about different cultures by exposing yourself to different cultures.  You learn about different foods by exposing yourself to different foods.  So there's a certain kind of self-motivation that you have to have to--be willing to expose yourself to those environments.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Have they all been fun?  Oh no.  Would I have--and I'm sure everybody could say that they would like to do things differently, but even the situations I've been in, the educational experiences I've had, I have--can say that I've gained a lot, I've grown a lot, and it has been a learning experience for me.  And I always am very grateful for that experience, because when I'm talking to other African Americans, whether they're older than myself or they're younger than myself, I can--I feel honored that I can at least provide them with a cer--my perspective, which may be a little bit different than their perspective.
Story_ID: 70553
Speaker 1: Okay, now what in it--what's the future hold for you right now.  I mean what are you--what are you looking--are you looking to, to serve the balance of your career in Aberdeen [South Dakota-
Speaker 2: Everybody--you-
Speaker 1: --physician-
Speaker 2: I have kind of dedicated my life to medicine.  I feel that I probably will be practicing medicine for a long time.  I do enjoy writing.  I occasionally write for medical journals.  I speak with colleagues.  I organize pain symposiums.  I give talks in various parts of the country.  I can see myself doing that for the rest of my life.  I like the outdoors, so South Dakota is wonderful.  Maybe--and I, I guess sometimes you kind of like to stay in a place, to get established in a place.  You never know--I can't be as non-yielding to say that I would never relocate.  But if I'm able to make a positive contribution to this area, I'm able to establish my goals, I'm able to make certain accomplishments, and I can actually see them helping the community where I live, then I can't say that I would be very eager to leave the area.  I could definitely see myself in South Dakota.
Story_ID: 70554
Speaker 1: Okay, now your parents got a chance to see you become a success basically, right?  And they-
Speaker 2: My parents did not see me become a doctor.
Speaker 1: Okay, but they, they had an idea that you were on the path, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, my, my mother passed away five months before I graduated, but she knew I was in medical school.  My father knew--passed away when I was a freshman in medical school, so they did actually.  My parents were--they were present when I got my bachelor's degree, when I got my two master's degrees, when I became a physician assistant, when I got my PhD.  They were not present when I was actually hooded and received my M.D. degree, but I was well on my way, so they knew for sure that my dream when I was five was actually coming to fruition and that I would be making a contribution in the field of medicine to my community.
Speaker 1: And do you see yourself as having a--do you see yourself as having I guess a responsibility to pass on maybe some of their--some of the intentions and direction that they gave you to, to young people, rather they be, they be your own or, or somebody else's kids?
Speaker 2: Oh, I, I think I do that now.  I think in the community the contributions that I make, the people that I meet, the children that I encounter I think that I really instill in the youths very much the same values that I have and some of the principles that, that was imparted to me from my parents.  And it's funny when you grow up you say, "Oh, I never wanna be like my father.  I never wanna be like my mother."
Speaker 1: Did you-
Speaker 2: And-
Speaker 1: --that when you--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: --initially, initially, I, I felt my dad was a little bit too stern.  I said maybe I don't wanna--maybe he's a little bit too stern.  Maybe I'll be more let--I'll be less stern, less yielding.  As I get older, I realize I'm like a chip off the old block; I'm just like him.  I'm very much like my mother too.
Story_ID: 70555
Speaker 1: We--but--and I think my main focus is to try to develop yourself professionally so that you are able to make a contribution.  Try to learn as much as you can from others so that you can make a positive contribution.  Not necessarily you have to be a doctor, but there's many positive contributions that you can make by exploring of avenues.  Maybe you might wanna be an astronaut; you might wanna be a pilot; you might wanna be a writer; you might wanna be a musician.  Whatever it is, it's your contribution, your mark.  And have the ability to be receptive.  Maybe there are--there's a lot of institutional barriers that are out that white America presents, and it's very difficult for African Americans, but you don't necessarily have to do that same thing to kind of get even with, say, age-old institutions.  I kind of like to see or make people understand that yes, I have the same abilities as other people of other cultures or other races have.  But just because you might not understand me or you haven't taken time to know me because of the color of my skin, I'm not necessarily gonna shortchange myself and hold those same beliefs.  I'm gonna probably turn this around and make this a more positive experience, because I want to be able for African Americans to grow from the experiences that I can contribute.  And if I'm so closed and narrow minded and very myopic in my vision, then it hurts the contributions that I can make to society, and it hurts the contributions that I can make to African-American youths.  And there's a certain amount of--in the--in a lot of situations there are certain things that sometimes they're there; you know that they're there, but you have to transcend beyond them to kind of fulfill your goals, to reach your community, to reach people, to send a message.  And if I could ever send a message to African-American youths, it would be this: Growing up is the best time in your life to explore whatever it is you want, so do it.  It might not be--you might see the need not to just necessarily follow the crowd, but to go your own way.  You know, I, I remember like Henry David Thoreau--he's a writer--he always followed a different drummer.  And, and it--in essence, it's very true.  You need to follow your own tune, whatever it is that makes you function, whatever it is that provides you with happiness.  Maybe a hundred people might want you to be a doctor, but you wanna be an astronaut.  Go for the astronaut.
Story_ID: 70556
Speaker 1: Okay, you're still young, you're one of the youngest history makers we've interviewed so far.  How, how would you like to be remembered, even though this is a premature question?
Speaker 2: I probably would like to be remembered as an individual that wants to make life a very positive experience for individuals that are not able to take care of themselves.  I think at the time of illness or a very catastrophic event in one's life, such as if you find out that you have terminal cancer--things happen, physiologically you're not able to necessarily take care of yourself physically, emotionally--people have to care for you--I'd like to be remembered as that individual that kind of helps that process, to make that quality of life a little bit better, or for you to--if you're facing a very difficult surgery, I'd like to be that individual that helps you sail through that period of time when you aren't in control.  I help you stay in control; I make you better.  And I also, since I, I do like to write--I like to write about--I like to provide information.  I like to disseminate information, medical information, that people get better, so I, I wanna be remembered as an individual that wants to disseminate information to make life--the quality of life better for individuals.  I wanna be that individual that realizes that yes, medicine important, but to really be the person that you need to be in order to be ex--excel to--in order to excel in your profession it kind of has to be a balance between your physical and mental abilities.  I, I, I don't think I would be the person that I am now or could ever do the things that I do if I didn't have the love for God, if I didn't have the love for life, if I didn't exercise the way I do.  I think you have to have that love for all aspects of your life.  And if--when and if you come to that kind of self-actualization, then I think you're able to be more receptive, and then you can also give more.  Until you receive, you can't give.  And I do--and I, and I think that there's a certain--through my educational experiences, I think that there's been that humbling process that's allowed me to receive, and now I can give.  So, yes, sure, in certain ways, I, I, I can give a person a certain quality of life.  I can make them better.  I can help their pain.  I can help them through a certain surgery.  But it's only because I have been humbled enough, sometimes in a very positive sense, sometimes in a very negative sense.  But even like a balance between all the negative and, and positive experiences that I've had, overall, it's provided me with enough know, it's provided me with enough skills that I can impart to African Americans that are growing that it's very important to sometimes just take whatever it is that you receive, because in the end, it's, it's gonna be--you can make a better world; you can make a contribution, and never forget that.  And no matter what you do, if you hang in there long enough you'll be able to do it, and you'll able--you'll be able to see--maybe it might not be immediate, but in--somewhere along the lines in your life, you'll be able to see where you can make a difference.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you, Dr. Westbrook.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
