Story_ID: 466989
Speaker 1: I am Denise Gines, the interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Scott Stearns is the videographer.  Would you please state your name and spell it for me, including any middle names?
Speaker 2: My name is Abraham Lincoln Woods, Jr. [HistoryMaker Reverend Abraham Woods, Jr.], A-B-R-A-H-A-M, L-I-N-C-O-L-N, W-O-O-D-S, J-R.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth?
Speaker 2: My date of birth is October 7, 1928.
Speaker 1: All right.  And your place of birth?
Speaker 2: My place is birth is Birmingham, Alabama, Jefferson County.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your occupation or former occupation?
Speaker 2: My occupation is minister.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And former professor, associate professor--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --at Miles College [Fairfield, Alabama].
Speaker 1: And your lo- and the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: This is Birmingham, Alabama, at the St. Joseph Baptist Church [St. Joseph Missionary Baptist Church].
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: 500 9th Avenue North.
Story_ID: 466990
Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to ask you what I call People magazine-ish type questions, okay?  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Maroon.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what about food?  What do you like to eat?  What's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Well, quite a variety, but I do like, fried chicken is one of my favorites.
Speaker 1: All right.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Well, that's, that's hard to say right now, since I've been involved in the ministry for so long.  I can't say.  I hadn't thought about just what was my favorite time of year.  Maybe, maybe it's the spring and fall.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination, someplace you like to go when you go on vacation?
Speaker 2: Well, when I go on vacation, I usually like to go to Orlando, Florida.  I have a son [Abraham Woods III] who is a urologist in Orlando, and he's been good about carrying us around in Orlando and to other parts of Florida.
Speaker 1: All right.  And do you have a favorite phrase or saying or bible verse?
Speaker 2: "I can do all things through Christ which strengthens me" [Philippians 4:13].
Story_ID: 466991
Speaker 1: Now, we're going to talk about your family and your family tree.  And we'll start with your mother's side of the family, okay?  Tell me your mother's name.
Speaker 2: Maggie Rosalee Woods [Maggie Wallace Woods].  She was a Wallace prior to the marriage to my father [Abraham Woods, Sr.].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what about her parents?  Who are her parents?
Speaker 2: Her father was a minister, the Reverend Colias Wallace [ph.].  I did not know her mother.  I've heard her mention her mother, but I did not know her mother.  Her mother died while she was still a child.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you know her mother's name?
Speaker 2: I did, but I don't remember it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Remember? Okay.
Speaker 2: --offhand. Relative to her father, he had a lot of Indian [Native American] in him, and he had some Indian relatives, too.
Story_ID: 466992
Speaker 1: Tell me about your mother [Maggie Wallace Woods].  What type of mother was she to you?  What type of relationship did you have?
Speaker 2: I had a wonderful, a beautiful relationship with my mother.  I hate to say it, but I guess it's true with many young people.  They love daddy, and they appreciate daddy, but a mother has a very special place in their hearts and in their minds and in their lives.  She was a wonderful woman who loved her children and sacrificed for us.  And I just cannot forget many of the things she went through because of wanting her children to have the best and wanting her children to be well.  So she was a wonderful woman, a very religious woman.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I remember her sitting at the piano playing various religious songs, and we would sing them.  My father [Abraham Woods, Sr.] would help to lead us in that, too.  So, she loved the church.  And she was a woman who loved education, even though she didn't go any further than the high school.  But she loved education.
Speaker 1: Did your mother work outside the home?
Speaker 2: No, she did not, she was a homemaker.  And she did not work outside of the home other than taking in work, like washing clothes and ironing clothes, from some of the white citizens who lived in that community.  I'll never forget that she would, she would wash a load of clothes that came from one of the white citizens, and iron those clothes.  And she would only get sixty cents for doing that.  And we would carry them back in the wagon, and my mother would get sixty cents.  And we looked forward to her stopping at the little store and buying a gingerbread, to divide that gingerbread with the children.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did your mother share any stories about her growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, she did.  Her father [Colias Wallace (ph.)] was a minister, and her father traveled.  And so, she was often left alone with her siblings and with other people that were a part of the religious organization who were friends of her father's.  And some of the places where she was left, she enjoyed being there very much, and some of the places she didn't enjoy too well.  I remember her talking about that.
Speaker 1: Um-hm. Okay. All right.  Do you know whether her family owned land?
Speaker 2: Not to my knowledge.  They might have owned land, but I don't remember her talking about it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Her father moved around from place to place.  Her mother had passed on.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And of course, I do not have any knowledge of her talking about land--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --which, which they owned.
Story_ID: 466993
Speaker 1: Now, your father, tell me who your father was.
Speaker 2: My father was Abraham Nathan Woods [Abraham Woods, Sr.].  And he came from Prattville [Alabama], a little place near Montgomery [Alabama], that's where he came from.  He later changed his name to Abraham Lincoln.  After my mother [Mary Wallace Woods] named me Lincoln [HistoryMaker Reverend Abraham Woods, Jr.], he changed his name to Lincoln also.  But he came from this little place not far from Montgomery called Prattville, where had brothers and sisters in Prattville.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you know about his parents, your grandparents on your father's side?
Speaker 2: I know about his mother.  Her name was Rubinia Frazier [sic. Robina Frazier].  I'm not too sure if that was--I think this was her second husband, I'm not too sure.  But we called her Mama, and we lived with her in her house early on.  And so, we knew her very, knew her very well.  She was very helpful, very helpful to the family.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And her husband was who?
Speaker 2: The husband that I knew was Mr. Frazier [Charles Frazier].  And I shall never forget Mr. Frazier, because I was a child when he died.  And the thing that people usually did when people died, their bodies were brought to the house on the day before the funeral, the evening before the funeral.  And the casket was put in the front room, and it stayed there all night until the next day.  (Laughter) I will never forget that.  Coming up believing in ghosts and haints, like many of the young people and older people of that time did, I don't know whether I ever went to sleep that night at all with that dead body in the front room.  So, I'll never forget.  We called Uncle Charlie.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, his name was Charlie Frazier?
Speaker 2: Charlie Frazier.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, how were they Fraziers, and your father is a Woods?
Speaker 2: Well, as I said, I think Frazier was her second husband.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: And what she was prior to that, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where did they live, the Fraziers?
Speaker 2: Well, when I, when I knew Uncle Charlie, we were living in Birmingham [Alabama] in East Thomas and 12th Avenue in a house that he had bought, or that he was buying.  I don't know where he came from--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --whether he came from Prattville [Alabama] or where.  It's possible that he did.  I think my grandmother, as I remember now, I think she was an Arbee [ph.] before she became a Frazier or anything else.  Because she had a brother, and his last name was Arbee.
Speaker 1: Arbee, how do you spell Arbee?
Speaker 2: A-R--
Speaker 1: --B-Y?
Speaker 2: --B-E-E. Arbee (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh B-E. Okay.
Speaker 2: He was from Prattville.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The town where my father was from.
Story_ID: 466994
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your mother [Maggie Wallace Woods] and father [Abraham Woods, Sr.] met?
Speaker 2: Well, they probably have told me, and I'm just not remembering.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I have heard, I have heard it mentioned just how they met, and how they felt that they were made for each other, and things of that kind.  She was very young; he was very young, too.  And so they carried on quite a relationship, I understand at that time.
Story_ID: 466995
Speaker 1: He [Woods' father, Abraham Woods, Sr.] was a sharp dresser.  He believed in dressing up very conspicuously.  And I don't know if that's what attracted my mother [Maggie Wallace Woods] or not.
Speaker 2: What did your father do for a living?
Speaker 1: He was an employee at a plant called McWane [McWane Cast Iron Pipe Company; McWane Ductile], where they made, where they made pipes, the McWane Cast Iron Pipe Company on the north side of town.  That's where he was working when I remember him.  So, he was a laborer--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --there.
Speaker 2: How much education did he have?
Speaker 1: Very little.  I don't remember how far he got, but he didn't get to high school.  Maybe two or three grades, a few grades, and that's all.
Story_ID: 466996
Speaker 1: What do you remember most about your childhood?  What is your first childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Well, (laughter) we had some livestock.  We had some hogs, we had some chickens; we didn't have any cows.  And it was my responsibility to make sure that the hogs and pigs were fed.  And one of my jobs was to get up early in the morning and make my way to the white community that was situated on the hill beyond where we lived, and search their garbage cans.  I'd usually have a bucket or two, and I'd get all of the scraps that hogs could eat, out of their garbage can.  I'd get my buckets full and come back home and feed the hogs.  That was my job.
Speaker 1: Wow (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was something I shall never forget.  Along there were other things, but I will never forget that.
Story_ID: 466997
Speaker 1: Tell me, how many brothers and sisters did you have?
Speaker 2: Ten siblings living.  My mother [Maggie Wallace Woods] had twins, but they passed away in childbirth.  And so we didn't know them, but there are ten others, other than myself.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Only one of them is passed away.
Speaker 1: Would you tell me their names in progression, and where you fit in?
Speaker 2: Well, we did have a list with that.  And of course (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But then if you don't know the progression, just tell me their names.
Speaker 2: All right. The--I was the oldest.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the sibling next to me was Mary Ruby [Mary Woods].  And the sibling next to her was Melza Leola [ph.].  And then we go on down and we get to a brother named Calvin Wallace [HistoryMaker Reverend Calvin Wallace Woods, Sr.].  And on down to Shirley [Shirley Woods Patterson], Lottie [Lottie Woods Hall].  Then beyond that I think we came to Franklin [Franklin Woods], then, then Lois [Lois Woods], and then Dwight [ph.].  I don't know whether I got them all or not.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now--
Speaker 2: By the way my mother named her boys, for the most part, after presidents--my--[President] Abraham Lincoln, and Calvin, after Calvin Coolidge [President John Calvin Coolidge, Jr.].  My mother did not seem to know history; she did not know that Coolidge had great responsibility for the Great Depression.  And of course, Franklin, after [President] Franklin Delano Roosevelt.  And Dwight, after Dwight D. Eisenhower [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower].  Now, I didn't mention a brother that--he fits in there somewhere.  His name was Roy [Roy Woods].  We expected my mother to name him after a president, but she had had a child every year, and she said she was tired, and told us to name him.  And my brother Calvin was always quicker of the lip.  And Calvin said, "Let's name him Roy."  Well, we said, "That's not a presidential name."  But he said, "Well, that's what we want to name him."  And we complained to Mother, and she said, "That's all right, name him Roy."  And so, she didn't change it.  And Roy was a cowboy, Roy Rogers.  I don't know whether you heard talk of him or not, Roy Rogers and Dale Evans.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And they had a horse named Trigger.  We were upset that this boy was not named after a president.  But I guess we should have been happy that he wasn't named Trigger, after Roy Rogers' horse.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: But this was our first sibling that finished college.  He went on and received his master's [degree] and went beyond that and received his Ph.D.  He later became a doctor, and his practice is in Charleston, South Carolina now.
Story_ID: 466998
Speaker 1: Tell me more about where you lived with all your siblings, and the things that you were responsible for, and the things that you did where you lived.  You lived on a farm, is that right?
Speaker 2: No, we lived in the city [Birmingham, Alabama].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And at that time, it was all right to have some livestock--
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: --in the city.  People had horses, they had cows, they had goats.  And we had hogs, chickens, and things of that kind.  I'll never forget that.  And my father [Abraham Woods, Sr.] had a plot of ground that he planted certain vegetables like corn, and sweet potatoes, and tomatoes, and greens, and things of that kind.  They allowed that in the city proper--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --at that time.  Later on, you were not going to be able to do that.  So, looking after the chickens and finding their hidden nests where they had laid many eggs and were going to sit on the eggs--we had to find those.  And there were many chores around the house.  I had to make a fire in the old cook stove.  And my mother [Maggie Wallace Woods] was very anxious that it be a good fire, because she made biscuits, and we had to get the oven hot for her to put the biscuits in.  And she taught me how to make biscuits and things of that kind, since I was the oldest too.  And I had to be sure that we had water in from the outside, because the water was outside.  And we had water buckets that we would bring the water in and set it on the table.  And for a good while, I did not know that we were not the only ones drinking water from the water bucket until one day I caught the cat on the rim of the water bucket (laughter) getting his fill of water, too, you see.  Our toilet was outside, and so we had to go out to the outhouse to the toilet, from the very beginning.  And of course at night, we had to improvise, and we had to--I don't know if you heard any talk about this, but we had what we called a slop jar, you see.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And that's the thing that we used during the night.  We, we, had many chores that our mother and father depended upon us to carry out.  And if you didn't carry them out and carry them out timely, there would be some consequences, you see.
Story_ID: 466999
Speaker 1: We were also at one time on welfare, I'll never forget that.  Because we would get the powdered milk, and the peanut butter, and the cheese, and things of that kind.  And we certainly looked forward to that. We had a large family, and my father's income was not sufficient to do what absolutely needed to have been done.  Whenever my mother [Maggie Wallace Woods] got sick, it was my responsibility to look after the rest of the children, and I learned to do that.  She taught me how to cook and make biscuits, make cakes, and do other kinds of things.  And not only that, but when I think in terms of it, sometimes we had a very hard time.  Because I can remember, I don't know whether my father was working, or work was slack, that we wouldn't have sufficient coal for the fires.  And one day I saw my father go out to the coalhouse.  And I went behind him.  And I knew there wasn't any coal in the coalhouse.  And so he was in the coalhouse, and I was peeping through the crack in the coalhouse wondering why he went to the coalhouse. He knew no coal was out there.  And he was in the coalhouse praying, asking the Lord to help us, that we needed some coal.  And you might not believe it, but in a few days after that, a truck drove up to our door and said "Is this where Abraham Woods [Abraham Woods, Sr.] lives?"  And of course, we said yes.  He said, "Well, I have a load of coal for y'all."  And my father said, "Well, I didn't order any coal."  He said, "Well, but I have a load of coal for you."  And so, he put that coal off.  And I started thinking, there must be something to prayer.  My father said he didn't order it, but I heard him order in the coalhouse when he prayed.  I've never forgotten, I've never forgotten things of that kind.  I've never forgotten the fact that my father traded at a store, and he would never have all of the money needed to pay off the farmer's grocery debt.  And the man would be kind enough to let us get, to get food until the next time.  But on this particular occasion, I'll never forget.  We were in that store, and the store was Holcomb Grocery Store [Holcomb's Grocery Store].  Mr. Holcomb was a fine man.  And he said to my father, "I'm sorry, but your bill is of such I cannot let you charge anything else."  I, I saw my father pleading with this white man, and this white man was talking to my father like he was a child.  I shall never forget it.  It sent chills through me, and I was greatly alarmed about that.  That was one of the things that opened my eyes to this thing of, of racism and the fact that black people had to live on such low levels, while other people had decent things to live with and live by.  And another thing that really shook me up--I don't know what happened, I don't know whether my father was misusing his money or what.  But he was not paying the house notes.
Story_ID: 467000
Speaker 1: All right.  So you were telling me about the mortgage.
Speaker 2: Yes, it appears that my father [Abraham Woods, Sr.] for some reason was not paying the note on the mortgage.  I don't know whether it was because of work problems or other reasons.  But it became so severe until we received a notice that we'd have to pay so much or else we would be evicted.  And regrettably my father couldn't come up with that money, and we were evicted.  I shall never forget, it was one of the most traumatic things that happened to me as a child, to see the authorities come into our house and take our furniture and set our furniture on the street.  It would tear you up; it tore me up.  It was a very embarrassing kind of thing, with my friends and peers and other people seeing that.  We suddenly had to move from that house, and we moved from one place to the other until we finally got to a place on 6th Street, still in East, East Thomas [Birmingham, Alabama].
Story_ID: 467001
Speaker 1: But if I may go back just a little bit, my [paternal] grandmother, Mrs. Frazier [Robina Frazier], was a fine woman, but she was not a Christian at the time.  In fact, she was an alcoholic.  And not only was she an alcoholic, but a lot of people were bootlegging at that time, and my grandmother was a bootlegger.  I never will forget people coming to the house for a drink, and she would go outside in the bushes and get a bottle of stuff and come in the house and, and fix it for those people.  But thankfully, the time came when her life was completely changed.  And just as committed as she was to being a bootlegger and being a liquor drinker, she turned to religion, and that was a happy time for all of us.  I just wanted to get that in, because many people were making Joe Louis and home brew, and things of that kind, trying to make it, trying to catch that mule.
Story_ID: 467002
Speaker 1: So finally your family finds another home to live in?
Speaker 2: That is correct (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's correct?  And do things get better during that time?
Speaker 2: Things were manageable.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Things were manageable, but we did not have a house that was as nice as the house that we were evicted from.
Speaker 1: But you still had livestock and--
Speaker 2: No, no more livestock (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No? Okay.
Speaker 2: --at that time.  Because as things were moving up, the city was becoming concerned about some of the rural activities that were going on.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what year are we in, about?  What year did this happen?  How old were you?
Speaker 2: Well, that's a good question, and I cannot say with any accuracy just how old I was.  I was in elementary school--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --at the time.  I was attending East Thomas elementary school [East Thomas School, Birmingham, Alabama].
Story_ID: 467003
Speaker 1: East Thomas elementary school [East Thomas School, Birmingham, Alabama] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) East Thomas elementary school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It, it was a school that had four teachers, I will never forget.  The principal and the teacher of the first grade was Lila E. Gice [sic. Lila E. Grice], and Mrs. Gice was a fine woman.  And if you went through her, she would certainly teach you how to write; she had a beautiful penmanship.  And the teacher you went to after leaving Mrs. Gice was Mrs. Gordon [ph.].  Mrs. Gordon was considered to be the best teacher in the school.  She was, she had a lot of Indian [Native American] in her.  She was a very kind, loving, considerate, compassionate woman.  And when you left Mrs. Gordon, you went to Mrs. Lela E. Butler [ph.], and Miss Butler was a good teacher.  I shall never forget, in Miss Butler's class she recognized that I had a good memory.  And so on some occasions, we would get to some reading or some poem, and she would tell me to go to the office and stay in the office going over the poem or going over the reading to see if I could learn it.  And my memory was so good until I could learn it, and then come back and recite it to, to that class.  The fourth teacher was Mrs. Murphy [ph.], she was the youngest teacher there.  And when you finished her class, then you had to go to a higher grade.  And there were two schools that you could select, Tuggle [Tuggle Institute; Tuggle Elementary School, Birmingham, Alabama] or Lincoln [Lincoln School, Birmingham, Alabama].  And of course Lincoln is the school that is to our east.  I decided to go to Lincoln rather than Tuggle, which was closer, because I'd heard that a gang was operating at Tuggle School.  And so, I would walk all the way from East Thomas [Birmingham, Alabama] and go to the Lincoln School right up there.  And that is where I matriculated until it was time to go to high school [A.H. Parker High School, Birmingham, Alabama].
Story_ID: 467004
Speaker 1: And you said a gang was operating at Tuggle [Tuggle Institute; Tuggle Elementary School, Birmingham, Alabama]?  Was there a gang problem back then?
Speaker 2: Well, yes.  Not like it is now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But there were lawless young people, and they were asking you--they'd block your way on the street, on the sidewalk, and they were asking for not much, but sometimes they'd ask you for two pennies or whatever.  But that gang spirit was there.  They were rowdy young men that came out of negative homes and that sort of thing.  So, you did have some of that negative kind of situation going on.  I didn't find it at Lincoln [Lincoln School, Birmingham, Alabama], but later on I was approached by a gang person who wanted to extract money from me over in this area, too.  So, you did have black folk who had those kinds of attitudes at that time, you see.
Story_ID: 467005
Speaker 1: So, tell me about Lincoln [Lincoln School, Birmingham, Alabama].  How were your days at Lincoln?  You were--what type of student were you?  I know you had a great memory (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I was a very mischievous student--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --at Lincoln, getting with the other young men and doing things in school I should not have done.
Speaker 1: Like?
Speaker 2: Throwing spitballs, and eating peanuts, and talking, and things of that kind.  And I shall never forget that we were eating peanuts and throwing peanuts and things of that kind, and the teacher had told us to stop.  And I stopped, and some of the others continued to do it.  And she looked back and she pointed at me, and told me to get up and get out of there and don't come back.  I was, I was shocked.  I tried to tell her that I was not the guilty person.  But she said, "Get out."  I don't know, I've always felt that maybe that lady didn't like me.  Her name, I'll never forget her.  I've forgotten a lot of the other teachers, but I will never forget Mrs. Josephine Truss to the longest day I live; she was my homeroom teacher.  And on Christmas, students would give her gifts.  I didn't have the money to buy any expensive thing for her.  And I remember one Christmas I bought her a box of envelopes.  It didn't cost much; I don't think it cost but a nickel or a dime.  And I might be wrong, but she seemed to have had a negative attitude toward that.  It just could be me, and not Mrs. Truss.  So, putting me out shook me up.  And it was not going to be long before we were supposed to graduate from Lincoln.  I was afraid to tell my parents [Maggie Wallace Woods and Abraham Woods, Sr.] that I had been put out of school, and I didn't tell them.  And we went on to prepare for the graduation as if I had not been put out.  And the day of the graduation I was all dressed up and ready to--I had not been in the practice or anything of that kind.  And when the class was called to line up, I lined up too; I just got in the line.  I didn't know where to get, I just got in the line.  And as they passed along the stage, the principal had their little diploma, or whatever they were giving at that time.  And when they got up to the person, their name would be called, and they would be handed their diploma.  When I got up there, my name was not called.  In fact, it was somebody else's name that was called, and they asked me to step aside.  And I stood aside and stood on that stage.  And if anybody has been in hell, I was in a literal hell.  I had to stand there until all of the class had passed.  And on the very end, they did call my name and gave me my diploma.  Mrs. Truss woke me up.  And I determined that from then on, I would get down to business.  And when I left that school and got into high school, I made the honor roll I believe every year, and was always an outstanding student.  But I have to give Miss Truss credit for shaking me up, or maybe I would not have been motivated.  But I was elected president of my class on numerous occasions at school (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is in school, in high school?
Speaker 2: In high school, at Parker [A.H. Parker High School, Birmingham, Alabama].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you went to what high school?
Speaker 2: Parker High School.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's the school right to the west.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I'm pastoring between two of the schools that I attended, Lincoln there and Parker.
Story_ID: 467006
Speaker 1: I was in various projects.  They entered me into various projects at Parker High School [A.H. Parker High School, Birmingham, Alabama], of an oratorical nature and various kinds of activities outside of the school.
Speaker 2: Tell me what--you said outside of school.  What were some of the projects outside of school?
Speaker 1: It was war time, and--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I think one of the clubs was called the Hi-Y club, and various other clubs that were patriotically oriented that I became involved with.  As I matriculated through the grades and came to be a senior, I ran for senior president. I was defeated.  Thank God for a wonderful teacher who helped me with a speech, I shall never forget her.  It was, it was an excellent speech.  And I recited it, because I had a good memory.  I recited it in seeking to become the president of the senior class.  But another young man who was, who was very popular, John Luke [ph.], I shall never forget him, he was elected to president of the senior class.  But then, there was a convening of the election for president of the student government.  And I--since I was one of the presidents, I was one of the candidates--and there were presidents from all of the classes there who would, who would make that selection.  And so, I took the opportunity to lay on them the speech that this teacher had helped me with.  And I knew it by heart, and I said it with as much feeling as I could.  And when I got through, that was all.  They unanimously elected me as president of the student government.
Story_ID: 467007
Speaker 1: And of course when I graduated I was president of the student government.  And because of my scholarship, I was one of the ranking scholastic students at Parker High School [A.H. Parker High School, Birmingham, Alabama].  And because of that, I was offered an academic scholarship by Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 2: Okay.  So you graduate from Parker High School in 1946?
Speaker 1: That is correct.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And you go off to Morehouse College (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Morehouse College.
Speaker 2: Was this the first time that you were away from home?
Speaker 1: Yes, it was.  I had never been away from home before.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It was the first time (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, tell me how you prepared to go to Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 1: Well, since I knew I was going, I took a job in the evening after I got out of school.  I worked at Jim Dandy [Western Grain Company; Jim Dandy Company], a milling company.  This is a place where they made meal, grits, and things of that kind, and food for livestock.  So, I worked until ten o'clock, saving my money in order to go to Morehouse.  They did not have room on the campus, and they sought to encourage me to go to the school in Augustus [sic. Augusta, Georgia], but I did not want to go there.  But a neighbor had a brother in Atlanta, and they told me I could live with her brother and attend the school.  So I did; I did attend Morehouse and stayed with him, and stayed with another lady a little closer when I got an opportunity, until they found room in the residence for freshmen called Graves Hall.  I shall never forget my stay at Graves Hall with some of the other students who also came from Parker High School.
Story_ID: 467008
Speaker 1: Who was the president of Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] at the time?
Speaker 2: Dr. Benjamin Mays, and I shall never forget him.  The students affect- affectionately called him Buck Benny, and he was a legend in his own right.  He was a dark man, Geechee kind of voice.  And he was such an inspiration and motivator, 'til we would run over you trying to get to the chapel when Dr. Mays was going to speak in the chapel.  I shall never forget, and I can hear some of his words reverberating within my being even now.  He would stand behind the podium and he would say to us in his Geechee voice, "I would not be a Jim Crow Negro, taking the wings of a bird going up in a theater where they won't let you sit with regular folks, going up to the roofs to see a movie.  I wouldn't be a Jim Crow Negro."  And then he'd say, "I wouldn't be a Jim Crow Negro going to a restaurant where you couldn't go in, and go around on the side to a hole in the wall and get you a sandwich.  I would not be a Jim Crow Negro" (laughter).  I'm telling you, that would just, that would just tear us up.  And I decided that I was not going to be a Jim Crow Negro.  So, I have to give Dr. Mays a lot of the credit, along with others.  Because at Parker High School [A.H. Parker High School, Birmingham, Alabama] I was fortunate to be a student in a Negro history course, and they didn't have them in all of the schools.  It was a book by Carter G. Woodson, 'Negro Makers of History.'  And when I went through that book and saw that men and women of color, not only in America, but around the world, had made outstanding contributions, it gave me a sense of pride.  And I started getting rid of my inferiority complex by recognizing that it didn't matter what color you were, that you still could achieve, you still could excel.  Because I was succumbing, too. As many others.
Speaker 1: You were what?
Speaker 2: I was succumbing to the inferiority complex that so many blacks were embracing.  But this helped me a whole lot, and along with Dr. Mays and some other circumstances.
Story_ID: 467009
Speaker 1: So tell me, you stay at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] how long?
Speaker 2: Well, frankly, unfortunately, I became ill.  I stayed at Morehouse one year.  I sought to take a pre-medical career, I planned to be a doctor.  Before I went to Morehouse, people at my church were saying, "Boy, you're going to be a preacher.  You got the mark of a preacher."  But I said, "No, no, no, I ain't going to be no preacher.  I'm going to be something that people respect."  I heard some folks criticizing preachers and calling them jacklegs, and this kind of thing.  And I heard people severely criticizing preachers and that sort of thing, and I said, "I don't want to be that.  I want to be something respectable.  I want to be a doctor."  So, that is what I was pursuing.  But I'll never forget, in the zoology class where we finally got to dissecting frogs and working on cats and things of that kind, I found out that I couldn't stand much blood.  And when I saw too much blood, I would get faintey.  And my [paternal] grandmother [Robina Frazier] called it, would have the blind staggers.  And I would fall out and faint.  So I tried to get over that, but I never was able to get myself to the place where I could stand blood.  In addition to that, I had another kind of sickness; I really thought I was going to die.  I thought I had tuberculosis or something of that kind, and I went from doctor to doctor. My people took me from doctor to doctor, and they really couldn't find anything.  And finally one of the best doctors, black doctors in Birmingham [Alabama], said, "Boy, you're all right, go on back to school."  I said, "Doctor, I'm sick."  And it was the kind of sickness that just would not leave me.  And I said to myself, I said, "Well, maybe the Lord is closing this door in my face because this is not the kind of career that he wants for me."  And so I decided to make a confession that I'd been called to preach.  I had it in me, but I was trying to, I was trying to ignore it.  And after I made that confession, it wasn't long before this sickness I had disappeared, and of course I'm still here.  That was in nineteen--
Speaker 1: Forty-seven [1947]?
Speaker 2: Nineteen forty-seven [1947] or '48 [1948], and I'm still here.  So, I went into the ministry, that's what, what happened.
Story_ID: 467010
Speaker 1: I'll never forget (laughter) Atlanta [Georgia], because I used to work at The Varsity.  You live in Atlanta, don't you?
Speaker 2: Yes, I love The Varsity (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'll never, I'll never forget The Varsity.  A number of us would go over and work at The Varsity, and you didn't get a salary.  The money you got, the only money you got was the tips that your customers gave you.  And you went and got the food and brought it back.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And of course at the end of the business day, you had to clean up the place.  There was one fellow over there, he was the worse Uncle Tom I have ever seen.  And he would be carrying on in an ignorant kind of way and stomping around, "Yes, sir, yes, sir, yes, sir."  You see. And many of the white folks would call for him.  And they'd say, "Well, he's busy."  And they said, "Well, we'll wait until he can get to us."  You know, so he was making a lot of money; he had many tips.  So one night a number of us--there was a young man from Clark [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and I think there might have been somebody from, from Morris Brown [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia], and I was from Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia].  And so we surrounded him, and we said to him, "You Uncle Tom, we are ashamed of you, you're embarrassing us.  You need to cut out this foolishness." And he said to us, "What y'all out here for?"  We said, "That ain't important."  He said, "Ain't y'all here to make money?"  We said, "Yeah, but that ain't important, we're embarrassed."  He said, "I bet you I got a whole lot more money than y'all got."  (Laughter) He said, "I ain't from Morehouse, I ain't from no house, but I got more money than y'all got."  He said, "Y'all better get smart if you want to know how to get this money from these white folks."  I'll never forget that experience at, at The Varsity out there.
Story_ID: 467011
Speaker 1: So, you heed the call to the ministry.  And where do you go to school?
Speaker 2: All right.  I would eventually end up at the Birmingham Baptist College [Birmingham-Easonian Baptist Bible College, Birmingham, Alabama].  I did go to Mile- to Daniel Payne College [Birmingham, Alabama], which had a little religious kind of program out there.  That college went out of business, but I ended up at Miles Memorial College [sic. Miles College, Fairfield, Alabama] where I would matriculate and receive a Bachelor of Theology degree there.  And of course it was the kind of school--I had not received my B.A. yet, but they had a program, unaccredited, where they could give you that kind of degree.  So I received my Bachelor of Theology degree from there, and I was going to later attend Miles College.
Story_ID: 467012
Speaker 1: You leave Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] and go the Birmingham Bible- Baptist Bible College [Birmingham Baptist College; Birmingham-Easonian Baptist Bible College, Birmingham, Alabama], and you get your degree in 1953.
Speaker 2: And I might say on graduation I was given many honors at the Baptist College.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had a forty-five-minute oration, and all the students had to write one.  And I expected my coaches to cut out quite a bit of my information, because it was forty-five minutes long.  My coach got with the president, and they thought it was so good, so they said leave it all in.  So I had to learn by heart, forty-five minutes of oration.  And with my good memory, I did learn it, and stood before that audience and went through it without making a mistake.  And there were many people there who marveled, and they had set their eyes on me as a young man who was headed for great, for great things.  They gave me many honors on that night.  I just wanted to mention that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I later got the Doctorate of Divinity from there.  In fact, the president sometime later selected me to be his successor when he retired at the Baptist College.
Story_ID: 467013
Speaker 1: So now with your, your degree in divinity [from Birmingham Baptist College; Birmingham-Easonian Baptist Bible College, Birmingham, Alabama], what happens next?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm out at Miles [Miles College, Fairfield, Alabama].  And--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) after finishing Miles in '62 [1962], the new president at that time was Dr. L.H. Pitts [Lucius Holsey Pitts, Sr.], who came from Atlanta [Georgia].  I don't know whether you knew of him, but he worked with the teachers.  He was a troubleshooter with the teachers in Georgia, and also was a part of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  He became the president of Miles College.  I had a good academic record.  In fact, they told me at first that I was valedictorian.  And then they found a young lady who had gotten out, because she'd had a baby out of wedlock.  But she had a few fractions of a record higher than mine, so they gave the valedictorian position to her, and they told me I was the salutatorian.  So after finishing Miles, I'll never forget.  We were there for some kind of banquet.  My wife [Marian Dowdell-Levette Woods] nudged me and said, "You're not making enough at the church [First Metropolitan Baptist Church, Birmingham, Alabama].  Go up there and ask Dr. Pitts to give you a job."  And reluctantly, I went up and approached him and told him that I was graduating, and would he give me a job.  So, he said he'd consider it.  And after he checked my record and saw that I was the salutatorian and things of that kind, he did hire me as a member of the faculty, and that's how I got on the faculty at Miles College.
Story_ID: 467014
Speaker 1: Well, let's, let's go back a little bit, because we're missing some years.  Because even you mentioned that you're married at this time in 1962.  But you leave the bible college [Birmingham Baptist College; Birmingham-Easonian Baptist Bible College, Birmingham, Alabama] in 1953.  Tell me what happens between '53 [1953] and '62 [1962]?  I mean do you begin to preach at a church somewhere?  Tell me what happens during those years.  I know you get married, so tell me about that also.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I was a member of a church.
Speaker 1: Of which church?
Speaker 2: First Baptist [First Baptist Church, Birmingham, Alabama], East Thomas [Birmingham, Alabama].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And after I married, my wife was a member of New Hope Baptist Church [Birmingham, Alabama], so she wanted to continue to her church.  And so I'll never forget, we were standing at the bus line with all the children; we'd had some children at that time.
Speaker 1: Well tell me, first tell me your wife's name.
Speaker 2: Marian Ann Woods [Marian Dowdell-Levette Woods].  She was a Marian Ann Dowdell.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Frankly, to tell you the truth, she was just sixteen when I married her.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When I met her, she told me she was sixteen, but she was only fourteen.  I was at a church meeting in East Lake [Birmingham, Alabama], and I was sort of listening to the old folks who were religious leaders.  And this old religious leader, Mrs. Billie Moore, I'll never forget, she was my beginning Sunday school teacher.  I, I, I loved her, she had great influence.  So, she had kind of recruited me to be involved in religious activities.  So I had a paper that I was going to read out at this church in East Lake, at First Baptist Church East Lake.  And when I got out there, standing on the steps there was this young lady.  I didn't know who she was.  I had on a black suit, black and white shoes, a black and white tie, and I believe a black and white hat.  And I guess that's in keeping with my daddy's [Abraham Woods, Sr.] conspicuous dress.  And they were attracted to me, her mother and the other adult that was there with her.  And they just marveled at me, and sort of put it in my wife that I was somebody she needed to know.  I'll never forget, as we were standing on the steps talking to this young lady, I had my paper in my hand.  She didn't ask to see it, she just snatched it out of my hand.  I said, "My God, wh- what's going on here," and she started reading it, you see.  Well, I wrote that off and said she meant well.  And I thought I would never see this woman again.  But unfortunately--well, fortunately, my sister Melza [ph.] was in the same class as she was in, and she told Melza she met me.  And I don't know whether Melza did this, or whether the young lady did that or not.  But I received a letter from her, and this letter was the letter that really put us in touch and was going to be the reason that we were going to eventually get together.  She says Melza wrote the letter, but I think she wrote the letter.
Story_ID: 467015
Speaker 1: I shall never forget, I had to ask her father could I come to see her [Woods' wife, Marian Dowdell-Levette Woods], and he acquiesced.  I didn't know the child was just fourteen.  And I carried my sister, two sisters, I believe, out there to see her at first.  Then the next time, I went to see her alone.  And when I got there, there was another young man sitting up there.  And so I said to her, "I see you have company, then I'll be going."  She said, "No, no, don't leave."  I said, "No, you have company."  She said, "He, he's leaving."  I said, "No, no, no," and I started back up to the bus line.  And she ran after me and said "Come on back."  Well, reluctantly I went back; I wasn't too pleased about it.  And when I left that night from her house and was standing on the bus line under a streetlight, I heard something say, "Bang."  And then I heard something say, "Vroom," something that went in front of me, saying, "Vroom."  And I said, "I wonder what that is."  Then I heard another shot, "Bang."  And "Vroom," and this went behind me.  And something said to me, said, "Fool, somebody is shooting at you.  And these are the bullets that's winding by your head."  And so when I had kind of thought, you know, I got away from there just as fast as I could.  It appears that that young man that she rejected, that he was so upset until he was trying to kill me.  In fact, the only reason I'm not dead is the Lord erased my name off those bullets.  And of course, after that, I was through with her, and I endeavored to stay away.  Because me and my friends discussed it.  They called me Prof, and they said, "Prof, one woman is not worth getting killed for.  There're a whole lot of women around here."  And I was determined that I was not going back, but she just kept on bothering me, kept on contacting me, until somehow, some way I ended up back over there. Sometime later, we set the date to be married.  And after we got married--
Speaker 2: Do you know what year it was that you got married?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I should know (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, how many--
Speaker 1: In fact, it will be fifty-nine years this year.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Now count back.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It will be fifty-nine years this year.
Speaker 2: Okay, fifty-nine years.  And so, you were substantially older than her.  You were about, what, ten or eleven years older than she is?
Speaker 1: Oh, no, no, no.  She was born in '32 [1932], and I was born in '28 [1928].  She is seventy-five now.
Speaker 2: Oh, I th--
Speaker 1: And I am seventy-eight, will be seventy-nine in October.  So we're about four years, four years different.
Story_ID: 467016
Speaker 1: I went to work at the pipe shop where my father [Abraham Woods, Sr.] worked, he got me a job there.  And they were grooming me to be what you call a cupalo [sic. cupola] attendant, which was a very dangerous job where you had to sort of regulate the molten iron that was coming out of the cupola.  You had to get it started in the morning, and in the evening you had to stop it by putting a bar in the little entrance where it would stop.  It was a very dangerous job.  And I shall never forget, one day I stuck a cold bar in the cupola to shake out the clinkers, and that molten iron sprayed on me.  Fortunate, it missed my face and hit my arm and part of my leg.  It was not such a deep degree that it incapacitated me, but I didn't get over that, and I thought it was time for me to leave the McWane pipe shop [McWane Cast Iron Pipe Company; McWane Ductile].  And so I did leave the pipe shop.  And after leaving the pipe shop I got jobs as a janitor at Molton, Allen and Williams [Molton, Allen and Williams LLC], a job where I was a janitor.  And I also got another job as janitor at a department store downtown; I worked two of those jobs.  And while I was working those two jobs, I decided to get some transportation, because I was walking all the way from the Southside [Birmingham, Alabama] to downtown.  I found me a little Ford automobile, and with both jobs we were able to manage the payments.  And I never would park that car near the entrance, because I had a feeling that my foreman might be upset if he saw my car, a nice little Ford car.  But one night I was running late and I wanted to hit the clock on time, and I moved up near the entrance.  And just as I moved up and got out, around the corner came the foreman, and he saw me get out the car.  That same night he came upstairs and he said to me--he called me Abe--he said, "Abe [HistoryMaker Reverend Abraham Woods, Jr.], you're going to have to decide which job you want."  I was a janitor at the department store in the day, and a janitor there at night.  And he and the manager of the department store had had a conversation about me, and they both said I was a good worker and was doing a good job.  And so he came up that night and said, "You're going to have to decide which of these jobs you want.  At the department store or here?"  And I said, "Not too long ago, you told me I was doing a good job."  He said, "I did."  I said, "Well, what is the trouble now?"  He said, "Your car looks better than mine.  So you're going to have to make a decision."  I said, "All right, then you can have your job."  And I left there, you see.
Story_ID: 467017
Speaker 1: A little later on I was going to get into insurance, working for the Atlanta Life Insurance Company [Atlanta Life Financial Group, Atlanta, Georgia].  And while working for the Atlanta Life Insurance Company, I was called to my first church, the First Metropolitan Baptist Church, on the Southside [Birmingham, Alabama].  And I had planned to work longer at the insurance company.  I was a debit manager, I wasn't making very much money there.  And I thought with the two salaries and the church, too, we would be in better shape.  But when my manager found out I'd been called to the church, one morning in a meeting he said, "Reverend Woods [HistoryMaker Reverend Abraham Woods, Jr.] is going to be leaving us."  I was shocked, I hadn't planned to leave.  He said, "He's now the pastor of a church, and we're going to miss him."  He was the kind of manager that felt if you had something else going for you, you wouldn't be hungry enough to go out and write business.  So, I had to go.  And I had St. Joseph--I mean, not St. Joseph, but Metropolitan Baptist Church.  And it was at this church where I started attending the Birmingham Baptist College [Birmingham-Easonian Baptist Bible College, Birmingham, Alabama].  And later on, I would go to Miles [Mile College, Fairfield, Alabama].
Speaker 2: Okay.  So just to put the years in perspective, (unclear) back to the year you got married, it was '48 [1948].  So, you had these jobs before you actually went to Birmingham Baptist College?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And you got your degree in 1953?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So that's what happened between '48 [1948] and '53 [1953]?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And at Atlanta Life, did you know Jesse Hill?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He was president, I believe, over in Atlanta [Georgia].  I don't know whether he was president then, but a very outstanding person.  Atlanta Life later moved back to Atlanta, but Jesse Hill, I remember him because he helped the Kings quite a bit, if I'm remembering correctly.  And he was one that we could depend on to help us, even in the struggle.
Story_ID: 467018
Speaker 1: All right, so, now you become the pastor of First Metropolitan Church [First Metropolitan Baptist Church, Birmingham, Alabama]. In fifty--and tell me what happens next?  What happens next?
Speaker 2: All right.  In the late 1950s, after the [U.S.] Supreme Court case, Brown v. the Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], where the Supreme Court handed down the ruling and said separate but equal is inherently unequal, and overturned the Plessy v. Ferguson [Plessy v. Ferguson, 1896] ruling in the 1890s, I believe it was, and said that there had to be desegregation with all deliberate speed--well, at that time the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] here in Birmingham [Alabama] was attacked not only in Birmingham, but in the state was attacked.  And the attorney general of the state asked the NAACP to turn over its membership roster to them, as if there was some shady persons--Communists, or this, that, and the other, who were part of the membership.  They refused to do it, because they knew it was a witch hunt.  Teachers were vulnerable, and other people who had jobs were vulnerable.  And they had no problem with dismissing you from your job when you were a part of that kind of activity.  So the NAACP refused to do it, and as a result, it was enjoined from operating in the State of Alabama.  I had started working with a young lady who was working with Mr. Patton [W.C. Patton], and Mr. Patton was the voter education person for the national NAACP.  And Reverend Shuttlesworth [HistoryMaker Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth] was a part of that organization, too.  So after the NAACP was outlawed in the State of Alabama, Reverend Shuttlesworth called a mass meeting at the Sardis Baptist Church [Sardis Missionary Baptist Church, Birmingham, Alabama] and said we need an organization that will carry the struggle on.  And he was criticized; some of the minsters criticized him, and other people criticized him.  And one outstanding preacher said to him, he said "Shuttlesworth, the Lord told me to tell you that you should not organize this organization."  And of course, Shuttlesworth shot back and said, "When has the Lord started giving you my messages?"  (Laughter) And so he organized it and we embraced it.  And I shall never forget, he said, "They killed the old hen," referring to the NAACP, "but before she died, she had some biddies."  And the Alabama Christian Movement [Alabama Christian Movement for Human Rights] was one of those biddies, and it turned out to be a fighting rooster.  This was now in the latter part of the 1950s.
Story_ID: 467019
Speaker 1: And you served as vice president because you were a charter member [of the Alabama Christian Movement for Human Rights].  Is that right?
Speaker 2: I was a charter member and I served as second vice president.  Because we had--Reverend Edward Gardner was the first vice, and I served as second vice president and also as a charter member.  I also was the chairperson for the place committee.  It was my responsibility to secure churches where we would have mass meetings.  We had a mass meeting every Monday night, and sometimes, more often when King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was on- when King came there we would have them more often than that.  It was my responsibility to find ministers who would let us meet at that church.  All of the ministers would not do it, because some of them were frightened of what could have happened to the church.  They said, "Well, they might bomb our church, they might set it on fire."  I said, "I can't promise you that they won't, but we do need to stand up in spite of what they might do."  I was going to be the one to speak to Reverend Cross [HistoryMaker Reverend John H. Cross, Jr.], who was the pastor of the 16th Street Baptist Church [Birmingham, Alabama].  That's after King comes in to see if it was all right for us to have mass meetings at the 16th Street Baptist Church.  He was a new pastor, and he told us that he didn't know their procedure, but so far as he was concerned, it was all right.  And he said, "If I don't call you back, come on."  And he didn't, and we went on and we started meeting there.  We come to find out that a number of his members didn't like it, and they became disgruntled because he permitted us to meet there.
Speaker 1: Well, before meeting at the 16th Street Baptist Church, you met at Fred Shuttlesworth's [HistoryMaker Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth] church, didn't you?
Speaker 2: At Bethel [Bethel Baptist Church, Birmingham, Alabama].  We met there on many occasions; that was his church.  We met at numerous other churches around the city.  We met at my church, the First Metropolitan Baptist Church [Birmingham, Alabama].  We met at Zion Star [Zion Star Baptist Church, Birmingham, Alabama], we met, we met at churches around the, the city.  But Bethel was the most prominent church, because Shuttlesworth was the pastor of that church.
Speaker 1: Right.
Story_ID: 467020
Speaker 1: Talk to me about the bombings at his [HistoryMaker Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth] home and at his church [Bethel Baptist Church, Birmingham, Alabama].
Speaker 2: Well we, we had a priot bombing at his church.  It was not as serious as the bombing on Christmas.  Guards had to be, had to be placed at his church.  I'll never forget that the interviewee that you're going to have tonight, [HistoryMaker] Colonel Stone Johnson, and some other men were guarding the church.  And somebody called them, some lady, and said, "There's a bucket on the side of the church, and its smoking."  So they went to the side of the church and there was a bucket where the dynamite had been lighted, and it was smoking, it hadn't gone off.  So they picked it up, the bucket up, and they set the bucket out in the middle of the street, and they backed up to the wall of the church and the dynamite went off.  The person you're going to interview tonight is Colonel Stone Johnson.  After I heard about that incident, I gave him another name; I started calling him Colonel Stonewall Johnson.  And that's the name I gave him.  And he was pleased with it until not too long ago.  Somebody told him that Stonewall Johnson [sic. Stonewall Jackson] was a Confederate general; and, and he was.  And as a student of history, I shall not forget that in a certain battle the Confederates were having with the Union soldiers, Jackson, General Jackson, was urging his men on.  And the battle was hot, and they looked up and said, "There stands General Jackson, like a stone wall."  Well, I didn't think it was anything wrong with calling him Stonewall Jackson [sic. Johnson].
Story_ID: 467021
Speaker 1: Do you have a story about the bombing at [HistoryMaker] Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth's home?
Speaker 2: On Christmas.
Speaker 1: Okay, what year was this?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: No, I can't be sure.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's fine.
Speaker 2: But I know you can find it.
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: I was one of the persons that had been sent to the transit company, to appeal to them to abandon their separate seating policy.  I believe at this time that some accord had been agreed to in Montgomery [Alabama].  We used to go down to Montgomery as ministers to see what we could do to help in Montgomery, and also to be a part of the mass meetings and any other kinds of activities that we could.  And many of those leading ministers would come up to Birmingham [Alabama.]  I shall not forget that several of them came up to Birmingham one day, and we were meeting with them at Shuttlesworth's home.  And the police came and they arrested these ministers.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the names of the ministers?
Speaker 2: No, not offhand.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'd have to go back.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And we say, "Well, why are you arresting these fellows?  We're just having a meeting.  Why are you arresting them, and what are you going to charge them with?"  And they said, "We're going to charge them as being vagrants."  We said, "Vagrants?  What does that mean? That means that they don't have a visible means of livelihood, or jobs?"  We said, "These men are outstanding pastors in their cities."  Nevertheless, they arrested them on the charge of vagrancy.  They did not hold them too long, but it was that kind of thing.
Story_ID: 467022
Speaker 1: I guess it was prior to that, I imagine, when the Christmas bombing took place.  I had been a part of a committee, along with Reverend Gardner [Edward Gardner] and others, who tried to get the transit company to set aside its segregationist seating arrangement.  They refused to do so, and as a result we had them understand that we were going to ride the buses in a desegregated manner anyhow.  And so on Christmas when the blasts went off, and we started inquiring.  And it was nothing strange for a bomb blast to go off in Birmingham [Alabama], because Birmingham was called Bombingham.  And there had been numerous bomb blasts here, yonder, and there, in a community we called Dynamite Hill [Birmingham, Alabama], not too far from here.  And Attorney Shores' [Arthur Shores] home was going to be bombed two times.
Speaker 2: Who?  I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Attorney Shores, Arthur Shores.  He was the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] lawyer.  His home was going to be bombed twice.  And so it wasn't nothing unusual to hear bombs going off, and so we had to find out where it was.  And we rushed over to Bethel [Bethel Baptist Church, Birmingham, Alabama], and there we found that the church and the parsonage had been bombed, and we were concerned about the welfare and the well-being of Reverend Shuttlesworth [HistoryMaker Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth] and his family.  And when we got there, we got the good news that they were all right, that there were no serious injuries, maybe little minor things.  And Fred had been blown out of his room, and the house had been blown down around him, but he was unhurt; he was talking to one of his deacons I think at the time.  So we were very happy that he was able, he and his family was able to come out of that terrible situation.  I shall never forget, they were questioning him--the authorities and the reporters and that sort of thing.  And one policeman said to him, he said, "Shuttlesworth, they're going to kill you," or something like that.  He said, "If I were you, I would get out of town as fast as I could."  Shuttlesworth shot back and said, "Officer, you're not me, and I ain't you.  And I'm not going anywhere."  That was the kind of stance, or the kind of words he said to him.  And it was not long after that that a newspaper reporter--I don't know if it was TV or the other media--said to Shuttlesworth, "Reverend Shuttlesworth, I understand that you all have planned to ride the buses in a desegregated way on tomorrow.  Are you all still going to ride?"  I thought Fred would have said, "We're going to meet and we're going to look at the situation and we're going to make our decision."  Before that reporter could get the words out of his mouth, Fred said, "If the buses run, we're going to ride."  And so even though his home had been bombed, and the church had been bombed, and he was miraculously saved, we rode the buses.  That really inspired people, to see him come out of that.  And one old lady said, "My God, Almighty.  God has saved Shuttlesworth to lead this movement."  And if you had had any doubts about whether Shuttlesworth was anointed to lead the movement after he came out of that, then you had assurance that divine power, that God was taking care of him and had ordained him.
Story_ID: 467023
Speaker 1: So, we rode the buses in a desegregated manner, I shall never forget I led a group.  And it was our responsibility to catch the bus going to West End [Birmingham, Alabama], and so we did.  There were others who took buses going to other parts of the city.  And the bus I was on, we, we took our seats near the front in the midst of our white brothers and sisters, and there was an old white man who started changing colors sitting up front.  And all at once he said to the driver, "Don't you see these Negroes" or "niggers," he said, "sitting up here?"  The driver didn't say a word, the driver just kept driving.  (Laughter) And so, he spoke to him in a louder voice.  "Don't you, don't you see these niggers sitting up here?"  The driver just kept driving, just kept driving (laughter).  And he saw that the driver was not going to respond negatively, so he pulled the cord and grumbled and mumbled, and said, "Let me off here."  So the driver stopped and let him off, and then he got off.  And the driver drove us around his circuit, and never did call the police to arrest any of us.  But that did not happen like that with some of the other routes.  Some of the other drivers did call the police, and some of our people were arrested.  And all we wanted to do was to get some arrests, so we could have a test case so we could go to court.
Speaker 2: Was this before the Montgomery boycott, bus boycott?
Speaker 1: No, no. No, no.
Speaker 2: It was after?
Speaker 1: It was not before, it was not before the Montgomery Bus Boycott.  I don't remember the date. But it wasn't before (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, so this was afterwards, trying to get the bus system in Birmingham [Alabama] desegregated?
Speaker 1: Yeah, you might want to check that out.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: I'm not sure I--
Story_ID: 467024
Speaker 1: You were also involved in leading a group in the sit-ins at department stores.  Is that right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Shuttlesworth [HistoryMaker Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth] invited Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] to come to Birmingham [Alabama] and to help us.  The police commissioner, as you know, was the infamous Eugene "Bull" Connor [Bull Connor], and he was determined that Birmingham would not change, that we would keep the status quo.  And so he was a man that had dealt with the Freedom Riders, and having them beaten up and this sort of thing.  And he made a statement when you asked about the law, "Damn the law, I am the law," and this sort of thing.  And so Fred asked Martin, after things were going so well in Montgomery [Alabama], to come and help us.  And so Martin and the SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] finally got here; Fred was in the organizing of the SCLC.  And they didn't come to Birmingham when we first invited- invited them, because there was a move on by a young lawyer named David Vann, with folks who supported him to change the government in Birmingham from a commissioner form to a mayor-council form, and that would put Bull Connor out.  And they had to get enough signatures to do that, and so they were able to get enough signatures to do that.  And when the election was held, the citizens of Birmingham changed the form of government from a commissioner form to a mayor-council.  And that left Bull and the other three commissioners in that position, and they did not want to leave public office.  A little later, a mayor was elected.  I'll never forget him, his name was Boutwell [Albert Boutwell].  I can't remember Boutwell's last name, but he was a legislator in Montgomery and he was one who had come up with the Placement Act [Alabama Pupil Placement Act of 1956] for the schools, where in order to maintain segregation, all the school systems had to follow a program where there was a placement act.  And they interviewed the students and they placed them in the school that they thought was best for them.  And of course, this was a slick way of placing minorities in minority schools and placing whites in white schools.  His name was Albert Boutwell, I'll never forget.  So he became mayor, and they started electing people for the council.  Bull Connor and the other commissioners would not vacate their position, and they did something that we'd been doing.  They decided to sit in, and it took a court order to get them out.  And finally a court order got them out, and of course this is, this is prior to the mayor being elected.  I got ahead of myself; the mayor had not been elected at that time.  But Albert Boutwell ran, and Bull Connor had stated that: "If the Birmingham government is changed from a commissioner form to a mayor-council form, I am going back to Plantersville [Alabama] and pick peanuts."  That's what he had stated.  But after the change, Bull Connor was one of the first candidates to put his hat in the ring for mayor.  And of course in the final analysis Albert Boutwell run- won, and there he was out, along with the other commissioners.  One reporter asked him, he said, "Bull, we have you on record that you stated that if the government of al- Birmingham was changed from mayor-council, I mean from commissioner to mayor-council, you were going to Plantersville to pick peanuts."  He said, "Did you say that?"  Bull paused and finally said, "Yes, I did say that."  And he asked Bull, he said, "Bull, you're not in Plantersville picking peanuts.  You're out here running for mayor.  Tell me about that."  Bull Connor paused again, and these are the most profound words I ever heard Bull speak.  Bull said, "You know, it's a bad wind that never change."  And that's why he ran and he lost.
Story_ID: 467025
Speaker 1: And of course, Boutwell [Albert Boutwell]--
Speaker 2: Won.
Speaker 1: We had asked, we had asked Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] to come.  And we were trying to hold off.  They said, "Give Boutwell a chance."  But we noticed some of the actions of Boutwell, knowing that he was the author of the Placement Act [Alabama Pupil Placement Act of 1956] and all of this.  And finally Fred [HistoryMaker Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth] said, "We've got to get King in here."  He said, "Boutwell is not well; he's about well.  So, we're going to have to get King in here."  So, King eventually came in to help lead the struggle against segregation and racism here in Birmingham, Alabama (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We- you formed one of the first groups, or led the first group?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And you were arrested, right?
Speaker 1: That is correct.
Speaker 2: Tell me about it.
Speaker 1: In fact, as we prepared for that crusade, Wyatt Tee Walker [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Wyatt Tee Walker] was sitting here with the blueprint.  And I was one of the ministers that was asked to go downtown with him and, and (unclear) look at the area and decide just where we wanted to launch our attacks, and this sort of thing.  So, it was designated to me to lead the first group to sit-in in the department stores.  And I'll never forget, I led that group to one of the upscale department stores downtown called Loveman, Joseph [Loveman, Joseph and Loeb, Birmingham, Alabama], it was a quality store.  They had a lunch counter--not a lunch counter, but they had a restaurant on the inside of the store.  So I led those people, and we took seats in the restaurant part where other customers were eating, and we sat down waiting for the waitresses to serve us.  And when we sat down we noticed that the other people who were eating, they either quickly finished or left what they were eating, and they got up and left the area.  And the waitresses busied themselves with cleaning off the tables, and that sort of thing.  They never did come to us; we're still sitting and waiting to be served.  And while we were sitting there, they turned the lights off in that area, and left us sitting up there.  And they pulled the rope which separated that area from the rest of the store, and there we were in the restaurant area with it closed and with the lights off.  We knew that we were not going to be able to get a test case there.
Story_ID: 467026
Speaker 1: So, reluctantly we left and we went next door to the other store. Newberry's [J.J. Newberry Company, Birmingham, Alabama], I believe it was, or Bradley [sic. Britts of Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama] or whatever they called it.  And they had a lunch counter, and some of us sat at the lunch counter and we asked to be served; it was at the store.  That--we were refused, and the people were very hostile there.  And they told us if we didn't get out of there, they were going to call the police and have us arrested.  And that's exactly what we wanted.  So, we refused to leave, and finally the manager came up and said, "I'm going to give y'all just one more chance.  If you don't get out of here--."  We said, "We're customers.  And if we can buy stuff in this store, we ought to be able to drink a Coke [Coca-Cola] and eat, eat a hot dog."  And so when he saw we were not leaving, he called the police.  And the police came and they warned us that we were trespassing, and that they were going to arrest us if we didn't leave.  So, that's what we went there for.  So, they finally arrested us.  They called the billy wagon and they put us in the wagon and loaded it down, I'll never forget.  Once they put us in, we started singing.  I'm telling you, we had a singing good time, and that wagon was just shaking from side to side going down the road going to the jailhouse with us in it. And so we did get to the jail, and they put us in with the other inmates that were there.  And of course, these inmates didn't know who we were or why we were there, I don't suppose.  And for the first night or so, it was pretty tough.  All of us couldn't go to sleep at the same time, because we noticed that some of those other inmates would be trying to slip up to our bunk, and we didn't know what they had in mind (laughter).  And so, we decided that somebody was going to have to stay awake.  And we heard talk of them doing many things--stealing what you had if you had anything, and robbing you, or trying to be intimate with you, and so many other things.  And we weren't going to have that.  And so after a day or two, they found out who we were.  And when they found out that we were people with Martin Luther King, Jr. [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], they started warming up to us and we were able to have songs, meetings and talk with them.
Story_ID: 467027
Speaker 1: And of course, those of us, since I was one of the leaders, they decided to send me and some of the others to work detail.  All of them were put on work detail.  And they sent me and some of the other leaders to what turned out to be the city's farm.  I didn't know the city [Birmingham, Alabama] had a farm, but it was somewhere out in the area called upper city.  And they were growing all kinds of truck crops--greens, cabbage, tomatoes, and that sort of thing.  And they put some of the other people in that area.  They took me and two others, the leaders, and gave us shovels and picks.  And they had their guns, shotguns, across their shoulders and told us to come and follow them.  And they led us deeper and deeper into the woods.  And we started talking to ourselves and said, "These, these fellows have left the farm and is taking us deeper and deeper into the woods, and we got picks and shovels."  We said, "What are they up to?"  And so finally we stopped deep in the woods, and they said, "Start digging."  We looked at each other, and we said to each other, "You mean to tell me that these fellows want us to dig our graves and then they're going to kill us?"  We said, "We're ai- we're not gonna do it, we're not gonna do it."  So, I asked them, "Dig for what?"  Because we wasn't going to dig.  They were going to have to shoot us and they were going to dig them themselves.  And they looked at each other and smiled and said, "We need water on the farm, and we think that we might find some water out here."  Well, that sounded reasonable enough to us.  And since they smiled at each other we figured it wasn't that serious, so we dug.  And when they came back, we had dug him a pretty big hole.  And they just came back and said, "Let's go," and just took us on back to the farm and put us on the truck and brought us on back to the jail.  I guess they just wanted to frighten us or give us a workout, or that sort of thing.  But they put the rabbit in the briar patch, because I was used to working on the farm and doing things like that (laughter).
Speaker 2: So, how long did you stay on the work farm?
Speaker 1: Well, we stayed in that jail situation I believe for five or six days, you see.
Speaker 2: Was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But they didn't take us to the work farm every day.
Speaker 2: They just let you stay in the jail?
Speaker 1: Yes, they would let us stay in the jail.  And I'm telling you, that food was horrible, it was really horrible. I'm telling you.
Speaker 2: Was this the norm, that the leaders of the Civil Rights Movement would be taken to a jail and taken to a work farm to work, or--?
Speaker 1: No, this was not the norm.
Speaker 2: No, this--okay, so this was--
Speaker 1: This was not the norm.  Because most of us didn't even know (laughter) that the city had a farm (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: --you see.
Story_ID: 467028
Speaker 1: All right, so now you also worked with voter registration, and at Miles College [Fairfield, Alabama] you had a program there, is that right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, that's right.  Prior to Miles College, you know, I mentioned I worked with Dr. Patton [W.C. Patton].  And I can remember the lady now who was the coordinator, Mrs. Bernice Johnson [HistoryMaker Bernice Johnson Reagon].  I call her my, my civil rights mother, Mrs. Bernice Johnson.  She's dead now [sic.], but that is where I started into civic and voter registration activities.  But at Miles the president got a grant, and he was able to set up a voter registration project and he made me the director of that project.  And we selected two students at Miles and gave them credits for working with that project.  And it was their responsibility to go out into the city and the outlying areas of the city and to teach people how to fill out the voter registration form; it was a long form.  And we paired them off, two by two, and went into areas around the city, and we were able to get a lot of people who were interested.  And once we'd sent the bus there and carried them down to the courthouse--and we would supply babysitters if they needed babysitters to stay at their home.  We had some help from some New England white students who found out about the project, and each summer they would come down to join that project and help us go into the various communities outside of Birmingham [Alabama] to help people learn how to fill out the voter registration form.  I would often pair a white and a black, and sometimes a black male with a white female.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And some of the people, when they saw that at the door, they wouldn't open the door.  They were afraid to entertain this interracial couple.
Story_ID: 467029
Speaker 1: And I told you that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: --many of the strategy sessions were held in his office.
Speaker 2: Right. We- I was asking you, during this time you were working at Miles College [Fairfield, Alabama], you were telling me how liberal Dr.--
Speaker 1: Pitts [Lucius Holsey Pitts, Sr.] was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Pitts was, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --relative to the movement.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, tell me about that.
Speaker 1: He encouraged the students to be a part of the movement.  Miles College was going to be a hotbed for what you might call students revolutionaries, who were itching to get after segregation and that way of life.  And it was going to be Miles College where people like the students and my good friend who's a member of our church here [St. Joseph Missionary Baptist Church, Birmingham, Alabama] now, Frank Dukes, who was president of the student government, along with others--they were going to organize the first selective buying campaign in Birmingham, Alabama.  And they were going to show us that we had some muscle, and that part of the muscle we had was economic muscle. That if we take some money out of the cash register, then we would get some respect.  So, the students at Miles College prepared a selective buying campaign leading up to Easter, and the merchants never forgot it.  And they taught SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference], that that was part of our muscle.  So we were going to engage in what we called selective buying campaign.  It was against the law to boycott, but we called it a selective buying campaign.  And so, Dr. Pitts became a sort of an influential leader.  In my capacity, I was dealing with the police.  And whenever we'd have a serious beating case or things of that kind, I would tell Dr. Pitts, he along with another influential leader, Dr. Montgomery [James T. Montgomery], who was a cardiologist in the city.  And they would go the powers that be.  And so, Dr. Pitts was a great influence for all of us and for all of the students.  The fact that caused the fire was that we were trying to, we were trying to get books and get money to bring our library up to par.  And we decided to go out in the community with cans with slots in them in order to ask for funds.  Bull Connor said that if we did that, he was going to arrest us all.  And so that upset the school, and I'll never forget on that chapel morning the president was crying.  He was a very tender-hearted person.  And one of the tough students said to him, pardon the expression, "Hell, Mr. President, don't cry.  We're going to take care of them, you see."  And so, that was when they moved out to be involved.  Miles College, we had to have armed guards sitting in the front, outside of our school.  They did an article on Miles College, I believe it was in Time magazine; I believe it was Time, not Newsweek.  And Miles College was the only school of higher education in Birmingham, Alabama that made tremendous contribution to bringing Birmingham to some accord with the country.
Story_ID: 467030
Speaker 1: Let me get back.  Now Dr. Pitts [Lucius Holsey Pitts, Sr.] was liberal with me, and he also helped to get money for me to seek to advance my degree.  That is why I ended up going over to UAB, University of Alabama in Birmingham [University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama].  This was in the late '60s [1960s].  And I, I was a good student there.  I'll never forget, for a long time I was the only student in many of my classes.  And this professor was a historian, and his name was Dr. Jack D.L. Holmes, and he was a tough teacher.  In fact, in this particular class he was so tough until half of the students, and they were all white, decided that this man is crazy.  He thinks we're going to get all this work, and, and, and something is wrong with him anyhow.  He said to the students whatever he wanted to say to them, it didn't make him any difference.  They said, "We're going to drop this class."  So when those white students, when half of them dropped his class, I thought I'd better go with them.  And then something said to me, they expect you to go, because they don't believe you have the intelligence to deal with this.  And so something said stay in.  It might kill you, but stay in.  And I stayed in, and that man threw everything at us but the kitchen sink.  We had to write four papers, and each paper we wrote we had to go up to the front and present it to the students, and the students would critique it and criticize us.  And when they got through with us, then he would get us.  So, I decided I'd better burn the midnight oil and make sure that my papers were clean, because I did not want to go through any embarrassing kind of situations.  So, I had some good papers.  We stayed on top of the lectures, and did everything he wanted us to do.  And on the final test he marked on my paper, 83 [percent].  That was pretty good, but when I examined it, there were too many questions that he overlooked.  And when I took that paper back, I ended up getting a 93 [percent].  And the word got around that this black student, whose class half of the white students dropped, made an A in his class.  I know word got around, because the white students kind of started warming up to me and trying to talk to me, when they had not been doing it at first.  And I did so well in this historian's class, until when he got ready to go off on his sabbatical, they asked him who was going to teach his class.  He recommended me, because I was teaching at Miles [Miles College, Fairfield, Alabama], working on my graduate degree.  And so, I became the first African American to teach African American history at the University of Alabama in Birmingham.
Speaker 2: Wow, all right.
Speaker 1: And of course, I wasn't--my president saw that they might be trying to keep me.  He called me in and I had to go back to my classes.  But here again, he was very, very liberal about me doing things for the movement.
Story_ID: 467031
Speaker 1: So, in the summer of 1963 you went to work in Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] office, is that right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, but before that, you're skipping the student march.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, tell me about that.
Speaker 2: After King came, and my leading the--a group to sit-in--this was just the beginning.  Sit-ins were led around the city [Birmingham, Alabama].  And on the heels of that, we could not get enough adults in jail, and so we needed another source of supply.  And Dr. King sort of resisted using students, but behind his back, one of his lieutenants, Reverend James Bevels [sic. HistoryMaker Reverend James Bevel], decided to turn the students out.  And of course we were a part of it, going to the various schools and urging the students to come out.  They knew what was going on in the city.  They saw the news, they saw the TV and radio and all of that, and they knew what we were about.  And they were itching to be a part.  And I went to various schools, and they were coming from schools all over the city, singing, "I ain't going to let nobody turn me around."  They were jumping out of windows, they were climbing over fences; they were running by teachers coming out of the school.  And we had a host of students coming from every which way down to 16th Street, to that church [16th Street Baptist Church, Birmingham, Alabama] and to Kelly Ingram Park [Birmingham, Alabama].  And it was because of the students that Bull Connor turned the dogs loose on us.  And not only the dogs, but the high pressured water hoses.  And of course he used the billy clubs and he also used gas too, on us.  And so, I was going around the city turning students out.  One morning I got back and there were my children down at the site--my wife [Marian Dowdell-Levette Woods], my mother [Maggie Wallace Woods], and my three oldest children [Yvonne Woods Bell, Anita Woods McGhee, and Ruth Woods Williams].  They said, "Dad, we want to go to jail, too."  So I said, "Well, I'm glad you do.  I've been so busy getting other folks' children in jail, I forgot y'all."  So my three daughters decided to go.  I had a five-year old boy [Abraham Woods III], he's the one who's the urologist in Orlando [Florida].
Story_ID: 467032
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What are your children's names?
Speaker 2: Yvonne Lucille [Yvonne Woods Bell], Anita [Anita Woods McGhee], and Ruth [Ruth Woods Williams]; they were my three girls.  They were in elementary school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my son was five.  So he said, "I want to go to jail, too."  And his grandmother [Maggie Wallace Woods] and mother [Marian Dowdell-Levette Woods] said, "No, you're too young, son, you can't go."  He said, "I want to go."  So they sought to frighten him and said, "Well, what would you do when those ferocious dogs get after you?"  He put his hand in his pocket and pulled out a rock (laughter).  And he said, "I'll hit him in the head with this rock."  They said, "You still can't go."  And he had a fit, falling out wanting to go.  But he was only five years old. So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was your son's name?
Speaker 2: Abraham Lincoln Woods III [Abraham Woods III].
Speaker 1: That was your, your youngest son?
Speaker 2: My oldest son.
Speaker 1: Oh, he was your oldest son, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm. This was in '63 [1963], you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 467033
Speaker 1: It was the students that really--three or four thousand of them--that filled up the jails and filled up Fair Park [Birmingham, Alabama].  Everywhere they sought to confine our young people, everything was full.  So, it was due to this influx of students that came in to help us, and who were not afraid.  And they braved the dogs, and some of them got--were bitten by dogs.  Some of them were bruised by the high-pressured water hoses, but they endured.  I'll never forget, we'd just come out of a mass meeting, and a reporter put a microphone in the face of a little girl.  I guess he suspected she didn't know why she was there.  And so, he wanted to prove his point.  So he asked her, "Why are you here," a small girl.  And she was tied-tongued, she couldn't speak well.  But she said, "Freedom, freedom, freedom," that's why she was there.  So, our students understood.  And King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] had to justify it, and the people certainly criticized him and said, "You're going to get these children killed.  You're going to get them hurt, you're going to get them injured."  And he said, the southern way of life is already hurting and injuring our children.  Now they have an opportunity to do something about it.  And so it was our children who helped to break, who was the straw that helped to break the camel's back.
Story_ID: 467034
Speaker 1: I also had another job, and that is to find folk that dogs had bitten and take them to the doctor for a shot.  We didn't know whether the dogs had good health or not, but this is what broke the back of desegregation--I mean broke the back of segregation in Birmingham, Alabama.  We got some accords.  It was one of my nieces, Bishop Calvin Woods' [HistoryMaker Reverend Calvin Wallace Woods, Sr.] daughter, who went to Atlanta [Georgia] to the court there to keep the school system from expelling the young folks.  And of course the courts ruled with us, and they had to let them all back into the schools.  And of course it was at this juncture where they had to make some accord with us, with King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and Shuttlesworth [HistoryMaker Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth].  At one time King wanted to call off the activities.  Shuttlesworth had been bruised by a high-pressured water hose.  I'll never forget, we were standing down near 16th Street and Bull Connor was some way across from us.  And he said, "There's Shuttlesworth, get him!"  And the fireman turned the high-pressured hose on Fred and caught him full force and knocked him off his feet, and kept that force on him.  And that force pushed him there in front of the church where you go down the little stairs into the basement.  And he was bruised, and so he had to, he had to, he had to go to the hospital and be treated.  And while he was indisposed, the attorney general, Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy] and others sought to get King to call a moratorium on the marches.  And of course, Fred found out about it.  They were up to John Drew and Dina Drew's [Addine Drew] house, where they met a lot.  And Fred showed up and challenged King.  He said, "If you call it off, I'm going to call it on."  And he said, "You forgot that I invited you here," things of that kind.  This is on the record somewhere, you see.  So they couldn't handle Fred, and so eventually they had to come to some accord with us.  They decided to do something about the lunch counters and things of that kind.  And so, we had that victory prior to the March on Washington.
Story_ID: 467035
Speaker 1: Then we, we were working on the March on Washington, so if you want me to get into that now.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: All right.  I had met another leader of the movement, a vice president of the movement.  And he was our leader in Tallahassee, Florida, that was also challenging the bus seating.  His name was C.K. Steele [Charles Kenzie Steele], I'll never forget him, a very dynamic man.  We had him up here to speak and I eventually had him over to my church, and we became good friends.  And the next thing I knew, I was getting an invitation to serve as the deputy director for the South, for the March on Washington.  I really didn't know why they selected me.  I found out in later years that it was Dr. C.K. Steele of Tallahassee, who was one of the vice presidents and one of the founders of SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference], had recommended me for this position.  So, in the summer I went to Atlanta [Georgia], and had, had an office there in the national office not too far from Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], where I saw him every day that he was there.  And it was my responsibility to work with Wyatt Tee Walker [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Wyatt Tee Walker] of New York [New York] to mobilize; to fly around the Southeast and other parts; to charter buses and carpools; to charter trains; and also to charter planes and get people to Washington [D.C.] however we could.  And that was my responsibility.  I flew everywhere.  I shall never forget I flew in some planes that flew so low you could count the cows in the pasture.  But I cut my eye-tooth on flying, and flying back and forth almost every week up to the Urban League [National Urban League].  They had a great office up there in New York, and of course Whitney Young was there.  And also at the meeting would be the president of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and the presidents of other civil rights organizations like SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee.]  [HistoryMaker] John Lewis was there, and Bayard Rustin, who had been given the responsibility of coordinating the march.  Cleve Robinson [Cleveland Robinson], who was also his assistant, and J. Philip Randolph [sic. A. Philip Randolph] would be in the meeting, and labor leaders and religious leaders.  And we'd have to give our report as to what was the activity and how di- how things looked.  So, whenever we had that meeting I had to give my report to Dr. King and let them know just how we were doing in chartering all of these things to go to Washington.  It was very serious that we have a great crowd.  Dr. King often said that politicians know how to count.  And if we don't have a sufficient crowd of folk, we will have flunked, and we cannot afford to flunk.  And so we worked hard in order to mobilize the people--
Story_ID: 467036
Speaker 1: I shall never forget, I chartered a train that moved up the coast of Florida.  And as it moved up the co- coast of Florida, stopping at the various cities along the coast, it picked up coaches of people who were going to the march.  We picked up additional coaches in Florida.  We rode into Georgia.  We picked up coaches throughout Georgia as we moved on up towards the North and the East.  And we picked up coaches in the Carolinas--South Carolina, North Carolina.  You're talking about a long train.  And we also picked up coaches in Virginia.  And when we got to Union Station [Washington, D.C.], I'm telling you, that was a long freedom train.  And that was not the only freedom train.  When we looked up, there were freedom trains coming from various other points in the country.  And not only were there freedom trains coming from various other points, but there were buses galore.  I'm just telling you, hundreds and hundreds of buses.  And when we saw that, we felt good, because we had some assurance that the crowd we needed would be at the march.  And of course, there was another concern, and the concern was that we don't need to bring that many people there, because you're going to have some incidents.  I don't remember one incident that we had at that march; everybody was orderly.  It was a mixed march, and you just should have been there to see that huge crowd of people, a number that John [HistoryMaker John Lewis] saw, that no man could number.
Story_ID: 467037
Speaker 1: And we marched to the Lincoln Memorial [Washington, D.C.], and I shall never forget.  I found my place in the VIP section.  I was standing in front of the huge statue of [President] Abraham Lincoln sitting there in the Lincoln Memorial.  Some little distance from me was Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] with the guards around him, and other people.  And we were looking out on the Reflecting Pool [Lincoln Memorial Reflecting Pool, Washington, D.C.], and there were wall to wall folks all around the Reflecting Pool, some standing, some sitting with their feet in the water.  And not only were there people around on the level land, but in all of the trees; there were people in the trees, everywhere.  I'm telling you, that was a sight that made us glad.  And of course the activities started, the singing.  And one of the singers was Mahalia Jackson, and of course she had a soulful kind of way of singing.  And there were others who did sing, too, but I remember Mahalia Jackson.  And there were the speeches.  And we got down to Martin Luther King, and he was introduced by none other than J. Philip Randolph [sic. A. Philip Randolph].  And if you have really heard about J. Philip Randolph, he was the dean of the civil rights struggle.  He was head of the Pullman car porters, and it was really his idea that we have that march.  And he had an eloquent sort of bass voice, a baritone voice, and he introduced King, "Martin Luther King, J-R," and Martin came to the podium, and he led up to I Have a Dream.  Now, I know you've heard it on cassette tapes and you've seen it maybe video.  But you just needed to have been there.  It was something in the air, a kind of charge, some kind of electric in the air that was coursing up and down in our bodies, I'm telling you.  King got into his speech with the kind of cadence that he, he used.  I'm telling you, he lifted us.  I guess we were sort of mesmerized, sort of in a hypnotic trance or something.  He just lifted us out of ourselves.  "And I have a dream that my little children will not be judged by the color of their skin, but by the content of their character."  And of course, he talked about the promissory note that had come back with insufficient funds, and all of that.  And he finally said that, he told us to go on back to the Delta Mississippi.  Go on back to Stone Mountain in Georgia.  Go on back to this, yonder and that.  And he said, "When that day come, we will be able to sing the old spiritual with new meaning, 'Free at last, free at last.  Thank God almighty, we're free at last.'"
Story_ID: 467038
Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines, the interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Scott Stearns is the videographer, and John Woods is observing.  This is a continuation interview.  Would you state your name for me, please?
Speaker 2: My name is Abraham Lincoln Woods, Jr. [HistoryMaker Reverend Abraham Woods, Jr.].
Speaker 1: And the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: It is first--
Speaker 1: St. Joseph's (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) St. Joseph Baptist Church [St. Joseph Missionary Baptist Church] in Birmingham, Alabama.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: Is September the 7th, 2007.
Story_ID: 467039
Speaker 1: We left off the last time, when you were telling us about the March on Washington, with Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.].  Tell me, how did the march affect Birmingham [Alabama] once all of the hoopla of the march was done in Washington [D.C.] and you came back to Birmingham?
Speaker 2: It certainly made a great impact, not only on Birmingham but on cities around the, around the country.  It gave us a great sense of pride, a great sense of accomplishment, and we've always had faith that we were on the right road.  But with what appeared to us to be the miraculous situation of the March on Washington, we were really somewhat intoxicated, you might say, with a sense of commitment.  And so, that kind of spirit was found here in Birmingham.  We could hear the eloquent words of Dr. King when he was saying, "Going on back to Mississippi.  Going on back to Georgia.  Going on back to Alabama."  He mesmerized us there, and I'm telling you, he gave us a high that we brought back to Birmingham and started dealing with the racism in a great- with a greater intensity in trying to bring about desegregation in the stores and in the public kind of arena.
Story_ID: 467040
Speaker 1: Now you were a professor at--or a director--
Speaker 2: At first at Miles [Miles College, Fairfield, Alabama].
Speaker 1: At Miles College (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Dr. Pitts [Lucius Holsey Pitts, Sr.] hired me.  I finished Miles in '62 [1962] and--
Speaker 1: You mean you began working there in '62 [1962].
Speaker 2: I finished in '62 [1962], and I was hired--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: --in '62 [1962].  Dr. Pitts had become the president of Miles.  The old president, Dr. William Bell [William A. Bell], had passed on, and Dr. Pitts had come to us from Atlanta [Georgia].  He had a civil rights background, and he had worked with the teachers as an advocate for the teachers in Atlanta.  So, he fitted well in the civil rights struggle that was going on Birmingham [Alabama].  I'll never forget that we were at a dinner.  I don't remember the name of it, but my wife [Marian Dowdell-Levette Woods] was there and Dr. Pitts was there also.  And (laughter) my wife all at once started nudging me and said, "Ask Dr. Pitts to give you a job."  (Laughter) I said to myself, I said I just got my bachelor's degree, and people have to have a master's [degree] in order to work in undergraduate colleges.  But she said, "Ask him to give you a job."  And my wife is very pushy, very aggressive.  And so at the end of that situation, I asked him was there anything that he thought I could do at the college.  I was a good student.  In fact, they had told me that I was the valedictorian of the class.  And I was making plans with my speech when they found out that another young lady that had a better average than mine, a few percentage points, she was out of school because she had a--given pregnancy.  And but when they looked at her record, then they told me that I would be the salutatorian.  So I had a real good academic record, and it must've interested Dr. Pitts, because he hired me.
Story_ID: 467041
Speaker 1: He first hired me as a director of a voting project that he pulled together.  And in that project we would take students from Miles [Miles College, Fairfield, Alabama], and eventually white students came from the New England schools to work on that project during the summers.  And we went throughout the cities and throughout the outlying areas teaching black folks how to vote.  It was a long form that was in use at that time, and we went from house to house to do that.  Usually I would pair a black student and a white student, and at some of the houses in the black community that they would go to, the people would look out the window and see a black young man and a white girl, and they wouldn't even open the door to let them in.  But we got a lot of cooperation there, and we even promised babysitters.  When the time came to go to the courthouse, we afforded babysitters.  And our bus went around and picked up people in the various communities, and it was a very, very, successful endeavor that Dr. Pitts [Lucius Holsey Pitts, Sr.] at Miles College established and we worked with.
Speaker 2: Now, going door to door asking people to register to vote or teaching them how to register could be construed as dangerous.  How dangerous was it for the students?
Speaker 1: Well, we recognized that there could be some danger involved.  In fact, the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] and other sick-minded folks would not want you to do that.  And on some occasions they would, they would act up, but these students were committed.  In fact, they were turned on.  In fact, I had a group of students from Miles, and they were so turned on until in order to set up people for the activity, they had started calling early in the morning about five or six o'clock.  And I found out about that, and I said to them, I said, "Young people, don't you think that that's a little too early to be calling people, rousing people out of their sleep talking about setting up to come and teach them how to register and vote?"  And of course they complained to Dr. Pitts about that, and Dr. Pitts told me to leave them alone, to let them go on and do what they wanted to do.  But these people were really committed in doing this kind of work.  One of the young people went on to become a part of a national group for voter registration in Atlanta [Georgia], and he worked with them for a long time.
Speaker 2: Do you remember his name?
Speaker 1: His name eludes me.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It might come to me later.
Speaker 2: How successful was the project?  Was there a number of people registered?  And did it make a difference in the election?
Speaker 1: It was really successful, and it did not make much difference in the election.  Because what happened is most of those folks, they turned down.  There was this thing of, I think you call it moral, moral turpitude.  If you were born out of wedlock, then that disqualified you from voting.  And there were a lot of ridiculous questions that they would ask.  In fact, they were so ridiculous until so many of us characterized them as asking you, how many grains of sand is on the seashore or how many bubbles are there in a bar of soap.  They were so ridiculous.  But they turned down most of those people.  At that time we did not have the weight of the federal government with us.  And so even though we were successful in getting the people committed to do it, and carrying busloads down to the county courthouse, they still opposed the registration and the voting of blacks.
Story_ID: 467042
Speaker 1: Now, you were at Miles College [Fairfield, Alabama] for a number of years.
Speaker 2: Forty years.
Speaker 1: What was your next position?
Speaker 2: Well, I taught some religion, the Old Testament, New Testament.  And then they had the need for teachers in social sciences--history, and they put me into history.  And it was then that we decided that if that's where I was going to be, I needed to get into graduate school; Dr. Pitts [Lucius Holsey Pitts, Sr.] decided that.  So, he found a foundation that would underwrite my graduate studies.  In fact, he found two foundations.  I was a Ford scholar being underwritten by the Ford Foundation [New York, New York], and there was another foundation that worked out of Atlanta [Georgia], and he got them to underwrite my graduate activities.  So it was then that I was able to move to, to go over to UAB [University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama].  However, you're asking--and maybe you're going to get to the activities, civil rights activities, that we had at Miles--
Speaker 1: Right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) later, all right.
Story_ID: 467043
Speaker 1: Once at UAB [University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama], I was taken as a conditional student, because they were concerned whether or not a student from Miles [Miles College, Fairfield, Alabama], in spite of what they went through, really had the intelligence to cope with that kind of curriculum.  I must say that, I want to say that at UAB I made A's and Bs.  In fact, I'll never forget that in the history class, the American history class, the professor was as hard as nails.  And the fact that he would take a little drink every once in a while didn't help the situation.  And he had all kind of attitudes in class, and he would speak to some of the young ladies in the class, whatever he needed to say to them.  And I guess the young men got upset since there was a black man in the class, and they were very upset about him talking to the young ladies like that.  And he was hard as nails with his work, you had to get his work.  I never did argue with him.  Whatever he said, I accepted it, whether I believed it or not; I went on and did what he asked to do.  But that semester, half of his class decided that this man was impossible, and that they were going to get out of that class.  And I heard them talking about dropping it, and I thought, well, maybe if they can't make it, maybe I need to drop it too.  And something said to me, said they expect you to drop it.  They don't expect you to have--you can't learn this no how.  You stay in.  And I did stay in, and that man made us write four research papers, and I burned the midnight oil.  And each paper, you had to come before the class, and the students would criticize you and examine your paper and ask you questions while you were up front.  And when the students got through with you, then the professor would get you.  And knowing I faced that kind of situation, I wanted to make sure that I had my stuff down right.  And I didn't have too much problems with my presentation with the students nor with the teacher.  But having this class dropped, and when the final examination came, when I got my paper back I had an 80-something.  And I was happy to get that, but I found out that there was several questions that he overlooked and didn't grade.  And when I took them back to him, he acknowledged that.  And when he graded that and gave me points for that, my grade, my score was in the 90s [percent].  And so as a result, I got an A out of that hard professor's class.  I'll never forget him, Dr. Jack D.L. Holmes was his name.  And somehow, he put the papers on the desk so the other students could see them.  (Laughter) And I know they were shocked when they found out that this black student had made an A in the class.  Some of them got much lower grades than that, and here half of them had dropped out.  So, they were not having much to do with me until after that.  Then they start warming up to me, wanting to talk to me and this, this sort of thing.
Story_ID: 467044
Speaker 1: You actually had an opportunity to teach there?
Speaker 2: What happened, when this professor [Jack D.L. Holmes] got ready to go on a sabbatical--he was a great researcher, and he was going to Spain, going to South America, because he was interested in that kind of history.  They asked him who would handle his class for the semester that was he on the sabbatical.  He was so impressed with me, knowing that I also taught at Miles [Miles College, Fairfield, Alabama] and was working on my master's [degree], until he recommended me to the administration.  And they accepted, and as a result I was the first black to teach African American history at the University of Alabama in Birmingham [University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama].
Speaker 1: And this was in 1968, is that right?
Speaker 2: Yes, se- '68 [1968] se- .  And one thing this professor did, he was in a local historical association here in the city, and he recommended me to be a member of that association.  I received a letter stating that I had been accepted in the association.  And sometime later when they found out I was black, they sent me another letter saying there--some mistake had been made and that I was not accepted as a member of the association.  The professor was very upset about that, and as a result he terminated his membership and roundly criticized the association.  He wrote the history of the university hospital and he had his students, and I was one of them, to help him do the research.  And I did a lot of the research on the old Hillman Hospital [UAB Hospital, Birmingham, Alabama].  That is where blacks usually went for treatment in that hospital complex.  And in his book, 'The History of the University Hospital' [sic. 'A History of the University of Alabama Hospitals,' Jack D.L. Holmes], he gave us credit.  If you had one, you'd find my name listed there as one of the contributors to that history.
Story_ID: 467045
Speaker 1: So you finished your master's degree in what year?
Speaker 2: I had to go down to the University of Alabama [Tuscaloosa, Alabama] in order to get my master's degree in history.  And so, I did start commuting down to the University--
Speaker 1: What year did you--
Speaker 2: --of Alabama.
Speaker 1: What year did you get your degree?
Speaker 2: Well, it was the 1970s.  I don't remember the exact date.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I got a diploma on the wall in the office there.
Speaker 1: Besides working on your graduate studies, you were still very active in the Civil Rights Movement and organizations dealing with civil rights.  Tell me about some of the organizations that you belong to, and some of the things they were doing here in Birmingham [Alabama].
Speaker 2: All right.  I was a member, a charter member of the Alabama Christian Movement for Human Rights, and I was also a member of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  And the NAACP was outlawed in the State of Alabama after the Brown v. Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] decision came down through the [U.S.] Supreme Court.  The attorney general wanted the NAACP to turn over its membership roster, and we knew that they wanted to check certain people--teachers and other people who were vulnerable, and see to it that they were prired- fired or brought under various kind of pressure.  So the NAACP refused to do that, and as a result they were outlawed in the State of Alabama.  I think in my first interview we said Reverend Shuttlesworth [HistoryMaker Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth] was also member, and had a mass meeting.  And as a result, the Alabama Christian Movement was organized.  I was a charter member of the Alabama Christian Movement.  In fact, I was the second vice president in that movement and sat on many committees.  It was my responsibility to get the churches where the mass meetings would be held.  It fell my lot to recruit the 16th Street [16th Street Baptist Church, Birmingham, Alabama] for us to have our mass meetings.  There was a young preacher there, Reverend Cross [HistoryMaker Reverend John H. Cross, Jr.].  And he didn't know how they did that, but he told me if he didn't call me back, just come on.  So that church became our headquarters.  I was on the executive committee.  I served on the strategy committee.  I served in various committees for the Alabama Christian Movement for Human Rights.  And I aided in voter registration for the NAACP.  Those were the two major organizations.  And there were some other organizations that don't come to mind right now.  But I was a part of a number of them, and of course, SCLC, the Southern Christian Leadership Conference.
Story_ID: 467046
Speaker 1: Talking about your recruitment of the churches for mass meetings and 16th Street [16th Street Baptist Church, Birmingham, Alabama] becoming the new meeting place.  Why was there a need to change from Fred Shuttlesworth's [HistoryMaker Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth] church?
Speaker 2: Well, the crowd had gotten so huge, and that church had a very limited capacity.  And not only were we using that church, but we were using churches around the city.  And some nights, we would meet at more than one church on the same night.  So, it was due to the limited capacity at Bethel [Bethel Baptist Church, Birmingham, Alabama].  And Bethel was in the spotlight, it was a target.  And so we wanted to spread this thing around the city and show that there was--well, the commitment of Reverend Shuttlesworth and Bethel was not the only minister and church that had embraced the movement.
Speaker 1: As the chairman of the strategy committee, tell me some of the strategies that, you know, were--
Speaker 2: I was not the chairman of the strategy committee, I was a member of that committee.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Frankly, some of King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] lieutenants--and of course there was Fred Shuttlesworth--Dr. L.H. Pitts [Lucius Holsey Pitts, Sr.] was an outstanding part of that committee.  In fact, a lot of the strategy committees met at Miles College [Fairfield, Alabama] in President Pitts' office.
Story_ID: 467047
Speaker 1: SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] and SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], can you speak to those organizations and some of the things they were doing, and the, the students of SNCC?
Speaker 2: Well, there was some cooperation, and then there was some opposition and competition.  The young people wanted to do some things that I suppose SCLC had not made a decision on that.  But there was a working relationship, a working agreement, but sometimes there would be a little--there would be a little conflict.  Another organization was the Islamic [Nation of Islam] organization.  The outstanding leader (background noise) of that organization--I'm trying--
Story_ID: 467048
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, you, you were telling me about the Islamic organization [Nation of Islam].
Speaker 2: Well, you asked me what organizations.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And I was mentioning the group that Malcolm X was affiliated with.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE: Speed.
Speaker 2: And there were several others I'll just mention in passing, and then go on.
Speaker 1: Okay, you can tell me.  We're rolling now, so you can tell me.
Speaker 2: We're rolling now?
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: All right.  There were numerous groups that sought to be a part of us.  I remember that Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] tried to get Malcolm X to join with us.  He often came and was a part of our meetings, but he did not outright forge an alliance with us.  There was the Fellowship of Reconciliation with Carl Braden, Anne Braden and there was some leaders, white leaders, who considered that group as being sort of Communistic in its, in its organization and its situation, and we were roundly criticized by working with a Communistic situation.  We worked with the movement in Montgomery [Alabama] during their bus boycott.  Back to the Communistic situation, I'll never forget that Carl Braden came to Birmingham [Alabama] and he assessed the situation with Shuttlesworth [HistoryMaker Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth].  And he wrote about it, and he said that Fred Shuttlesworth was a hard man for a hard town, and that he was not a refined, eloquent person, but he was what Birmingham had, and he was the person that was really moving in the city.
Story_ID: 467049
Speaker 1: Talking about Communistic, or Communist organizations.  Did- were you under profile by the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation]?  Did you know you were, or had an idea--you or any of the other civil rights workers (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) As a matter of fact, all of us believed that we were under surveillance, that our phones were tapped and that our movements and activities were monitored, even to the extent--you must remember that we found out some years later that a U-2 [Lockheed U-2] plane was used in order to monitor and in order to watch the Civil Rights Movement.  Yes, in later years of course all of the threats we got--and in some y- later years when the fellow who had shot the president of the Urban League [National Urban League]--I can't remember his name [HistoryMaker Vernon E. Jordan, Jr.]; I think he was the president of the Urban League.  He was on the rampage, and he even came to Birmingham [Alabama].  And I was one who received an alert from the law enforcement officers to be aware and to be careful, because I was on his hit list along with some other people.  But I'm sure that we were under surveillance by, by the authorities, certainly not just the local authorities, but also by the national authorities also.
Story_ID: 467050
Speaker 1: So, now 16th Street [16th Street Baptist Church, Birmingham, Alabama] is the headquarters, for meeting--as a meeting place.  And tell me what happens before and after the 16th Street bombings.
Speaker 2: Well, what happened before the 16th Street bombing is that it was the gathering place for all of us, especially the students.  It was James Bevel [HistoryMaker Reverend James Bevel], who behind Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] back, initiated the action to turn the students out of school.  And we had the responsibility to go to the various schools and make an appeal to the students to come and join the march and come down to 16th Street.  That was the headquarters, it was a very convenient place.  It was near town, it was adjacent to the Kelly Ingram Park [Birmingham, Alabama].  And so, it was a church with a good seating capacity.  It was a prominent church, and so it fitted well into our plans.  So, it was the marches and the mass meetings from the 16th Street Baptist Church which put that church into great prominence.  I found out sometime later that all of the members did not agree with Reverend John Cross [HistoryMaker Reverend John H. Cross, Jr.] about our meeting there.  They were, they were afraid that something would happen to the church, that the church might be bombed.  And whenever I dealt with churches and the minister brought that up, I had to be truthful; I said we had no way of knowing.  And many times, they would not let us come.  So, all of that demonstration activity--the mass meetings with King, moving from the church, confronting the police in Kelly Ingram Park, and eventually getting downtown going to the lunch counters and things of that kind, 16th Street was very prominent; 16th Street was very, very important.  So, that's the kind of activity that was going on.  So the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] started looking and zeroing in on it as our headquarters.
Story_ID: 467051
Speaker 1: And of course, you know, with all of the students that wanted to be involved from all of the schools--in fact, I had been turning students out at another school.  And when I came back, my three oldest children, Yvonne [Yvonne Woods Bell], Ruth [Ruth Woods Williams], and Nita [Anita Woods McGhee], went down there and said, "Daddy, we want to go to jail, too."  So I said, "Good, I'm glad to see you."  And my son [Abraham Woods III], who is a urologist in Orlando [Florida], he was five years old at that time.  And he said, "I want to go, too."  And his mother [Marian Dowdell-Levette Woods] and his grandmother [Maggie Wallace Woods] said, "No, boy, you too young, you can't go."  He said, "I want to go."  And they said, "Well what would you do if one of those ferocious dogs got after you?"  He calmly put his hand in his pocket and came out with a rock and said, "I'll hit him in the head with this rock."  They said, "You still can't go," and he had a temper tantrum there.  But my three children went, and of course they filled up the jails.  And we broke the backbone of segregation by the sheer numbers, because we'd stay a whole week.  And they ran out of jail space, and eventually put the young people over in the park, the Fair Park [Birmingham, Alabama] area, and this sort of thing.  I was the first, one of the first leaders to go to jail, which led to that crusade.  But that was going on.  And then after we had gotten some resolution with that, there was the March on Washington, which was a fantastic success.
Speaker 2: Well, let me ask you this about the students.  Was King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] opposed to using children at, at first?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: What was his ideology behind that?
Speaker 1: Well, from all I can remember is that the word was out that the students would get hurt or get killed, and that King would be responsible for it.  And I can't, I think that sort of halted him in making some decisions.  So, he really didn't make that decision.  It was a Young Turk, James Bevel [HistoryMaker Reverend James Bevel] who made it, and said we've got to do something to keep the movement going.  We are not getting enough adults, and I think these young people want to be involved.  So behind his back--and of course after he did it, King had to support it.  And I shall never forget his conferences that he--in substance, and maybe not these words--said, "The students are involved, and you said they're going to get hurt." He said, "They have already been hurt by this southern way of life, and now they have an opportunity to help bring some redemption and some change."  So, he had a good answer for them, and he embraced, he embraced the move.
Story_ID: 467052
Speaker 1: At Miles College [Fairfield, Alabama] there was plenty of activity going on with the students there also.  Tell me about that.
Speaker 2: Yes, the student government.  My dear friend, Frank Dukes, who was one of my associate ministers here who had served in one of the wars, he was one of the students there.  And he along with some of the other Miles College students became very disenchanted with what was happening in Birmingham [Alabama], and so they did various things.  And one of the major things they did was to call a boycott.  We called it a selective buying campaign, because it was against the law to boycott in Birming- in Alabama and in Birmingham.  And so it was a selective buying campaign, where a long time before Easter the appeals came out. Wear your old clothes.  Don't go downtown and buy any new clothes for Easter.  Take the money out of the cash register.  And that thing caught on, and we put those merchants in great straits.  We did not have to take all of the money out of the cash register; all we had to do was just take the marginal profit out.  And we saw that we had another tool that we could use in order to deal with racism.  So, Frank Dukes, my good friend Johnathan McPherson, who was the advisor, and many others, they were responsible for initiating it.  By the way, that student who went into voter registration, I thought I had his name.  But at any rate, that was just one thing.  Bull Connor was confronted on numerous occasions by Dukes and some of the other students.  I was a professor there, and of course I was encouraging the situation.  I was a part of SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference], and we were supporting the student group.  In fact, Dr. Pitts [Lucius Holsey Pitts, Sr.] on occasion would warn the white community that things were building up and that things were going to blow up, and that there were other strange students coming on the Miles College campus, and these students were very aggressive students coming from various places, and that if something was not done, this thing was going to go off.  And so he was good at telling the powers that be in Birmingham about that; that they needed to make some concessions before the explosion came.
Story_ID: 467053
Speaker 1: But the Miles College [Fairfield, Alabama] students were really a bee in Bull Connor's bonnet.  He hated Miles so bad.  Miles was seeking to upgrade its library, and we were going to go into the communities.  We had cans, and we were going to collect monies.  And he said that if we go, that we would be arrested.  And of course Dr. Pitts [Lucius Holsey Pitts, Sr.] halted the activity, and we were meeting in the chapel.  And frankly, it hurt Dr. Pitts so much until he was weeping in the chapel, I'll never forget that.  And one of the students got up and said, "Hell, Dr. Pitts, don't cry.  We going to take care of these so-and-so's."  And I'll never for- Frank Dukes said, "They're trying to deal with us economically, but I have no fear of that, because I'm already economically defunct, already." And so, I'm telling you, the Miles College students were ready.  I was influential in getting some of the teachers, the staff, to go.  Some of the teachers--in fact, the chairman of my division of the Association of Behavioral Sciences [sic. Division of Social and Behavioral Sciences] was a white man.  His name was Brink Fulton [ph.], I'll never forget him.  He joined the demonstrations, and he was arrested.  (Laughter) And when they put him in jail with the white inmates, of course, they called him a nigger lover, you know.  And they started bothering him, and they had to take him out of that confine and put him in the drunk tank, where they isolated drunk people.  But Miles was really committed to students, and many of the professors were.  In fact, Miles was so committed, until sometime later on, somebody set the school on fire, the office on fire.  We got all kinds of threats, and the president had to put guards--I shall never forget seeing guards with rifles and shotguns and what not, sitting out front at Miles College guarding the school.
Speaker 2: What year was the fire?
Speaker 1: I can't remember what year it was. I'd have to go back (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But this was in the '60s [1960s]?
Speaker 1: It was in the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I believe it was.  And of course, they featured Miles--it was either in Time magazine or Newsweek, I don't remember which one of those national magazines they featured Miles in--
Story_ID: 467054
Speaker 1: Reverend Woods [HistoryMaker Abraham Woods, Jr.], now we talked about before the 16th Street bombings [16th Street Baptist Church, Birmingham, Alabama].  Tell me about what you were thinking, or reflect on what went through your mind when you heard about the 16th Street Baptist Church bombings (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I'll never forget that I was getting ready to go to church.  I do need to tell you that another thing that happened that I think was significant, which drove the bombers, was the desegregation of the public schools.  Our good friend, James Armstrong, had two children that sought to integrate Graymont Elementary School [Birmingham, Alabama], not too far from here.  And I think we sought to integrate other schools, and I think this helped to put the fat in the fire.  So, they decided that they were going to teach us a lesson.  When I heard the blast--and hearing a blast was nothing new.  There had been various bomb blasts in the City of Birmingham [Alabama] on numerous occasions, so much to the extent that Birmingham was called Bombingham.  So, various residents were bombed, and so it was something that happened here.  But when we heard that on Sunday, we didn't know where it was.  And so I got in my car and I started moving toward, in the direction where the sound came from, and starting asking people.  And eventually I ran into somebody and asked them did they hear it, and they said yes.  And I asked them if they knew where it was, and they said, "We believe--," and somebody said they had bombed 16th Street Baptist Church, and that is when I made a beeline down to the 16th Street Baptist Church.  I was really shocked, but I must admit I wasn't surprised, because we always knew that churches that became involved could be a target.  And so when I got there, I got there before they put the lines up, and I went near where the church had been bombed.  And people were weeping and wailing, and some people were cussing.  So we were watching them bring different things out of the basement, and some were bodies.  And they were covered, we didn't know who they were.  That was one of my most traumatic moments.  I was almost overcome with a spirit, an attitude of revenge, and entertained the thought that if I had some massive weapons, I would find all of the white folk I could and I would mow them down.  However, I came to my good senses, and something said to me, said that, that's what y'all are all about.  That's not what Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] is teaching.  And then I took the position, why did they do this to our young people?  Why didn't they do this to those of us who are the leaders?  Why did they single the situation out and cause our young people to suffer like that?  They--if they had done it to us, people like me and Gardner [Edward Gardner] and Shuttlesworth [HistoryMaker Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth] and others, we would understand.  But they've done this to our young people.  So, when I left 16th Street--
Speaker 1: Before you left, did you see Reverend Cross [HistoryMaker Reverend John H. Cross, Jr.]?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I did not, I did not see Reverend Cross.  I did not see him until sometime after that.  But--
Speaker 1: So when you left--
Speaker 2: --he went through a terrible situation.  Some of the members who didn't want us to meet there certainly took the opportunity to say, "You, you are responsible.  It's your fault that this has happened to us, by giving the authority, the opportunity for SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] to meet here."  So, they tore into him pretty bad.  But he was a man of commitment.
Story_ID: 467055
Speaker 1: So, tell me what happened when you left the church?
Speaker 2: I went to get in my car.  And as I went to my car on the corner, there were a group of blacks, and they had rocks.  And every car with a white face in it that drove that way, they, they let loose a barrage of rocks.  And of course the cars that could keep driving had no intention of stopping, they just kept going.  But at this particular point and time there was a car with an old white couple in it.  And they had, they had damaged the car, and one of these rocks might have hit the driver, I don't know.  But when I walked up and saw them doing this, I threw my hands up and said to them, "Brethren, no.  What are you doing?  Don't, don't, don't do this.  Stop."  And some of them turned and looked at me and said, "You mean to tell me after what they have done at 16th Street [16th Street Baptist Church, Birmingham, Alabama] and done to our little girls, you tell us not to do this?"  I said, "Yes, do- don't do it."  They said, "Well, we'll do it to you," and that sort of shocked me.  And one of the fellows drew back a rock.  And I said, "Well, that's all right, brother.  That's all right."  And I went on and got in my car, you see.  And I went on eventually and ended up at the church.  They would not let us in the hospital and that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: Do you know [HistoryMaker] Ozell Sutton?
Speaker 2: Hozell?
Speaker 1: Ozell.  Ozell Sutton, who worked for the government.
Speaker 2: Not offhand.  I can't--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --say that that name registers with me right now.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, after the bombing at 16th Street, what was the climate of Birmingham [Alabama] as far as meeting?  Where did you, where did SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] meet after that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Frankly, to tell you the truth, so far as I can remember, we still met.  There were some members at that church and other churches, and of course, our church was under repair.  So, I think I met at various other, other churches.  In fact, some of the parents of the victims were upset with Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], and pointed the finger of blame at Dr. King, too, for this having happened.  But we met, we met at various other churches during that time.  But it was a bitter period, because that same evening two young men were killed.  Virgil Ware, out in the western part of the city, was shot off his bicycle.  And a young man named Jimmie Jackson [sic. Johnny Robinson], I delivered the eulogy for him.  His folks were a member of my father's [Abraham Woods, Sr.] church, and we had his funeral at New Pilgrim Baptist Church [Birmingham, Alabama] where Dr. Smith [Nelson H. Smith, Jr.] was the pastor.  So, here we have a policeman who was so bitter, who caught these boys throwing rocks and told them to stop.  And they started running, and as they ran, he took the shotgun and shot the one in the back.  And here, white youth, who had been to a Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] meeting, were so filled with hate that they shoot Virgil Ware off his bicycle.  Now after that, there was some crocodile tears shed in Birmingham.  I shall never forget, I was a member of the first interracial committee that was organized.  And we would meet at the city hall with the new mayor, Albert Boutwell--
Story_ID: 467056
Speaker 1: You were telling me about the interracial committee under Mayor Boutwell [Albert Boutwell].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And I had asked you did you have any--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) anything to do with his election?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't. Because I guess we voted for him but--because we thought he was going to change things.  So, I'm sure we voted for him.  But in due time, we found out that he was not going to bring about the changes that we needed in Birmingham [Alabama].  He had been with the legislature and he come up with the school placement act [Alabama Pupil Placement Act of 1956].  And that was an act would subject every student who wanted to go to school to be placed by some white board and sent to the school which was best for them.  And as a result, they sought to get around the decision of the courts, and they would send the blacks to black schools and send the whites to white schools.  So, I never will forget Fred Shuttlesworth [HistoryMaker Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth] said, "We're going to have to go on with the demonstrations."  The demonstrations had not taken place, and he said, "We're going to have to go on."  Well, yes, they had, but he said, "We're going to have to go on," that is, SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference].  He said, "We're going to have to go on and do what we need to do, because Albert Boutwell is not well."  And so that is why the, you know, we went on into the demonstrations, even at the point, at the point that we did.
Story_ID: 467057
Speaker 1: So what happens next for, for Birmingham [Alabama], as far as things that were able to be changed?  What were some of the fruits of, of your labors?
Speaker 2: Well, David Vann got various committees made up of blacks, my brother [HistoryMaker Reverend Calvin Wallace Woods, Sr.] was one, to seek to bring about desegregation at all of the department stores and other things--desegregation in all the public facilities.  So, this kind of activity was ongoing.  And we also, we also got after voter registration in a way that we had never gotten after it before.
Speaker 1: Tell me who David Vann was (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) David Vann was a young white lawyer.  And he was one of the young white lawyers that agreed with many of what could be called forward thinking people in Birmingham.  And that is, to get rid of Bull Connor, you had to change the government.  He worked along with the chairman of the Birmingham Chamber of Commerce; I shall never forget, Sidney Smyer.  Sidney Smyer and some white leaders were in Tokyo [Japan] when they saw the dogs attacking blacks on TV in Tokyo.  They were over there trying to get some business, trying to work out some business deals with the Japanese.  And when they saw that taking place, they were greatly embarrassed, and they came back to Birmingham.  And David Vann was the young lawyer which they appointed to work with us in our strategy sessions in trying to deal with the problems in Birmingham.  David Vann was the white representative present in order to go back to the white community to carry our demands and see what could be done.  And he was caught in a bad position, pardon the expression, it was sort of like, you're damned if you do, and you'll be damned if you don't. You see.  And of course, David Vann was going to eventually become the mayor of Birmingham (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well this is--
Story_ID: 467058
Speaker 1: He [David Vann] co- becomes mayor after you become the SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] Birmingham [Alabama] chapter president?  Is that right?
Speaker 2: He becomes mayor before I became the SCLC president.  I did not become the president of the Birmingham chapter of SCLC, because there really wasn't a chapter.  We were here working with the Alabama Christian Movement for Human Rights, an affiliate organization.  It was sometime, some years later.  I was not the first president; I think Reverend Sam Pettagrue [Samuel P. Pettagrue, Jr.] was the first president of that.  And then after Pettagrue, Reverend N.H. Smith, Jr. [Nelson H. Smith, Jr.] was the president.  I became president after Rev. N.H. Smith, Jr. of New Pilgrim [New Pilgrim Baptist Church, Birmingham, Alabama] gave it up.  And that was in '78 [1978].
Story_ID: 467059
Speaker 1: Well, let's go back a little bit to '65 [sic. 1968].  And tell me your thoughts or your re- reflections of King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] assassination.
Speaker 2: Again, that was a, another traumatic experience.  You really, you really didn't want to believe it.  And yet you knew it was possible, because King often had thoughts about something could happen to him, and we understood that something could happen to us.  But it is something that some of us, I think, from the beginning tried to be in denial about.  And after the realistic thing started hitting us, we found ourselves in a kind of a mood, kind of an emotional kind of situation. What is going to happen to the movement now?  Our leader is gone.  What are we going to do?  Where can we go?  So, you somewhat had some despairing moments before you were going to have to eventually accept it.  And after they realized that they killed the dreamer, his dream still lives, and his dream still lived in us.  And we must recommit ourselves as never before to see that his dream and our dream came into reality.  Because we could remember him saying that "I may not get there with you, but we as a people will get to the Promised Land."  And so that was our rallying cry--to do all we could, and commit ourselves and get to the Promised Land and bring the dream into fruition.
Story_ID: 467060
Speaker 1: So what were some of the things that happened after King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] death here in Birmingham [Alabama], and even at Miles College [Fairfield, Alabama]?  Because you're still at Miles College?
Speaker 2: Well, we're still standing up against racism and still trying to go on with the business. We had some breakthroughs.  And--
Speaker 1: Some breakthroughs?
Speaker 2: We had breakthroughs, because the marches now, and the demonstrations had opened a way.  And not only that, but as you know, in 1964 the [U.S.] Congress passed the Civil Rights Act [Civil Rights Act of 1964].  That was very, very significant.  And one author has written a book, and the subject of the book is 'But for Birmingham' ['But for Birmingham: The Local and National Movements in the Civil Rights Struggle,' Glenn T. Eskew], and so, you know, that's the kind of impact that the 1964 Civil Rights Act made so far as voting was concerned, and so far as other things were concerned.  And of course, it was not going to stop there.
Speaker 1: Did you--
Speaker 2: The flames blew from Birmingham down into Selma [Alabama].  And as a result, the activities down there were going to bring about the 1965 voters right act [Voting Rights Act of 1965].
Story_ID: 467061
Speaker 1: As we go on, the Voting- Voting Rights Act [Voting Rights Act of 1965]--did the SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] help in any way in getting--was there a lot of discussion about how a person could register?  You know, you talked earlier and you were telling me how long the application was--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --and the questions that were asked.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Who, do you know who, or was there anybody in your circle who worked on that?
Speaker 2: All of that was out.  The, the beginning of that took place with the Civil Rights Act [Civil Rights Act of 1964].  And certainly with the voters rights act, all of that was out.  All of that long questionnaire was out, and Selma [Alabama] was the place where the fight to do that took place.  James Bevels [sic. HistoryMaker Reverend James Bevel], who was a firebrand here, along with some others, went down--it's interesting to hear that at first they thought about killing Wallace [George Wallace], so they say.  And then they had another thought about it, and said let's go to Selma and let's start this voters right action. This--to get rid of all of the encumbrances to keep blacks from voting.  And so they did, along with my good friend, C.T. Vivian [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. C.T. Vivian].  And there are various documentaries and what not showing him confronting the authorities that be, and being knocked down, beaten and what not.  And of course, you know, that whole effort resulted in what we call Bloody Sunday.  Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was supposed to be in Selma on that Sunday, but for some other reason he couldn't come.  And I understand there were those who thought about calling it off, but they decided to go on with it.  And of course they were going to cross the Edmund Pettus Bridge [Selma, Alabama], this was a part of the voter registration crusade, and the authorities were determined that this would not happen.  And so they started across the bridge, and at some point they met up with the state troopers and other folks who had been deputized on horseback and what not, and they were told to turn around and go back.  And of course while they were trying to reason and talk, they were charged by the horses, and many of the civil rights people were trampled and they were wounded.  It was a terrible, terrible kind of thing.  And that crossing across the bridge, I was not there that Sunday.
Speaker 1: Did you, did yo- did--did you watch it on television?  Do you know Amelia Boynton [HistoryMaker Amelia Boynton Robinson]?
Speaker 2: Amelia Boynton, sure, I knew her.
Speaker 1: And her picture flashed across the screen all over the United States when it happened.
Speaker 2: Yes, she was hurt.
Speaker 1: Do you remember watching this on television?
Speaker 2: She was hurt, she was hurt there.  I talked with Amelia and have been in her presence many times.  But she was one of the chief leaders down in Selma.  And of course, the congressman, what's his name?  A young black congressman from Georgia?
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] John Lewis.
Speaker 2: John Lewis.  John Lewis was one of the leaders there.  And another one of my friends from here in Alabama, I can't think of his name, but he made a name for himself in (unclear) also.  His son was one of my students at Miles [Miles College, Fairfield, Alabama], he was a lawyer.  These were some of the people who made up the leadership, and were hurt in that Bloody Sunday.  And of course this went around the world, and as a result of that, Dr. King called for a march.  And people came from everywhere, all around this nation for that, for that get-together.
Story_ID: 467062
Speaker 1: Let's talk about when you do become SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] chapter president in '78 [1978].  I want to talk about the deadly force used by the Hueytown [Alabama] police that you were involved in getting--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --some justification for the citizens.  Tell me about that.
Speaker 2: After I had been elected to the position of president, the first problem that stabbed me in the face was the shooting, the unjustified shooting of a black man in, in Hueytown.
Speaker 1: Where is Hueytown?
Speaker 2: Hueytown is in the western area of the city [Birmingham, Alabama], and we went to see what had happened there.  And this man's son had been stopped, the police said, for a minor traffic kind of situation.  And there was some kind of confrontation, and the boy went on home.  And of course eventually the police were going to end up at his house.  And of course he told his father about what had happened, and his father was a no-nonsense fellow, and he did not believe in taking what people did to you.  And so, he got ready for the police, and asked them not to come in; and he had a gun.  They said he shot out--you know, I still can't remember that clearly.  But at any rate, they let loose on his house just like a war.  He had a daughter who was pregnant there, and there were women in the house.  And they let loose a barrage on this house.  And consequently, he was shot and he was not dead, but they took time in calling the paramedics.  In fact, from what it looked like to us, they wanted him to die.  And so they delayed calling the paramedics until it was too late.  And it was into that situation that I led the forces of SCLC.  I'll never forget that we carried on numerous marches in that community.  I also was a little concerned about the fact that whenever we did anything, they tried to call us Communists and said we were Communist-inspired and that we didn't have any sense on our own, and that the Communists had to lead us and tell us what to do, to the extent that a Communist group on one occasion sought to get into our march.  And I remember I personally asked them not to join with us.  And I personally asked them not to join with us because I was just tired of hearing the racists and white folks accuse Communists of inciting us, and that we didn't have sense enough to want to vote and want our rights without the Communists.  And of course we continued our marches there, asking for justice--
Speaker 1: When did (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous) until this man's wife had a fatal heart attack and died at one of the marches.  However, we did not stop the marches then; we continued to march--
Story_ID: 467063
Speaker 1: Well, one of the biggest or largest marches since the '60s [1960s], you had about three thousand irate citizens to march because of the senseless murder of Bonita Carter.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Tell me about that.
Speaker 2: Yes, that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Because that, that incident sparked many different things.
Speaker 2: That is the incident that caused us to end our activities in Hueytown [Alabama].  We were still involved out there when a group of Bonita Carter's people and friends came to meet with me and other SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] officials at our church.
Story_ID: 467064
Speaker 1: So she was shot, is that right?
Speaker 2: Yes, she was shot by an officer named Sands [George Sands].  It happened in a community going east.  What happened is that a black man had had a little confrontation with a white clerk at a filling station.  And there was also a store part to the filling station.  And as a result of this confrontation, I understand that the black man left and came back with a gun, and he was going to continue the fight that he and this clerk had started.  And so the clerk pushed the alarm, which stated that a robbery was in progress.  The young man ran across the street.  He left his car parked at the station, and he ran across the street.  And while he was across the street, people had started gathering there at the station because of what was happening.  And this young girl and a friend of hers, a young girl named Bonita Carter, they rode their bikes down.  And this young black man hollered out and said, "Somebody get my car and drive my car out and bring my car to me."  Well, undoubtedly, this struck a responsive chord with Bonita.  So, she got in the car.  The keys were still in there, and she proceeded to drive the car out of the lot down the exit into the street.  And by that time the Birmingham [Alabama] police arrived, and the white clerk pointed at the car.  And he said, "He's in that car."  He didn't see him go across the street.  And so, the policemen got out with drawn guns and hollered at Bonita to stop.  She stopped, and they started moving toward the car from the back with drawn guns.  Bonita was frightened, and so she laid down on the seat; she laid her head down on the seat.  And she was given orders.  I think one order was to get up, or get out, or something.  But any rate, she sought to comply with the order that she was given.  When she raised up to comply with the order that she was given, one of these policeman by the name of Sands let loose on her with a magnum pistol and killed her.  Also, the people who were standing around the policemen came up following the car, and they shouted to the officers that the black man is not in that car.  He went across the street.  And they kept shouting that to the officers, and they paid them no attention.  They listened to the white clerk who said, "He's in that car."  And so, Bonita Carter was fatally shot.  That was the straw that broke the camel's back.  Black people had been the victims of police brutality down through the years.  So as far as we were concerned they were like the Nazi Gestapo, and they would kill a black and then ruling would be a justifiable homicide.  We decided we were not going to take it anymore.  All hell broke loose in that community.  White stores and cars with white people were attacked, and it was a terrible situation going on.  Bedlam reigned in that community.  In fact, one of my responsibilities was to go into it along with others to try to get some peace and to bring about some cooler heads, and have some mass meetings where we could look at this thing and decide what would be the best activities.
Story_ID: 467065
Speaker 1: So, you were talking about coming together and deciding what to do about this matter after Bonita Carter is killed.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, we talked earlier about David Vann.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Tell me about him now.  Is this the time when he's mayor (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All right.  We decided to have mass meetings, and by having mass meetings to mobilize our forces, and elect people, enlighten people about what this was all about, because we decided to have a massive national march in Birmingham [Alabama].  Before we had it, a blue-ribbon panel was appointed by the mayor and some other leaders to investigate the shooting of Bonita Carter.  B.W. Clemmons [ph.] was the lawyer which had the responsibility of helping to deal with that.  And the blue-panel committee brought back its findings, and the findings were that Officer Sands [George Sands] had no justifiable rights or right to shoot Bonita Carter.  However, the police shooting committee brought back a finding that said that Officer Sands was in his rights, that's the way Birmingham police are trained, and he did nothing wrong.  We met with Mayor Vann, I'll never forget, in his office with many ministers and other leaders, and we were hopeful and prayerful that he was going to do the right thing.  But to our surprise, and to our shock, instead of supporting the blue-ribbon committee that had been organized to look into this, he supported the police shooting policy.  This distressed us greatly, so much so until I saw an old tough preacher cry.  This preacher's name was Sam Davis [Samuel M. Davis], and I say he was tough because the bishop sent him to a church [St. Paul African Methodist Episcopal Church, Birmingham, Alabama] not too far from here, and the members didn't want him.  And so when he got there, they locked him out of the study, he couldn't get in.  He went back to his car, and he got a hatchet out of his car, marched back into the church and chopped the study door down (laughter).  And after he chopped the study door down, these people were astounded.  They said, "This Negro is crazy."  And so, they got out of his way, and he pastored that church.  But I saw that preacher, after we pleaded with Mayor Vann to handle Sands and he refused, I saw that preacher crying.
Story_ID: 467066
Speaker 1: We were all despaired, and so we called on the massive march [in Birmingham, Alabama].
Speaker 2: So, you had about three thousand citizens (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) About three thousand in it.
Speaker 2: --go to city hall?
Speaker 1: I also had my national president, Dr. Joseph Lowery [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Joseph Lowery].  And we marched, we were stretched all across town.  And as we got on the street near city hall, Mayor David Vann came out and walked down to where we were, and he got in the march with us.  Our chant was, "Officer Sands [George Sands] is got to go, Officer Sands is got to go, Officer Sands is got to go."  And then David Vann got in the march with us.  And when his presence was detected--he was in the front--then we added something else to the chant, "David Vann has got to go, David Vann has got to go, David Vann has got to go."  And of course I saw the impact upon him.  He started sweating, his facial expression and changing colors, you know, as some people do, because he really did not expect that.  But he didn't know how upset black people were.
Story_ID: 467067
Speaker 1: The strategy meetings were held at this church.
Speaker 2: At which church?
Speaker 1: This church.
Speaker 2: St. Joseph's [St. Joseph Missionary Baptist Church, Birmingham, Alabama]?
Speaker 1: St. Joseph.  And ministers like E.W. Jarrett, that's his picture, and his wife, on the wall back there, and others who were concerned about the community.  And some of the Miles College [Fairfield, Alabama] leaders and what not, we decided that we needed not to try to change the police or deal with them, that we needed to start at the top and see what we could do about the mayor's [David Vann] position.  So, we asked one of the councilmembers, Dr. Richard Arrington [Richard Arrington, Jr.], who was on the council at this time, to run for mayor.  Dr. Arrington had been a great asset to us, because whenever we had to deal with police brutality, he had a way of getting that information and passing it on to us.  And when we stood up against the police and what they had done, we had a little information that they didn't know we had.  So, he was a great asset to us.  He had been the dean out at Miles College for some years.  And so, we asked him to run, I'll never forget.  I was one of the first, me and Jarrett, to ask him to run.  And he said, he said had we taken a poll of the community.  What is the consensus of the sentiment of the community for him to run?  And I said, no, we haven't done that.  In fact, we don't have time to do that.  And I believe I said to him, that, "If you run, I think you can be elected.  But if you don't run, I'm going to run, and I can't be elected.  You need to run."  And he promised to give us an answer.  He never did give us an answer, so when we met at Reverend E.W. Jarrett's church, Trinity [Trinity Baptist Church, Birmingham, Alabama]--Jarrett is now dead--in that mass meeting we drafted him and said, "We're not going to wait on you to decide.  We have drafted you to run for mayor of Birmingham [Alabama]."  And he conceded t- to the draft.
Story_ID: 467068
Speaker 1: And so, the campaign was set up, and we proceeded to deal with it, with many others who supported that.  I think Bernice Johnson [HistoryMaker Bernice Johnson Reagon], she was one of my mentors.  In fact, she was the woman who got me all tied up in voter registration and my first taste of civil rights.  She worked for Dr. Patton [W.C. Patton], who was the voter registration leader for the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] out at the Masonic temple of the 9th congressional district.  And so, she was the campaign manager.  And it was our responsibility to try to get support.  I'll never forget that I went to some leaders of the community--and I need not call the names.  One of the leaders I went to was considered to be the richest black man in Birmingham [Alabama], and I went to him to support Dr. Arrington's [Richard Arrington, Jr.] candidacy.  And he said to me that he was going to support the incumbent, David Vann.  And he said he was gonna do that because Richard Arrington did not have a chance.  "If I thought he had a chance I would put all of the money needed into his campaign, but he does not have a chance to be elected mayor."  And I think he promised a hundred dollars or more.  And I'm not sure (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But the campaign--
Speaker 1: I'm not sure we took that.  We were so upset that we didn't take it.
Speaker 2: But the campaign was successful?
Speaker 1: What happened is he was in a runoff with the most conservative white in the race.  And a few of the whites looked at this conservative white candidate in a negative way, knowing what Birmingham had been through, and thought he might have been for more of the same.  And in the runoff, Vann was not even in the runner-up.  And so we, we had the voter registration crusade as never before.  In fact, the killing of Bonita Carter served as a catalytic agent to fire black folks up.  And some who had been negligent in voting, they went out to vote.  In fact, the white ele- the black electorate I think turned out about 70 percent.  The white electorate always turned out larger, but nobody was expecting this, and with the black electorate turning out about 70 percent and getting about 12 percent of a disgruntled white electorate, it was enough to tip the scales, and history took place in Birmingham, Alabama.  Richard Arrington, Jr. became the first black mayor.
Speaker 2: And this is was in 1979, am I correct (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That is correct.
Story_ID: 467069
Speaker 1: So now you have the first black mayor in Birmingham [Alabama].  And you're still at Miles College [Fairfield, Alabama], and a big influence in the SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference].  And there's another matter that you and the SCLC take up, and that's the matter of Maggie Bozeman and Julia Wilder.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Before we (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tell me about--oh, you want to go--
Speaker 2: Before we get to that--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Let me tell you that after Dr. Arrington [Richard Arrington, Jr.] was elected, he did not have this kind of affiliation with the civil rights organizations.  And there appeared in the paper, columns that stated that, "Don't expect Richard Arrington to call the shots in Birmingham as mayor.  Abraham Woods [HistoryMaker Reverend Abraham Woods, Jr.] will do that."  They couldn't have been so wrong. (Laughter) Dr. Arrington had a Ph.D., and I was just happy to have been a part of helping to get this historic situation done.  But he brought about many changes--a different police shooting policy.  Also, blacks would be included in various committees.  They would be judges, they would be firemen, police, you name it.  He turned this city around.  In fact, we felt like we were a part of Birmingham, and this was no longer a tragic city, but now it was a magic city.  And of course they were going to try to get him out--I don't know whether you're going to deal with that.  And we were going to have to support him, because they were going to seek to persecute him.  They could not stop the fruits of our civil rights efforts, but now they were going to seek to destroy Richard Arrington, and they sought to send him off to jail.  But that's another story.  We supported him.  We had marches in his behalf, and we confronted what we called not the justice department, but the injustice department.  And of course, Dr. Arrington was able to get out of that, because he had not done anything wrong.
Speaker 1: What was he accused of?
Speaker 2: Well, he was accused of taking, taking money, and making serious political mistakes.  In fact, a young lady who was in the legislature, Patricia Davis was her name, they accused her of taking a twenty-five thousand dollar bribe from the miners organization in order to get certain bills passed.  They eventually successfully convicted her, and she was going to have to serve seven years in the federal prison in Kentucky.  But she said that they came to her and laid out a proposition to her, and said if she would just testify against Richard Arrington in this matter of wrongdoing that he had done, that they would let her off.  She said she refused to do it.  So frankly, they were manufacturing things, and they finally came up and called him an unindicted co-defendant.  They indicted somebody else, another lady, wasn't him, but they called him an unindicted co-defendant.  But all of that played out, and they could find nothing to send him to prison for.
Story_ID: 467070
Speaker 1: Now, you were asking about something else?  Oh, the Bozeman, Maggie Bozeman and Julia Wilder.  I received a call from Maggie Bozeman in one of the south Alabama counties.  And she said that a Birmingham [Alabama] news reporter told her to call me and explain her plight to me.  And what had happened is that she and a friend of hers, Julia Wilder--and Maggie Bozeman was a schoolteacher--they were very involved in voter registration, especially making sure that people who were disabled and who couldn't get to the polls, that they had their day at the polls.  And the authorities did not want blacks to turn out like that, and so they charged these women of doing things that were not proper.  We went down and we marched in the little county courthouse, I shall never forget.  And they had their trial and they were convicted, and they were sentenced to serve time in Julia Tutwiler Prison [Julia Tutwiler Prison for Women, Wetumpka, Alabama].  As a result, I appealed to our national organization, and our national organization was with us as we marched in the little town, in the little county.  And Dr. Lowery [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Joseph Lowery] decided that we would march all the way to Washington [D.C.].  The voters right act [Voting Rights Act of 1965] was coming up to be again enacted.  And so, we marched.  Some were marching and some were driving throughout the United States all the way up the coast until we got to Washington.  And when we got on the outskirts of Washington, a messenger met us and said [U.S.] Congress had just now decided to enact, or to enact again, the Voting Rights Act.  And that was what we were after.  I shall never forget, when we got there, there was jubilation, and they asked me to pray.  And I shall never forget standing on the [U.S.] Capitol [Washington, D.C.] steps giving a prayer of thanksgiving to God.  These women were eventually going to get out, but they were the ones who were the persons we were supporting in this effort.
Story_ID: 467071
Speaker 1: And it was in Washington [D.C.] that the talk started going around about Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] was talking about running for president.  Now, Jesse was there for that activity, and there were some of the preachers who said that they were not, they were not going to support Jesse.  And the reason they were not going to support Jesse was that Jesse has his own agenda, and that he does not have meetings with people to get their opinion and whatnot about what he's going to do.  He decides what he's going to do, and he tells you to come on.  And so they said they would not support him.  John Nettles, who used to be the state president [of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference] and the first vice president of the national organization said, "I'm going to support him."  And I went along with John Nettles, and I said, "I'm going to support him, too."  And there were a number of us who said we were going to support him.  And so when Jesse did run, I became the manager of his campaign office downtown.  And we did all we could in campaigning and having meetings to get out a good vote for Jesse.
Speaker 2: Now this was in 1984.  With, with the campaign, tell me some of the people who might have been involved besides--you just mentioned a few.  But what was it like working in Birmingham [Alabama]?  How did the everyday person feel about Jesse Jackson's campaign?
Speaker 1: Well, I think the rank and file were very pleased, but there were some black politicians who were not pleased.  In fact, it appears that they had already made their promises to the white candidates, and so they were not very pleased.  He did not get a lot of the support.
Speaker 2: Was there a voting rights campaign, I mean, a voting registration drive centered around this campaign?
Speaker 1: Well, we had those going on all the time, and certainly there were efforts to get out the vote and to encourage people to come out and vote.  Here you have an opportunity to vote for a black man.  And of course, what we would hear from some of them was that he can't win, that America is not ready for a black president. We conceded that that might be so, but we needed somebody to articulate the issues which pertained to black folks, and Jesse could do that.  And not only that, we needed somebody like Jesse to run for this office so he could encourage other blacks to run for lesser offices throughout the United States.  And of course, this was part of our answer to those people, because all the blacks, all the black officials, were not happy about Jesse running.
Story_ID: 467072
Speaker 1: Many other things were going on in, in the S-, SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] and the other organizations that you were affiliated with, continued to look and work hard to desegregate many establishments.  And I know one of the major focuses was on Shoal Creek golf club [Shoal Creek Golf and Country Club, Shoal Creek, Alabama] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: Tell me about this.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: 'Cause now thi-, this is going on to, this is in the early '90s [1990s], is that right?
Speaker 2: Yes, the first part of the '90s [1990s].  We had certainly stood up against police brutality; that was our second name in SCLC.  Police could no longer shoot a black and nothing be done about it or said about it.  And we had challenged various businesses that had unjustly fired blacks, and we carried picket lines out in front of those businesses to take the workers back.  And some of the businesses, we put out of business.  So there was a whole lot of things going on that SCLC was a part of, which we wouldn't have time to mention.  But in the early '90s [1900s], the PGA Tour [Professional Golfers' Association] was coming to Birmingham [Alabama].  I was enlightened about it by Councilman William Bell, who was on the council.  He was concerned because there were no black members in the Shoal Creek private golf situation, and that these people were going to be using public money, public buses, and they were going to be enjoying the results of other public benefits.  And this Shoal Creek private golf club had no blacks.  In fact, they had to, they had a kind of arrangement that blacks could not be members.  And of course this thing came out in the open.  And I shall never forget that I was the one at the council meeting to challenge it and make a statement that we were going to stand against it, and that the president of this private company acted like we were still in the dark ages, and we were going to demonstrate if the PGA came here.
Story_ID: 467073
Speaker 1: So, tell me the effects of the demonstrations at Shoals Creek [sic. Shoal Creek Golf and Country Club, Shoal Creek, Alabama].
Speaker 2: Well, before I do that, forgive me.  Let me sort of back up just a little bit to the Sands [George Sands], Bonita [Bonita Carter] thing.  Because I want it to go on record that as a result of the fact of my calling Sands a murderer, I was sued by Sands for a quarter of a million dollars.  And of course I did not have that.  And he kept that case going until some years later, when it was determined that a police officer was a public citizen, and that he had no right to sue against complaints like that.  I wanted to throw that in.
Story_ID: 467074
Speaker 1: Now you're asking me about--?
Speaker 2: The results of the demonstration--
Speaker 1: At Shoal Creek [Shoal Creek Golf and Country Club, Shoal Creek, Alabama]?
Speaker 2: --at Shoal Creek.
Speaker 1: There were various people who sought to get SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] not to demonstrate when the PGA [Professional Golfers' Association] came in.  They said that they thought that the Shoal Creek Club was going to do the right thing.  But I came up under Fred Shuttlesworth [HistoryMaker Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth], he was a country boy.  And Fred used to say that, it's the wheel that squeaks that gets the grease.  It's the baby that cries that gets the milk.  And you'll scald the hog when the water is hot.  And so the water was hot, and so I told him I had no intentions--even Richard Arrington [Richard Arrington, Jr.], the mayor, tried to get us to back off that.  We tried to get him to be, to apply for membership.  But in the final analysis, other leaders in this city was disaffected, and they got out of the Shoal Creek thing.  And the Shoal Creek head said that he wasn't going to renegotiate, because we had a gun at his head and that we were threatening to demonstrate.  And I had him know that it wasn't a threat, it was a promise.  As a result, I got press time on the leading 'Meet the Press,' and the other outstanding prime time newsmakers.  And of course it was later revealed that the people who were supporting it, like Lincoln [Lincoln Motor Company] and other kinds of businesses, decided to just drop their support, and they were going to go to Memphis [Tennessee].  And it was at that time that these people, one of the officials from the Alabama Power Company [Birmingham, Alabama], came down.  And we negotiated and we got that settled.  Mr. Willie [Louis J. Willie, Jr.], who was an official at Booker T. Washington Insurance Company [Birmingham, Alabama], became the first black.  And of course as a result of that, other private golf clubs opened their doors around the country, not only for blacks, but also for women.  We understand that women were having a problem too.  And among these clubs that opened their doors for participation by blacks was the golf course in Augustus [sic. Augusta, Georgia].  And this is where Tiger Woods had the opportunity to play, and he won the Masters [Masters Tournament].  So, it was good results.  I got calls from around the country about that. But one unfortunate thing happened.  Farrakhan [HistoryMaker Minister Louis Farrakhan] came to Birmingham [Alabama], and he had come to Birmingham sometime before, no church would let him speak; they were afraid.  But we opened our doors at St. Joseph [St. Joseph Missionary Baptist Church, Birmingham, Alabama] and he spoke at St. Joseph.  When he came back the second time, a larger church opened its doors, and Farrakhan criticized me in the huge mass meeting and on radio for taking off after a golf club, a private club.  He said that we should be doing things other than that.  I guess he was misinformed.  He didn't know that playing golf was over a billion dollar business.  And of course my participation and leadership in that has been justified, and I got an apology from Farrakhan and his people on that.
Story_ID: 467075
Speaker 1: Now, one of the other things that was very--that you took a prominent lead in, was to have the case against the bombin- the bombers of the 16th Street Baptist Church [Birmingham, Alabama] reopened.  Tell me what led up to you urging the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] to reopen the case?
Speaker 2: Well, I received an invitation from the head of the FBI, his last name was Langford [G. Robert Langford].  And he sent invitations to various ministers and other leaders to come and meet at the FBI office.  They wanted to enlighten us on the work of the FBI and other things.  Well, I started not to go.  I reluctantly decided to go, because the FBI did not rank high in our thoughts when we thought about the negative things that they had been a part of and had done.  But I did go.  And while there, I'll never forget--I'll make it quick.  They had some refreshments, and I decided to refrain from eating or drinking any of the refreshments.  I had a negative thought that these folks are going to poison us or something (laughter).  I know how outlandish that sounds, but when I came to my good senses, we did share in it.  And Langford asked us what we would like for the FBI to do?  And I jumped on him with both feet and said to him, that what you could do, if you're really serious and honest, is reopen the bombing case where those little girls were killed.  And the other ministers joined in, and we gave them a good working over.  And then he asked if there was anything else?  I said, "Yes, there needs to be more black presence in the FBI.  And I understand that there are black agents now that are being mistreated, and they have filed a suit against the FBI.  There needs to be more blacks."  He said, "Well, I'll see about that too."  And so he made this promise, and he quietly went to work on it, getting the authority from the attorney general. Washington [D.C.] and the president and all that, and he started the investigation.
Story_ID: 467076
Speaker 1: And of course it's history now that they came up with the suspects that were known all the while, Blanton [Thomas E. Blanton, Jr.].  A little after it happened, I was called and told that a fellow named Blanton was a part of that, and the other fellow named Cherry [Bobby Frank Cherry].  Of course Baxley [Bill Baxley], an aggressive attorney general, had already convicted one man, Chambliss [Robert Edward Chambliss], Dynamite Bob Chambliss.  And so, nobody else had been convicted.  And of course the investigation started, and Blanton and Cherry were going to be brought to the bar of justice.  And of course, I was at all the trials that took place.  And Doug Jones [G. Douglas Jones] was tapped by the attorney general to be the prosecutor.  I've often wondered why the attorney general didn't handle it himself.  I style him as a coward, not wanting to be involved.  Because after Baxley did it, then his star went down like the Titanic.  And so Blanton was convicted, and that was a happy day.  And I shall never forget, we celebrated that victory of justice at the criminal justice building and courthouse.  But there was some problem with convicting Cherry.  They said that he had dementia, and that he was not able mentally to help his attorneys.  And there was some law that a defendant had to be able to help the attorneys, and so he was not convicted.  And we demonstrated over at, at the University of Alabama [Tuscaloosa, Alabama] where some of these psychologists, or whoever they were, had said that Cherry was not in a position.  And of course we targeted the judge; we held daily demonstrations down at the Criminal Justice Center [Birmingham, Alabama].  We had mass meetings, and we had a march which involved some national SCSC- SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] people and some of our national board members and other people to try to get this decision turned around.  And we found out later that the judge came to this decision on a ruling that had been turned over, that'd been overturned.  Now we couldn't understand that, and we c-, we of course we confronted Doug Jones.  And Doug said he thought that two out of three was a good batting average, which enraged us--that we were not about to give up on Cherry.  So, we kept up so much agitation until the judge finally decided to send him down to Tuscaloosa [Alabama] to the mental institution for evaluation.  And it was there, after observations, private and without his knowledge, that they found out that he knew enough and that he was able--he could remember all his wives, he could remember all of the cars, and he could remember a whole lot of other details.  And so, they decided to have his trial.  Prior to that time, we were attacked by terrorists, 9/11 [September 11, 2001] happened.  And so in our public demonstrations, we called Cherry, Osama bin Cherry.  And we said that we should not be concerned about catching Osama bin, whatever his name is--
Speaker 2: Laden [Osama bin Laden].
Speaker 1: --yeah, if we were not going to do something about Osama bin Cherry.  So, they were terrorists.  They might not be foreign terrorists, but they're domestic terrorists here at home.
Story_ID: 467077
Speaker 1: And so he was eventually convicted, and we had another celebration.  I'll never forget, Reverend Shuttlesworth [HistoryMaker Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth] and I and the others, we marched singing, "Glory, glory, hallelujah, his truth is marching on," ['The Battle Hymn of the Republic'].  And of course I was a little saddened by the fact that when I went to congratulate Doug Jones [G. Douglas Jones], that Doug withdrew his hand from me and wouldn't shake my hand.  He called me a traitor, and what this was all about is Doug had not planned to seek to convict Cherry [Bobby Frank Cherry].  He was running for senate, and since he said that two out of three was all right, we were disenchanted about him, and so we decided to support his opposition, a lawyer from Montgomery [Alabama].  And that's what he called me a traitor about.  But Langford [G. Robert Langford] gave me credit for being a part of reopening that case.  And of course I've been very disappointed that Doug Jones--who has been honored and who's had opportunity on many forums to go--did not think that SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] and the support that we gave to this case made any difference.  Maybe he changed his mind about that, since our good friend that he tried to save has been convicted.  And without calling his name, you know who that is.  So, we were delighted that the Lord kept us around here.  I had had my cancers--kidney cancer, lung cancer, which metastasized into my liver and all of that.  But the Lord kept me around here, because I could hear the voices of those little girls crying, "How long, how long?"  And I felt that we owed it to them to bring this to some resolution.
Speaker 2: So this was closure for you and for--
Speaker 1: It was closure for me and for the others (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) many others.
Speaker 1: That's right.  Mrs. Robertson [Alpha Robertson] lived enough to see that day, too.  She's dead now.  And Chris [Chris McNair] is still here, but you know about his troubles.
Story_ID: 467078
Speaker 1: Now, Reverend [HistoryMaker Reverend Abraham Woods, Jr.], you were also a member of the steering committee along with, once again, David Vann, and--led by Odessa Woolfolk, about making plans for the building of the Civil Rights Institute [Birmingham Civil Rights Institute, Birmingham, Alabama]. Can you--
Speaker 2: That is correct (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Can you tell me about that?
Speaker 2: That is correct. And we have to give David Vann credit for coming up with the idea of something like that.  Of course, after he was defeated by his friend, Mayor Richard Arrington [Richard Arrington, Jr.], he did not alienate himself from public service.  But in due time he embraced Dr. Arrington, and joined with him to do what he could do to help.  And he turned out to be a great asset during Dr. Arrington's administration, I want to throw this in.  During Dr. Arrington's administration he and I were so close, and we were always on the same page, until the police decided to raid whiskey houses and drug houses.  And Dr. Arrington appeared with them on occasion, and this infuriated the drug dealers.  And Chief Myers [Bill Myers] sent out a committee to find out who this, who is this fellow behind hiring a hitman to kill Dr. Arrington about this?  And after he did his investigation, he went to Dr. Arrington and said, "Dr. Arrington, we found out who it is behind hiring the hitman to kill you."  And he told Dr. Arrington, "Abraham Woods (laughter) is behind that."  What a preposterous tale.  And for a while, Dr. Arrington acted, acted a little funny towards me, and I eventually found out what was going on. But--
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: --it was David Vann who had his idea, and he got Mayor Arrington really to support that.
Speaker 1: What year was this?
Speaker 2: Well, that's a good question.  I ought to know, but I don't remember without looking at something--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --right now.
Story_ID: 467079
Speaker 1: But at any rate, we worked with Odessa Woolfolk, we worked with David Vann.  There were some other people on that committee that didn't work as close up as we did.  One thing I contended for that the institute [Birmingham Civil Rights Institute, Birmingham, Alabama] not look like a jail, that it ought to be an imposing, eloquent, stately kind of structure.  And so, the designers had to go back and forth to the drawing board until they finally came up with a civil rights institute with the steps going up with the dome, and that sort of thing.  And it was an eloquent, stately, dignified look that we were pleased with.  I'll never forget when we had the groundbreaking and we turned over the first shovels of dirt where this Institute would be built; it was a great accomplishment.  Dr. Arrington [Richard Arrington, Jr.] tried to get bond issues and other things in order to underwrite it, but each time the white community would vote it down.  In the final analysis, he decided to sell the Social Security building [Social Security Administration Southeast Program Service Center, Birmingham, Alabama] in order to get the money in order to start building the museum, and this he did.  And of course Odessa Woolfolk did a yeoman's job as the chairman and the lead person, in doing various things to see that we stay on course and that this project was accomplished.  I'm proud of it.  Of course, I might mention that because of my work with the city, I was honored as a distinguished citizen.  And if you would go down to the city hall, in the front entrance there are the bronze likenesses of distinguished citizens, people who made contributions to the city.  And I was blessed and fortunate to be one of them.  And some years later, I was also honored by the Civil Rights Institute with a little plot in from Dr. Arrington, and Fred Shuttlesworth [HistoryMaker Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth] and others to name the community room in my honor.  And so, I'm very proud and happy to have had a part in its establishment, and certainly grateful that they saw fit to, to honor me.
Story_ID: 467080
Speaker 1: Reverend Woods [HistoryMaker Reverend Abraham Woods, Jr.], what do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: Well, I want people to look upon me as somebody who was really committed to being compassionate and being sensitive to the problems and the needs of others. One who sought to make a difference for all of us. I just want to leave a good name, and that when my name is mentioned that somebody would say, "I remember Abraham Woods.  He tried to help us."  I'm always honored.  I'm back and forth from the hospital and the clinic because of my conditions, and I cannot go to any clinic or any hospital or any doctor's office without somebody being there who knows me.  And on many occasions they come over to me and speak to me; I don't know who they are.  And they say, "Reverend Woods, we thank you for what you did." Say, "You are a living legend."  And people have come and thanked me and said, "You did so and so," and I have no idea, I really don't remember.  They say, "Remember, we met at your church and you took our case," and that sort of thing.  We tried to help so many people until I just, I--I just want to be remembered as somebody who tried to make a difference.  And we are honored by people around the city [Birmingham, Alabama], and by my students that I've taught after forty years at Miles College [Fairfield, Alabama].  I was a tough teacher, but there are many of them who see me and say they thank God for me, and they're proud of me.
Story_ID: 467081
Speaker 1: If you had one sentence to say something to the future generations, what would it be? If you had just a few words?
Speaker 2: I would say to--and you said to the future generation--I would say to the present generation and I would say to the future generation, the dream has not come into fruition.  And we've got to stop our conduct that serves as an obstacle in keeping the dream from fruition.  We've got to change our way of living, our conduct; and that involves a whole lot of things.  To this present generation, we've got to stop the killing.  We've got to keep ourselves sober.  We've been in slavery, our forefathers, and we're back in slavery to drugs.  We've got to go back to godly family living.  We've got to get rid of all of the immorality--the immoral things, rapping, the way we wear our clothes down below our posterior, and the gangs and all of that.  And I know that's not just one word, but I sometimes wonder if the dream of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] is not becoming a nightmare.  So that is why I would say these things to the present and to the future generation. You've got to be involved, and you've got to commit yourself to being a part of the answer and not a part of the problem.
