Story_ID: 64767
Speaker 1: My name is Angelique Walker-Smith. A-N-G-E-L-I-Q-U-E W-A-L-K-E-R hyphen S-M-I-T-H. My position, I'm a minister and a journalist.
Speaker 2: But, currently, aren't you executive director of--
Speaker 1: Oh, you're talking about my cur--Oh, yes.  I'm the Executive Director and minister of the Church Federation of Greater Indianapolis, which is the council of churches in greater Indianapolis [Indiana].
Story_ID: 64768
Speaker 1: What's your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Purple.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Alabama.
Speaker 1: Your favorite food?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  Apple pie.  I don't know.  I never thought about it.  I guess apple pie.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: My favorite, or the one I use the most?  Either way?  You ready? Let's see here.  "The good news is," people say I say that a lot.
Speaker 1: Always good news?
Speaker 2: There's some good news somewhere.
Story_ID: 64769
Speaker 1: I'd like you to talk about, you know, tell who your father was, his name, your mother and that.
Speaker 2: My father is Reverend Roosevelt B. Walker, and my mother is Mrs. Geneva Willis Walker and I was born in Cleveland [Ohio], but I was raised in Springfield, Ohio. So I was age three when we moved to Cedarville [Ohio], then we moved to Springfield, Ohio.
Speaker 1: Tell me about your father and what you know of him and what type of person he was and also anything you know about his parents.
Speaker 2: My father is a Baptist minister in the African-American Baptist church.  He grew up in the ghettos of Cleveland [Ohio]; his mother [Carrie Walker] immigrated from Alabama to go north to Cleveland.  First to Chicago [Illinois], then she moved to Cleveland.  She had twelve children that she had to raise by herself in the ghettos of Cleveland during the depression and my dad was one of the twelve children, the seventh child.  He was raised in a great deal of hardship, pretty awfulness, and then he met my mom who immigrated from Alabama and went to see her brother and lived with him in Cleveland. And he was preaching at a church and she was an usher in the church and they met there at church and they married. Then I was born a year later.
Speaker 1: What do you--did your father ever share with you any stories about growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, many stories.  He talked about how much of a hardship it was living in the ghettos of Cleveland and how they had to scrimp and save just to get by every day.  His mother was the only provider--I mean, the only parental provider in the home of twelve children, and this was before welfare and so it was really, really hard.  There's a picture of them outside of this really impoverished home that they lived in.  I mean, I think it was like a two bedroom--two room or three room flat in the kind of squatter area in Cleveland, Ohio, one of the--if not the poorest, one of the poorest areas in Cleveland. And my dad had to go down to--there's a little Jewish community--the Jewish community was like the entrepreneurs in the neighborhood and he had to go down to the Jewish store; sometimes he would find leftover bread and things and he would bring it back to the home so that they could eat that day.  There were rats in the home.  They had to cook over an open pot and fire and it was really pretty impoverished and every child was kind of like on their own to survive and make ends meet in the home and my dad was one of the major providers that made sure that the family was provided for at a very young age.  And then, at age sixteen or seventeen, he went off to join the Marine Corps [United States Marine Corps] and they gave him a new outlook on life. But all along, grandmother or grandma, she was called Grandma Walker, she was a woman of faith and went to church and that's what got her through and when he went off to the Marine Corps and came back, he had a changed life.  He became what he called MP [military police] in the Marine Corps in the Korean War and while he was put in the slammer for, I guess for, being naughty or violating some rule, he was called into the ministry and he, literally, his life was changed for Christ and it totally converted his life, and he got called into ministry, came back to Cleveland and started pursuing his spiritual journey and he joined this church called Bible Baptist, and that's where he met my mom, when he had come back from serving in the military, well, the Marine Corps in the Korean War. And while he was in the Korean War, he discovered--he met this French man and this French man told him about the name, Angelique, and he loved the name and he said if he ever had a daughter, that was what was going to be her name, so he met my mom when he got back, and one year later I was born and I got the name, so I'm kind of reminder, I guess, of his calling and a reminder of his transformation in his life, and I was conceived in all of that.  They didn't think I was going to be born.  I was a miracle child.  I was a blue baby.  My heart wasn't quite right, but I made it and I'm still here.
Story_ID: 64770
Speaker 1: Tell, tell us about your mother.  A little bit more about her.
Speaker 2: My mother [Geneva Willis Walker] was also the seventh child, of ten children, and all of her older siblings, basically, had left home--well, I'll start at the beginning.  There were ten children.  Two of them were by different mothers, okay, but the eight of them were same mother and father and it was too, really too many for one home and they were on the rural--it was the rural South, about a hundred acres of land.  It was called the Willows Land, where they grew up and my granny, who is my grandfather's, her father's mother, owned--Oh, granny and papa  owned, I don't know, sixty acres of land or something like that, then my grandfather [Osie Willis] owned like forty to fifty acres of land, and they both had a house on each parcel of the land, but half of the family was raised by my granny, which was my mother's grandmother.  Then the grandfather raised the other--my grandfather, her father raised the others and she was raised in the home with my grandfather, her father, whereas the others were raised by her grandmother.  Is that clear?  Okay.  So, they were raised in different, two different households.  She was the youngest child raised in that household by her stepmother [Sally Wheat Willis] and by my grandfather and her older sister, Aunt Theresa--well, I call her Aunt Theresa, had married and left home.  Her older brother, who lived in that same home, had married and gone to Cleveland [Ohio].  Her older sister had married and gone north to Indiana, Gary, Indiana, but the brother had gone to Cleveland up north, and then the other brother went down South.  He went down to Arkansas or Mississippi; no, Louisiana, went to Louisiana and married and went there, so that, basically kind of left my mother at home after her older siblings had married.  She had a younger brother that was the child of her stepmother and my grandfather, and it was just really the two of them that were left behind.  And I think, this is just my take on it, I think that she really, really missed her siblings and they were very close and she wanted to be near them and wanted to get out of the house and get out around, so at sixteen or seventeen, sixteen or seventeen, she went to visit her family member up in New York on her mother's side, her biological mother's side, who had died in childbirth when the last child, when the eighth child, which is my mother's younger sister, who was raised in my granny's house.  That was Aunt Sally.  Anyway, so she went to New York, visited on her mother's side, her natural mother's side, came back and then decided she wanted to go stay and visit with her brother in Cleveland.  So, she followed her brother, went up to Cleveland and stayed with him and his new wife, Aunt Irene, and while she was there, as I said, then she went to church and that's where she met my dad [Roosevelt B. Walker], but she grew up very much in the rural South on the land--we still have the land.  I lost my grandfather a year ago and now she's the youngest child in the home, so she gets the part of the land with the house on it and now we have responsibilities there to help my mother with her inheritance, but she very much was a Southern girl, very, I think, naive probably, seventeen, eighteen years old would stay with her brother.  You know, grew up in a Christian home, a Methodist home, a black Methodist home.  The AME Zion Church [African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church] which is our family church down there.  She went up to Cleveland, and while she was there I think it was difficult for her because she was in the city and that was very different then being, obviously, out on the land having lived on the land all her life, but she and my dad fell in love and they got married [1957] and then I was born.  She didn't finish her high school education until three of our--my brother [Victoriald Walker] and sister [Danya Walker] were born, all three of us were around and she didn't go back to finish her high school diploma until much later, actually, after we were born, and she went back, and then she went back after my parents divorced and got her college degree, and then just this year she got her seminary degree which was really, really special because she came up north with very little.
Story_ID: 64771
Speaker 1: Who are you most like?  Your mother [Geneva Willis Walker] or your father [Roosevelt B. Walker], and would you tell me what they were like personality-wise?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know who I'm--I think I'm a little bit of both.  I don't know that I'm more like one than the other, 'cause I admire them both; so I guess to some extent I emulate them both.  I mean, they've always loved their kids.  There's been no question about that.  No matter what the pain of the divorce was or anything else, we always knew we were really loved.  Mom is soft spoken and a little more quiet and very Southern.  Dad is street-wise and bold. They're really opposites.  They're really opposites.  So dad had this great presence in the pulpit.  You could tell Christ had taken his life, a converted man, and I grew up with him praying in the study and reading and going to school.  I always knew education was important.  God, family and education, in that order was the discipline in our home.  It was a very disciplined home.  Every Sunday we were in church.  Wednesday we were at prayer meeting, Tuesday was, you know, this or Thursday was choir rehearsal, very strict, disciplined home. And Dad was always there running the home and Mom was there to love us and take care of us and--
Speaker 1: Well, where do you fit in the hierarchy?
Speaker 2: I'm the eldest child.
Speaker 1: So, as the eldest were you taught that there were certain responsibilities?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, of course.  I had to take care of my younger sister [Danya Walker].  I had to take care of my little brother [Victoriald Walker] and, in fact, to kind of honor my role, my mother was pregnant with her fourth child and the child was stillborn, but I got to name the last child [Kensuella Walker] and gave the name, and that was really special that they took my suggestion.  It was very, you know, I washed the diapers and changed my brother's diapers and (laughs)--he was eight years younger but I was already carrying him on my hip and warming his bottle and all kinds of things like that.  Looking out for my sister who was, shall we say, a little bit more daring than me (laughter).  I always kind of shielded her, you know, can't talk about my sister.  Nevermind if she's some naughty sometimes, she's still my sister.  I was very protective.
Story_ID: 64772
Speaker 1: Share some childhood memories of some others, you know, growing up in your household.
Speaker 2: I don't know.  Let's see here.  Well, childhood memories?
Speaker 1: Anything in school or anything, you know, trips your family took or anything, you know, stories in the household, you know around the dining room table or anything like that.
Speaker 2: Well, every Sunday, we had to know what Dad [Roosevelt B. Walker] preached on Sunday morning.  You didn't come back to Sunday dinner and eat until you knew what Dad said that morning in the pulpit; so we always got a quiz and we had to memorize Bible verses and learn prayers and things before the meal was served and everybody took their turn to pray around the table.  I had my spot.  My sister [Danya Walker] had hers.  my dad, my mom [Geneva Willis Walker], then my brother [Victoriald Walker] each had a spot at the table that was kind of our spot.  I had my plate, you know. And we knew that if we didn't pay attention on Sunday morning we were, you know, this is probably not a good idea, you should pay attention, so we always listened very carefully.  What else?  We knew that we had Saturday chores.  They had to be done.  Didn't go outside and play until you had Saturday chores done.  You know, bath on Saturday night, up on Sunday.  But I went through all the rituals of the black Baptist church.  Usher, (inaudible), choir, Sunday school teacher, piano player, you name it, I did it at a very young age, and so I knew that church. I still know that church like the back of my hand, because that's what we did and that was what was important.  Now, I suppose the most vivid stories of challenge were around issues of race, because we lived in the first home that was integrated in our neighborhood.  We had been in Cedarville [Ohio].  We moved from Cleveland [Ohio] to Cedarville and I was, at that time, three years old, but then by the time I was in school, it--what was it?  I started school at five, in kindergarten, and we lived in the first home outside of this impoverished community in Cedarville.  It was called Little Pittsburgh and that's where all black people were supposed to live and these were mostly migrant workers.  I learned that later.  I didn't know that then.  I know that now that they were migrant workers on the land for the sharecroppers.  They were sharecroppers and migrant workers, and that's where black people were supposed to live at Cedarville, Little Pittsburgh. But my dad got accepted at Cedarville Bible College [Cedarville University] which was a very white, fundamentalist, conservative school, after he had accepted Christ, went to Bible college, Baptist Mission--was it, Baptist Bible Mission, I think it was called in Cleveland where my mom and dad married, and they said he should go to this Bible college, Cedarville Bible College, so he went to Cedarville to go to school there. And naturally, they expected him to live in Little Pittsburgh, but my dad says this crazy white guy for whatever reason rented them this house and let them live in this house by the Bible college; so we lived there but it was really pretty awful racist community.  We were one of the few blacks in the area, and I would walk up and down the streets every day.  I was aged five to age nine, so for four years I walked every day up and down that street to school with white people looking, peering out of their houses never to speak to me and you know, shooing me away, and going to school.  Now, I did make friends with this one little white girl.  Her name was Rita Check.  I'll never forget Rita Check, and Rita Check lived on the corner in the prettiest house on the corner.  All the houses were pretty modest.  I mean, it wasn't anything to really speak about because it was a poor place, but to us this was like the brick house on the corner and she lived there and she and I kind of liked each other, kind of got along.  I remember I went up to her doorstep with her to walk her home and as soon as I approached the steps, her mother told me to go away and I wasn't really welcome there, so Rita and I still were friends outside of her mother's eyes, but we had to be really careful, and then after a while, she was too scared and so we couldn't be friends anymore.
Speaker 1: Now, how does that make you feel as a child?
Speaker 2: Well, I had a good home, and my dad always said,--my dad was a real radical.  He was involved in the civil rights movements.  He was a nationalist.  He was at this white, conservative, fundamentalist school, but he also went to Central State [College, Wilberforce, Ohio] which was right down the road, and Wilberforce [University, Wilberforce, Ohio] which is right down the road and, eventually, he graduated from Payne Theological Seminary [Wilberforce, Ohio], the black seminary there. But my dad never lost his identity as a black man.  He didn't care what the white fundamentalists said about--I mean, there was no interracial dating or interracial fraternizing at this white Bible college.  That wasn't supposed to happen or anything, but my dad really refuted this issue around the color issue and he always was very clear that those were the other people and that's what he taught us.  He said we were, you know, God's children and that black is beautiful, and he was into the "black is beautiful" thing--I mean, this little rural white town, "black is beautiful."  This is my child and they're the ones crazy, not you.  You just have to understand that the evil one has different expressions of itself, so he never really cared for them.  He never thought that we were anything other than beautiful, black and God-fearing people and that they were sinful people.  That's how it was defined: that they were the sinful ones, they were the evil ones and we can accept them but we have to still abide by the rules of love and all this other stuff.  You know, because of my family and I was in the black church then, my dad was pastor while I was at the Baptist Bible college.  It was hurtful.  It was very painful.  It was pretty ugly.  You know, people didn't want us there, but we always knew that they were the wrong ones, you know, they were the ones that didn't understand, but it was painful, it was hurtful, and my teachers expected more from me.  I could never understand why I got more homework, why I had to do more.  She would--the teachers were literally giving me more work to do to set me up for failure, but I'd get home and Mom and Dad said, well, you'll just have to work harder.  You'll learn to survive like we have, and that's what I did.  I learned to survive in a very awful situation and I got more of it when I got to Springfield [Ohio](laugh).  I got more of the same, and the KKK [Ku Klux Klan] came after us and my grandmother [Carrie Walker] was visiting from Cleveland [Ohio], I remember.  Well, she came a lot, but she came this one time and we were all sitting in the family room, because we, again, moved into the first home of an integrated neighborhood.  We did that again, and we were all sitting in the living room one evening talking about the day's events.  We'd just finished dinner and my grandmother--I'll never forget--was sitting in that chair where Dad sat, that was dad's chair.  It was like, well, grandma's special, she's sitting in Dad's chair.  She was sitting in Dad's chair, and this brick came flying through our bay window and missed my grandmother's head by about a couple inches.  It would have killed her.  Broke our whole bay window and it was the KKK, you know, saying that we shouldn't be in that neighborhood.  I mean, there were other episodes of that sort that happened but that's the one I'm vivid, most vividly remember because it really frightened me.  my dad had gone upstairs at the moment that it happened and he came flying down and, you know, the whole place was shattered that night and we had all this glass everywhere and everything, but it was the KKK that had done it, and they were right over in Xenia [Ohio], just nearby.  I didn't know all of what was going on but I knew that they didn't like us.
Speaker 1: How old were you at the time?
Speaker 2: Well, I moved to Springfield at age nine.
Speaker 1: What year is this?
Speaker 2: This is--
Speaker 1: Because, what year were you born?
Speaker 2: Fifty-eight [1958].  Yeah, fifty-eight, so this is around sixty-eight [1968], sixty-seven [1967], the height of the Civil Rights Movement and everything, and my dad, bless his heart, from the pulpit--he was in one of the leading pulpits in Springfield, some will say, the leading pulpit, but certainly one of the leading pulpits in Springfield--would stand up in the pulpit and preach civil rights stuff and talk about Dr. King [Martin Luther King, Jr.] and, you know, in spite of his Baptist, Bible, fundamentalist training in a Baptist Bible college, he would stand up there and say that this wrong and we need to organize.  He would hit the streets.  I even think he walked with Dr. King and this was really very big and very peculiar for that area, and so they knew he was outspoken.  They knew he was a black nationalist to some extent and he didn't apologize for that, but, you know, it was pretty painful along the way too.  I remember one story when I was in fourth grade--no, I was in third grade and I had a teacher named Miss Wopetich, I know that's a very unusual name, but she was a new student teacher.  She had just come out of school and, you know, I was really--I mean, I'm not trying to say I was the best kid ever, but I was a pretty abiding kid, pretty obedient, okay, 'cause I was kind of like the abiding eldest child.  I got straight A's in school even though I had to do more. But anyway, in third grade I remember we were all standing in line ready to go home and two people got disorderly in the line and she came through and decided that she was going to spank--see, back then corporal punishment was still allowed.  She went through and spanked every child in the room, and I'm not kidding, I know she hit me harder (laughter) than everybody else in the room.  Well, I just walked out.  I was just outdone.  I couldn't believe that someone hit me for no reason.  I mean, my dad and mom spanked me, but I probably deserved it sometime.  You know.  I understood it was out of love, you know, it was not anything antagonistic, but I am--she did, she hit me the hardest and that was it.  I walked out. I cried.  I intentionally cried all the way home and I told my mom and I told my dad that this had happened.  Well, that became the important issue for the whole week for my parents.  My dad went to--my dad and mom went to the principal.  They went to the superintendent.  They went to the top of the Board of Education and put out an edict: don't ever do that again or I will take you to court.  I'll never forget that, and I guess the reason why I'll never forget that is, not only did it show my parents love, but I was right and I knew I was right that this should not have happened. But I mean, there were things like that that occurred but the most consistent piece of the race piece was that I had to do more.  I always was given more homework.  I had to stay after school.  You know, they felt like, you know, I had to do more than everybody else.  But I just learned to do more.  In the end, it was meant for good. I mean, in the end I learned to survive in the academy, and eventually, did Ivy League education, went to a private school and all of that.
Story_ID: 64773
Speaker 1: Did you feel any pressure, as a child, growing up in the church or were you pretty, you know, as you said compliant?  Did you feel any pressure because--I was asking if you felt pressure because you were older?  Did you feel pressure because you were the preacher's kid?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, of course.  No, the preacher's kid, the first family.  My mother [Geneva Willis Walker] was the first lady and we were the children of the pastor [Roosevelt B. Walker] and the first lady, and we had responsibilities, but of course. But I mean even if I had not been the child of the pastor and the first lady, my journey, my own spiritual journey has been my own peculiar journey.  I never knew how that would spell out vocationally, but my path has also been just my path, and even if I weren't their children, I think that still would have been my path.  Now, what the black church experience did to my parents was to help codify it for me, but I think my own journey was still my own journey and I could not escape my own destiny or my own journey along the way.
Story_ID: 64774
Speaker 1: As a young--let's describe the young Angelique.  What was she like?
Speaker 2: Shy, very introverted.  I was very introverted up to age twelve, yeah, twelve.  I spent a lot of time in my dad's [Roosevelt B. Walker's] study, in the library, in my books, in the Bible.  I read stories.  It wasn't like I was looking for truth.  I liked all the stories and the stories of Esther and all the weirdness, the unusual things in the Bible.  I liked stories.  I liked fairy tales.  I liked mythical tales.  I liked legends.  I liked dreams and, you know, I liked things like that all along the way; so I went into myself.  I  was very introverted into myself.  I don't know, maybe my parents were even concerned about that at some point, but I don't know.  I was very shy and very introverted and it wasn't until I was, like, twelve years old I met a girl named Lisa, Lisa Williams. And her dad was the president of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and she moved around the corner from me.  I said, "Wow, another black girl in the neighborhood who's my age." And because her dad was the head of the NAACP, my dad thought that was fine, he was totally supportive of that.  So I could go around the block and visit with Lisa.  That was one home that I could go visit and it was with Lisa and we became very, very close.  We called each other sisters, in fact.  Lisa was just the opposite of me, just the opposite.  Lisa would laugh, she would talk loud, everything that I really wasn't.  She was still smart--she was very smart, but she was very outgoing, and she and I ended up going to school together, to Ridgewood [School, Springfield, Ohio], the first year.  I got accepted at this private school, and Lisa and I would ride the bus together to the other--we were one of the kids that were bused, so we had to go to the--we were on the South Side where black folk live and we had to go to the North Side.  Lisa would have the whole bus singing and dancing and have a good time and she'd say, "Come on, you help me out," and have me involved with it.  It was Lisa Williams, really, who brought me out of myself.  It was my friendship with Lisa that said it was okay to come out of myself, and after my friendship with her, I was better.  And I still wasn't as outgoing as I am now, but it was Lisa who really made me say it's okay to be more outgoing.
Story_ID: 64775
Speaker 1: The school I was at where Miss Wopetich was when we moved from Cedarville [Ohio] --okay, Cedarville was ages three to nine, really, three to eight then we moved to Springfield [Ohio] and that was ages eight or nine until, well, when I went off to college in Springfield. So when I go to Springfield at a school called Highlands Elementary [School].  That was a public school and again had to walk through a predominantly white neighborhood that didn't like me and go to this school, although there were other black children at the school, 'cause it was all the South Side, just that we were in this pocket where white folk lived too, but it was the South Side where black people lived, so the school was like--for us, that was big, about twenty percent African American, which was a big deal in Springfield and this is grades K-6.  So, anyway, I started in third grade at Highlands Elementary, and that's where I had Miss Wopetich for my teacher.  But then in fourth grade I had a teacher named Mrs. Maude Howle, and she was a Greek Orthodox woman and for whatever the reason she took a profound interest in me.  This white, Greek Orthodox woman, Maude Howle, and she was beautiful.  She had this--she used to wear her hair in a French roll, this deep black French roll and exotic earrings and flashy dress and pink lipstick.  I mean, she was very striking in her presence.  But she was very kind and very sophisticated and she took a profound interest in her teaching.  You could tell, she's one of those teachers who was called to teaching.  It wasn't work for her.  She loved to be a teacher and was committed to teaching and she saw in me my spiritual journey, and she saw in me my yearning to learn and she said to me, "You know, I see that you're interested in Egypt," which I had profound interest in Egypt.  I did very well in mathematics that was back then.  I did really well in mathematics and I was struck by Egypt.  Well we were presented the books on ancient civilization even in grade three and she could tell I was very interested in religion, the religious aspects of Egypt and she said that was good and she affirmed that and she would give me more books and more information about Egypt. And she would give me more books about things that interested me and I found myself staying after school not because the teacher was trying to give me more work just to be mean but because she thought she was nurturing my interest. So she would mentor me after class, because I did have this yearning for learning and she would stay after.  Class would be over at three and I would stay sometimes until four, four-thirty just looking at the things she would give me to increase my interest in learning. And she would give me extra assignments, not because it was a mean thing to do, it was because she cared about what I was interested in.  Then, one day, she did something very extraordinary.  She took me to her church which was on the North Side--a white, prestigious North Side to the only Orthodox, I think it is the only Orthodox church in the community and she showed me her world of orthodoxy.  She showed me the world of being Greek and being Orthodox.  She showed me the organ she played on Sundays for the orthodox church.  She showed me the different symbols and icons in the church and she showed me how some of the icons and things actually came out of Egypt even in Greece, and I made some connections there.  Well, she took that profound interest.  I did straight A work again, this time because I was being nurtured not because, you know, somebody was trying to do something evil to me, but she took this profound interest in me. And then in fifth grade I had another teacher, but in sixth grade Mrs. Howle requested me back in her class; so I had her in fourth grade and I had her in sixth grade and it was Mrs. Howle who changed my imagery of white people, because she cared.  It was out of care for nurturing my learning.  In sixth grade, she was concerned about where I would go for seventh grade and she's the one that recommended I go to this white private school on the North side 'cause she thought I had the ability to do that and that I should be tracked a different way.  So, she made this recommendation and I went on full scholarship to this private school for two years, called Ridgewood [School], and it was on the far North Side where I was bused.  That's when I met Lisa [Williams] who also went to that school.  Her parents paid for her, but I was on full scholarship 'cause we didn't have that kind of money to go over there.
Story_ID: 64776
Speaker 1: How long were you in that school?
Speaker 2: Which one?
Speaker 1: Ridgewood.
Speaker 2: I was in Ridgewood for two years.  I graduated because it only went to grade eight and they wanted to recommend me.  I graduated with honors and they wanted to recommend that I go to a boarding school up east which is the first time I heard about the Ivy League and the East Coast boarding schools and that kind of thing but my parents were adamantly opposed 'cause they couldn't see their child being separated from them. So that didn't happen and I ended up going back to another urban school.  It was called--what was the name of that school?  Anyway, it was a junior high school, Hayward.  Hayward Junior High [School, now Hayward Middle School, Springfield, Ohio] and it was a typical inner city school and it was even closer to the poorer area in the black community, and there were gangs there and there were a lot of things that were distracting but the Lord was good protecting me.  I came through there.  Then, I became eligible to be bused to the North Side which was supposed to be the best school, supposedly, Springfield North High [School, Springfield, Ohio] and so I was bused over to that school and then my best friend's father drove us every day for junior and senior year of school.
Story_ID: 64777
Speaker 1: Did you go through any teenage rebellion?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  I think it was at age sixteen where my parents had a bit of a fit with me.  Everything was unfair at that point. At age sixteen and I would tell my dad [Roosevelt B. Walker] everything's unfair, you're just unfair, all these strict rules, you know, you know.  And that's when the family unit, you know, mother [Geneva Willis Walker] and father were having problems and, you know, I would say Dad was unfair because everything had been so good at home.  It was unfair to me that they were breaking up.  It was unfair to me all the things I'd experienced, and it was just unfair.  That was the word I used. So everything was unfair at age sixteen, and I couldn't bring boyfriends home or boys to my home or anything like that.  Had to be in by eleven o'clock, you know, there were certain things I couldn't do, some things I could do and everything's just unfair at that point.  So, I rebelled at age sixteen, but I never left--I never ran away from home.  I had a best friend's home who really protected me.  I would go to her home and her parents who became like a refuge for me.
Story_ID: 64778
Speaker 1: Did your parents divorce when you were in your--
Speaker 2: No, they divorced when I went off to college but the home was breaking up when I was in tenth grade.  It was very hard.
Speaker 1: Right.  That was hard.  So, now it--it was always assumed you were going to go on to college.
Speaker 2: Well, yes.  I mean, from day one I was always thinking I was going to go to college.  I mean, that was the logical choice.  That's what my dad [Roosevelt B. Walker] had done, although my mother [Geneva Willis Walker] hadn't done college at that point. My dad always thought boys or girls, didn't matter; you were going to go to college.  You know, as I said, God, family and education; so from day one I thought I was going to college. See, all my cousins were either in the ghettos, basically the ghettos of Cleveland [Ohio], so in the ghettos of Cleveland, or they were in rural communities down South and there weren't a lot of us that went on to college, quite frankly, so my dad, you know, he's always been a high achiever.  It's like, of course, you're going to go to college and everything. So, yeah, I was always planning to go to college.
Speaker 1: So, now where did you end up going?
Speaker 2: To Kent State University.
Speaker 1: Now, why did you choose Kent State?
Speaker 2: Well, I was wanting to go out of state, actually.  Initially, I wanted to go to a girls' college.  I forget the name of it just now, in Missouri.  I wanted to go to a girls' school.  I can't think of it just now, the name of that school, but there's girls' college in Missouri, that's where I really wanted to--
Speaker 1: Isn't it very oriented towards the arts?
Speaker 2: Yes, it is.  You know the school I'm talking about?  I can't think of it right now, it's been so long.  But I remember I got all this material on colleges and that one really got my attention, but you had to pay out-of-state fees, that was the first thing and there was no way we could afford that. And like I said, my parents were breaking up and I didn't know where the money was going to come from anyway; so I was left in this difficult situation of how am I going to pay for college, you know, because I don't have money to go to school.  It would have to be on scholarships, so I was left in a very difficult predicament. Then my dad and I had a falling out.  It was a major falling out and he basically said, "Well, I'm not sending you to college.  I'm not going to help you go to college." So I said, "Okay."  My whole dream, my life was falling apart in front of me and I was determined I was going to college; so I went through the whole logical assessment.  I said, "Okay. What's affordable where I can still leave Springfield [Ohio], get out of this hardship situation?"  My mother wanted me to stay home and take care of the kids and be with her, be her companion and her friend.  That was a hard choice and I was doing very well.  I had been a waitress and I was doing well at the steakhouse as a waitress. And then I became a teller at the bank and they were very interested to see me kind of go up the ladder.  I did very well as a teller, got up to be the head teller within a year or so; so I could have stayed and my mother was trying to convince me, really to do that, to stay at home and just do well in the banking business and you know, you'll be okay and a lot was going on. But I felt really guilty but I felt I had to go to college.  I could not abandon my journey.  So, what I did, I worked two jobs that summer after I graduated from high school, saved my little pennies and I took out a major loan and I decided Kent State was as far away as I could get from Springfield.  It offered a journalism program in the arts and I could go and finish doing my four years, but it was the farthest point away.  It was still, you know, acceptable in my standards at that time and I got a loan and I saved and worked with my last pennies that summer and I went up there.  I went up there with a room and no board and I cooked in my room with a little, those little, what do you call them, where you cook on them?  Hot plates.  That's what they were, a hot plate.  I bought a hot plate.  I saved my little pennies.  I bought a hot plate and I bought a refrigerator, one of those little refrigerators and all the other people in the dorm had the room and board plan.  I didn't have that money.  I cooked in my room, you know, where everybody else went over there and I worked two jobs to put myself through school.
Speaker 1: Now, how did you handle the whole college experience?  I mean, this was a very traumatic time for you, really but the base that you had had, you know, had sort of crumbled in many ways.
Speaker 2: Well, the good news was I wasn't in Springfield anymore. (laughs) I can make it if I could get out of Springfield.  I could make it if I was pursuing my dream.  All I needed was the incentive of my dream and getting out of Springfield.  I was, I was less strong than my brother [Victoriald Walker] and sister [Danye Walker].  They were stronger than me.  Now, they had to be because they were younger than me, but I could not go through the shame of my parents divorcing in Springfield.  I would have died.  I had to leave.  So, by having left and having my dream pursued, that's all I needed to live at that point.
Speaker 1: Have you come to understand why your parents divorced?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I still wish it hadn't happened.  They're very different people, but you know, when you grow up in a home that says marriage is the life, is sacred, God says so. I mean, that's what I grew up with.  It was basically Catholic in that way, though it was Baptist, you know, you married for life.  It was pretty devastating, and the good news is, I had lots of aunts and uncles that were still married.  In fact, over in Cleve--that's another reason why I chose Kent State, I had extended family forty-five minutes away and I could go see them anytime I wanted.  I was close to them, so my Aunt Artis, Aunt Irene, the brother that my mother went to stay with when she moved from the South to the North, I went and stayed with them.  When I couldn't quite make it, I'd go and see Sam and my Aunt Artis would feed me and you know, all those things to provide the nurture I needed and they were still married.  They may not have known what their marriage meant to me at that time but all my aunts and uncles were still married and they kept that illusion or that dream visible for me and that was really important.
Story_ID: 64779
Speaker 1: Did you like Kent State [University, Kent, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: I loved it.  Are you kidding.  It was the best choice, one of the best choices I ever made.  Absolutely.  Kent State offered me the opportunity to pursue my interest in religion and I got a certification in religion and philosophy.  I got a major in broadcast journalism or telecommunications and I got a minor in dance.  So, I was able to dance which I wanted to do and wasn't allowed to do growing up and I learned how to do classical, modern dance and ballet and learned how to do African dance, all the things. You know, African dance was still kind of like, well, that's not quite Christian, you know, but I learned how to do--I was in an African dance troupe.  I was in a modern dance troupe.  I went and studied in New York.  I went and studied in Cleveland [Ohio].  I took master classes at the Cleveland Ballet and you know, my parents really thought, you know, you can't make money dancing, but I was able to dance and I got a minor in it. And I loved choreographing dance and drama, and I was in the musical 'Hair,' and I had some leading roles in plays and things and I loved it. But I also did the journalism, got that degree, but I loved it.  It was a whole new world and Kent State has everything.  I mean, everything.  Everything from, you know, the whole thing around '76 [1976] with the protest movement to Pan-African Studies Institute [Institute for African American Affairs: Pan-African Studies] where I spent a lot of time.  Pan-African Studies, the Institute for Pan-African Studies, Dr. William Crosby [sic, Edward W. Crosby] was the head of that institute.
Speaker 1: What fascinated you about that?
Speaker 2: Oh, it built on everything that I had learned about black studies in my home.  It, it opened up my whole world, even beyond the Christian understanding.  It helped me to understand African religions.  It helped me to understand W.E.B. DuBois.  It was all based on W.E.B. DuBois's understanding of Pan-Africanism.  That was the basic premise of the Institute for Pan-African study. I did straight A work over there.  I hung out with folklore, people who did folklore who were from Ghana and from the Caribbean.  There were people at the Institute from all over the world who were from diaspora, the black diaspora, and they would do poetry and they would have singing and, you know, introduction of Pan African studies and it just opened my world in some ways I needed to have opened.  I almost got another degree in Pan African studies, but as I hung out over there so much, there and of course, at the bar for the dance, the dance bar.  And I did television work there.  We had a TV studio there and I had a TV program called 'Reflection,' where I interviewed the professors and the students and it's called 'Reflection' and everybody seemed to like it.  It was on cable throughout the campus and I actually got a bit of a reputation on that.  Then, I was recruited to run for the Miss America pageant there.  I was the first runner-up in the Miss America preliminary pageant there, Miss Portage County.  I was the first runner-up, but anyway, it was fun.  They helped me pay for some books.  So, that was kind of fun.
Speaker 1: So, you were really kind of on your own at that time?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was great.  It was just tremendous.  Fly my own wings.  It was great.
Story_ID: 64780
Speaker 1: So, then you graduate, and then what are your thoughts at that point.
Speaker 2: Well, it's probably important to say, at this point, that I had met my present, now who is my husband [R. Drew Smith], when I was sixteen years old.  Okay.  That was--our church went to visit his church.  No, his pastor and my dad [Roosevelt B. Walker] had gone to that Bible college back in Cedarville [Ohio] together, and so our church went over to visit his church here in Indianapolis [Indiana]. And it was Youth Day, here in Indianapolis at the other pastor's church and my husband [R. Drew Smith], well--now my husband's father was the associate pastor at that church and so we met and we started writing to each other and he would come visit me from time to time.  Now, my dad was totally upset, naturally.  Totally opposed, in fact that was part of why we fell out, you know, 'cause of that.  But, anyway, we developed a friendship and then we started to date each other and we were dating other people in college, but we were really dating each other as well and were becoming closer and closer.  He became my best friend.  It was really great.  Well, by the time I was a junior, my professor of religion had said I should consider doing graduate work and not just do the journalist piece, but I should continue to do religious stuff, anyway, so we had that conversation.  My husband, who then was my boyfriend then, had been accepted at Yale University Divinity School [New Haven, Connecticut].  He had been at Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana] and so he was a year ahead of me in school.  He's two years ahead in age but one year ahead in school, and he had gone to Yale for his divinity degree.  He had been recommended by the chaplain down--the campus minister at Indiana University who was a graduate of Yale as well.  So he had gone up there and so he invited me to come visit him up at Yale at the Divinity School at the university there.  I said, "Sure, why not?" You know, so I went up there and it was great.  I had thought I might go to some Pacific School of Religion [Berkeley, California] because I'd been wrestling with this sense of vocation in ministry.  I didn't know what that was like.  I thought it was maybe missionary work.  I thought maybe I could integrate my drama work and dance work with religion, you know, any other way but the way that I ended up doing.  I met this white Methodist minister who told me they ordained women which was unthinkable back in that day.  I mean I never even thought that was even you could think about, but he said they had been ordaining women for a long time and you know something to be aware of.  So, anyway, I really worked through all of that.  It was a painful thing.  I felt guilty 'cause, you know, even to think about that as a possibility and so by the time my junior year had finished and I worked at the Urban League that summer in communications which was great fun, came back that fall and had to make some decision, and that's when now my husband invited me to come up there and he proposed marriage in April of my senior year and I said, yes, and I ended up going up to Yale instead of going out to the Pacific School of Religion.
Speaker 1: So, then, what was life back then?  Did you--then were you mainly a housewife?  How was that?  He's a student--
Speaker 2: No, we're both students.
Speaker 1: You're both students!
Speaker 2: Oh, no, that's what I was saying.  Yeah, I decided not to go to the Pacific Schoo--see, I was going to go for graduate studies at the Pacific School of Religion.  I debated between that and working at a CBS--a CBS [Columbia Broadcasting System] affiliate wanted me to come work for them as an intern in Dayton, Ohio, and then a Christian broadcasting station wanted me to come and work for them.  I was being recruited in three places, but then after I went to visit my husband at Yale Divinity School, I was kind of convinced that, you know, this, this is very interesting.  And then, he asked me to marry him; so I was trying to reconcile how was I going to pursue the marriage and pursue my vocation and the only way I could really bring it together was to go to Yale Divinity School; so I applied there.  I was accepted and we were graduate students together--
Story_ID: 64781
Speaker 1: So how was that experience?  Then being first married and then students together?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I graduated in '80 [1980], May of '80.  Was it May?  Yeah, May of '80 and I worked again all summer.  We got married in August and then we took our little used cars and trekked on off to Connecticut together, married student housing.  He had already completed a year; so he was a year ahead of me. So this was my incoming year, but it was terrific.  It was great.  I mean, I graduated, got married and started graduate school all the same year.  It was a big year.  It was a banner year, but, yeah, it was great.  Yes, it was great. I was one of the few woman--well, back in the day, this is back in 1980 you understand, I was in that kind of first pioneering class of African American women who were doing seminary at that point on the East Coast in going to Ivy League schools and places like that. And I was even more unusual because I was married. And the women that were going, most of them were not married, but I was married and starting.  So, that part was different.  There was one other--only one other African American woman in my incoming class, Marcia Riggs, and she went on to do Ph.D. work and she's teaching in the academy now.  But, it was great.
Speaker 1: What were your thoughts of you--What life did you and your husband [R. Drew Smith] envision for yourself?
Speaker 2: We've always been very mission driven.  Very committed to marginalized communities, poor communities, always have had a heart for, if you will, the brokenness of our world.  Always, have always had a heart for Africa and mission work.  We're both pretty evangelical in our theological framework.  We've always felt Christ was the answer.  We went to evangelical conferences and things like that; so he and I have been kindred spirits.  We grew up in very similar homes: his father was also a minister, his mother, first lady, one of three children.  Some people say our marriage was arranged because we have very similar backgrounds, but you know, it's been great.  We were married twenty years this year.
Speaker 1: Do you have children?
Speaker 2: Just the one.
Speaker 1: So, he finished a year before you did?
Speaker 2: No, that's not true.  What happened was (laugh)--one would assume that, I suppose, but that's not what happened.  What happened was, he caught--I caught up with him because he took an intern year and we went to New York and did ministry, and while he did an internship that year, I continued my studies in an inter-seminary program in New York City [New York] which is where I got to meet people like Jim Cone [James H. Cone], black theologian, and Jim Forbes [James Forbes] and some other big name people in religion, because they were teaching at Union Theological Seminary. And Union was a part of an inter-seminary program with Yale in New York, so I got exposed to some of the, I think, some of the brightest  minds that were on the scene at that time in black religion.  Jim Washington [James Melvin Washington], the great black historian, was there.  Cornel West was there.  That's where I met Cornel.  All those types of people, but, no, it was a great time.  At least you have a warning system.  This was when--I don't know if you know James Cone, but he's known for black theology of the oppressed.  He was really taking on the academy around reformation of basically classical theological thought in saying the oppression of black folk matters and we ought to look at things not only theoretically and theologically but contextually in terms of people's experiences.  But, anyway, but yeah, Jim Cone, Jim Washington, Cornel West, Jim Forbes, I mean, and then a lot of the African Americans that were in my classes at that time had gone on to be very preeminent scholars all over the country, even the world.
Speaker 1: So, let's talk about who some of those are.
Speaker 2: Well, some of them were the ones that I've just named.  For example, some great ones, there's--who else that came through there?  Alan (unclear) came through there and studied at one point.  There are a lot of different names.  I don't know if people will recognize them if they're not in the discipline, but there are a lot of different names.  George Cummings [George C.L. Cummings] another one, Dwight Hopkins [Dwight N. Hopkins], Josiah Young [Josiah U. Young], Katie Cannon [Katie G. Cannon], Jacquelyn Grant, Sue J. Johnson.  Who else would be another one?  All of them.  I mean, doing woman as thought, now doing black theological thought.  Cornel West is probably the most omnipotent name that people would know at this time.  When I went back to Yale, Skip Gates [Henry Louis Gates] was up at Yale at that time in the literature department where Skip is known now for a lot of the things with NPR [National Public Radio] and so forth, I mean with PBS [Public Broadcasting Service] and so forth, but they were all there.  John Blassingame [John W. Blassingame], head of the black studies [African American Studies Program] there at Yale.  He was there at that time.  He's now passed the past couple years ago, but all of these types of people were in our orbit when we were going to school.
Story_ID: 64782
Speaker 1: And, what was important about this movement at that time, the challenge to the traditional thought?  What's important from a historical standpoint?
Speaker 2: What's important about that time in my life, or what's important about--
Speaker 1: This movement. The people.  You said there was a challenge to traditional thinking.
Speaker 2: What was important about that?  Well, what was important about it was really where you had all these bright minds who were seeking of critique of classical orientation to the academy at that time. And you had these, I mean we were very young, much younger then, who were asking very hard questions and there were questions being asked not because we wanted to pursue so much our intellect but we were pursuing our heart.  You had incredible debates between African American women and white women, for example.  White women were asking the questions of feminism.  Black women weren't asking questions of feminism.  We were still asking the issue of race and so African American women, at that time, when we were kind of like pioneers in the academy at that time, they were saying, "Well you know, that black men aren't treating you right and there's all this subjugation in the black church and all this sort of thing, how can you put up with that?"  This was at the time, you have to understand, white women had already, they were being ordained for, what, at least ten, twenty years in the Methodists and the Lutherans and all of them; so they had older women already ahead of them that had been pastoring.  We didn't have that kind of benefit and we weren't asking those kinds of questions.  We still felt a kinship to people like my father [Roosevelt B. Walker] who were our pastors.  See, I mean, see, they were talking theoretically about women's issues or feminist issues.  For us, when you're talking about me, you're talking about our brothers, you're talking about our fathers, you're talking about our husbands.  It was very personal, and we never--at that point, black women were very much resisting being incorporated to white feminist thinking.  In fact, there was a basic chasm there more so than it was with our black brothers, because when we looked at them, although we knew, okay, supposedly we were subjugated in the black church, these were our brothers, our fathers and we knew how to handle that.  So, there was a major debate between black women and white women during that time.  With our brothers, you know, we would joke around more with them and we would talk about it, but it was interesting to see how African American men, at that time, who were in the academy were really saying, "It's important for African American women to be in these positions to be talking about leadership in the church." It was very interesting because when we graduated, many of my sisters who graduated in '83 [1983] from Union [Theological Seminary, New York, New York] and Yale [University Divinity School, New Haven, Connecticut] and Harvard [Divinity School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Princeton [Theological Seminary, Princeton, New Jersey]--Renita Weems [Renita J. Weems] is another one.  Renita was down in New Jersey, at the time, at Princeton.  But, anyway, by the time we had graduated, at least on the East Coast, I can't speak about Ohio and Indiana, but certainly on the East Coast, it became vogue to get African American women as your associate minister or your executive minister at some of the steeple churches like with Wyatt Tee Walker and Convent Avenue [Convent Avenue Baptist Church, Harlem, New York] which was where I was ordained and churches of that quote "steeple capacity." We were there, we would work hard, we were educated, we were committed, and it became vogue to bring us in as associates and executives of the churches.
Story_ID: 64124
Speaker 1: --recognized through ordination.  And it was he who made that happen basically. He said he saw the gifts that I had and convened the council for me to do my trial sermon.  Unfortunately, Dr. Wilson [Mannie L. Wilson] passed that following year and his successor, Reverend Clarence Grant [Clarence P. Grant], who was the associate pastor was actually the one that ended up ordaining me because it was the wish of Dr. Wilson who had started the process along. So the fall after I graduated from Yale [Yale University Divinity School, New Haven, Connecticut], in November, November 20 [1984], I was ordained at Convent Avenue Baptist Church [Harlem, New York, N.Y.].
Speaker 2: So, Dr. Wilson was a very important part of your life--
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, very special.  I mean, it's important to remember, and I tell women this today, there's no way that St. John--in the church I grew up in and accepted Christ at age nine, would have a ordained me. There's no way that would have happened.  But, at that point in my life, I didn't even desire that to happen.  I mean, I think it's important to say for me, and every woman's story is different, I was not ever seeking to be a leader or seeking to be a minister or to--I was not impressed with that for myself.  I was impressed by my father [Roosevelt B. Walker] doing that and men doing that.  So, you know, along my path it became evident from other people in my life that the gifts were there to exercise ordained ministry, but that's not something that I was--even when I was at Yale Divinity School, I was not actively pursuing that.  Those were gifts that were identified along the way and, for whatever the reason, the Lord made these things to happen and Dr. Wilson became the person who saw the gift and I was ordained.  But, as I think about it now, I know that St. John would have never have done that, and you know, while I was at Yale Divinity School, the Methodists tried to recruit me to be--the United Methodist wanted to be a pastor in their church.  Some other denominations came to me and asked me to do that.  I never felt that I could ever give up my Baptist heritage.  That's not something that was ever an option for me at that point. And as it turned out, it was my own community of faith that saw my gifts and ordained me and I was in the ministry.
Speaker 2: So, what gifts are we talking about?
Speaker 1: I think for Dr. Wilson it was very clear.  Dr. Wilson, very special man, he was an elder statesman in New York.  He had been at Convent Avenue.  Convent Avenue has a membership of about four or five thousand.  It's one of the steeple churches.  It's down the street from where Adam Clayton Powell was. Abyssinian. It's right down the street from Abyssinian [Abyssinian Baptist Church, New York, N.Y.].  It's literally like blocks, just blocks.  They were contemporaries of the church that I was at.  You know, we would go to Abyssinian for some things and support and everything. And Dr. Wilson and Adam Clayton Powell were contemporaries, but I think where Dr. Wilson--he was an unusual man, he was a pastor's pastor.  He loved the people.  He loved students.  You know, not all pastors really are into this mentoring role of students, but Dr. Wilson loved the people.  He loved Convent.  It was a love affair for he and his wife.  It wasn't just being the pastor of Convent Avenue, this mega kind of church back in the day, it was really a love affair for Christ.  I mean, he loved the people and he acted out of that love of the people and the people knew that and I think that's why the church prospered as it did.  There were three services.  This is back in 1980.  There were three services, the eight o'clock, eleven o'clock and a six o'clock and a youth church every Sunday. This is every Sunday, and I exercised most of my ministry with the youth church, the children's church and the youth church, but I also started a ministry there on media, which was revolutionary back in 1981.  I created a lay team of a taped ministry and also of how people could learn more to use technology back in that time coming out of the journalism program.  In fact, I created a lay ministry of about twenty people and that ministry is still going on after all these years, but it was with that, working with the youth church. I also think that Dr. Wilson had a lot of respect for my husband [R. Drew Smith] and my marriage and marriage was really an important ingredient of Christian leadership for Dr. Wilson and he saw where I was willing to work with my husband in the church as well as do the things that I was doing as my own ministry.  I was able to couple it as well as work individually.  I think Dr. Wilson really respected that.  He would go as far as to say, even from the pulpit, "Well we have Mr. Smith and his good wife, Angelique Walker-Smith."  That's the way he would often introduce us, "his good wife," and, you know, for Dr. Wilson coming out a very traditional school that was a real compliment.  I really heard that and you know the whole thing with my own marriage thing with my parents and all that, you know that that was being affirmed and that was being expressed in a very positive way of testimony and the church meant a lot to me.  But, he saw those gifts and he nurtured those things and always was supportive of us and would call us into the office. And I remember, he, actually, let me preach one time in the--was it the eleven o'clock?  No it was the eight o'clock, it wasn't the eleven o'clock, it was the eight o'clock service that I was allowed to preach even before I was licensed.  You know, he observed and would point things out to me and he told me one day, "You know, you possess the gifts for leadership in the ordination in the Baptist church."  He told me that one day, I remember, in his conference room.
Story_ID: 64125
Speaker 1: Why did you--why do you say that Baptist theology, that that was what you were, you know, you preferred--was it because that's what you had grown up with or was it because, you know, after looking at all the other religions, you know, the other religions that practice Christian faith that that's what you came sort of back home?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, it's very interesting because even as a young child I always knew that my Christian faith was faith greater than being Baptist.  I always had this, and in fact, I kind of went against the grain with my dad [Roosevelt B. Walker] about that.  I mean, I do ecumenical work now or evangelical work with a lot of different types of churches and I've known since I was very young I was different that way; so I didn't have a problem once I got to Yale [Yale University Divinity School, New Haven, Connecticut] and understood that this is how different denominations define themselves, their confessions, and their doctrines and all that. That's where I really got a handle on all of that; so I didn't have a problem with that knowing that there's a diversity within the Christian faith and that there are other religions.  I really didn't have--when I was in religion and philosophy, that was not a problem for me, but me, myself, my personal testimony, I knew had to be loyal, really loyal to my upbringing.  It's been the African American Baptist church that has kept me sane.  The codification of my faith that has kept me, I think, together along the way.  It means something for me, for example, to sing 'Amazing Grace' or, you know, there are things that affect me when I'm in my own setting that I don't get affected in other ways.  It reaches to the inner-most self of who I am and I couldn't see myself leaving my commitment there to be with others, but I wanted to be with others and my calling is an ecumenical or a diverse community, but I can't leave home.  People like Howard Thurman I think are a little more eloquent than I am about that.  Howard Thurman talks about everyone has to have a home before they're able to go to other people's home.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's interesting.  So, you--that's where you got ordained and then what was next?
Speaker 2: I became an associate pastor at a Baptist church in Hartford, Connecticut, Central Baptist Church and it was an endowed church.  It was a mixed church and there were Caribbean, folks from the Caribbean, from Vietnam, from India, from Europe.  There was a Latino Hispanic church congregation there.  It was truly the rainbow and it was an endowed parish.  They had endowment from years ago and I was over three endowments at this parish as the minister of Christian education and outreach. And they had the (unclear) fund, the Clark fund and there was some other little fund, or whatever it is and what I was able to do was to be able to use resources and to advance ministry and to promote a pluralist understanding of different walks of life there at the congregation.
Speaker 1: What does that mean?
Speaker 2: Well, what that meant--I'll tell you what that meant at that time.  At that time, it meant being able to--let's put it this way, when I was at Central Baptist Church [Hartford, Connecticut], I was able to understand better the challenges of racism along my life preparing me to minister in that congregation.  I could see things in the systems, in the structure of this endowed congregation that were preventing the equity of groups of people in that congregation. And I was given resources, and I was given support to help break down those walls. And I think because of my upbringing I was able to see some things and work with groups that had not normally worked together.  One of the biggest successes, I think, of my ministry, for example was being able to work with not only the mixed congregation but the Latino Hispanic congregation.  I didn't speak Spanish but that was all right because I was accepted there and I learned some basic things and we're able to couple a youth program--we brought the youth from the Hispanic church and the mixed church together and we raised monies over two years for them to go and work on a work mission project in Puerto Rico in a rural community. And something behind that changed the equity issue in that community of faith and there was more dialogue between the two.
Story_ID: 64126
Speaker 1: Now, when you say an endowed church, what does that mean?
Speaker 2: That means they have monies that were put away in investments that matured with interest and they had like four of those endowments, foundations.  It was a very wealthy congregation.
Speaker 1: But it was a congregation that was diverse, sounded like there were two--people at different church services.
Speaker 2: There were.  There was a mixed congregation.  It was made up of whites, from Europe, whites from United States, there were Vietnamese, people from Asia, Vietnam, India--Vietnam, India, China.  There were a few congregations--few people, congregants from China and Caribbean.  Most of the blacks in that congregation were from Caribbean, mostly Jamaica, but there also were African Americans in there too and there were a few Africans in there also.  It was a truly rainbow congregation, but then there was another congregation and the whites like to refer to that congregation as the 'Spanish-speaking congregation,' but they referred to themselves as the 'Hispanic congregation.'  They didn't want to just be defined around language.  They were Hispanic people and so there were--there were two congregations meeting in the same place. And the Hispanic congregation was seen as the mission church of the other church. And I was there the period of time when they thought by bringing me on I could help bring about some better understanding between the two and I tried to do that and work with the neighborhood, 'cause a lot of people commuted into this downtown congregation, but I really hit the streets and worked with the things that were a bit different for that church.
Speaker 1: Like what?
Speaker 2: Well, the evangelism piece, as I said.  I worked with a discipleship team.  I created a discipleship team of education that said that education should be something more than educating the people in the congregation.  You really should reach out to especially young people and children in the neighborhood and so I actually went to discipleship group of about fifteen people from my education department and trained them to be able to hit the street and go down and knock on doors and let the families know that were primarily Hispanic and African American in that neighborhood--to let them know that they were invited to come to this congregation and visit.  My youth groups swelled from twenty to sixty by the time I had left and the majority had been from these disciples--this discipleship team I trained and went out to that neighborhood. And then if you added the Hispanic youth who then were also starting to meet with us by the time I left it was about a hundred.
Speaker 1: Where was husband at this time?
Speaker 2: Oh, my husband [R. Drew Smith] had gone back to Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] to get his Ph.D. in political science.  Now, before he did that, he was a deputy director at Operation Crossroads Africa.  I forgot to tell you that.  Also, while I was at Central Baptist [Central Baptist Church, Hartford, Connecticut] every summer, my husband and I were in mission work in Africa.  The first summer, '83, after I came out of Yale I went to Sudan and lived in the desert and lived in the village in Sudan in the north and rode camels and--anyway, lived behind the veil with women because they accepted me 'cause I was married and learned something about Sudanese women in Islamic culture.
Story_ID: 64127
Speaker 1: What did you learn?
Speaker 2: Oh.  I learned how to be humble with my faith--I left Yale [Yale University Divinity School, New Haven, Connecticut] with all this zeal for Christ and excited and all this and then I was thrown to an Islamic situation in the north and in the Sudan and I was totally dependent on the hospitality of the Muslims in the north and it was great.  It transformed my life.  We would stay up late at night talking about "Why are you a Christian?" and I'd ask them, "Why are you a Muslim?" and we would talk, I mean, philosophically about all kind of incredible issues about why Islam was important to them, the discipline of Islam.  It really boiled down to, "What is the discipline of your Christian faith?"  I mean, every day when I was in the north in the Sudan that summer, five times a day, everybody stopped, everybody stopped to pray and is it--do you do that as a Christian? You know, does your society in the United States pray on a disciplined basis every day?  I was faced with those kinds of questions about my faith, and I too, asked them about their politics and so forth, but that was very valuable.  I rode a train from Khartoum to Al Fasher two hundred miles, about two hundred miles inland from Chad, from the border of Chad because you know, Sudan is the largest African country on the continent surrounded by nine neighboring countries and Chad is the farthest west neighboring country; so it's two hundred miles inward from there.  And it--I was so far out west in the desert, the Sahara Desert, there weren't any vehicles, you had to ride camels out there, but the point is here, I had to take a train from Khartoum to Fasher which is the Darfur region out in the west, seven days, six nights on this old English train built in 1943 that broke down four times and we were totally dependent on the villagers to take us in and give us tea and to feed us and take care of us. And we went all the way out there; so I was totally at the mercies of my Sudanese host, and it didn't matter that they were Christian or Muslim.  What mattered is that they cared.  And when I got out to the west and lived in that village in that community and worked with all the Sudanese people and saw how the women lived behind--I call it, quote, behind the veil and went to the rituals for women and was allowed at sacred places that a lot of people are never invited to, I just really learned to be very, very humble about my faith and to be tempered about my zeal and it really increased my faith.  It didn't change my faith, it increased my faith; so that was in the Sudan.  Then, the next summer, my husband [R. Drew Smith] and I co-lead a group to a village in Sierra Leone, Mabuve (ph.) village about forty minutes outside of Freetown, the capital.  Then, the next summer I was in--was with [Operation] Crossroads Africa again in the mountain kingdom of Lesotho in South Africa. But anyway, so now I've lived in three different African countries and traveled to twenty one, because I've traveled to some other places in the world since then.
Speaker 1: Did you see there, or have you viewed that there's an equality among religions?
Speaker 2: Is there inequality?
Speaker 1: Equality?
Speaker 2: Is there an equality? Well, I think they're universal truths in the various, at least in the great, in the monotheistic religions.  I would also say in some of the polytheistic religions but I would have to be careful there about the ones that I would define, because I understand that there are many expressions of religiosity, but certainly with the monotheistic, the, quote, great monotheistic religions, I think you can find clear streams of universal truths and I think in many of, quote, the larger, more recognized polytheistic religions you'll find universal truths. But for me, the defining line for me personally is "Is Jesus Christ your Lord and Savior?" And that's where I become very evangelical.  But, I think in terms if you are talking about morals, talk about universal moral claims, it's clear.  I mean all your philosophy and religion scholars and so forth find those very easily.
Story_ID: 64128
Speaker 1: And, so you did that over three summers.  Now, how did you end up coming Indianapolis [Indiana]?
Speaker 2: I followed my husband [R. Drew Smith] here.  I was--well, after I finished my associate pastor, I became the full time executive director of the Council of Churches in Trenton, New Jersey, and then I got to a point where I was really thinking--let me do some more reflection here, so I went to Princeton Theological Seminary [Princeton, New Jersey] and did a doctor of ministry program. And I was like two years into the program and my husband had graduated from Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] by then and his alma mater Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana] asked him to come back and teach down at Bloomington. And I was just at that point where it was either I had to withdraw from my vocation or not complete the program.  I mean, it just wasn't working for me.  It worked for some other students who were in steeple parishes who had congregations that would allow them the time off and so forth, but I wasn't in that situation.  I was in a specialized ministry, ecumenical work.  I was the executive, which was me.  I was the main person in the office and I was doing national things for the national Baptists and I got involved in-- a lot of things happened. I got involved in the anti-apartheid movement. I did my journalism.  So much was going on.  Something had to give. And I had to come to a very difficult decision of saying, I need to go back to the academy and finish this degree.  So, by the time he was willing or interested to come back to his alma mater to teach, I was prepared to make that difficult decision of focusing in on my studies. And so I came back to Indiana with him to Bloomington.  And I spent a lot of time at the law library doing my, getting my exams completed and getting to the program.
Speaker 1: Then so, what year was this?
Speaker 2: Now, I left Trenton--I was in Trenton.  He left in '90 [1990].  I left in December of '90.  He had already completed a semester at IU by the time I moved out here into Bloomington.
Speaker 1: Well, describe these last ten years then.
Speaker 2: It's 1990.  You're talking about 1990, since to now.  Well, it was curious. The most important--one of the most important accomplishments for me was getting my doctor of ministry from Princeton.  That was really important.  It wasn't so important because, you know, it was Princeton and, yeah, I was the first African American to get the doctor of ministry from there.  That was not the important--I needed to have a deeper, more substantive critical lens on my ministry.  I really valued that.  I was finding myself being invited to a lot of things, to do a lot of things and not having as critical a structure to evaluate which directions I should be pulled into or not. And what that program allowed me to do was to have a self-critical analysis of myself, my ministry and of a lot of institutions out here, to ask really hard questions so that I could be more in the driver's seat as I reflected in prayer what it is my ministry was to be about. So for me that was really important to complete that program.  Meanwhile, I did some things here in Indianapolis that were very important, not least of which is become an assistant chaplain at the Indiana Women's Prison [Indianapolis, Indiana], working with women on Death Row, administrative segregation and disciplinary.  I've done that for ten years now.  My doctoral work looked at how these women re-enter society through a faith community and how they're received or welcomed or not.  That's what my doctoral work did, and I thought that was important to do. And that's been a very important part of my journey is being with those women.  To this day, I'm there with them every Sunday morning before I go to a church in the federation [Church Federation of Greater Indianapolis].  I'm ministering to them and with them.  Another important part, I suppose, has been my ecumenical work where I serve as the executive director, part of my calling, and my journalistic work with television and some other things.  I have a column in the [Indianapolis] Star news, comes out quarterly and some other things on the side.
Speaker 1: Now, your husband, is he teaching still?
Speaker 2: My husband taught at Indiana University from 1990 to 1994, '93 [1993].  I can't remember.  It's '93, '94, three or four years and then he moved over to Butler [Butler University, Indianapolis, Indiana] and was teaching at Butler for three to four years.  He moved here and now, he's at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] as a scholar in residence where he's doing research and he has several funded projects by foundations to do some major research and writing which is what he really enjoys.  The good news is he can do that from here or anyplace else in the world he wants to do it at because he's a scholar in residence, he's a researcher.  He doesn't have to be in the classroom right now.
Speaker 1: So, he doesn't have to be in Atlanta?
Speaker 2: No, he lives here.
Story_ID: 64129
Speaker 1: Tell me about your work with women on Death Row, prisoners.  What good do you think you can do at that point?
Speaker 2: I think the only good I can do is to be faithful, that is to be there.  I think that's--it's not that I have any special insight on Scripture, although I've had to study that.  It's not that I've had any special insight on family life or counseling.  What's important in prison ministry is the women can depend on you to be there.  If I've made any difference at all, it's been that when I say I'm going to be there, I'm there.  If I say I'm going to do something, I do it.  I think that incremental faithfulness is the only thing that really makes the difference in the end.  I mean, they're very clear that I'm for Christ.  They know that--about the Bible is authoritative, I mean, all of those things. But in the end, I think it's that they know that on Sunday morning Angelique's going to show up here and we're going to pray together.  We're going to talk together.  We can be open and going to look at Scripture together and I'm not going to judge them.  I think that's what matters in the end.  Just faithfulness, simple faithfulness.
Speaker 1: Do you sometimes wish you could have gotten to them sooner?
Speaker 2: No, because the church has gotten to--unlike the stereotype, many women in prison do know the church.  Their grandmothers have told them about the church; so some of them had to go to church.  That's unlike the stereotype; so they know the church.  When I go to the [Indiana] Women's Prison [Indianapolis, Indiana] and I ask them to do the Lord's Prayer, many of them know the Lord's Prayer.  You ask them if they--you ask them about a church--the problem is many of them have had bad experiences in the church.  Many of them have been judged for what oftentimes is abusive situations or I mean just the whole systemic pieces of why they're there.  I mean, the majority of these women have used drugs, have abused drugs, have been abused most of their lives, either by their family members--I mean, I'm not trying to just feed a liberal line here but the situations of these women are really often times very extreme and they've been exposed to the church and that's why I wanted to do my doctoral work on how it is that religious community or Christian community is hospitable to these women, because a lot of their experiences has been inhospitable, unwelcoming, and the church hasn't been able to change its culture to poor, marginalized, abused people. And sometimes that's around race issues.  Sometimes that's around gender issues. And I was trying to figure out what is the culture of church that offends and doesn't welcome the stranger.
Speaker 1: Did you figure it out at any point?
Speaker 2: Sort of.  Every case is very particular but I think there are some very fundamental things that institutional churches can do, and one of them is just to get out of the sanctuary and hit the streets and live with people in their homes.  I mean, I think that that's just one of the fundamental things the churches can do.  There are a lot of different things.  I looked at six case studies and ended up focusing on three.  I looked at a Roman Catholic church, a black Pentecostal church and an African American Baptist church; so my study was very focused on particular cases and that was one of the learnings--is that you have to take particular cases for what it is they show you. And then you'll find some common streams, but one of them clearly is, I think the institutional church has difficulty of acculturating itself to a particular marginalized groups.
Story_ID: 64130
Speaker 1: Well let's talk about the blak, the role of the black church in the black community and what--if you have any views on how it has historically been and what you think needs to be addressed.
Speaker 2: Well, I'm afraid you'll find me to be quite a loyalist here.  I think the African American church has been the stabilizing institution at least in this country. And I think a lot of our future is based on the African American church being able to not only keep its traditional presence but also to have an even more relevant presence to the poor, our own folk, our own marginalized African American poor.  As I work with women who are in prison, as I've done street ministry in the neighborhoods and worked with welfare mothers and a lot of other things--again, I find that they are finding it more difficult to reach out to the more traditional expressions of the Christian faith.  I think that's one of the reasons why you're seeing a growth of mega-churches or more evangelical churches that a lot of them are getting out more now in trying to reach out.  When I say reach out, I don't think this means a reduction or any kind of minimizing of discipline in the faith.  I think, in fact, discipline of the faith is actually an attraction, particularly as I work with women in prison.  I mean, when I talk with them, they want to know very clearly what are the boundaries?  What are the expectations?  That's an attraction because a lot of them have found where they have worked beyond the boundaries; so contrary to I think more liberal thought about that, I think that you're more evangelical structured communities actually find themselves disposed toward more of these communities which is why you find, I think, a lot of poor groups in Pentecostal churches, charismatic churches, if you will, more Biblically literal churches as opposed to the  more liberal churches because the boundaries are defined.
Speaker 1: But then, let me ask you this.  If the black community has been so committed to the church, which they have, it's probably our most predominant institution, then why is that same community so bereft of prosperity or--
Speaker 2: Why the community is so bereft of prosperity?
Speaker 1: Why, if this same community that dedicates a lot of its time and energy with people either tithing or going--you know, spending time and money there and in many cases worshipping the pastor and I speak specifically of the Baptist church in which that is really hallmark--why is that same--why is that community not prosperous in its, in any way, shape or fashion?
Speaker 2: Well, see, I think again that gets to the complicated nature of living in the United States.  I mean, the African American church cannot be everything to all people and I think for us to have the assumption that it can is where we often times get disappointed.  See, the African American community I think has to understand that, yes, the African American church can offer certain things but the problems that African American community are suffering from are more systemic than that.  I mean, there's still the structural barriers that are out here that are being, that are still very much with us in the African American community and I don't know that the African American church can be there for all of those things.  I mean, the role of a worshipping community is to be hospitable.  It is to nurture.  It is to pastor.  It is to speak prophetically to issues and concerns, but I don't think that we can say that's where we can always spend all of our time to meet all the social ills and problems.  I mean, we need African Americans in leadership in the sciences.  African Americans in leadership in politics.  African Americans who are millionaires.  We need leadership across the board and the old assumptions that the pastor and the deacons and the deaconess can play the roles of, if you will, during the time of segregation where the black church community almost had to be all these different things.  I think those days are passe.  We now live in a globalized, multifaceted society and we have simply got to be more realistic about what it takes to live in a globalized, multi-tiered society.  We need leadership at every single level and until the African American church is able to embrace that as widely as possible, the people suffer, the people suffer. So I think we need a re-tooling and a more critical understanding of what the role of the  church is versus what its role is relationship to a more moral society of where we live.
Speaker 1: And, how do you propose that be done, because you are talking about something that's also generational.  This is not how your father [Roosevelt B. Walker] would have viewed things.
Speaker 2: Well, that's right.  It is another generational perspective.  I think that's right but I also think we do have people of the older generation who understood that early on.  I mean, someone like Dr. Wilson [Mannie L. Wilson], for example, Convent Avenue Baptist Church [Harlem, New York, N.Y.].  Convent Avenue, back in 1980, I mean, it's been twenty years now, three, four thousand at that one, there's more now, understood that it took the middle class, the upper middle class, the lower class, lawyers, doctors, all of them to have a role in what that ministry was to become.  You know, Dr. Wilson was a pastor.  He wasn't an architect, he wasn't an astronaut.  He was a pastor and he had an ability to be able to work with different vocations and professions of people in that congregation and to make use of them for the benefit of the community.  And that's, I think, that's what we need.  We need more of this kind of coordination and more of this facilitation for people to use their gifts for not only the church but for the community.  If we try to hoard it all into just this parochial place, I think we lose out.
Speaker 1: So, you are essentially, a new voice.  I mean, this is not the Baptist, the Baptist, the National Baptist--I mean, how is this voice even being heard?  I mean, everyone heard, whatever it was a year ago, two years ago, all the scandal and frankly, it took a long time for the church, whatever, the leadership--I mean, they ignored it.
Speaker 2: Well, is your question about the convention now or is it about the new voice?  Your question, is it about the new voice or about the convention?  (Laughter)  I mean, I'll answer either one but which one?
Speaker 1: I'm not sure.  I guess I have a question about the convention.  I mean--
Speaker 2: Okay, now the convention.  Well, I mean, its--I think anyone who's grown up in the African American Baptist church knows the sense of loyalty of the people.  Very, very loyal people, and it is not just so much a loyalty to the leadership, it's a loyalty to the tradition and to the legacy of, in this case, the National Baptist Convention U.S.A. Incorporated.  Now, of course as you well know, we now have a new president, Dr. William Shaw [William J. Shaw], who's coming out of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], who's very much trying to reclaim the tradition and the history and posterity of the convention and is speaking out in some very helpful ways at this point in our leadership.
Speaker 1: I shouldn't do this. (Laughs) Okay, let me ask you, what do you think will be the most important role of the church to play going forward in the black community?
Speaker 2: I think the most important role it can play is to be a, if you will, a stabilizing force in the community.  Now, that's pretty generic and so forth, but what I mean by that specifically is not to just live inside of its sanctuary, but to be a sanctuary outside of the walls of the church: sanctuary from within and sanctuary from without.  And, I think if the church is not able to do that, not only does the church lose, but the people lose and I think the African American church has to be at the vanguard of being sanctuary within and sanctuary without. And we have to have a clear balance of being able to do both. And that's ambitious, but I think we have no choice.
Speaker 1: And, what do you see the role--I mean, you said, you're a popular type of minister.  When I say you use the popular media for your ministry and what--and some people might look askance at that though, you know, most churches try to if they can have a TV or radio program. So what, I mean, what does, you know--you work with Odyssey Network and, you know, other things.  You have the column in the Star [Indianapolis Star, Indianapolis, Indiana].  What does that represent to you?
Speaker 2: Well, you're quite right.  I mean, some do look askance at that.  I mean, they see it as kind of a compromise to the tradition.  You know, you're using a medium that has not been as well known particularly in certain settings or that it is seen as secular versus sacred.  You're quite right. But there are others who view it as also an opportunity to educate and to bridge build the walls between those who are within the church and outside of the church.  That's where I come out at it.  I see it as a bridge building tool between the secular and sacred and it comes again out of my evangelical heart that says the church must be present or sanctuary outside of the wall.  I mean, for me, as I look at Jesus's life, Jesus didn't spend a lot of time in a synagogue or the temple in his adult life. He did as a child, but not as an adult.  He was out with the people who were basically the disenfranchised in the community and to me that's very evangelical, and that's where I think a church ought to be. So to be able to use the media, to be able to go visit women who were in prison, to hit the streets, to embrace those who are not, quote the most embraceable in this society, I think that's where Jesus would want us to be and I think he would want us to make use of the tools and the talents that we have to bridge build the worlds between the sacred and the secular. And so for me, I think it's a wonderful opportunity to get the word out for Christ and to get the word out about our faith. So for me, it works.
Story_ID: 64131
Speaker 1: What, what do you want to do from this point on with your ministry?
Speaker 2: Well, I'd like to do more with the media. I enjoy if very much. I think there are some creative forms that my media piece can take. I would like to see a more--a careful integration between my global learning and my ecumenical work--and the secular and sacred communities coming together. I suppose I would like to see--now that I have a little girl, I'd like to be able to be a real mentor to her. She's very special. To really be there for her as a mother, I mean, that's integral to my future, is being there to mother her. And you know, my marriage, you know, I'm pretty traditional in that way. So I think those are some of the things. Vocationally, it's not that I've reached a plateau, but it's not like I have to have certain accomplishments. I've been very blessed to have travelled around the world, lived in other places, serve in ministry, meet some of the great leaders of the church, work with people like Doctor Billy Graham and Archbishop [Desmond] Tutu. I mean I've really been able to engage conversation and ministry with some of the people I respect the most in ministry. I study with some of the best. But also, I've been able to serve.  And to be able just to continue that would be good. I would like to write a couple of books, I suppose. I have about three books I'd like to write and hopefully I'll get a chance to do that. I've been looking at some fellowships at some places like at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and a couple of other places that have sent me materials on things, to do a fellowship maybe for a semester, take a sabbatical time and do some writing. That might be kind of nice.
Story_ID: 64132
Speaker 1: And your work with the--the Church Federation [of Greater Indianapolis]. What is the Church Federation and what is its purpose?
Speaker 2: It was founded in 1912, it's what we call a council of churches. It's one of the Councils of Churches in the world. It even pre-dates the World Council of Churches and the National Council. And I follow really a fine legacy, although all male and all white--I'm the first African American and the first woman to be in this position since 1912. But to their credit, these men--these Anglo men--really seems to have had a vision of a more inclusive society and stood for a lot of the issues I support, not least of which is the issue around race. I mean, back in the 1920s they were bringing people here like W.E.B. DuBois which back in the day was not particularly--
Speaker 1: They brought W.E.B. DuBois
Speaker 2: Yeah, they brought in W.E.B. DuBois, who else?  I mean, great names like that. They were working together when it wasn't popular. They were accepting African American churches in the '20s into the membership. Although they didn't at its founding, but at least in the 1920s they were developing race relations committees. I mean, really doing some things that were pretty much at the vanguard pretty early on.
Speaker 1: So what is the mission of the Church Federation, for those--'cause a lot people wouldn't know.
Speaker 2: Well no, you're quite right, it's unusual for some. It's a cooperative ministry of different denominations and congregations and Christian organizations  that are working to show their visible unity in Jesus Christ. So it's not just to good things because we're Christian people, but we actually believe that their is a mandate in scripture that Jesus wanted the church to be one. It's based in the seventeenth chapter of St. John, that Jesus prayed that they would be one, and not divided. And so we believe in the Councils of Churches that whatever it is that we're doing when we feed the poor, or minister together, that is not the end in of itself. That is a sign of the unity for Jesus Christ. And that Jesus Christ is busy in the world, if you will.
Story_ID: 64133
Speaker 1: What is one of your favorite biblical passages?
Speaker 2: Oh, I have so many. Yeah, I have so many. Probably John 3:16. And it's probably just because my mom [Geneva Willis Walker] kind of ingrained it in my head. It was the first verse that I had to really learn. "For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life." That's probably my favorite.
Speaker 1: And why is that?
Speaker 2: Because it's based on God's love. It's not just about the profession of faith, but it's about grace. That regardless if we accept Christ or not, God still loves us. And that everything that he did was based out of love for us. Was based on the ethic of love, and I like that.
Story_ID: 64134
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be?  You're still very young.
Speaker 2: Well, I used to--when I was younger--I used to think that my legacy would simply be to be--well, when I got married, to be a good wife. And also to be loyal to my inheritance. The inheritance of strength and courage in my family. That's what it used to be--I used to be more ambitious about that and that somehow the inheritance or my legacy, you know--for example my grandmother [Carrie Walker], a real woman of faith, a great woman, you know, she never got her due for raising twelve children in the ghettos of Cleveland [Ohio]. My grandfather [Osie Willis], who yeah, he was able to get acres of land, he went up north and went back to get the land from his white father who wouldn't give it to him, but nevermind that, he came back and was strong. But he never kind of got the recognition that he deserved. And that goes all the way down the line from people on the land, to people in the ghetto. That somehow that I can somehow bring some honor and bring some respect to my family that has been strong, courageous and I think pretty faithful. They made mistakes too, but in the end, they were pretty incredible people. So, I suppose to some extent to bring honor and respect to my people. And just to live my life for Christ, however it kind of works itself out, you know. I really wasn't interested in ordained ministry, but that's what I'm doing and that's where the Lord wants me.
Story_ID: 64135
Speaker 1: What are your hopes for the African American community? I mean and I say this--I say this to the young child who had to walk the streets of, you know,  the town and felt ostracized and you know, I say that in that context.
Speaker 2: Well, I know this may seem kind of cliche and kind of trite, but I like for them just to know that they're loved. I would like for them to know--I think that's what Christ is all about. To know that we're loved, in spite of our pain and in spite of our--whatever our journey is. And to be a testimony to that love. I don't know--I guess that's kind of simple, but that's what it boiled down to for me, I guess. And I don't know that humane people, or people of faith have always been as faithful to that testimony.
Story_ID: 64136
Speaker 1: What about the disparity that has existed in the world, you know, Christian community as it relates to African Americans.  Where--what are your hopes there? I mean that, you know, what are your hopes or your thoughts there--will that disparity ever go away?
Speaker 2: Well--.
Speaker 1: Those who call themselves Christians and yet discriminate against people (unclear)--.
Speaker 2: Right.  Exactly.  Well see, I, I come at it from a different starting point, I mean.  I guess my life and the life of my people, my family (pauses)--for me it's not an issue of being able to measure outcomes, don't get me wrong, I think that's important--it is important to see outcomes of change, but that's not actually why I do--at least hopefully the things that I do as a Christian woman.  I do these things because it would--if this world was perfect, supposedly perfect, if it was--people did what they were supposed to do, treated each other right and so forth, I wouldn't do it--I wouldn't want to do it just because it's the thing to do, or because I thought it was just gonna produce an outcome.  I would want to do it because it's about being faithful--to what it is Jesus would have of my life.  So whereas I'll be the first to want to say, "We must change the systems of race, the systems of all these "isms" that are plaguing our world.  But my point departure is to say, "I will want to do those things because I want to be faithful to what it is I think Christ was about."  So my point of departure isn't for some humanitarian outcome change, although I hope that's what will happen along the way, simply because I want to be faithful and I want to do what the Lord requires of me.  So I don't know--.
Speaker 1: What about those who, who are perpetrators like (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Who are perpetr-, I don't understand what you--.
Speaker 1: No, I'm just saying you're not the one who's, who's discriminating--you're not, you're not that person--,
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Right.
Speaker 1: --so what about them?  What are your thoughts--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I expect the same of them.  I expect the same, that's what my great disappointment is.  See, I think you've got liberals or conservatives who are trying to do whatever they do just to be outcome-driven--to do X, Y and Z.  As opposed to saying, "My whole life is dedicated to living the life that Christ would have of me to do these things, which I think is a stronger point of departure.  I mean, for example, you see people now who were involved in the Civil Rights Movement, and once we got the Civil Rights Act, you know, it's kinda like, "Well, you know, well, we, we won that battle, you know, you know, what's the problem here?  We, we got the Voting Rights Act, we got all of these Constitutional amendments and there's any other, so, you know, what's the problem here?"  Well, that was a outcome, yeah, and I celebrate that, but the journey's not over.  The--I wouldn't be involved in that just for the sake of getting that outcome done.  For me it's saying, "Now that we've done that, okay, now we have to talk about economic issues, now we have to talk about people in prison, now we have to talk about what it means to live in a post-Apartheid system, now we--now some of the issues have evolved or have changed.  So it wouldn't matter if it were the prison issue, it wouldn't matter if it's post-Apartheid, if it's--the issue is faithfulness.  And we must always have a prophetic statement and a pastoral word to the moment in which we find ourselves as a Christian people.  But if your just outcome-driven, and you reach your certain outcomes, just throw up your hands, "Well, you know, women can vote now and, you know, you can do all these--."  No, we're not satisfied.  And why are we not satisfied?  We're not satisfied because I don't believe Christ would be satisfied, which is why he ended up on a cross.  He had to do something more to make the point of faithfulness.  And I think that's what the Christian life is about--is faithfulness.
Story_ID: 64137
Speaker 1: Then the only other thing, you know, we're working on this project that's sort of (unclear)--but why do you think it's important for African Americans to document their own history?
Speaker 2: Oh.  Because they're wonderful testimonies of faith.  African American peoples at least historically have been people of faith.  And to have these testimonies recorded that our children can see and use as guideposts along their journey is compelling, is nothing short of compelling.  So I celebrate that.  Yeah, it's great.
