Story_ID: 237450
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My full name: Ruth Theresa Prudeaux Williams.  Prudeaux would be P-R-U-D-E-A-U-X, and Williams, W-I-L-L-I-A-M-S.
Speaker 1: And, ma'am, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Okay, before I leave my name, I'm mostly known as Teena, T-E-E-N-A, which is a nickname for Ruth Theresa, but most people know me as Teena.
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm glad you stopped me because I was--
Speaker 2: What is it?
Speaker 1: I'm glad you stopped me 'cause I was--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: That's important.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And do you have any other nicknames or--
Speaker 2: No, that's it.  Well, when I was a child, they called me, Miss Prissy, but Teena's been my nickname.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right, and my birthdate, October 4th, 1927.
Speaker 1: Getting back to the name a second.  Maybe you could tell us about Prudeaux.   That's French--
Speaker 2: Prudeaux, the origin is French.  And the story that I, my father [George Ernest Prudeaux] has told me, and my sister, Katherine [Prudeaux] seems to find evidence to confirm it: when the English and the French were at war in Nova Scotia [Canada], when they--I mean they were at war in Europe, in those settlers who were in Nova Scotia, there were many French and there were many British citizens there.  And there was a fear that the French people would side with France.  And so for fear of that, the British called all the male Frenchmen to a church for a meeting and locked them in there and subsequently transported them out of the country to Canada and elsewhere.  And I understand that's where my father's original family came, from France to Nova Scotia to Canada, and then down into the Louisiana Territory, before it was part of the United States and settled in the Gulf Coast, which would be in the--along the Gulf of Mexico, like Pass Christian [Mississippi], New Orleans [Louisiana] and so forth.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And were part of a community there.
Speaker 1: All right, and ma'am, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a funeral director, and I'm also an Episcopal priest.  I started off as a professional medical social worker and became a funeral director when I married my husband [Albert Williams], who owned the funeral business and went back to school [Worsham College of Mortuary Science, Chicago, Illinois] to prepare for that.  And in my work there, I recognized the need for a religious dimension.  So I went to seminary [Chicago Theological Seminary, Chicago, Illinois], but I did not seek ordination until much later because I did not quite understand the meaning of a call.  So I'm functioning now, presently as a funeral director and as a priest.  And in my priestly work, I'm also trained as a, professionally trained as a spiritual director, which goes part and parcel with all the work that I do, because I'm dealing with people, you know, and their conflicts and so forth.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, before we go into--oh, I'm sorry.  What is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date?
Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am.
Speaker 2: (Laughter)  October 26th, that's what you mean?
Speaker 1: No, today's date, today's date?
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sorry.  August 26th, 2004.
Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am.
Speaker 2: You threw me off when you asked me that (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, and where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: In my office in Chicago [Illinois], Unity Funeral Parlors.
Story_ID: 237451
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five People magazine-ish type questions that I am compelled to ask you, and they only require a short answer.  And the first one is, ma'am, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Food.  You want more than just seafood?  I would say catfish, fried catfish and red beans and rice.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's a Louisiana meal (laughter).
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is blue.  But I also like white, very much.
Speaker 1: All right, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall is my favorite time of the year.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No, no favorite.
Speaker 1: And lastly, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Well, truthfully, my favorite--what I say all the time constantly is "Thank you, thank you, God."  That's a constant for me, but at the present moment, I cannot think--I know I have a favorite saying.  But I can't think of what it might be right now.  But I try to focus on positive things.  And I don't, I don't mean just in the sense of positive thinking, but I try to focus on positive things to help me to respond to other people in a good way, good relationships, which I think are very, very important.  Friendships and love are the most important things in life.  And I would say that.
Story_ID: 237452
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Louise Elizabeth Cassimere Prudeaux.  Now, Louise Elizabeth is--you don't need me to spell that.  Cassimere would be C-A-S-S-I-M-E-R-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And Prudeaux, P-R-U-D-E-A-U-X.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I don't remember her date of birth.  She was in May 22, I think 1895.  And she was born in Pass Christian, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Can you spell that for us?
Speaker 2: It's two words, P-A-S-S, and it's pronounced Christian, but it's spelled, Christian, C-H-R-I-S-T-I-A-N, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's down on the Gulf [of Mexico], right?
Speaker 2: On the Gulf Coast.
Speaker 1: All right, now, how--what do you know about her ancestors or the ancestors on that side of the family?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: Well, I haven't done it.  My sister, Katherine [Prudeaux], has, and we haven't gone as far in my mother's family as in my father's [George Ernest Prudeaux] family.  But the stories I have been told by my, my maternal grandmother [Selika St. Aurin Casimer] and one of my maternal grand aunts, was that their grandfather came from the [Caribbean] islands.  I'm not sure whether it was Haiti--to New Orleans [Louisiana] and that one of--that he owned a cigar factory.  And my mother's father [Francois Casimer], which would be my grandfather, I guess, came from that source, that origin.  Now, that's what I know.  There were some Spanish there from the islands, French and Spanish, so I'm not sure whether it was Haiti or not.  But I was told that one of the islands was Haiti, and one was another island.  I don't know, but they were French and Spanish origin.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I'm, I guess African, also.
Speaker 1: All right, so, but they had a cigar factory.
Speaker 2: My, that would have been my grand--my maternal grandmother's grandfather.  That's what I was told.  Now, I don't know whether my sister in tracing the tree, whether she got there or not.  I do know she has my mother's--father's name and my mother's grandfather's name.  But I don't know much more about that, 'cause she hasn't been able to trace that island connection.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But Haiti is one island that's associated with--
Speaker 2: And there was another island, but I'm not sure which one it was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It might have been Cuba.  I'm not sure.
Story_ID: 237453
Speaker 1: Are there any stories from that [maternal] side of the family about your ancestors that are passed down?
Speaker 2: Well, there's strong religious inclination.  And some of their--the culture of the Creoles that were passed down, like the cooking, the language.  We did not speak [Louisiana] Creole [French] language which is the local, not truly French, language.  My grand--my maternal grandmother [Selika St. Aurin Casimer] spoke French and spoke it fluently.  But I only knew a few words.  We never spoke French in our house.  And my mother [Louise Cassimere Prudeaux] did not seem to be so inclined.  My father [George Ernest Prudeaux] would make a joke of it.  His mother [Marie Lizana Prudeaux] also knew French and spoke French.  But we were not speaking it.  But they did speak the Creole, which is a dialect, when the adults didn't want us to know what they were talking about.  That much I know.  And strong family ties.  We lived very close, in a closely-knit area.  And we only associated with people in the area in which we lived.  So everybody knew everybody.  You went to the same church; you went to the same school.  You married neighbors' offspring and so forth.  So it remained like an enclave.  In New Orleans [Louisiana], where I grew up, was in the Seventh Ward [New Orleans, Louisiana] where it's well known for a Creole settlement.  My parents, both parents, grew up in the Gulf Coast, Pass Christian, Mississippi and Bay St. Louis [Mississippi], and brought their, that culture with them to New Orleans.  But my maternal grandmother was born in New Orleans.
Speaker 1: So, your ancestors on that, on that side sort of, over time, migrated to New Orleans from those other places?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, what did they do for a living?
Speaker 2: My mother never worked, and she, in her late years, she used to speak of being sad about not ever working out of the household.  And we would tease her about it, because a lot of people who are working now, wish they had more time at home.  But she grew up in a culture where that's what you were supposed to do, get married, have children--she was a very devout Catholic, and be a housewife and take care of your husband and children, which is what she did.  And my father worked, I imagine, several jobs during the--but I never knew my father to be unemployed.  And that was very important to him.  He would thank God that while, during the [Great] Depression years and the bad times, he was always employed.  And I knew him mainly as an insurance agent.  He sold insurances.  But earlier in life, he worked wherever work was.  He always knew how to find work and worked.   So he was not a professional person.  He was not educated.  He was just a smart person who was well read and read extensively: newspapers, magazines, books, and so forth.  He was quite a reader and tended to be more alone.  My mother was very family oriented so there was always big family around.  My brother named our house the Do Drop Inn, and because my mother would say to people invariably, "Do drop in some times," and she meant it.  Whenever you're around, just drop in.  And she was very hospitable, offering--you know, always had coffee on the stove, a coffee pot with the French coffee and the chicory and so forth, and she'd have cookies or something.  Or in the summertime, lemonade.  Coffee was a year-around event, 'cause that was very important among Creoles.  And we constantly had people in for dinner.  They would just drop in, and she would stretch a meal like the miracles, you know.  We would tease her about taking the miracle of the two loaves, you know, the fish and the loaves of bread and making a meal for a crowd of people.  But she could do it somehow.  And it was a miracle being performed all the time, 'cause she was, as I said, a very hospitable person.  Daddy was out working so much that he wasn't around a great deal.  And he didn't really like much of that.  He didn't like to have a lot of people around.  My mother thrived on it.
Story_ID: 237454
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Louise Cassimere Prudeaux] talk about growing up in New Orleans [Louisiana] and did she tell you stories about growing up?
Speaker 2: A little bit.  She grew up in Pass Christian, Mississippi which is on the Gulf Coast.  It's rural, still a rural, sort of incline.  Seafood was the big thing, 'cause they were right on the Gulf [of Mexico].  And they would just--you didn't--you'd just go out and catch your shrimp and your fish and your crabs and so forth and have big dinners all the time.  That was a big, big event.  Those were times of segregation, you know.  And my mother, not--she didn't talk so much about this, but her mother [Selika St. Aurin Casimer] and her aunt would talk about free people of color versus non-free people of color.  My mother never talked about that.  But it was very important to my grandmother and to her family that they were free people and had never known slavery.  True or false, I don't know, but that's the way they spoke.  My mother never talked, as I said, never talked about it.  But she--
Speaker 1: So they still kind of saw the world the way it was prior to the Civil War.
Speaker 2: Right.  And so--
Speaker 1: Who was free and who wasn't.
Speaker 2: Right.  And, but my mother grew up in the segregated period.  She didn't have that privilege that my grandmother--her mother, see, was born in New Orleans.  Things were a little different in New Orleans than they were outside of New Orleans.  And so--
Speaker 1: In what ways?
Speaker 2: Racially.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Racially.
Speaker 1: Yeah, for the benefit of those who've never been there and who are watching this--
Speaker 2: Well, they didn't name it this way, but I would say in my present-day and understanding, I would say it was like a three-tier society, and then South Africa.  So that you had whites and non-whites, and they the colored; they would refer to the Creoles as colored.  And they were given a little preferential treatment.  Now, what little was--they didn't have any basic rights.  So, in our generation, we did not think of that as being anything, but that apparently was very important to them.  And they did have some special privileges.  Whatever they were, I don't know, that my grandmother and her sister would talk about, that my mother was not impressed with.  Now, she went to Catholic school as a child.  And she--but after, but they were segregated, segregated schools.  And it was common among the Creoles that when the young ladies--and not only among the Creoles, but among people of color--there was no school to go to beyond that.  So my mother--my grandmother's sister used to teach piano lessons, and she just learned it.  She was not taught music.  She just learned music and then taught what she knew.  And she would also teach--she had large, a large family.  So she'd have other relatives' children and neighbors, and she would teach them a lesson so that they could continue to be educated because there was no--they didn't have funds to send somebody away to go to school, for high school.  And there were no high schools available.  And that was the same setting that my father [George Ernest Prudeaux] grew up in.  There were no high schools.  You'd have to go away for a high school, which was not true for us.  There were schools there for us.  So she grew up in that kind of environment.  It was very strict Catholic, you know, it was sinful to have a thought.  Of course, we still (laughter), you know--it's thought, word and deed, which is true, but, I mean, it looked like everything was sinful.  And my mother felt the stress and strain of that kind of strict environment, you know, that she did not particularly like.  And so she never--and she only had one sibling, and that was a brother who was five years older.  So she--her cousins were her close people, and a neighbor or two as friends.
Story_ID: 237455
Speaker 1: What about your father?  Let's--can you give us his full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father's name was George Ernest Prudeaux.  He was not a junior in the sense that his father's name was George Joseph Prudeaux, so he was not a junior.  But George Ernest and Prudeaux, as I spelled before--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --P-R-U-D-E-A-U-X.
Speaker 1: And what's his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Now, it's--I'm not sure of that.  It's February, might be February 7th, and my mother [Louise Cassimere Prudeaux] was born in 1895, so my father must have been born in 1893 or 1892, somewhere like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where was he born?
Speaker 2: My father was born Pass Christian, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, not Pass Christian, in Bay St. Louis [Mississippi], which was--they called it right across from the, right across the bay.  There's a little body of water called the Bay [of St. Louis], covered with a little bridge [St. Louis Bay Bridge].  So, it was the next town.
Speaker 1: So Bay St. Louis is Mississippi as well?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, on the Gulf Coast.
Speaker 1: Now, what do you know about his side of the family?  How far back can you trace those ancestors?
Speaker 2: My sister [Katherine Prudeaux] traced it a little farther back than my mother, and I gave you the story about Acadians, they were called, where you--which is the proper name for Cajuns.  They were the Acadians who came into Louisiana Territory and my father's father [George Joseph Prudeaux, Sr.] settled in the area where the Creoles were.  And his mother [Marie Lizana Prudeaux] was a Creole.  And I guess his father was too.  So, all I know is that they came to [sic. from] Canada.  I don't know much about what happened there, but I do know that when, my father's father and also, he had other relatives, would--I told you they were great people for fishing and catching oysters and so forth.  And he had a shop, an oyster shop, they called it.  It wasn't a market or something like that, and where he sold seafood for families who did not go out for their own fishing.  So apparently, not everybody did that.  But he had a seafood shop, and apparently had a good business.  I understand--and consequently, he also had a boat, as well as canoes.  And during the early period, now, I think it was my grandfather, but it might have been his father.  I don't know the history that close.  But during slavery, I'm told--so that would have been his father or grandfather, during slavery, he, at nighttime would help the people in his boat to get to a further part, away from the swamps of the area and helping them to get escape.  And he was able to hide it because he was very fair--I don't know.  I don't think he was white.  But he was very fair.  And so he could hide, and he never got caught.  I heard that he was--there was some suspicion, but he was never a suspect.  And so I don't know what he did to convince the people, but they--I understand from other people down there that he was well respected by the community on both sides.  And that's what he would do at night, and in the daytime, he operated his seafood place.  And so therefore, he knew a lot of people, and was friendly with a lot of people, you know.
Story_ID: 237456
Speaker 1: Are there any other stories from that side of the family?
Speaker 2: My father's mother [Marie Lizana Prudeaux] cherished their Creole culture very strongly, probably, certainly more than my father [George Ernest Prudeaux] himself.  But his mother did and cherished their heritage and tried to keep it intact in terms of how you married and so forth.  My father's family were Roman Catholics also, but apparently not as devout as my mother's [Louise Cassimere Prudeaux].  So they were church-oriented, but not as devout from what I hear, and I don't know, you know, about that.  But I do know that their expression, as I experienced it, would bear that out.  So my mother--the church was such an influence in her life, so strongly, that it governed everything in her life, where with my father, he felt that, you know, you--all the praying that she did took care of him.  He didn't have to go to church or pray, and he was--he would treat things casually like that and laugh about it.  But when he got sick, he wanted everybody to pray for him, and he knew how to pray (laughter), that kind of a thing.  Now, that's what I remember most about 'em and most about their food, their culture about food and so forth, very proud of their family, very proud of their heritage, very proud that they stuck together as a family and whatever hardships was a family under--whatever hardships might have occurred became a family problem and not an individual.  And that's how they made it, by sticking together.  Big family--my father came from a very large family.  My mother was just one of two children.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did your father talk about growing up and Pass Christian [sic. Bay St. Louis, Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: Not much.  His father [George Joseph Prudeaux, Sr.], I understand, became blind.  And my father, he did speak of economics being very, very bad for them, very tight.  And my father worked some kind of a work all of his life, from a boy.  And he was very fair, and made acquaintances with the other race.  So he had access to books and things to read that another person might not would have.  So a lot of people in my lifetime saw my father as an educated man, but he was not, and that was because of his demeanor and, I'm sure, his desire to have what he never had, and so he did the best he could with that and made--he didn't talk a great deal.  And his English was not picture-perfect.  So (laughter), he realized if you didn't talk much, you wouldn't--nobody would know what he did not know.  And I learned that from my husband [Albert Williams] too, that you listen more, and you'll learn, and at the same time, if you talk too much people will know how much you don't know (laughter).  So, I guess my father must have learned the same thing.  But that was the way he was, his nature was, to--as I knew him, not to talk much until late, very late in life.  And as he--I'm talking about like five years or so before he died.  He became very talkative in quite a contrast to the way I knew him as I grew up.  He was not a fisherman like his father, and his other family.  And I remember dad laughing 'cause they would go hunting in the fall and winter, and in Louisiana, you could do that and catch all you want.  You didn't have all these restrictions, you know, of what you could catch.  And dad would end up buying fish to bringing home, 'cause he didn't wanna come back empty-handed.  And everybody teased him 'cause apparently, he was not good (laughter) at fishing or hunting.  But he'd always come back with something, and it was a big joke in the family about his hunting and fishing.  He was not a sports person at all.
Story_ID: 237457
Speaker 1: Can you tell us how your parents [Louise Cassimere Prudeaux and George Ernest Prudeaux] met?  Is there a story associated with how they met?
Speaker 2: No, I would guess that they met because one Creole family and another Creole family, and, of course, it was important for the Creoles at that time to be sure that a Creole married a Creole.  They did not marry outside of their community.  So while they lived in different towns [Pass Christian, Mississippi and Bay St, Louis, Mississippi], we're only talking about a little bay [Bay of St. Louis] cross--separating, you know, a little small bridge [St. Louis Bay Bridge] separating.  So my guess is that's how they met.  The families knew each other, and that's all I know about.  Now, I have a cup and saucer at home, and you've seen, I'm sure, many of these in the antique shops with gold on the rim and flowers and, and on it, it says, "Forget me not."  And I understand they called those engagement cups or I understand that my father gave that to my mother, a cup and saucer.  And it's a big cup--not a demitasse--a big cup.  And I have it.  Now, that would be from the early 1900s.  And that's all I know about, you know, their relationship.  They didn't go to school together.  They would not have gone to church together because Sunday morning, they'd be separated going to their local--but because families--it was important that a Creole marry a Creole, and my guess is that's how they just knew each other.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you know if they got married before they moved to New Orleans [Louisiana] or--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, because most of my brothers and sisters were born in Pass Christian [Mississippi], and it's only, I think--we used to refer to ourselves as the first six--there were twelve of us, you know.  And we used to refer to ourselves as the first six and the last six.  The older ones were called the first six.  And the younger ones were called the last six.  And we would say that our parents believed it was cheaper by the dozen, because we were a dozen of us.
Story_ID: 237458
Speaker 1: It's a good time to name your--all your brothers and sisters, name them--and it's only twelve now (laughter) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, mercy (laughter). That's a job (laughter).  That's a job, but all of them were born--the first--let's see.  I'm number eight, and my older sister, seven.  So the number six child was the first one born in New Orleans [Louisiana].  Now, the first child was born in Houston, Texas.  His name was George Joseph Prudeaux [Jr.], named after my grandfather.  He had--who was George Joseph [Prudeaux, Sr.], not George Ernest.  And then the, my--the second one was my sister, Inez [Prudeaux Chauvin].  And the first six are closer in age than we are, 'cause they were like one at--next year, you know, like a year or a little, slightly more than a year apart.  And Inez was like a second mother to us.  I was her little baby doll, you might say.  And she kind of took a lot of special interests in me, used to make a lot of clothes for me.  She was very talented, very talented in domestic things, you know, sewing, embroidery, crochet.  And her children, all of her children know that, her girls, you know, and encouraged me a lot to stay in school.  She read a lot, and she trained to become a practical nurse.  And the reason she chose practical--she wanted to be a nurse.  But it would have been the short route.  It wouldn't take so long to do as a practical nurse in contrast to being a registered nurse.  You follow me?  But then she finished the work, but she never got the certificate, and then subsequently married and had a family, so she never went back to school.  So she was determined that I would not--that I would continue in school.  Then the next sister, the next, the third person would have been my brother, Claud Raymond Prudeaux.  And he became a school teacher, but he finished high school and then went to work and then went back to college.  When I was a senior in college [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana], he was a freshman.  And he told all the girls, you know, that I was older than he was (laughter), and that--he had to take a little time though, he--'cause there're considerable years between us, like about twelve years between.  He said, and part of that time, he was defending the country.  Well, actually, he served in Pearl Harbor [Naval Station Pearl Harbor, Hawaii] at the time Pearl Harbor was attacked.  But he was in government service.  And so when he came back, he did not have a G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944].  He had to send himself to college.  But he did and subsequently got three master's degrees.  So education was very important to him.  That's the third child.
Story_ID: 237459
Speaker 1: The fourth child was my sister, Selika [Prudeaux Bordenave], and she married young and had her family.  The girls were, as was custom in the Creole tradition, the girls were taught that it was most important to get married and have a family and to take care of your husband and your children.  Then the next one was my brother, William Prudeaux, and he was the one, I told you, who would spell his name P-R-U-D-O 'cause he didn't see any point in writing all those letters, when you're only gonna say "doe" (laughter).  So, and the teacher would complain on him, but he refused to change.  He was one who was the quietest of all.  He wouldn't talk at all.  He would answer only in monosyllables and said very little.  You didn't get to know him much.  But he was very--my, I was very close to all my brothers.  And they were just like--I was little in stature, and everybody just kind of made me their little baby.  So I was treated rather special, I must confess.  My brother was a merchant seaman [U.S. Merchant Marine], and he died at sea during World War II [WWII].  Then my next brother is the one you a picture of, Armand Hypolite [Prudeaux].  Now, how, where my mother [Louise Cassimere Prudeaux] got all these names, I don't know.  But I guess she had so many children, she had to go find names.  And we, I say Armand, but he was really called Armand, but his name is spelled, Armand, and he was called Armand.  And he loved to mimic the [Louisiana] Creole [French] language, and he knew a few phrases.  And I think he made up some of 'em.  And he would talk a lot of clowning, you know, with the Creole bit.  And he was also more inclined in the Creole tradition than some of the others were.  He went into postal service.  He served in the [U.S.] Army, and, and was in war, in the war, in the--I don't remember all of those things.  But in the Pacific [Theatre of World War II], he served.  But he was in Pearl Harbor [Naval Station Pearl Harbor, Hawaii] at the time it was attacked, as a civilian and was later drafted and had--and served the country in the [U.S.] military.  And then my sister after that--now, that was the first one, Armand, was the first one to be born in New Orleans [Louisiana].  The others were born in Pass Christian [Mississippi].  And then my sister, just before me, Marie [Prudeaux Grace], was born in New Orleans.  And then me.  All the rest of us were born in New Orleans.
Story_ID: 237460
Speaker 1: --What is your first childhood memory?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) My first childhood memory was not a pleasant one.  I was four years old and very talkative, running off at the mouth, talking everything I knew.  And I don't know what I said, but I was saying something that I repeated that I heard.  I have no idea what it was, and that's the only whipping I've had in my life.  But my mother [Louise Cassimere Prudeaux] said, you will never forget it.  And it is true.  I have never forgotten it.  And I'm very careful about what I say to people.  And I'm very careful about repeating things, and I avoid repeating anything.  I have never forgotten that one.  And it's been good for me because you can get into a whole lot of trouble repeating things, which are often not quite accurate information, you know.  And you can get into gossip.  You can get into painful situations.  You can repeat something that's not true, and you can't recover it.  And she taught me that lesson.  I don't know what it was.  That has gone long from my memory.  I don't think I ever knew what it was that I said.  It wasn't what I said.  It is that I repeated something, and that I should not have done that, that you don't repeat conversations.  And so, and she--and we were taught that children remain in a child's place.  You don't get into adult.  That's the way I was brought up.  My parents were very strict, very strict.  And they believed that if you spare the rod, you're going to ruin the child.  They strongly believed that.  So I didn't have to have another whipping.  You can count on me, believing that I tried to do the best I could of not violating their rules.  Now, I'm not--I wasn't perfect.  You know that.  But I would always get just below getting into enough trouble to get a whipping and spared myself that.  But that's my earliest memory, and my guess is that I was four or about to be four, somewhere along that.  I don't remember beyond that.
Story_ID: 237461
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: The smell was the smell of the coffee being brewed.  You could smell it through the whole block.  My mother [Louise Cassimere Prudeaux] would make a soup, out of sight, a vegetable soup in the wintertime, and we were only a half a block from the [Valena C. Jones] Elementary School [New Orleans, Louisiana].  And we had to go home for lunch rather than have, buy lunch in the store.  All of our friends, schoolmates, would have lunch in the store, and we felt deprived.  Now, I can appreciate what she was doing, but then we felt that we should have had some of this junk food that they would buy, you know.  But we would also relish that wonderful soup that she made.  And she made a vegetable soup that would knock you out, and she would bake a sweet potato, and we would hold it hot in our hands, you know, in order to warm our hands and have this wonderful vegetable soup that you could smell all over the neighborhood.  I remember that and the smell of food was the big thing, gumbo cooking and--or wild game being cooked.  We ate well because people could catch the fish and go hunting, as I said.  And so food was plentiful and very important.  The other smell I remember would be in church with the incense.  They used the incense--this was before Vatican II [Second Vatican Council], and they used the incense quite extensively, extravagantly.  And as--we were in church constantly for big celebrations, and I remember the incense and the things of that sort.  I could remember the smell of the water, of the Lake Pontchartrain at different times of the year.  I could never make an association of whether it was good or bad.  I do know that when I would get a whiff of something similar to that away from home, I became very homesick.  So I don't know what that odor was, but it was an odor (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What did it smell--
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: What did it smell like?  Was it like fish or something or--
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't a pleasant smell, and it wasn't a bad smell.  But it was smell that you knew you were at home.  That's the only way I can describe it, right.
Speaker 1: What else?  I didn't wanna stop you (laughter).
Speaker 2: That's about all I can remember.
Speaker 1: Sights, sounds and smells, okay.
Speaker 2: Mainly, it was the smell--I associate smell with food, food and coffee, because as I said, food was so important in our life.
Speaker 1: Any sounds?
Speaker 2: Sounds, well, I remember the sound of blues.  I really love blues, even now, and I just love to hear people singing the blues, like when I grew up, you know.  And we called it homemade music.
Story_ID: 237462
Speaker 1: I remember my--in the first six of the family, were four boys and two girls.  In the last six were five girls and one boy.  So my brothers were mostly older than I was.  And I can remember them playing, you know, the piano.  We had an old piano in the house, and we had--they used to make music with a washing board.  They used to use--make some kind of music using a broom.  Anyway, whatever they did, whatever music--I don't know what somebody else would call it, but we thought it was fun.  And we were not supposed to be watching or hearing this.  We were supposed to be in bed.  But we would be finding some kind of a place where we could peek and hide to watch them do this.  And we would have so much fun.  They were just entertaining themselves, and, of course, I've told you my mother [Louise Cassimere Prudeaux] was a very gregarious person.  So she always had cocoa on the stove, a big pot of cocoa and coffee.  And she would have cake or cookies and food, 'cause the fellows all liked to eat.  And all my brothers, you know, when we would all go to bed, they'd come in the night--we never had leftovers 'cause they'd eat 'em during the night.  And my mother always had, starting fresh, you know, with fresh food.  But I remember the sound of that music.  And as a child, I remember the juke player, you know.  That's what we called it, the juke player.  And we had one of those little spinning tables with the long arm.  And we would play a few of the records.  Most of our social life was at home.  So, music was very important.  Now, the other side of the music was church music.  And I heard the most beautiful, Gregorian chants and music in the church, songs that you don't hear any more, which I miss a lot 'cause we had very, very high solemn masses and the ritual was very rich.  And it was so wonderful.  It just would fill you up, your insides so that you feel like you'd burst open with a very good feeling.  I remember those sounds.  And, of course, the noise of a Creole family getting together is unbelievable; everybody talking at one time.  You don't know how you can ever hear a conversation.  But you would, you know, you'd butt into different other conversations.  So you try to be engaged in three or four conversations at one time.  And then if somebody couldn't hear well, it would be hilarious to hear the kind of answer you would get (laughter), you know, or misunderstanding or misinterpreting and things of that sort.
Story_ID: 237463
Speaker 1: Was there a sense in New Orleans [Louisiana] in those days that New Orleans was special, a special place for music?
Speaker 2: Not just music.  I found that in--as I grew up and even now, that people from New Orleans figured they were special regardless, I mean, they were special about everything.  They really felt like special people (laughter), and I grew up feeling that way, that we were just very special people.  So, everything about New Orleans was the best.  You couldn't find better food.  You couldn't find better--and they would tell you that, this is the best in the world.  And they believed it with their whole heart that this was the best.  Anything you said, this was better.  So everything was best in New Orleans, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, you found that to be true, actually later on?
Speaker 2: Now, I know better (laughter), but still very good (laughter).  I would still say very good, and I would still say in terms of food, I would still say it's the best, right.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, can you tell me about your neighborhood?  Now, what was--what were the demographics of the neighborhood, and who lived there and how did they live?
Speaker 2: It's different now, but when I grew up in the Seventh Ward [New Orleans, Louisiana], it was known as the Creole area, the Creole community, the Creole neighborhood.  And the Seventh Ward, and Corpus Christi [Church; Corpus Christi-Epiphany Catholic Church, New Orleans, Louisiana] was a Catholic church that many of the local residents built, 'cause they--Creole men were mostly craftsmen, carpenters, electricians, very gifted people.  They just knew how--they were industrious.  Their focus was on a man must know how to earn a living and support his family.  And a woman must know how to cook, and do all the domestic chores to take care of her family.  That was it.  If you did that, that was what you were called to do.  Everything else is okay, but that came first and was extremely important.  If--they would help add on.  If you had--as your family increased, your house increased.  And you would add a building, so all the men would come to your house.  The wife would do all the cooking for them, and they would build a house--another room or another bathroom or an upstairs.  So we would refer to the house as the house that Jack built. Now, that was a story ['This Is the House That Jack Built'], apparently, a fairytale or something, but the house that Jack built was that it was not a plan, like you'd have an architectural drawing.  You just--it just grew as your family grew.  And it was spacious, and it was fun, and everybody got together and did it that way.  So in terms of the economy, the Creoles lived in what today I would call very similar to an immigrant community.  They all lived together in the enclave.  You associated with each other, went to the same schools.  You had the same school teachers, same church, same religion.  Everything was the same, and you intermarried.  That was very important, to intermarry.  And very few professionals, even today, there are very few professionals in the African American community in New Orleans, and certainly among the Creoles.  There might have been, I can remember about three physicians.  I don't know about surgeons.  There might have been one.  They were people in the insurance field, burial industry.  It was very important to be able to bury your family, what they call decently, and to pay for it in advance.
Story_ID: 237464
Speaker 1: We had our own grave.  My family tomb is in the, what they call the old St. Louis Cemetery No. 2 [New Orleans, Louisiana], where, in the early history of the city, is where people of color were buried.
Speaker 2: Is that the cemetery that--
Speaker 1: Marie Laveau.
Speaker 2: Marie Laveau.
Speaker 1: That's correct [sic. St. Louis Cemetery No. 1].  And St. Louis Cemetery No. 1 [New Orleans, Louisiana] was where the white residents--that's the early history of the city.  So our tomb, family tomb, predates the Louisiana Purchase.  And that's where my mother [Louise Cassimere Prudeaux] and father [George Ernest Prudeaux] are buried.  Now, we don't--I mean, those of us who have moved away, don't expect to be buried there.  But it was the expectation that all your family would be buried in that same place.
Speaker 2: So you have family that are buried in that cemetery that were buried there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In that same place.
Speaker 2: --prior to the Louisiana Purchase.
Speaker 1: In that same spot.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You buried--it's a two-tier tomb, and it's above group, and you, the last to die is put in the top tomb, top shelf, they call it.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And the one that was there drops down.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And then the next person comes up top, you drop down to the--inside the group.  You don't go down into the ground until the third burial.  And that continues through the years, you know.  And if you had a burial too soon for that to happen, I don't know what--I don't know the details of that 'cause I imagine, you must have had some of that.  And then the--it's operated by the diocese, Roman Catholic church.  And you have--you just own this as your family, your family tomb, they call it.  That was very important.
Story_ID: 237465
Speaker 1: The people were, economically, I would say, at a level of working class.  Materially, they didn't have much.  I mean you--I remember, all of our clothes were made at home, for example.  Now, beautiful embroidery, might be inexpensive fabric, but with very expensive handwork, crochet and all of these kinds of things.  But everything was done within the home.  And it was working class.  You had poor people, but not poor in the sense that we know poverty.  We didn't have poverty like we talk about poverty today.  You might have a man who was unemployed, 'cause he couldn't find a job.  But he'd find something that he could do to make ends meet, but he--but the family was never hungry because you--if you weren't blood related, you were so culturally related that no one was at need whose wants were not met.  You--nobody had to be deprived of their basic needs.  So you didn't have poverty in that sense.  You had hardship, like you might be unemployed.  Well, they can go down to the [Mississippi] River and work on the--what do you call it--stevedore.  That's hard work.  Creoles only did that when they had to, 'cause they were craftsmen, and you--a carpenter can always get a job or painter.  Now, he might not be able to get paid when he finished his job, but he got paid some kind of a way, like doctors.  The doctors didn't always get paid in cash.  They might get paid in food or service or something of that sort.  So New Orleans [Louisiana] was economically a depressed area, and not an area of professional people in any sort, no matter what the racial background was.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It was economically depressed.
Story_ID: 237466
Speaker 1: Now, do you remember Mardi Gras and that sort of thing when you were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes.  Mardi Gras was the big thing (laughter).  So important that when I first left home, and I only knew predominantly Roman Catholics, you know.  When I first left home, I--it just never occurred to me that there were people who did not know about Mardi Gras.  As far as I knew Mardi Gras was celebrated all over the world.  Now, mind you, I'm an adult now.  And I just never thought about it that way.  And so I did not go to work for Mardi Gras, nor did I report in, 'cause I didn't think I had to.  I thought everybody took off for Mardi Gras (laughter).  And I had the rude awakening that everybody did not know about Mardi Gras, and so--but it was a big day for us, very big day because we had lived through Lent and--I mean we're about to go through Lent.  So it starts really, you start celebrating at Christmastime.  Everything is very holy, getting ready for the birth of Christ, and then for the New Year, and then right after that, you know Lent is going to come soon.  And so you have dances and you have cotillions and you have--so when we would call ourselves poor, but that didn't stop you from being in the cotillion and having a beautiful evening gown and all of the trappings that go with it.  So you, you participated in all of these things, and, and that was a big event.  And the day of Mardi Gras, everybody got up early.  My mother [Louise Cassimere Prudeaux] made a huge, huge, maybe two pots of red beans and rice, and potato salad.  These are foods that you can put in the refrigerator and take out.  And even before the refrigerator, I can remember the icebox, where you had things in the icebox.  And then you can take 'em out and put 'em on the stove.  But everything was freshly cooked, but to preserve it so you would not have any spoilage, and you'd have food all day long and not run out.  Now, I can't imagine that today.  But I can remember as late as my leaving, you know, to go away to graduate school [St. Louis University School of Social Work, St. Louis, Missouri], that my mother never ran out of food, and she would have food--and people could stop in all day long during Mardi Gras.  And, but it was mostly like red beans and rice, and sturdy food.  And people enjoyed that and looked forward to it, you know.  And everybody had a costume of some form or fashion.  We didn't buy costumes at the store.  You made 'em at home.  And you tried to be imaginative.  Now, I don't remember us ever being Indians [Native Americans].  There was a group in other areas that were [Mardi Gras] Indians.  That was in the area--not the Creole area.  The Creoles, to my knowledge, were not Indians.  Now, that's another story.
Speaker 1: The black folks would (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, they would dress like Indians.
Speaker 1: The Wild Tchoupitoulas and--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then they had the [Krewe of] Zulu--I don't know when the Zulu parade started, but the Creoles never participated in that either until late years when they started participating.
Story_ID: 237467
Speaker 1: What were the relationships in New Orleans [Louisiana] when you were growing up, between the blacks and the Creoles?  I mean, how did--I mean, with this three-tiered system going on, I mean--how, you know?
Speaker 2: Right.  When I grew up, it was definitely separated.  It was beginning to change.  And--but prior to that, it was part of the--it's just the truth.  But it's part of the Creole culture.  They were very focused on how their children would look, the color of their skin and the texture of their hair.  And I know as we came along, we felt this was so silly.  But this was prior to the Civil Rights Movement.  And part of our response was, my guess is influenced by teenagers bucking the system more than a true understanding of civil rights.  But color was a very, I mean, colorism was truly a problem for Creoles and non-Creoles.  They referred to the people who were not Creoles, as "those people."  They referred to them as Americans.  I remember saying to my grandmother, who lived with us, "How can you say they are Americans?  We are Americans."  "Oh, no.  You are not Americans.  You're Creoles."  "But we are Americans," I would say to them, you know.  And, "No."  And now that I'm doing some research, I can understand where they're coming from.  Early in that period, the free people of color referred to the English who came down and settled in the area--they were more brutal to the Creoles and to all people of color, than were the Spaniards or the French.  And so when, when they came down into that area, they were Americans, and they did not like the Americans.  So anybody that came from that area were Americans.  And so when they mixed in with the slave population, all of those people were referred to as Americans, and in the, and the ones--you've heard of the Garden District [New Orleans, Louisiana], the Garden District were not Creoles.  They were Americans, is the way Creoles referred to them.  And the Creoles had their own community.  Now, later in the Civil Rights Movements, the Creoles who identified themselves as white Creoles, disclaimed those who were colored Creoles.  But the Creoles of color said, "There's no such thing as a white Creole, 'cause Creole means mixed.  And you come from a mixed heritage, and, and part of that mixture is colored."  Now, the coloreds, when I grew up were not acknowledged African as their color.  Well, we say, "Well, where did they come from?"  You know, that's what the young people would say.  They had to come from somewhere.  And they'd say, "Well, islands."  "Well, the islands were also enslaved.  So what do you mean?  Where'd they come from?"  "No, they were merchants who were free, colored people."  Now, my maternal grandmother [Selika St. Aurin Casimer] and her sister insisted that these were people of color who were free people from the very get-go, were never slaves when they came to this country.  And we never believed that, but now, I'm beginning to find out that that was true, that there were people of color, of African descent, who came to this country, who were never slaves and never were enslaved.  And so they might have been telling the truth.  But we never believed it at that time.  But even as I grew up, that was very strong and even stronger for my older brothers and sisters than it was for us, as we came along, 'cause I can remember being very fiery, fired up in wanting to talk with the archbishop about segregation, 'cause you can excommunicate somebody from church for divorcing.  Why can't you excommunicate them for having segregated schools?  Now, I was young, I'm talking about the '40s [1940s] when I had this kind of thinking.  And my family thought I was off the bat here.  But I can remember a group of us going to see the archbishop and asking for a meeting with him.  Of course, he did not meet with us.  He gave us some lower person, high--a monsignor or somebody to meet with and shared our opinions (unclear).  But it was always, you know, "Pray to God that things will change," that kind of stuff, same thing you'd been hearing all along, that we didn't buy.  But we left, we left there, personally satisfied that we had a voice, that we could speak of our voice and be heard.  But we left there feeling nothing was gonna be done about it, and nothing was done about it during that period.  It was much later that the church became involved in the Civil Rights Movement.  That was only in the '60s [1960s], certainly not in the '40s [1940s] when I came along.
Story_ID: 237468
Speaker 1: I remember that me and a couple of my schoolmates--now, I tell you, it was a tradition among Creoles that your girls, in particular, went to Catholic school.  All your children go to Catholic school, but with my large clan, my family could not afford for all of them to go to Catholic school.  So all the girls went to Catholic school, at least after they got out of grade school.  We started in Catholic school.  Then, we had went back to public school because she couldn't keep all of them in parochial school with the tuition.  And then later when I graduated from grade school [Valena C. Jones Elementary School, New Orleans, Louisiana], the girls went to Catholic school, so parochial school, and they sacrificed and made the way to pay them to go to parochial school.  I was the exception because I asked--I was a good student, and I asked my family to let me go to the public school where my friends were going.  And because I was a good student, they allowed me to do that, and they later regretted it, they said, because that made me associate with Protestants.  And, of course, at that time, we were taught, you don't go into a non-Catholic church, you know, because bad things were gonna happen to you, which we found out did not happen.  But I had my first exposure to that.  My mother [Louise Cassimere Prudeaux] was awfully embarrassed about letting me go with this group, and there was an a cappella group [The Barker A'Capella Girls Octette and Dramatic Readers], and I was a public speaker and used to recite poetry.  And I'm talking now I was like fourteen, fifteen years old and going into these churches where, you know, there was no other place to do anything of that sort.  And it was my first exposure to seeing Protestants and how they worshipped, and, and seeing what you meant by "slain by the spirit," which was frightening and terrifying and what have you.  But I began to see a different culture too, because that exposed me to people of color.  We didn't use the word black then.  We didn't even use the word Negro, although if you used the Negro, you didn't refer to Creoles as that.  They referred to themselves as Creole or colored.  So it was my exposure to, as they called 'em, "those people," which I felt embarrassed about.  But that's how the Creoles at that period.  They were very much prejudiced and isolated and separated themselves from everybody, from whites who felt themselves superior to non-whites who didn't appreciate our culture and criticized us for not being able to talk good English, you know, and so forth.  So they remained enclosed into this enclave.  As I grew older, I became ashamed of that and many other Creoles did and tried to blot out their culture and not use the word Creole at all.  And except for the food, they tried to disassociate themselves from that kind of environment.  And now they are reclaiming it, but in a more positive way of recognizing, yes, you're of African descent, although some of 'em still don't claim that.  But, and you can proud of both, you know.  And so, I have family--I refer to myself as black.  But I have, the rest of my family say, "Well, you can be there by yourself, 'cause I'm not going there."  So that's the way it is, and they refuse to identify themselves by anything but colored.  And I've also had some to go over to the other side.  We refer to as passe blanc--pass for white--things of that sort.  There were a lot of Creoles who did that, many, many, many.  So New Orleans [Louisiana] changed from that to, you define yourself as to who you are by race.  And Catholic church closed their books.  You can--used to be able to do research.  They closed their books, because people were researching their family and, in the process, if they found that someone was of color who was living as white, they were getting problems and lawsuits and so forth.  And so the Catholic church today closed it.  And you have to have special arrangements to do research in the--and that's a primary source of research because you have--the Roman Catholic church was known to have excellent records of people brought into this country, whether you were a slave or not because one of the things they insisted is that the Catholics had to be baptized and receive communion.  So the people of color, their Creole tradition and their religion gave them a favored status over others.  And that's part of where, where that came from.
Story_ID: 237469
Speaker 1: Oh, one other aspect of the culture I wanted to ask you about was, the hoodoo and all that.  Did (laughter)--did you encounter any of that growing up or--?
Speaker 2: Every time I, the word Creole comes up, that's the first question usually, is what about hoodoo and voodoo (laughter).  That's very common in New Orleans [Louisiana].  It's considered the voodoo capital of the country here.  And I'm not sure whether it's New Orleans or Detroit [Michigan], which is the capital of the [Universal Hagar's] Spiritual church, the spiritual church, very closely connected.  The people of my community, being Roman Catholic, that, of course, you know, is forbidden, and particularly those who came from Haiti would know that too.  But what happened was the--they would hide that from their priests.  But they did believe in hoodoo.  Hoodoo is not voodoo.  Voodoo is actually a religion.  Now, we didn't know all of that distinction as I grew up.  It was, to us, it was all the same, voodoo and hoodoo.  But I think hoodoo is probably a coined word for voodoo.  Voodoo is an authentic religion.  Hoodoo is superstition, a practice of superstition, where you could burn a--burn something and say some words to put a curse on a person, to get even with them.  They firmly believe that, so much so, if you combed your hair or brushed your hair, you never let that hair get into the trash.  You reserved it, 'cause if they got your hair, they could send you crazy.  And they believed that, I mean wholeheartedly believed it, even though they were Roman Catholic and not supposed to believe in these things, or you're not supposed to have evil spirits or anything like that.  They strongly believe--and they would sprinkle their houses with holy water to get the evil spirit out.  But they'd go in the backyard and bury a statute to get even with somebody (laughter).  So it was a contradiction of the worst kind.  I was taught by my mother [Louise Cassimere Prudeaux] to stay away from that because evil has power.  And evil can corrupt you, and you just don't go near there.  But I do know many of my relatives who firmly believed and practiced it of a very--they even would say, bury St. Joseph, a statute of St. Joseph upside down, if you're trying to sell your house (laughter).  That makes no sense to me.  But this is what they did.  Now, the reason it was so easy to incorporate in the Roman Catholic tradition: you don't pray to the saints, but you have those pictures there and reminding you, keeping your mind focused on what you're doing, because your mind can stray off into all sorts of things, you know.  But if you're praying, you're not revering that saint over God.  You're not supposed to have idols.  You're praying and asking that person to pray for me through this ordeal, keep me in your prayers, you know, and intercede with God for me.  That was part of the Catholic tradition then and even now.  It's still part of the Catholic tradition, not practiced as much.  And they lighted candles and burned candles, and they had altars.  Every Creole that I knew had an altar in their home.  And we had an altar with the saints, the little statutes of saints and pictures and my mother burned a candle twenty-four hours a day.  Now, I'm hearing of people with their houses burning down for burning a candle.  And we, we had a little frame house, and burned a candle twenty-four hours a day, never without a lighted candle, 'cause my mother took time to pray all day.  And so did my grandmother [Selika St. Aurin Casimer], very--as I said, very religious people.  And so, it was not difficult to see how voodoo could be brought into that.  I had a sister who believed in it.  The rest of us said we didn't believe, but we didn't want to test it so just stay away from it.  And we saw it as a superstition that would only hold you back instead of helping you to progress further.
Story_ID: 237470
Speaker 1: Tell me about school.  What school did you attend, first, in New Orleans [Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: I first attended the Catholic school, kindergarten, at Corpus Christi Church [Corpus Christi-Epiphany Catholic Church] in New Orleans in the Seventh Ward [New Orleans, Louisiana].  I was in kindergarten, first and second grade, I believe.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was transferred to the public school probably in second grade when my family could not afford to keep all of us (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was the--
Speaker 2: --and pay the tuition.  Huh?
Speaker 1: I'm sorry.  What was the name of the public school?
Speaker 2: The public school Valena C. Jones [Elementary School, New Orleans, Louisiana], V-A-L-E-N-A, Valena C. Jones.
Speaker 1: Oh, Valena.
Speaker 2: Valena, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: V-A-L--okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --C. Jones.  Okay.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: Did you--did it make a difference for you at that age?  Did you notice a big difference in the Catholic school and the--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  In the Catholic school, the--remember--what I remember most of the Catholic school was in kindergarten.  I don't remember much about the first and second grade.  But I do remember kindergarten, because the room I sat in--the whole ceiling was painted blue.  And from one side to the other was this great, big, giant eye.  An eye, and it was the eye of God, and we were taught that God was looking down on us and seeing everything we did, everything we said, and everything we thought.  And I was terrified of God and that big eye (laughter), and I remember as a child, putting on somebody's glasses and saw my own reflection in the glasses; I remember screaming, because it brought me back to that time, you know, of this big eye, very frightened.  But we were taught about God and catechism and, oh, the Catholics had the, this statement, "Give me your child for the first seven years, and you can have him for the rest," because they would put in you such an indelible feeling that it would never get out of your system.  Now, I believe that's true.  I really do believe that those first seven years are so very important.  And that's where I got from my mother [Louise Cassimere Prudeaux], my home, but also for the Sisters of the Blessed Sacrament.  When they got through with you, your sense of guilt is forever, you know.  And it doesn't mean you're gonna be perfect, but you don't feel good about being bad (laughter), you know.  And I really believe that.  Now, that's what I remember about the Catholic school.  The public school--and the difference in the Catholic school was, you were disciplined strongly, and when I came along, even in the public school, you could be--the teacher could hit you with a ruler and so forth.  So everybody believed in that kind of punishment.  But the nuns, I do remember, prayer was very important and so forth.  And I would--we learned our lessons too.
Story_ID: 237471
Speaker 1: But when I got to public school [Valena C. Jones Elementary School, New Orleans, Louisiana], you didn't, you had--I don't remember saying prayers, but The Pledge of Allegiance, every day we did that.  Everything was patriotic, in contrast to religious.  It was almost like a religion, it was so patriotic and going through that.  But our teachers there were, as I can remember them, many of them were in the age of my older brothers and sisters.  And so--'cause they went to normal school.  They didn't go to college.  They went to what they called a normal school, and then that's how they're qualified to teach.  And they had a personal interest in us.  They knew our families.  They would come home and see my mother [Louise Cassimere Prudeaux] or ask my mother to come in.  They knew it was better to go see my mother than--if my mother was asked to come in, they knew it was gonna be really tough for us (laughter) later.  But they would drop in like a friendly visit, and then let it be known what they needed this child to do or that child to do.  They had a personal interest.  And I remember--and this was true of [McDonogh No. 35 Senior] High School [New Orleans, Louisiana] too, but especially in grade school, I remember them teaching us, they called it civics.  And the public school system controlled that, you know.  So they had to teach us civics.  But in civics, they taught us what we today call African American history.  And they taught more about our African American history than they did about any civics we--if they gave us a test on that book, we wouldn't have been able to pass that.  But we knew other stuff that they didn't know about.  So I really appreciated--and the school principal's name was--I'll have to--Fannie C. Wilson [sic. Fannie C. Williams], I think was her name, Fannie, I think her name was Fannie C. Wilson.  She was the principal before I was born, and remained the principal through all of my relatives practically, you know.  So--and the school teachers, as I said, were, were schoolmates of my older brothers and sisters.  So they--everybody knew everybody.  And it was wonderful.  I--my grade school, I have some pleasant memories of that, being in the plays, on the stage.  I remember being a mouse (laughter) in--I forgot, some fairytale.  And I was dressed, and my family made the costume and put this long tail.  And I was so proud of being a mouse that I--and I was just a half a block from school, and I wanted to wear my costume to school.  So I wore it from the house to the school (laugher), going through the street as a mouse in this great costume.  I was a ballerina, and never had any dancing lessons, but they had this little frou-frou [tutu] and all.  We had a court queen every year.  They sold tickets.  Whoever sold the largest number of tickets was the queen, very wonderful times in the public school.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Any teachers that you remember particularly that were--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I remember Miss [Annabel L.] Nash.  Miss Nash was one of my favorite teachers.  And I was, I'm sure, one of her favorites.  And I remember I was talking.  I wasn't supposed to be talking, and she took the yardstick and touched.  Well, you'd have thought that she killed me.  It hurt me so badly, and I did all I could to hold the tears back.  And she felt--I could see she felt so sorry for just, you know, having touched me.  And I got home, and I cried for days.  It took me a long time to get over it.  I still loved her so much.  She was so dear to me, and she let me know how much she loved me too, you know, that--but she had to correct me.  And I appreciated that, but I never forgot her.  I remember Mr. [Milton J.] Becnel.  He was a neighbor, lived around the corner from us.  And--but these are teachers who had a special interest in us, you know.  There were many others whose names won't come to me right now.  I'll probably think about it next week or tonight when I'm in bed, but teachers who had a concern for us.  But this Fannie C. Wilson, by golly, she was something.  Everywhere she would travel, she'd come back and tell us about it.  We'd have a school assembly, and then we would listen as she would make--would inspire in us a desire to travel and go places when we would be able to do it, and tell us other parts of the world.  I remember her telling us about the cherry trees in Washington, D.C., and the cherry blossom time, and I have several times tried to plan a trip to Washington at that time, and invariably, got there a week before or the week after (laughter), you know.  But I remember that, and a number of other things, you know.  I liked my grade school and my high school too, but I liked my grade school most of all.
Story_ID: 237472
Speaker 1: Were you a good student?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, I was a very good student, uh-huh.  You know, I was--we had leftover books though.  We got the books from the white school, the kids who would--they got new books, and we got the old books.  This is the way it was.  That's how we grew up.  We had no sports.  You didn't have swimming, and then when I left school and came up here, you know, and everybody had to know how to swim and all.  We couldn't swim.  If you didn't know how to swim in the lake, it was too bad.  And my father [George Ernest Prudeaux] took us out, but, you know, we--girls were always very protected there.  And he would just hold us, and let us think we were floating.  But I never learned to swim until I was adult, and I only learned to swim enough to pass the test.  And then I tried several times after that, but that's something you should learn in childhood, you know.  But we had no sports.  We had--except what sports you make up, you know, in your own backyard and in the neighborhood.  We always played at home, because it was such a big family.  We couldn't go anywhere.  My mother [Louise Cassimere Prudeaux] wouldn't let us, and she would tell the parents, "You let them come over here."  And they would say, "Well, you know, you have a lot on your hands."  She said, "Let them come."  So the children would beg to come to our house, 'cause they have so many children.  They might be an only child or somebody who's an only child or just two of 'em.  They wanted to come where they had a lot of children, and we'd play and so forth.  So my mother always had the neighbors' children, too.  And it was wonderful, so if somebody had to go to the hospital, you didn't need to call a babysitter, you know.  You just come on and you didn't, you didn't refer to--I don't remember hearing the word babysitter.  You just come on and be with the family.  And so we had a deprived situation, but I was top in my class, of what we had to work with, you know.  So I graduated valedictorian of high school.  But--
Speaker 1: Okay, was high school--
Speaker 2: Vale--huh?
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: What did you say?
Speaker 1: No, I'm just saying what high school was it?  What's the name of it?
Speaker 2: That was McDonogh No. 35 [Senior High School, New Orleans, Louisiana].  The building is torn down where I went, but the new school is built, and it's still the public high school.  I don't remember any others right now except a trade school.  But that school was the regular high school.  My sisters went to parochial school, Xavier Prep [Xavier University Preparatory High School; St. Katharine Drexel Preparatory School, New Orleans, Louisiana] or the Sisters of the Holy Family school [St. Mary's Academy, New Orleans, Louisiana].  I was the only one who went to public school.
Story_ID: 237473
Speaker 1: In high school [McDonogh No. 35 Senior High School, New Orleans, Louisiana], were you involved in high school activities or normal high school activities?
Speaker 2: I was involved in school activities all my life, from grade school [Valena C. Jones Elementary School, New Orleans, Louisiana] on.  I was always--now, I had an instructor, Walter C. Barker [sic. Walter J. Barker] was his name.  He died.  He wrote some poems that he published himself.  It was never any big, published thing, but it was about race.  And that's what inspired me to become interested in race and equality and things of that sort.  And he had this group he called the a cappella group [The Barker A'Capella Girls Octette and Dramatic Readers].  I don't know the correct name right now.  And these were the girls who were taught to sing.  He would use a harmonica and give them a pitch.  And they had beautiful voices, and they would sing unaccompanied by any instrument, which was the word a cappella.  And he always had a public speaker to memorize and recite his poems, the poems he wrote, sometimes other poems, but mostly, his poetry.  And he would have 'em in churches, Protestant churches, in the evening as part of their service or--not necessarily their worship, like on Sunday, but part of their services during the week.  And then there'd be preaching and what have you, very dramatic preaching and so forth.  And I participated in that, and that's how I started to learn public speaking.  And I was very--he would stress your enunciation and pronunciation.  And that became important to me, growing up.  So I would go home and practice this, and I was like a nuisance to some of my brothers and sisters for correcting them all the time.  And my mother [Louise Cassimere Prudeaux] would have to get on me, you know, about that, because she didn't want me to think that I was better than anybody else.  And I didn't want them to be talking incorrect English, you know.  And so she saw the value in one sense, but she could also see a negative side developing if she didn't keep it curtailed.  So she kept me in line, which she would call later in life, "Keeping your feet on the ground and keeping your head from swelling up," (laughter).  And so that was important to me.  Now, there were--I remember in high school, Mr. [Lucien V.] Alexis [Sr.] was the principal's name.  And he was a military man before.  So he operated the high school like a military, military school.  And we didn't wear uniforms; we didn't have to wear uniforms, but I remember that I was fourteen going on fifteen.  And girls in New Orleans [Louisiana] mature--in warmer climates, you know, faster and get interested in boys earlier and so forth.  And we were not supposed to wear lipstick.  And we put on lipstick after we got out of the school building to go home.  And we were very disciplined the next day for it, because even though you weren't on school property, you violated the school rules.  That was serious.  Now, what kind of activity we have?  We had, we called a physical ed [physical education] teacher.  All they did was show us exercise, you know, up and down and turning around like that.  We had no equipment at all.  It was the basement of the school, is where we--it was dark, too.  I remember that, dark and dingy.  We had no schoolyard.  And so we would practice military marching, and marching around the school, and marching in the school and military, whatever you--you know how you see the soldiers exercising.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, yeah, drilling.
Speaker 2: That was our physical education, the drills and so forth.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And I'm sure it had much to do with the principal who was, as I said, a military man.  Now, his wife [Rita Holt Alexis] owned a school, a trade school where the girls learned to type.  So a number of my classmates went to her school when they graduated from high school and became trained as secretaries and so forth.
Story_ID: 237474
Speaker 1: What were your aspirations when you were in [McDonogh No. 35 Senior] High School [New Orleans, Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: I always wanted to go to college, from grade school [Valena C. Jones Elementary School, New Orleans, Louisiana].  My inspiration was my cousin, Audrey DuConge.  She was my mother's first cousin.  She was--she graduated from Xavier University [of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana], and she was a pharmacist and then a social worker.  And she was like a supervisor or something.  We looked up to her.  She always dressed professionally, hat and gloves on every time, and wore dark suits.  And she just looked so good and so professional.  And she spoke so well.  And I just--she was my idol and really the person who was the inspiration for me, as well as my sister, Inez [Prudeaux Chauvin], to finish school.  I always wanted to go to college.  I always wanted to be in the helping profession.  I thought, in early life, that I wanted to be a nun.  And I think the picture of my communion would show my aspirations there of where I was going.  But when I got to be fourteen years old, I knew that that was not for me, 'cause I got interested in boys and wanting to date and so forth.  And I didn't date until I was sixteen, you know.  But many of the girls did, but those of us who were in school together and tried--aspiring for college, their parents were just like ours [Louise Cassimere Prudeaux and George Ernest Prudeaux], very strict.  You had to go out in a group, and with us, it was a clan, you know.  If one went out, everybody who could walk went to the movies with you or you stayed home.  If you--if you couldn't take your brother and sister with you, then you couldn't go.  So that's how we'd take it (laughter).  And you better not stray away, you know, and so forth.  So it was something else, to grow up as a teenager there.  But the school, there weren't much activities to do in school--except now, during that period, the thing I remember most was the war [World War II, WWII] had broken out.  And they were collecting scrap iron or something.  I don't know exactly what, but I do remember that a group of us in high school went on the streets and would find whatever kind of metal they told us to look for.  And we would bring it to the school, to some kind of distribution.  Well, our school, which was of color, won the city recognition as the most, because we found railroad tracks, and we got metal from there and just groups of us, girls and boys together, and we were so proud.  I don't know what we got or how we got it, but we got the most of the metals and so forth that they were looking.  Now, that was a very important thing for us.  That was patriotic.  As I said, in the public school, everything was patriotic.  And it--we were just--there was no place to swim; no place to play tennis; no place to play anything of that sort when I came along, for African Americans.
Story_ID: 237475
Speaker 1: You were valedictorian of your class in high school [McDonogh No. 35 Senior High School, New Orleans, Louisiana], you said.  Now, that's--
Speaker 2: That's how I was given a scholarship for college.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you got a scholarship to Xavier [University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right, and tell us about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I kept it till I graduated.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, tell us about Xavier.
Speaker 2: Xavier was a wonderful experience for me.  I was--I graduated from college at nineteen, so you see the span of time I went through.  It was during the period of the fellows being at war [World War II, WWII], overseas and so forth.  And the nuns were still very strict.  The girls had one staircase to go up.  They couldn't go the same staircase as the boys.  Even though your classroom might be closer, but you better not be caught going up those stairs, you know.  We were separated.  We had classrooms together, so it was co-ed [co-educational] but separated in every way that you could be separated.  And we would sit on the campus and talk or sit on the ground, but you knew the nuns were standing in the window watching (laughter) somewhere, you know.  We'd sneak off the campus and go to a little store.  You weren't--smoking was forbidden, and we first learned to smoke, and, you know, it's like smoking behind the shed.  We'd go behind this little store and get off the campus.  If you were reported, you were in serious trouble, but most people would protect you.  And I enjoyed Xavier.  I was very active in public speaking.  I was editor of the school paper [Xavier Herald].  Charles de Lait [ph.] was my instructor there, and he's the one who taught journalism, but I was never interested in that as a career.  After I lost interest as being a nun, I became interested in being a psychiatrist and that was the influence of my cousin, Audrey [DuConge], who was a social worker.  I wanted to be a psychiatrist, but as I learned about what you had to do to be a psychiatrist, it seemed impossible, an impossible dream.  And so I gave that up and chose to become a social worker.  So I majored in liberal arts.  Liberal arts prepares you for nothing except life and education.  So I had a wonderful background for education, but unless I went to graduate school, I wasn't trained--I didn't have the qualifications to be a teacher.  My schoolmates, most of my--of the girls, became schoolteachers.  So they had careers immediately, where I didn't.  And those that I was closest with went to this secretarial school and learned to type before college, which I didn't.  So I went--I graduated from high school in January instead of June.  Now, how I did that, I don't know.  We were on the semester system, and I think being--I skipped school--skipped class twice.  So that's how I graduated early in life, in grade.  But I think that's how I happened to graduate in January, mid-term, instead of June like most people do.  I went right into college.  I figured if I didn't, I would not get there.  So I had to go right away.  So I went right from high school into college, no period in between.  And then I finished on the accelerated program.  I was afraid if I didn't continue going to school--summer and winter--that I would never graduate.  And I had to keep up my grades.
Story_ID: 237476
Speaker 1: Now, I did not--I was disappointed in not finishing with higher honors in college.  I was, great disappointment to me, 'cause I felt that I should have, and I felt that I could have, but I felt that my teachers, some of them, particularly the nuns--now, this is what I believed, were harder on me in their grading than they were on some others.  Now, this is what I believe.  I could be totally wrong.
Speaker 2: What do you think would be the reason for that?
Speaker 1: I think deferential treatment to people who had--for example, I went to school with one girl whose grandfather was the surgeon of the city.  Her father was an insurance executive, a couple of others, you know, like that, parents might have been schoolteachers.  But I think that had something to do with it.  I really do believe that.  I might be very wrong about that.
Speaker 2: You're saying that they didn't see you as the same class.
Speaker 1: That's right, right.  They respected my Catholic background, my family, you know, and all of that.
Speaker 2: But they saw you as B instead of A, I guess.
Speaker 1: A what?
Speaker 2: They saw you as a B instead of an A, I guess or something like that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, I made, I made A's, but not enough of 'em (laughter), you know, 'cause I made many A's, but I also--I went to public school, remember.  And a lot of other people went to Catholic school.  So, the girls who went to Xavier Prep [Xavier University Preparatory High School; St. Katharine Drexel Preparatory School, New Orleans, Louisiana], I believe, got preferential treatment--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --compared to those who went to McDonogh [No.] 35 [Senior High School, New Orleans, Louisiana] public school.  That's what I mean.  I think that had much to do with it.  Now, I might be wrong about that, because I really owed--all the nuns were not that way.  There were some who were very encouraging to me, and they're the ones who, you know, encouraged me to go on into graduate school and what have you.  And I really am devoted to the Sisters of the Blessed Sacrament because they are the ones who made it possible for me and many others to get a college education or to get a education, period, 'cause that was a very good school, Xavier Prep was a very good school--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and was probably superior to the public school, probably was, 'cause they taught music and all that.  We didn't have all of that.  In grade school [Valena C. Jones Elementary School, New Orleans, Louisiana], we were taught music appreciation, and they played [Ludwig van] Beethoven and [Wolfgang Amadeus] Mozart.  We were taught art appreciation, and we were seeing the--our teachers had that kind of interests in you knowing these things in grade school.  But at Xavier Prep, you had to learn--it was a preparatory school for college.  And so, they taught the arts and what have you.  And you had sports, and you had, you know, the things that you would--the background you needed for college.  And so, I think that was a good part of it.  Anyway, I finished Xavier [University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana], and I had very good memories of Xavier--
Story_ID: 237477
Speaker 1: My bad memories were that it was part of my own personal life and development.  I was a teenager.  The whole society was changing.  Creoles didn't mean as much as my family felt it meant.  People--the fellows are coming back, including my brothers, coming back home [from U.S. military service in World War II] and not satisfied with the segregated system and rebelling against it.  So, it was before the Civil Rights Movement, but the spirit was there to rebel against the system.  And in the process of rebelling against the system, rebelling against this strict discipline and a failure to understand how we have to live as people and not as Creoles in this little small community.  And I invariably liked Protestant boys.  And my parents, my--not my father [George Ernest Prudeaux] so much as my mother [Louise Cassimere Prudeaux], was so upset about me associating with Protestants for fear that I would marry a Protestant, which, of course, I did (laughter).  But, and then eventually became a Protestant, but much, much later, 'cause I never thought that would happen.  But that was her great concern.  Well, those things were changing, and as I was rebelling against that, I was also feeling the desire to be an adult before I was an adult.  And it took me a long time to know that I was not adult.  So I was at, I was--that was in my, when I was seventeen and eighteen, more like, yeah, my late--I was close to eighteen, but I wasn't eighteen yet.  And I was feeling very grown and very rebellious.  And that was a very difficult time for me, very difficult.  And my friends couldn't understand it, because their parents were not as old as my parents.  So they weren't as strict as my parents, you see.  My parents could have been their grandparents because of having so many children.  And so I was--I grew up in a home like that would have been their grandparents rearing them, rather than their parents, you know.  So they didn't have that--they had a strictness, but not the degree that I grew up in.  Well, my classmates did not under--nor did I feel like talking about it, you know.  And so I would talk to my eldest sister [Inez Prudeaux Chauvin] or my brothers about it, and they were trying to help me to understand mom and dad, although they were having their own problems with getting them to understand them, you know.  But the boys were always, I felt, treated differently than the girls.  They were respected as adults, to me, at the time that I'm trying to be respected as adult, not realizing that I was still very far from adulthood, even though I was approaching eighteen years old.  But the, the magic word is to get eighteen, and you're grown up, you know.  And my family was--my parents were trying to tell me, eighteen doesn't mean anything except you're eighteen years old, and you're legally, but you're not ready for this world.  You're not prepared.  You don't know anything about being on your own, which, of course, I didn't.  But I didn't know that then.  So that was--I remember those years as bad times for me, my last year and a half at college [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] were very difficult.  And I loved my schoolmates.  I was all wrapped up in them, 'cause they were different from the way my mother was thinking.  They were conformist.  You learned how to get along in the world by conforming, and we were fighting this attitude of conforming.  And so that, when, when I graduated, and separated from my classmates because I graduated in three and a half years instead of four--
Speaker 2: Now, what year is this?
Speaker 1: Nineteen forty-seven [1947].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And was preparing to go to graduate school [St. Louis University School of Social Work, St. Louis, Missouri].  And to accept the abruptness of--you graduate, and then that's it.  You don't see each other anymore every day.  Some got married--many of them got married right out of college and went away or the fellows would go to graduate school, medical school, or something.  It was a very difficult time for me.  It was the most difficult time, I think, of my growing up because my family was here, and I loved my family.  But they were stuck in this Creole bit, and my schoolmates, who were moving on into a new world, you know, and I'm torn between those two, of my loyalty to my family and the desire to be like my schoolmates.  And oddly, I had no close contact with my schoolmates for years until more recently because all of us went away.  Some stayed in New Orleans [Louisiana].  I thought that I would go away and come back to New Orleans and make a difference.  And I ended up not ever wanting to go back to New Orleans to live.
Story_ID: 237478
Speaker 1: Did you go right away to St. Louis University [School of Social Work, St. Louis, Missouri]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I went to St. Louis University, and I was on scholarship.  First, I was waiting for state aid.  The--during that period, we could not go to the--to LSU, Louisiana State University [Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  So the state had to pay you to go elsewhere.  And I did not know about all these other schools.  I didn't have advisors in school to prepare me for other possibilities.  And being in a Catholic school [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana], they're gonna steer me to a Catholic school.  So St. Louis University was the one that was considered the one to do.  Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] would not have been--that would be farfetched.  Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] which would be a black school, was not a Catholic school; Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee], you know, and things of that--so I was steered to this Catholic school.  Well, my mother [Louise Cassimere Prudeaux] was delighted about that.  And so, I went to St. Louis University, was just beginning their integration.  I was the only person of color in my area and in social work, most of the social workers were professionally employed before they got their master's [degree].  So I was so young with all these mature adults, and suddenly, I mean, it was just like leaving--so now my world is changing--it was all crisis for me.  All of a sudden, this big adult that you wanna be, you are an adult now, and you're on your own.  And you have to work and go to school too, where before, I couldn't stay in the dormitory at St. Louis U, 'cause they were not integrated.  I had to live out in the community.
Speaker 1: They had like black houses--
Speaker 2: Right, in private homes.  And I had to pay rent, you know.  I didn't think about that (laughter).  I had pay--buy my own foods.  I didn't think about that.  And I had a sense of pride that I was not gonna write home and ask for any money.  And the state money was slow in coming.  And then finally, I--and I struggled through that first year, but I made it.  But I lost weight.  When I--my mother said, "Come home," I could not afford to come home, 'cause I had a good job and working at the hospital.  The nuns got me that.  And I could get my meals there.  So all I had to do is pay my rent.  That was a big help, you know.  And my mother said--my father [George Ernest Prudeaux] was losing his sight, and she just really wanted me home, you know.  "You're there, and you're not in school, and you're working," and she was worried about what I was doing otherwise.  I was dating, but God knows, I didn't have any time or energy to do anything else.  So anyway, I went home, because my father was supposed to be going blind.  Well, my father didn't go blind, and my mother wanted me home.  He was sick, but he wasn't that sick.  And she just really wanted me home for the summer.  So I was there.  Well, I had, I told you, just learned to smoke.  And in graduate school, all these social workers, looked like everybody was smoking.  It's amazing I didn't die, and so I'm trying to smoke.  And daddy wasn't gonna buy cigarettes 'cause he told, you know, "Okay"--he didn't object to my smoking.  My mother objected.  She didn't--"but you have to buy your own."  So my sister who smoked would buy my cigarettes for me (laughter).  Well, I was miserable down there, because I knew I was wasting time in a sense.  I'm not earning money to help me back to school.  And I was afraid that I would get stuck there and not get back to my second year in graduate school.  And medical social workers, that's two years of graduate school.
Story_ID: 237479
Speaker 1: So I got another scholarship through the muscular dystrophy [ph.], who paid my tuition and gave me a stipend, a monthly stipend, which meant I could go to [St. Louis University] School [of Social Work, St. Louis, Missouri] and study and not spend all that time working.  And so my second year was a very good year.  I didn't have time to look up former classmates.  I could get little jobs, you know, little odd jobs in New Orleans [Louisiana], whatever you could do in the summertime to make a little bit of money, to get back to school.  And I got back to school, and with that scholarship, that was the best time I had.  This--graduate school was a real struggle, a real struggle.  The climate was different, cold.  I'd never been around snow.  St. Louis [Missouri] can have ice storms, and I remember I had to get a paper in, and it was an ice storm, and they had said, it didn't matter what had happened.  You had to have this paper in.  And I didn't take it, you know, there were others--and I told you, what--by the second year, there were two others in my department, classmates who were--and they were also Creoles, didn't have any other African Americans in my class.  They were in school.
Speaker 2: Seemed like you could glass at the class and not figure out who was black in the class--
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: You could glance at the class and not tell it was integrated, I guess, you know, by looking.
Speaker 1: Right, but one fellow was--he was brown skinned.  You might would take him for something else.  The other woman was from, a Creole from St. Martinville [Louisiana] or something like that.  I'm not sure.  I thought she was white.  She had to tell me she was (laughter) Creole.  I didn't know she was.  But anyway, it was very tough.  These are your classmates, older, all white.  I came from a different background, different culture.  Everything was wrong, and then the house where I was living, the people were very nice to me, but they were all Protestant.  I didn't have any objection to that, but you know, I grew up in a different setting, and getting to church on Sunday, on my own, alone.  Everything was tough for me, but I made it.  And it was, the grace of God that carried me through, and I graduated.  And I was able to save enough money to send for my mother [Louise Cassimere Prudeaux] to come for my graduation.  Others contributed, 'cause she wanted to be there to see me graduate and meet the people where I stayed.  And then she came with me to Chicago [Illinois] to see where I was staying, to make sure I wasn't (laughter), you know, on my own and what have you.  And she was satisfied and went back home.  And that was it.  So my pleasant, my pleasant school days would have been Valena C. Jones [Elementary School, New Orleans, Louisiana] and McDonogh [No.] 35 [Senior High school, New Orleans, Louisiana].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I had good days at Xavier [University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana].  I'm not discrediting it.  But it was a hard time for the social climate, for the race relations, from the period of my life, a teenage period; parents who are living in a different era than the whole--the whole world is changing and they don't seem to be changing with it, you know, with the war [World War II, WWII] and all of that.  And as I said, it was, this was in the '40s [1940s].  And then I came here [Chicago, Illinois] in 1950--
Story_ID: 237480
Speaker 1: --Chicago [Illinois].  It's 1950.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You've got your master's degree from--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --St. Louis University [School of Social Work, St. Louis, Missouri].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And--what did you do in Chicago when you got here?
Speaker 2: From then on?
Speaker 1: Yeah, what did you--
Speaker 2: Well, I started as a medical social worker, and I was at Cook County Hospital [John H. Stroger Jr. Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois], and very proud to have the job, some wonderful experience.  County Hospital, every day was a new experience.  Every day was another lesson.  And I learned a lot about a variety of people and all races, all cultures.  People think of County Hospital as only the poor or the people who are on public assistance.  I've had patients who were clients, who were from very well-to-do families, whose illnesses brought the patient there and whose families just couldn't handle the mounting medical bills.  And I'm talking about 1950, which is far different from today, you know.  And there were people in County Hospital who had been patients there for years, particularly in the neurosurgery department, people who had--who were paraplegics, people might have had multiple sclerosis, and things of that sort, a large number of them, who were relatives of politicians, who were not in Oak Forest [Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois] or in some other nursing home, but there.  But they also needed a lot of special treatment beyond the measure of a nursing home.  And so I was exposed to a lot of cultures, a lot of racial backgrounds, and there were many people who were recent immigrants, not citizens yet of this country, who could not speak English at all and whose interpreter spoke little English, and I'm speaking of all kinds of languages, Polish, German, you know, all sorts of different languages.  And then I worked with men who were--they had a hospital--might still have it now, called the Men's Hospital [ph.].  It was not only, but a large number of addicted men who, suffering from mostly alcohol addiction, extreme alcoholism, very extreme.  During that period, they had a section called Skid Row which is cleaned up now.  But Presidential Towers [Chicago, Illinois], which is now there, that's where Skid Row used to be.  These were men who literally lived on the street and sent to shelters and all.  I grew up fast.  I matured fast from right out of college, right out of graduate school into the real adult world.  And it was mind boggling, and it was no time to stand still and say, "What's going on?"  I mean, you just kept moving.  And what I learned in school was very helpful, but then you had to--what I learned at home was even more helpful of working with varieties of people.  And I found my big family background, coming into a real asset for me because you had so many personalities in my family, and you had the same thing.  So it was quite an experience, a learning experience, things that you cannot learn in school.  You cannot learn in the book.  You cannot learn in advance.  It happens, and it's things that are happening, experience happening right at the moment, things that I'd never heard of before, that I'm learning about.  I know about heavy drinking.  I never knew of alcoholism as the kind that I saw there.  These were men, a large number of them were Caucasians--most of them were, most of that clientele were mostly Caucasians.  A large number of them were professional men who just were cut off from their families completely and just could not, you know, we'd make referrals to Alcoholics Anonymous, a very successful program for those who could make it, but so many would just not be able to carry on.  And so they were the worst of the alcoholics, good people who just had a weakness, you know, lost everything, lost family, lost fortunes, lost relationships.  Most of 'em, most of them had no contact with families.  The families couldn't deal with it.
Story_ID: 237481
Speaker 1: I didn't know much about narcotic addiction during that period.  Before I left there, I learned about it, and I learned about it more from the maternity section where the women, the--that was--and I didn't work on that ward, and I was glad that I didn't have that assignment, 'cause I was staunchly Roman Catholic still, and the discussions of abortion, which was illegal, but all of that was coming up, you know.  So I was glad that I didn't have to have that, but as our coworkers, as we talked and shared stories, in the casework meetings, drug addiction came up.  And so I learned more about drug addiction through that, not through users, but through babies who got it from their mothers, you know.  So that was a very wonderful experience in both the inpatient--that was one of my first efforts, first time being recognized.  A story was done in the [Chicago] Sun-Times, I believe it was.  I believe that was the paper, and--showing me in one of the wards as--me and my supervisor talking with a patient at the bedside and showing medical workers not just in what people usually think of as a social worker, but in the professional part of social work.  That was a nice story.  And then another time, I was invited to participate in a radio panel discussing social work and what it meant and the involvement of it.  And I was very proud of my, my field then.  And I left Cook County Hospital [John H. Stroger Jr. Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois] and went, I worked for one year as a consultant for the City [of Chicago, Illinois] during the time when they had the city welfare department separate from the state welfare [department].  Then they merged, and I left the system and went to the Veterans Administration.  And I worked in the V.A. West Side [Medical Center; Jesse Brown Veterans Administration Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois] in the outpatient department.  But my assignment was to work with the quadriplegics and paraplegics of World War II [WWII].  And I had inherited that caseload of about four hundred.  And I had only two African Americans in that caseload.  All the rest were Caucasians.  Many of them incurred their injury not in battle, but rather in--it might have been swimming in London [England] or somewhere and injured their head or something that sort, accidents, but while in service.  And they were given everything that they needed, special housing, special automobiles, special everything, you know.  That was an interesting experience, but it never measured with County Hospital experience.  That was the most wonderful experience in my professional life, most wonderful experience.  I really had a sense of helping people, although sometimes it was discouraging 'cause you'd have repeat situations and you--because you were not ongoing.  It was while you were in the hospital--while the person was in the hospital or being transferred.  Your ongoing relationship was when it was in the clinic, where you had an ongoing relationship.
Story_ID: 237482
Speaker 1: My husband [Albert Williams] owned the business [Unity Funeral Parlors, Chicago, Illinois].  That's how I got interested in funeral service.
Speaker 2: Now, when did you meet your husband?  Can you tell us about that?
Speaker 1: Yeah, my social work friend, Mrs. Catherine Boswell [ph.] Morrow, she was married to Dr. Boswell [ph.], and they divorced.  And she later married Fred Morrow [Everett Frederic Morrow], who was white, in the White House [Washington, D.C.] under [President Dwight David "Ike"] Eisenhower.  She and I were coworkers when I was working with the city welfare department, and she introduced me.  My husband was much older than I was.  And as soon as I met him, you know, I just knew, that's--"Lord, please deliver him to me," (laughter).  And I was hoping he would feel the same way I did.  And he did.  And so, that was a--the best thing that happened in my life.  And that's how I got into funeral service.  And then from funeral service--
Speaker 2: Okay, now what year was it when you met your husband?
Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-seven [1957], um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  So you've got a successful career in social work going, and you have to kind of change gears, I guess, to be involved in the funeral business, right?
Speaker 1: Well, yeah, 'cause number one, I didn't like the funeral, being on the same side of the street of a funeral home (laughter).  But I became very involved and interested in it, and decided, after working here--'cause I worked at the [Unity Mutual Life] Insurance Company first, doing the house organ--doing the school--doing the company paper.
Speaker 2: For the sake of this part that--let's explain what your husband did.  Now, he was--you talked to me about it earlier, but it's not on tape.
Speaker 1: Okay, my husband, my husband started his career as an insurance agent--
Speaker 2: And his name?  Let's get his full name out too.
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: His name; let's get his full name.
Speaker 1: Oh, Albert; Albert Wycliffe Williams.  Everybody called him A.W.  Johnny Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson] called him Mr. Chairman of the Board.  He spoke at his funeral and at his visitation and called him Mr. Chairman of the Board.  But everybody knew him as A.W.  His name was Albert Williams.  And his middle name was Wycliffe.  No one ever used that name, and I liked it.  And so I would always use his full name, Albert Wycliffe Williams, and I called him Albert.  I never called him A.W.
Story_ID: 237483
Speaker 1: He [Williams' husband, Albert Williams] started his career in the insurance field, and he had a mentor who was interested in him and encouraged him to pursue that as a career.  And I can't remember the name of this man right now or the company that he worked for.  But this man was interested and promoted him to a supervisor, and then he had a regional area.  And he worked with other prominent--who later became prominent in Chicago [Illinois], like Arthur Knight and Harris [ph.], who was at Metropolitan Life Insurance Company, a number of people who became prominent in Chicago, had their early knowledge of each other in the South.  And they came to the North, you know, and worked.  Well, he, he continued in the insurance business and later met the Dejoie family and C.C. Dejoie [Constant C. Dejoie, Sr.] was the man who was the owner of this stock company, Unity [Industrial] Life Insurance Company, which was housed, located in New Orleans [Louisiana] as the main location and also in Chicago.  And it was doing well, and my husband was put in charge of everything.  Well, the [Great] Depression came in that period, and it was a very difficult time for the whole country, not just for African Americans, the whole country was in distress.  And the company was also--a branch of it was here in Chicago.  With Mr. Dejoie's blessing, my husband formed--reorganized that company into a mutual company, 'cause the stock company was going out of existence by default because they could not--they couldn't stay in business.  The people didn't have the money for it.  And he formed it into a mutual company, and Mr. Dejoie became the president and chairman of the board, and my husband was the corporate secretary and ran the company from Chicago.  And this was the home office here.  And then later years, my husband became president of this mutual company, and then later, chairman of the board and president.  Mr. Dejoie was retired.  My husband kept his relationship with Mr. Dejoie throughout his life, because he saw Mr. Dejoie as his mentor, and the one who really gave him that last push that he needed.  And that's where--that was his beginning and he never forgot it.  And he felt indebted to him for the rest of his life.  He respected and admired the man through all those years.
Story_ID: 237484
Speaker 1: Mr. [Constant C.] Dejoie [Sr.] was also the owner of The Louisiana Weekly magazine [sic. newspaper].  And I went to school with his--I don't know whether sons or grandsons, maybe sons, I'm not sure.  But that was the history behind that.  While he [Williams' husband, Albert Williams] was in the [Unity Mutual Life] Insurance Company and making great strides, doing well, somehow he made it through the [Great] Depression and just did well.  He said he would serve as his own janitor at night and then wash up and change clothes and open the front door for the workers in the morning when they came in.  But that's how he made it.  And then I worked there, and then he asked me to come and work here at the funeral home [Unity Funeral Parlors, Chicago, Illinois].  And I did clerical work, and--but he thought I could be helpful there.  And I got interested in becoming a trained, professional social worker.  And I wanted the--I don't mean that, I mean, trained funeral director.  I wanted that because I felt if I'm [gonna] be in charge of the office, I wanted to gain the respect of the men--and this was then, mainly a man's field.  You have women now becoming [funeral directors], in great numbers, but it was mainly a man's field.  And my husband didn't think it was necessary, but I did.  And so he agreed to let me go on back to school, and I became a full-licensed funeral director and embalmer.  But I was licensed as a funeral director before that, during the grandfather clause that they had.  And there was a period of a year and a half when you could take the state examination.  And if you could pass it, you could get a license.  And I studied and studied with my husband, and both of us passed it and got our license as funeral directors.  And then I went back to school [Worsham College of Mortuary Science, Chicago, Illinois] and got the full training, because I wanted the respect of the people.  And then he put me in charge.  But he still had a manager, because my father [George Ernest Prudeaux]--my husband did not get out of that paternal attitude of a man is in charge.  It took him a long time.  And he also was involved the same way at Illinois Service Federal Savings and Loan, which was originally Illinois Federal Savings and Loan [Chicago, Illinois].  And he was one of the founders and did the same thing of--there was a group that was organized, did not--I don't know if it had a name or not.  But it never could get their state papers.  So, it was a group of African Americans who were trying to get this savings and loan started, or bank or something.  But they could never get their state papers.  My husband, I guess with the experience of what he had with the insurance company, he and a group of men got together and the Robert Taylor, Mr. Robert Taylor, the public housing [Robert Taylor Homes, Chicago, Illinois] was named after him, he's the one who invited my husband to be a part of this group.  And he was one of the founders of Illinois Federal Savings and Loan Association, which later became, merged with Service Federal and became Illinois Service Federal Loan Association.  And it took him a while to overcome that a woman could also lead.
Story_ID: 237485
Speaker 1: And he [Williams' husband, Albert Williams] and I used to have many discussions--I never would get into an argument, 'cause I learned early from my mother [Louise Cassimere Prudeaux].  You don't win 'em.  So you just wait until it's the right time to talk, and the right time to talk is after you've given him a good meal (laughter), and he's comfortable and then you just bring it as conversation.  And if there's, if it's not in agreement, you let it alone.  And, but you keep coming back.  And eventually--and I'm thinking of the story in the Bible of the judge who finally gave in to this widow, 'cause she kept coming back.  And he finally said, you know, "Just take care of this widow, 'cause she's annoying me."  Well, I learned, you know, from my mother and other women in my family, don't argue.  Just wait for the right time and persuade and eventu--and pray, and eventually, he'll come around to seeing--and don't say, "I told you so."  It's his idea.  It was his idea all along.  And so, one day, it was his idea to recognize that a woman could lead, which is how he helped with the assistance of the other board of directors to put Louise [K. Quarles] Lawson as president of Illinois Federal Savings and Loan [Illinois Service Federal Savings and Loan, Chicago, Illinois], and then she pushed Thelma [J. Smith], and now my son [Norman Williams] is that position of chairman of the board and chief executive officer.  My husband would be very proud.  He would not have known this happening, you know.  But he, it was--he was able to put me in charge of the funeral home [Unity Funeral Parlors, Chicago, Illinois], and all those things were happening simultaneously.  So it was, as I said to Louise--she died this year--"Stumbling blocks can become stepping stones."  And I said that to my husband, but he thought it was his idea, so I agreed with him.  He said, "Stumbling blocks can become a stepping stone," (laughter).  And I learned that it's--it makes for a peaceful marriage, and it makes for a better life.  And you can achieve something in a variety of different ways, you know, like in the civil rights, we never marched with anybody, but he contributed money.  He said, "I can't do that.  I'm--more power to them," but he was a negotiator, and he believed in negotiating.  And I kind of believe that his method--although you still needed that other one, you needed somebody to storm the doors.  I really do believe that.  And it was the young people who had to do it.  But you also need those to go to the negotiating table and negotiate.  And I am more persuaded in that direction.  And a great deal of that comes from my parents who are--that's not compromise.  To negotiate is not to compromise, but you have to have some of that in your personality to be able to negotiate, I think.  You have to know how to also compromise.  I believe they go hand-in-hand, you know.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: 'Cause you can--yeah, there's no--without the troublemakers, there's no reason to negotiate. Yeah, so it makes--you have to have both elements (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, right.  Right.  Right.
Speaker 2: So then, after my husband recognized my leadership role, which I felt I had recognized a long time ago, but you don't, you know, start doing that.  I had to--his personality would not have allowed me to do differently, 'cause he was very--also amazing that I would marry a man who was so authoritative as my father [George Ernest Prudeaux] was, but in a different way.  My husband was very gentle, very compassionate, very kind.  A lot of people didn't know him as--they only saw him as a strong person.  But I've seen my husband weep, cry, you know, and so forth.  He was a very tender, compassionate, very compassionate person.  And he would think about what you said, you know.  You knew that your words were not in vain.  He would give it some thought, even if he didn't end up agreeing with you.  You knew that he thought about it and gave it some thought and would look at different sides of the picture.  And that was encouraging to me, very much so.
Story_ID: 237486
Speaker 1: I persuaded him [Williams' husband, Albert Williams] that working with families, I needed--there was a religious dimension that was required.  I didn't know what it was, but I could sense people in their grief, and I didn't see it happening from the ministers.  I didn't see the ministers giving that kind of support, grief support.  And, I also--
Speaker 2: The ministers associated with the funeral home [Unity Funeral Parlors, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 1: The ministers associated with the family.
Speaker 2: The family, oh, with the families and stuff.
Speaker 1: With the families, uh-huh.  And there might be a lot of reasons for it.  It's very difficult to deal with grief and to help a person in grief.  The inclination is to get over it, and, you know, "He's buried now, forget it and move on."  And that's not the answer, and these people needed somebody to talk with, so they can talk about their husbands, for example, and just because he's dead is not the end of his existence, you know.  And I recognized there was a great void there, and I wanted to go back to school.  So he agreed and I went to the University of Chicago, to the School of Social Service Administration [Chicago, Illinois], thinking that maybe as a social worker, I could get some more training.  Immediately, they recognized, this is not where you need to be.  You need to be, maybe in divinity school, 'cause what I'm hearing from you, I think that's where you need to go.  So I went to Chicago Theological Seminary [Chicago, Illinois].  My son [Norman Williams] was applying at the same time.  He was very inclined toward the ministry.  And he had first--you know, he grew up as Roman Catholic.  We were trained to bring our children up as Roman Catholic no matter who you married.  You weren't supposed to marry a Protestant, but if you did, you had to bring your child up as Roman Catholic, and so we did and sent him to Catholic schools.  But he went to college, and so he came back, you know, different from (laughter), and went to the Protestant, 'cause he liked the preaching better.  And he was persuaded toward the ministry, 'cause he earlier wanted to be a priest.  And he discovered that the priesthood was not for him, 'cause he wanted to marry--like I wanted to be a nun, you know, (laughter).  So he registered for--I said, "Well, get the papers, 'cause I--that's where I wanna go also."  Well, he came back, and the instructor that you had to see took him, and not me.  And I'm sure it was gender.  They didn't know we were--the school didn't know we were related.  And they took this male, African American and did not take this female African American (laughter).  So I had to wait to enter to school, after he did.
Speaker 2: Do you think (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'm beginning to learn gender discrimination which I had not exper--had not experienced before, because I didn't know it.
Speaker 2: Do you suspect they have quota or something for African Americans (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, I don't think so.
Speaker 2: And maybe took a male rather than a female, but they only wanted one?  What--
Speaker 1: I don't think so.  It might have been, but I don't think so.  I never got that feeling after I got in there.  So I don't think that.  I think just whoever was the interviewer would choose a male over a female (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay, so it was just one spot left regardless, I mean, it was just one--
Speaker 1: I don't think that was exactly so.  I don't know.  I really don't know.  I think--I really don't know, but I always thought it was gender.  It might have been age.  My son was young, I'm old.  I was a mature woman, so that might have been it too.  A lot of--I, you see, I, early on, only knew about race discrimination.  I didn't know about gender and age and all that.  I quickly learned that though, after I got into the field of religion, is when I learned about gender and age, and I was getting older too, you know.  Before that, I was always the youngest of everybody.  I'm now beginning to be the oldest or eldest of everybody that I associate with, which is really different.
Story_ID: 237487
Speaker 1: What was the University of Chicago's [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] theological school like?  Who was there?
Speaker 2: I didn't go there.  I went to Chicago Theological Seminary [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: The University of Chicago Divinity School [Chicago, Illinois]; I did not enroll.  Now, we had instructors in both so that we had some of the same instructors at Chicago Theological Seminary.
Speaker 1: Is it located--is the Chicago Theological Seminary located on the campus of the university--
Speaker 2: Right across, yeah, it's on the campus of the University of Chicago, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, it's not--
Speaker 2: And in the early life it was part of the same department [sic.].  But they broke away.  I don't remember what year they broke away and was no longer part of the University of Chicago.  But the relationship is very close, and you can get a--you can make arrangements to use their facilities.  You can also go to take classes there with, you know, but you pay tuition for your course anyway in graduate school.
Speaker 1: Now, what year is this now, when you--
Speaker 2: When I'm at seminary?
Speaker 1: Yes, uh-huh.
Speaker 2: I started in seminary--well, I graduated in '82 [1982], so I have to count backyard.  If I graduated '82 [1982], it must have been '78 [1978].  It must have been '77 [1977].  Seminary would be three years, and then I got, for my second master's [degree] which was a Master of Divinity, and then I got a Doctor of Ministry.  So that was 1982.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, back who was there, and who was teaching there and what was--
Speaker 2: [Reverend Dr.] Susan [Brooks] Thistlethwaite.  That's a tongue twister (laughter), Susan Thistlethwaite is the president now.  She was an instructor when I was a student there.  So she taught me there.  We're now very good friends.  Many of my teachers are gone now from--but some of 'em are still there.  But you have almost a whole new faculty, you know, there now, in contrast to--[Reverend] Kenneth [Bryant] Smith was the president before Susan Thistlethwaite.  And he was president while I was a student there.
Speaker 1: Is that the same Kenneth Smith that was, that served on--
Speaker 2: Kenneth Smith, you know--
Speaker 1: --the Chicago School Board?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the same--no, he was not president when I was a student.  He became a president later.  The president when I was a student was Shelby Rooks; Charles Shelby Rooks was the president.  He was African American, and I think the first African American president of that school.
Story_ID: 237488
Speaker 1: You got three degrees out of there, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, Chicago Theological Seminary [Chicago, Illinois], I got two degrees.  I'm now working on the third, but that wasn't my intention in any of 'em.  I went to seminary because the [University of Chicago] School of Social Service Administration [Chicago, Illinois] said that's not where I needed to be.  It would be a school like the [University of Chicago] Divinity School [Chicago, Illinois], theology school.  Well, I talked around, and the Divinity School has a very high reputation, 'cause of the University of Chicago.  But Chicago Theological Seminary also has a very good reputation.  And from things I heard from people who had studied there, they started there and switched to Chicago Theological Seminary because they felt it was more in keeping with their religious understanding and background, where the Divinity School was more focused on book knowledge and studying the authentic word of the Bible from a--not necessarily religious point of view and that they felt that it was not comfortable for them.  Well, I felt, if it wasn't comfortable for them, it would not be comfortable for me either.  So I chose to stick with Chicago Theological Seminary.  I did not know [Charles] Shelby Rooks at that time.  And he was president at that time.  It later turned out as I was a student there, that his wife's name was Adrienne Martinez Rooks, and she heard the name Prudeaux, and she said, well, I'm related to the Prudeauxs, and so it turned out that her relative and my relative were related.  She was related through marriage, not through blood.  But nevertheless, I was related to the Martinez through blood on my father's [George Ernest Prudeaux] side.  And, and that's how we got to know each other.  So we claimed kinship and became dear friends until they died.  But he was president, and he retired after I graduated.  He retired right after I'd gotten my second degree from the Chicago Theological Seminary, the Doctor of Ministry.  That's the last year they let you work on that right from your Masters of Divinity.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, you have to have experience in between.  So it's a three-year period, but you don't take any more academics than what you--than what I had.  So academically, I completed all the courses.  Well, my--but I didn't have experience other than being a lay person.
Story_ID: 237489
Speaker 1: Now the instructors [at Chicago Theological Seminary, Chicago, Illinois] kept saying, "You have a call to ministry."  I didn't know what they were talking about.  I didn't know what a call meant, and as I heard students talking about receiving the call, I didn't have any of that: no voice; no shaking; no nothing.  And all of these people were Protestant, plus I was still Roman Catholic, and I was not able to think of myself as anything but that.
Speaker 2: Okay, so they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, I wasn't still Roman Catholic.  That's not true.  I joined, I joined the Episcopal Church in 1970, right after my husband [Albert Williams] had a stroke in '68 [1968].  And the way his church responded to him, persuaded me to join them.  And I thought I'd never do that.  So, I had joined the Episcopal Church, but it was so much like Roman Catholic, you know.
Speaker 2: Now, what church was he a member of?
Speaker 1: St. Edmund's [Episcopal Church, Chicago, Illinois] at--where [HistoryMaker] Father [Richard L.] Toliver is, on [East] 61st [Street] and [South] Michigan [Avenue].  So I was a Protestant then, but I never saw myself as Protestant.  I saw myself as English Catholic, Anglo-Catholic.  And many Episcopalians call themselves Anglo-Catholic, holding onto the Catholic tradition in the Episcopal Church.  In the Episcopal Church, we have two--you have the high church and the low church.  And I was in the high church section, as my husband was.  So I, that's where I was when I was in seminary, and when the people were talking about the call, and they were using a lot of quotations from the Old Testament and all, and the Roman Catholics at that period had not done much about Bible study.  That came later, and they're now very much involved in Bible study.  Well, we heard the Bible by it being read in the Gospel and all the readings every Sunday, and if you go every Sunday and following the readings, you will have read the complete Bible in three years.  But you--that's not like studying it, you know, and having Bible class.  So I would hear people quoting chapter so and so and verse so and so, memorized, you know, which we never did.  And I still don't know how to do that yet, you know, a couple of phrases, I will know, a couple of pieces.  But I never tried to memorize the Bible that way, but to focus on words that would be important for meditation or something.  So I wasn't inclined to become ordained, 'cause I didn't see--I didn't know what a call meant.  I knew that I had to do this though.
Story_ID: 237490
Speaker 1: And I brought that [ministry] training [from Chicago Theological Seminary, Chicago, Illinois] with me into funeral service.  And I formed what I called the widows' club and we were trying to get a name for it.  And we wanted it to be identified as widows, but it was hard to find a name without saying, "the widows."  So, and this was during the period of the acronyms.  Everybody had an acronym, you know.  So I had LARUTH, La--L-A, meaning The Ruth, R-U-T-H.  Ruth from the Bible was the widow who followed her mother-in-law and so forth.  So I picked that one as--and Ruth happens to be my first name.  But that's not how I picked it.  I picked it, Ruth as the Bible.  And here was the story of a woman who was a widow, who followed her widowed mother, and kept loyal--mother-in-law, I mean, and kept loyal to her, to Naomi.  And I proposed it, I invited a group of women who were widowed.  Bob Ming's [William Robert Ming] widow, Irvena Ming, her name was, was retired and working as a secretary at St. Ambrose Roman Catholic Church [Chicago, Illinois].  She was Roman Catholic, and I persuaded her to join me in forming this group.  And she became our first chairman.  And we're still going strong today.  Now, that must have been, I'm guessing twenty-eight years ago, 'cause I--we tried to celebrate our twenty-fifth, so it's about twenty-eight years ago, yeah.  And some people continued coming and some die out through the years, and some just felt, you know, they didn't need it anymore.  It's a support group, but it's--I have to keep from having it become a social club.  It constantly runs in that direction.  I have to constantly move it back to what our focus is, is that we're helping people to accept widowhood.  And that's how I used my theological training in this work of trying to give pastoral care without that name or trying to give spiritual guidance without that name, but just as a friend.  And I found that it was needed for more than just the widows.  So, I did not form any other groups.  I just, when I'm talking with people in family arrangements, I generally use this table because we usually have more than one, and I stop in my interviews with them and take time to let them talk about their grief; let them cry.  I encourage them, if you have to shout--and it's not everybody, you know--some families say, "Oh, just stop that foolishness."  That's not foolishness.  And I recognize how important that is, and I help them to express their feelings more freely and to recognize what the funeral is about.  And I am convinced, I know this, I know this is, for me, it's a fact, that viewing the dead body helps you to accept that the person is dead.  That's a fact.  And going through the funeral experience helps you to release those emotions that you would otherwise keep in, which is injurious to your health.  I know that's a fact, and that you're able to more adjust to this world which is gonna change for you, particularly for a widow, for a woman.
Story_ID: 237491
Speaker 1: A man who's widowed will have more people calling him, particularly women, and looking after him than he wants.  A woman who's widowed, when the flowers and all that is gone, seldom get a call unless you're very close friends or close sisters.  You're no longer invited to the dances.  When my husband [Albert Williams] lived, we would have--at the [The Original] 40 Club [Chicago, Illinois], my husband would have two and three tables of guests.  When my husband died, I was not invited, until recent years when my son [Norman Williams] is now a member, and I'm his guest.  You're no longer part of the social circle.  You're invited to bridge clubs, and if you don't play bridge, you're invited to have lunch, and you can go.  You're invited to social activities involving women, but you're not invited to the mixed group.  My husband always invited widows.  Lorraine Green, Mrs. Lorraine Green, who was big in the AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha] Sorority and all, we always would take the limousine and go pick her up and take her to the 40 Club and take her back home.  After my husband died, I continued that practice, and he would, for widows, offer to have you come.  "And you don't need an escort," he said.  "[HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Ruth] Teena [Williams] and I will escort you."  And many of 'em didn't want to go, but we gave them the opportunity.  Now, that's the compassion I told you my husband had, because he felt that way.  And also he said to me, "I'm much older than you.  I'm probably gonna die before you.  Have friends of a lot of ages," which he did himself. "So you don't have friends--when I die, all the rest of 'em die."  Well, many of my friends did die after my husband died, 'cause most of my friends were of his age group.  But I also belonged to--and he pushed me there, I belonged to social clubs like The Girl Friends [Incorporated] and [National] Smart Set.  He said, when they invited me, he said, "Yes, you want to belong."  I said, "Well, I don't know if I want--I don't play bridge." He goes, "It's not a bridge club."  And so he wouldn't hear that.  He said, "No, you need this.  You need these friends.  You need this companionship.  The day will come when you'll be glad you--." And I now see the wisdom of what he said.
Story_ID: 237492
Speaker 1: But all of that is part of ministry, you know.  You don't think about the priest just being on the altar celebrating the mass.  There's more to that than, in the ministry, of working with people during the time of their sickness, during their good times and bad times, not just baptisms and weddings, but funerals.  I've had the experience here of many Protestant, and I say Protestant because Roman Catholics, you cannot be a priest without knowing how to conduct a funeral, 'cause that's part of your training.  It's very important that you be buried in the church or buried in the sense of, not laid to rest, but that you're given the final rites.  That's extremely important, but I found that there were many Protestant ministers who had never conducted a funeral.  And I was shocked when a man came to me, and he was--he identified himself as the minister.  He said, "I don't know what to do."  And I said, "Well, while the visitation is going on, I'll go through it with you."  And I could tell him, as a funeral director, without knowing the denomination of what your ritual is.  I could write up an order of service for you and tell him when you read the scripture and when you read the prayers, serve as the emcee for him, so he'd know next time to do it for himself; tell him what prayers to say at the seminary--at the cemetery, I mean, you know.  So, gee, if you're not prepared for that, how you gonna help a person if they're grieving?  If you don't know how to conduct the funeral.  Now, many others do know how to conduct the funeral.  And in this day, more people attend funerals than they attend church on Sunday morning, for many churches.  So when they come for a funeral, they have a good congregation to preach to.  And you have to help them to understand that the sermon is now, not the time to excel on how much Bible you know, but to comfort the family, words of comfort, and you're not gonna take a long time preaching and running up this time that becomes expensive for the family who has to pay the cemetery more money if you don't arrive on time.  You wouldn't be thinking about those things, you know.  But with my background, I can bring all of this experience into this field.  And it makes me more helpful to the--to my clients, you know.  Now, whether they appreciate it or not, I don't know.
Story_ID: 237493
Speaker 1: At this point in my life, as--I feel, as someone said to me, "Why are you going to work on a Ph.D. now?"  I said, "This is something I always wanted to do and couldn't afford to do it.  I couldn't afford in my early life, financially.  In my middle life, time wise, I was busy in my family and my husband [Albert Williams] and my social life.  And now I have the time to do it, and this is how I want to spend my time."  I want to do what I always wanted to do in my early life was work on my Ph.D., I felt, in my field.  But my field has changed.  But it's still interrelated, you know.  And so, I have found that all of them worked together to help me get where I am.  And so they said, "Well, now, what are you going to do after this?"  I said, "Let me put it this way.  I'm preparing for my final stage period.  I'm in my twilight years.  I have lived a good life, and I've been blessed tremendously, very fortunate.  I'm ready to die any moment now.  I'm prepared to meet my maker.  If I live, and I'd like to live to make the Ph.D., fine.  But if I don't, I'm prepared to go."  And so all of these other things don't matter to me anymore.  And for the first time in my life, I really have learned to know what is really important, and what's not important in life.  And I can appreciate that, and I go back to my family, my mother [Louise Cassimere Prudeaux] who taught me that.  The most important things are family and relationships.  God first.  And I've kept that as my training and I've tried to put that into my son [Norman Williams].  And I also got it from my husband, who was also--he knew.  I was blessed to have him and to learn from him what an average person would not have learned, by the difference in our ages, you know, and the way he responded to me and respected me as a woman and not as a child.  He was very, very helpful to me.  So all of that I brought into funeral service, and for me, it is the most rewarding career in one sense, because you know--you see the results of what you've done in helping a family mend, break up--pick up the broken pieces and put it back together and go back and live your life as fulfilling as you can.
Story_ID: 237494
Speaker 1: I didn't become a [Episcopal] priest until 1987.  It took me all that time from 1977 to '87 [1987] to become ordained, 'cause I couldn't even ask for ordination.  It was on my mother's [Louise Cassimere Prudeaux] death bed that I finally understood what they had been trying to tell about what was a call.  And I saw my mother, I knew she was dying.  The medical person there were saying, "How--why could you say that?  Who told you she's dying?"  I said, "I know she's dying.  I can tell.  I can see what's happening to my mother."  She had this breathing tube in her throat, and she could not respond.  She was only sick two weeks.  She had a stroke and pneumonia, and she died, all in two weeks on New Year's Eve.  And I was, on Christmas night she went into intensive care.  And we all--my brothers and sister--my brother who was here, and my sisters from California came and--to be with me, and to be with mom.  And we would take turns holding her hand and praying, you know.  And the nuns came.  My mother was staunch to the--to her death, and prayed with me.  And while I was at her foot of her bed, looking down at her, the sun was coming down through the window and shining like a radiance unbelievable, you know.  It just felt like a sacred place.  It brings tears to my eyes now, and I then knew, 'cause the words came out of my mouth, "God, do with me what you will."  And that's when I knew I had a call.  I knew I had to become a priest.  And I remember my mother saying to me one time before, she said when we were talking, she said, "I don't see anything--" she never talked about me.  She's talking about people.  "I don't see anything wrong with a woman being a priest."  I said, "How could you say that?  You're a Roman Catholic.  You know that you don't ordain women," and, "how could you say that?"  She said, "Well, I just don't believe that."  I said, "Well, you remember when--how you used to reprimand me, 'cause I didn't believe everything they said?" (Laughter) And she laughed.  She said, "Yeah," and, "but I believe most of what they said."  She was correcting me.  "I believe most of what they said.  But I don't believe everything.  I believe that Jesus had women followers, and I believe that they were disciples just like the others."  I said, "Well, where are you coming?  You asked me where'd I get all this from when I was talking as a teenager.  Where does this come from?"  She said, "It came from in my mind."  I said, "Well, now, you believe me, huh, that I just thought it up?" which is true.  I just thought up, "Why, if this has to be this way?" and, "why that has to be this way?"  She laughed.  She said, "Well, yeah, I understood."  But I never accepted that a woman could be a priest, 'cause that was instilled in my mind, and that was my stumbling block.  And it was at her deathbed that that loss of the dearest person brought me the gain of the dearest person in my life, which is God.
Story_ID: 237495
Speaker 1: And that [death of my mother, Louise Cassimere Prudeaux] made me know that I had to become a priest.  And I talked to my husband [Albert Williams] about it.  And then he and I saw, after my mother [Louise Cassimere Prudeaux] died, after the funeral--well, yes, after my mother died and after the funeral, we went to see the priest.  But before I could do anything, my husband was diagnosed with a life-threatening illness.  And he had an aneurysm and he said, "Well, I want to know all of the pros and cons before I go into surgery, because I've lived my life fully, and I'm not gonna--I don't wanna be a vegetable."  So they did the workup and found he had two aneurisms, one near the heart and one near the renal cavity--renal artery.  And they said, "It's death threatening.  You could die at any moment or you can live five years.  We don't know."  You know, nobody knows when you're gonna die.  He said, "I know that.  Now, tell me my chances of survival."  They said, "50-50."  He said, "Then I'll take the 50 without the surgery.  God's been good.  I'm a live my life as it is."  And so he was on his feet every day until he died.  He came to the office every day, and he knew what he had.  For the first six months, we--priesthood was on hold, and we just cried and cried, and then finally we said, "This does not make sense.  Where is our faith?"  And we decided to live it to its fullest.  And those were the best years of talking and knowing and expressing our personal feelings an--just an indescribable relationship.  And during that period, his--I still was Roman Catholic--no, I had already, I had already become [Episcopalian]--I get his illnesses mixed up.  I'm reverting back to 1968 when I joined his church [St. Edmund's Episcopal Church, Chicago, Illinois].  During that period, his church sent him flowers and cards and all, which persuaded me to join them.  And during this period, when he had this life threatening illness, they didn't know what--about it, 'cause he didn't show being invalid or anything like that sort.  But they know that there were days, some Sundays when he didn't come to church, 'cause he wasn't feeling well or something.  Mostly, he said, he just couldn't sit in church, and the--he could be quiet at home, but he couldn't.  So I would go--well, they would send cards and flowers and cards to me too, "thinking of you."  And so, that's how we went to see the priest.  And so we went back to see him, and then I went back to the school and talked with them, and then I had to go through--the process of becoming a priest is long and tedious.  You have so many committees and so many people have to vote on you to see whether you've really received a call.  And I went through all of this situation and then I got to the--they sent the standing committee which is the--you have the committee on ministry, and you have--you have to go through a weekend conference and they spend a weekend of psychiatrists and psychologist and other people observing you as you're relating, how you relate to other people and all of that in preparation to see whether they'll even approve of you becoming a priest.  Well, finally, I made the postulancy and the candidacy.  But they had, before that, they had told me I had to go back to seminary.  I said, "I've got all the training.  I have more training than I need.  I have a Master of Divinity.  I have a doctor in ministry [Doctor of Ministry]."  "Well, you have to have Anglican studies."  "Well, why do I have Anglican studies?  I'm a Roman Catholic.  I know--the Anglican Church came out of the Roman Catholic church."  "Well, you still have the Pope authority, and you have to learn about the Episcopal Church."  So I said, "Well, my husband has a life-threatening illness, and the cannons of the church permit you to study under a priest.  Would you allow me to study under a priest and--so that I can have easy access to my husband?"  I said, "If I'm in school, I can't leave the classroom," and this is in Evanston [Illinois]--I mean Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois].  Well, they insisted, so I enrolled [at Seabury-Western Theological Seminary, Evanston, Illinois], and one week later, on a Sunday, while talking, my husband died suddenly.
Story_ID: 237496
Speaker 1: Even though we [Williams and her husband, Albert Williams] knew it was life-threatening, even though we had talked about it, we had put it behind us and said, "We're gonna live."  And we really lived as if this didn't happen, as if it didn't exist.  Now, I'm sure he did not.  I'm sure he kept that to himself.  I believe this in hindsight, not then.  And we were--we had very happy moments, and that day we went to brunch, and we were sitting down talking, and he was fully dressed.  My husband--you almost never saw my husband in casual clothes except on the golf course.  He was always in shirt and tie--or when he walked the dog, he was in a sport shirt--always, suit, shirt and tie and all.  And when he died, that's the way he was dressed.  And, I'll go off into another story, so I'd better stick to where I was.  I called--I could not go back to school [at Seabury-Western Theological Seminary, Evanston, Illinois] that week, 'cause I was planning on my husband's funeral.  And he had said he wanted to be buried on a Saturday, and he had died on a Sunday, which meant the whole week.  And we met his wishes for a Saturday, and did just what he said, "I want the biggest funeral.  I want you to pull out everything in style."  And I'll come back to his funeral, 'cause that was important to me.  But getting back to the priesthood, I finally went back to the seminary, and I said, "You know, it might be a mistake.  Maybe I wasn't called to be a priest."  I said, "Look at the things that have happened.  My mother's [Louise Cassimere Prudeaux] died.  My husband is, has died, you know.  Maybe these are signs I'm not supposed to be a priest."  They said, "No, no, don't conclude that.  Just keep praying and ask God to guide you."  And there was a monk passing through town, and they asked me to see him.  And so I--they encouraged all the students, but they particularly urged me to see him.  And I did.  And I told him my story, and the whole--about my social work and funerals and what have you.  And he said, "You know, I don't--" --this was when my Bishop, who was [James W.] Montgomery, he didn't believe in ordination of women and the Episcopal Church was still divided on that.  And so--even though they had voted in General Convention [of the Episcopal Church] to ordain women.  My local priest was against it.  So this minister spoke to me, said, "You know, I was not in favor of the ordination of women, but if ever there was a person called to the priesthood, you are."  He said, "And I'll keep you in my prayers," and I asked him, could I go to confession, because the Episcopal church respects confession, but it's mostly public confession, not private confession like Roman Catholics, who don't practice that sacrament anymore either, which I think is unfortunate, 'cause it's really like psychotherapy.  But anyway, I went to confession.  He heard my confession, gave me his blessings, and said, "Continue seminary, don't give up."  So I went on and finished that year, and then I went on to do all the other processes before you become a priest and was ordained in 1987 at the cathedral.  I used to say, when they would tell me, you would--to be a priest.  I said, "No; furthermore, when I--if I ever become a priest, it'll be in the front door, not the back door."  I never knew what those words would mean.  It was prophetic because Bishop Montgomery did not ordain--you know, when the ordination of women first occurred in 1974, when the women went, rebelled, and he had two bishops to cooperate and ordain them in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  But that was not by General Convention approval.  And then later, they approved the ordination of women, you know, and that was like '74 [1974], '75 [1975], '76 [1976], somewhere along in there.  I don't remember the exact year [1976].  Well, my bishop, Montgomery, whom I dearly loved, but he was not in favor of the ordination of women.  We had a Bishop [Quintin Ebenezer] Primo [Jr.] who was the black bishop, black--a suffragan bishop, and he would ordain the women, but they would ordained at local churches.  When I was ordained a deacon, I was ordained at St. James Cathedral [Chicago, Illinois] 'cause Bishop Montgomery would ordain you as a deacon, but not as a priest.  And he left in September, and in December I was ordained a priest by Bishop [Frank Tracy] Griswold [III], who is now the presiding bishop in New York.
Story_ID: 237497
Speaker 1: How has your ordination been received by the [Episcopal] church?
Speaker 2: Right now, very well, but early on, not well at all.  I had members of that same church [St. Edmund's Episcopal Church, Chicago, Illinois] where I'm serving now, who would come to the altar rail and when I was serving the challis, the wine, and walk away when I got there.  I mean that was very obvious, and that was very painful.  I had some who left the church and went elsewhere, left that particular church, not denomination, and went elsewhere.  I've been invited to other churches to preach, and when they saw me, they said, "That woman again," you know, and would leave, that kind of thing.  It was very difficult.  But I was old enough now to be able to take those kind of hurts, because it was the same kind of hurt as racial [discrimination] or things of that sort.  Up to then, it was only race that I knew, in terms of discrimination.  Now, it's gender, but I didn't identify it so much as gender and particularly in the church, where I didn't expect it.  So that was very, very painful.  It hurt me to have friends who questioned why you want to be a priest.  You can't tell--and why accept that you are called that way, and, and you have to go that direction.  People who criticized me for becoming a priest, like if I just chose to do this.  And, "Why you want to do this?  What are you gonna gain from it?"  I mean, wholly wrong emphasis.  And then after that, I left St. Edmund and received an invitation to serve as assistant to the dean at St. James Cathedral [Chicago, Illinois].  Well, that was quite an honor.  But, again, gender and age, because they had a vacancy that could be filled for a full-time priest, and I'm a priest, working part time.  I said, "I'm available for full-time work.  I'm widowed.  I have time to do this."  Well, they just ignored it.  And I persisted in letting him know, "I am available for full-time work," as they also asked me to participate in interviewing people who would come there as a deacon.  And it would be a transition deacon to priesthood.  Anyway, they chose this young man who was a social worker before he was a priest.  He did not have as many years of experience as I had.  He was younger; he was white; he was male.  And I saw in that what happened as discrimination, racially, gender and age.  And I, to this day, still feel that way.  He certainly, I hate to say, but he was lacking in many areas, and often, they would ask me to do something--when he was deacon, there were things he could not do, liturgically, that I could do because I was a priest, would ask me to do those.  And I felt that I was required to do it.  I felt inside my heart that I was required to do it, but I didn't want to do it, but I did it because I, as a priest, I felt I needed to do that.  And I asked God to help me through that period.  And then when he became a priest and could, was qualified now, you're ordained to do these things, his personal life, and his wife, his children--his baby, his, you know, whatever, he was out for maternity--or paternity, I mean, leave or something, and I would have to substitute for him with no extra pay, with no extra compensation.  And to me, that was total discrimination.  And someone spoke of suing.  I said, "I'm very much opposed to anybody suing the church," and I still am.  I feel you pray and negotiate and that somebody--eventually, things will change.  And I'm still persuaded that way.  Now, I'm fully accepted at St. Edmund.  I'm back there, in my retired years, as a part-time assisting priest.  And I feel so loved and so supported.  And, and they claim me as their own, and I feel like I'm back home.  I don't feel any discrimination, age-wise or--it's an older congregation anyway, but there are young people there too.  I feel respected as a priest, as a woman, as a person, as a person of color.  And sometimes I'm embarrassed with the amount of accolades they give me, and the amount of deference, I feel embarrassed about.
Story_ID: 237498
Speaker 1: The Episcopal church just went through--
Speaker 2: Anglican.
Speaker 1: Yeah, or the Anglican (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's part of the Anglican Communion.
Speaker 1: Sure, I know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And the church has gone through another crisis with gender orientation, at least known gender orientation.  We should put it that way--
Speaker 2: Yeah, when you're speaking (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) because there are gay priests already--
Speaker 2: You're talking about gay, yeah--
Speaker 1: --in the Episcopal Church.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: And it's just that the, knowing that somebody is or--
Speaker 2: Well, that's true.  It's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) acknowledging it openly seems to be the crisis.
Speaker 2: It's always been true.  You've had, I mean this bishop [Vicky Gene Robinson] was not the first gay bishop.  But he's the first publicly known.  He acknowledges who and what he is, and he--our church invited him this year during the month of February to come and preach during the celebration of Absalom Jones and, who was the first black priest in the Episcopal church, and he was called a bishop, although he was never consecrated a bishop.  But we regard him with high respect as the first one there.  And the Bishop spoke of his experience as a gay person in the same vein as race and many African Americans rebel against that, of putting it in the same understanding.  But discrimination is discrimination.  I don't care what color or flag you go under, whether it's gender, age, race, skin color, nationality, or whatever it is.  We are people of God.  We're God's creatures, and we are to be respected.  And I really liked his sermon.  I liked what he had to say, and I think we have to be more understanding and compassionate and not try to be God.  Even priests: we are ministers; we're not God.  So we're not here to judge a person.  You might have an attitude about behavior, but we are not to judge a person.  We're to love people as God's creatures.  And that's another thing I learned in my home and my family home and from my mother [Louise Cassimere Prudeaux], as long as I can remember, she said, "You're a child of God."  And that has stuck with me.  I'm a child of God.  So no matter what anybody says about you or however you're discriminated against, you are first and foremost a child of God, which means you are equal to anybody.  I have kept that and I've--I think all of my family has held to that.
Story_ID: 237499
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well, one of the things--and I'm gonna go political now, a little bit, one of the things is recognize the signs of when we are divided, when things are put in our way to divide us, because it's--that's how we are conquered.  It's by dividing, like in the Creoles, you give them a little special treatment, you divide them from the rest of your brothers and sisters of color, and that's how you're conquered, where if you really learn to stick together and remember that you're part of the human family, and part of God's creation and forget all these false labels that we attach to each other, with age and race and color and gender and sexual orientation, you know, and drop those labels and love each other as human beings, if we, as African Americans could get back to, to where we used to be.  We used to be closer, more united, and sadly, I hear it verbally: people who have made some success and talk down about those who are still down at the bottom.  It is true, there are some people who are down there and don't even try.  But that's not true for most people.  I believe people are good and most people don't wanna be there.  They are there because they can't help it, because there are so many strikes against them.  It's discouraging to work for minimum wage or less.  Minimum wage is what, $5.75 or something?
Speaker 1: I think so.
Speaker 2: That's what you buy--for lunch.  You see what I'm saying?  So if we could just learn that those of us who have made it remember that our brothers and sisters, not just our blood brothers and sisters, but all of us are really blood brothers and sisters as we come from one mate, mates--one couple of human beings.  And so that makes us blood relatives all over the world.  And if we could just remember that and would build up instead of tearing down, if we could just pick up the trash in the neighborhood, even if you didn't put it down there, you know.  Tutor somebody.  If you've got a little bit more--you don't have to be a college graduate.  If you know how to read and write, teach your neighbor how to read and write.  You don't--should not have illiteracy.  There's no reason for anybody in the neighborhood not to know how to read and write.  I learned that from my family.  I didn't know anybody who was illiterate, who didn't know how to read and write, but I learned that there were people who were not part of the family, they were taught to read and write.  That's what we--if we could learn that.  But it's any superior group that can divide you is how they conquer you.  And it doesn't happen just among us.  It happens among all people.  If we could remember politically that here we have a person, a candidate for public office, and I'm not going into calling names or anything, but I'm talking about a situation, who is promising, an outstanding star, you might say, stellar star, and here comes someone else to create competition and divide the vote.  Can't you see that?  Can't you see what is happening?  Haven't you had enough experience through the years of knowing that that's another way of conquering you?  Now, that's a political statement, but we need to recognize that that's our life, too.
Story_ID: 237500
Speaker 1: When you look back at all the things that you've done in your life--you've done a variety of things and had some rich experiences, is there any major thing that you would change?
Speaker 2: That I wish I'd done differently?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I wish I could be as old in my young years--take that what I have learned down to when I didn't know anything.  I don't know that there would be anything I would change exactly.  I'm trying to think.  We make mistakes.  Yes, I wish I'd not made some of the mistakes I made, but basically, truthfully, I would say, no.  I don't know of anything that I would have changed except that I do know I've made some bad decisions, and I have good sense enough to correct them and not get stuck in a situation that needs to be eliminated.  I have good sense to know that I'm blessed with having a wonderful son [Norman Williams] and he's chairman of the board of Illinois Federal Savings and Loan [Chicago, Illinois].  He's, sadly, he's a workaholic, but I don't--I say sadly because everybody thinks that's bad.  But, you know, we love work, me, my husband [Albert Williams], my son.  We loved--working is not a chore for us, 'cause we love what we do, you know.  So, I just wish for his good health that he would, would take care of himself well and--but he's been very--he's been a good person, very compassionate and really a good person.  I'm proud of that.  I can't think of anything that I wish that I had not done, 'cause I've learned something even from my bad experiences.  I've learned some good lessons.
Story_ID: 237501
Speaker 1: When you look back on your life, then what would you see at this point to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I don't know if I can answer that, except to say, the life I've lived.  I love my family.  I love my big family.  I--there are many things that some of my brothers and sisters did that I would not do.  I don't mean bad things.  I mean that I wish that they had done better for themselves, you know, but they lived their life, and I have learned to appreciate that not everybody--we're all different.  And we have to live our lives differently.  And you can't live somebody else's life for them.  So I wish that I could have done more for my brothers and sisters.  But I do know that I did the best I could.  I do know that the ones who are living now and even those who died often said to me, they're so proud of what I have done or accomplished.  And I sometimes feel embarrassed about it, 'cause I feel I've been more blessed than they are.  And, but they were blessed too, in many ways.  There're more way to be blessed than material, and they recognize that.  I don't know what legacy I have except maybe just--I tried to live my life that it would be a model life, made the mistakes of teenaged, you know, rebellion and so forth, but barring that, the rest of my life, I would say that I have tried to live a life that would be a model life, which is what I am called be anyway.  All of us are called to live a life that others can model and build on behind us.  And I owe that to my family and to my friends and to my mentors like Dr. Virginia Lewis who I call--I adopted her as my foster mother.  I had a habit of calling my mother [Louise Cassimere Prudeaux] every Sunday, and when my mother died, I didn't have her to call.  And I'd go to the phone, and then I couldn't call anybody.  So when Virginia was widowed two years ago, I asked could I adopt her as my foster mother.  And she was delighted.  And it was good for her because she was a new widow.  So it was timely for both of us, and I call her every Sunday now.  And is quite a remarkable person, an educator, she and her husband.  And she certainly is my present model.  Audrey, my cousin, Audrey DeConge was early in life.  My sister, Inez [Prudeaux Chauvin], in a domestic way, and my friend, Dr. Virginia Lewis, in my present life.
Story_ID: 237502
Speaker 1: Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Ruth] Teena [Williams].  As part of the Do Drop Inn, cheaper by the dozen clan, as a daughter, a sister, a mother, a wife.  I guess that's what I can say, and a friend.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Story_ID: 237503
Speaker 1: A Sunday afternoon in February a few years ago when we were celebrating African American History Month and Absalom Jones, the first black, African American priest in the Episcopal church.  And that picture was taken without my knowledge.  I, it looks like I'm posing, but I'm really not.  The red, black and green, or the liberation colors, in my vestments.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Great, okay.
Speaker 1: That's the group picture of The Girlfriends [Incorporated], the Chicago [Illinois] chapter of Girlfriends.  It's a national organization, social primarily, of African American women, and that was taken in the, I think in the '60s [1960s] or maybe '70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And this is you?
Speaker 1: That's me in that far corner.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, very good.  We'll move on to the next one here.
Speaker 1: I was honored to be asked to serve as the cover person for Ebony magazine in 1964.  And that's the picture of me in my home at the time.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, got it, Fred [ph.].  Just give us a quick close up here.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of me on the Sunday I celebrated my last Holy Eucharist mass at St. Margaret of Scotland Episcopal Church [Chicago, Illinois] where I served as the priest for about seven, seven and a half years.  And the men in the, celebrating, uniforms that you see are the Knights of Columbus, a Roman Catholic order of laymen, and that was quite a privilege and honor for them to come and salute me on my last day at that church as a tribute to me.  That was because they were friends of my brother (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: And they came to celebrate with me.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Very good.
Speaker 1: A picture of me in my younger years.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Probably taken, probably taken in nine--in the '70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, great.
Speaker 1: And my husband, A.W. Williams, Albert Wycliffe Williams.  I always liked to say his full name, but everybody called him A.W.  And that was a picture in the late '50s [1950s].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Now, that was a, I was a senior in college, just before my graduation.  So that would have been 1947.  I was at Xavier University [of Louisiana] at that time, in New Orleans [Louisiana].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of me after I was ordained a priest, but I'm in my lay clothes as a--in my profession as a funeral director, not as a priest at that time.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, go ahead, whenever you're ready.
Speaker 2: That's a picture of me--my back is to the camera--it's a picture of me having lunch, a luncheon at my home.  And you'll see [HistoryMaker] Etta Moten Barnett who was one of the persons interviewed and [HistoryMaker] Jewel LaFontant [MANkarious], Eunice Johnson and her daughter, [HistoryMaker] Linda [Johnson Rice], and some other friends.  We were honoring, I think her name was Dixon [ph.].  She was head of the DuSable Museum [of African American History, Chicago, Illinois].  That's the same luncheon in reverse order of the table.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  So you're here?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And this is?
Speaker 2: I can't see that.  It must be Eunice Johnson.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I've told you that already.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  You did, didn't you?  They must have gotten two in there.
Speaker 2: That's a picture of me and my husband and my son [Norman Williams].  That picture was taken--I remember it, because it was the year he died.  It was taken in 1985, probably March or April, and he died in October.  But I like that picture, 'cause I'm reminded of a few years earlier, the three of us.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That's 1985.
Speaker 1: And that one is the three of us, and that would have been taken in early '60s [1960s].  I would say 1960--somewhere between '61 [1961] and '63 [1963].  I think it was the occasion of my son's confirmation, maybe, in the church.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, and we next have this one.
Speaker 1: That was, I'm sure in the late '60s [1960s], and that's in the home of Mrs. Helen Howard.  She was the wife of Dr. [T.R.M.] Howard, a physician whose hobby was hunting.  And his entire playroom consisted of animals that--large animals that he had hunted and they were prepared by a taxidermist.  So his whole downstairs in his home looked like a wildlife refuge or something.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 1: Now, that's a picture of me with the late Mayor Harold Washington, and that was after he was elected as mayor.  It was one of the celebrations, and I like it very much.  I like that picture, yes.  And I had a great admiration for him.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That's a childhood picture, and I think it's my first communion.  It might have been confirmation.  I'm not sure.  But I must have been anywhere between eight and--say anywhere between six and eight or nine years old.  I don't know.  My holy innocence then (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next one.
Speaker 2: Now, that's a picture of me and one of my brothers.  I came from a large family, you know, and that's one of my brothers.  He's now deceased, taken in New Orleans when I was a teenager.
Story_ID: 237504
Speaker 1: I'm a teenager, and we're in, I think it was in Pass Christian, Mississippi, a group of us for the weekend, and one of my few clowning moments (laughter), with everybody's hat on my head.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of my father [George Ernest Prudeaux], an early picture of my father.  I don't know what year, but I would guess it to be probably in the '30s [1930s].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That's my mother [Louise Cassimere Prudeaux] and father on the occasion of their fiftieth wedding anniversary.  They're both deceased, and I had a memorial tribute in the church bulletin.  I don't remember what year, but it might be on the cover.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: The cover might say what year.  I don't know.  But it doesn't really matter.  That's not important.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: All right, that's the ordination to the priesthood at St. James Cathedral [Chicago, Illinois], the Episcopal Church on [North] Wabash [Avenue] and [East] Huron [Street].  That was 1987.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That's the--at the end of the service for my ordination as a transitional deacon, which is what you become before you become a priest.  So that was the ordination of me as, with the bishops and other, others of us who were ordained deacons on that occasion.  And that's the final step before priesthood.
Story_ID: 237505
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me and my husband [Albert Williams], probably in the '70s [1970s], as we were preparing to leave for a formal dance.  I think it was taken in our home before we left for the formal dance.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, good.
Speaker 1: This one is probably in the '60s [1960s].  We're already out at a social, and that's a picture of me and my husband.  My husband was very active in social clubs.  I--he probably was more active than I was.  He probably belonged to more clubs than I did, and so we had many activities of that nature.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: And that picture would have been, I'm guessing, in the '70s [1970s], when we are--I involved in some, some social or civic activity.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, now the one in the glasses?
Speaker 1: With the glasses?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Right.
Speaker 1: That's what I was talking about.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That's a picture of me standing behind my brother and then two of my sisters.  We were there to celebrate another brother whose picture is not on there, celebrate his birthday in New Orleans [Louisiana].  And that's what we were doing.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, and what year was that, approximately?
Speaker 1: My--I have to say approximately, five--I would say about six years ago.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: So I don't--I can't remember what year that would be (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Ninety-eight [1998].
Speaker 1: Ninety-eight [1998], something, where along there.  Same thing, yeah.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION):
Speaker 1: That's a picture of me seated with my son's [Norman Williams] in-laws.  His wife is in the red jacket, and next to her are her parents, her mother and father.  And then I'm in the midst of that.  And then the two to the other end are my two stepdaughters, daughters of my husband at a previous marriage.  We were more like sisters, because they're slightly older than I am, yeah.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Good group; good-looking group.
Speaker 1: Thank you.  All right, that's a picture of the Sunday I celebrated my first mass after I was a priest, after being ordained a priest, that my first mass.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  What year?
Speaker 1: That was 1987.  Um-hm.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Now, this is the only picture I have like that.  That's me and my husband seated on the couch, and his older of the two daughters with us, and then behind us our son, Norman, and his other daughter, Barbara [ph.].  So that's the only picture I have of the five of us.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Who's this with?
Speaker 1: Right, now, I'm there with [HistoryMaker Dr.] [Robert] Satcher [Jr.], the prominent orthopedic surgeon at Northwestern Memorial Hospital [Chicago, Illinois], who was recently named as an astronaut and is about to go into training for that second career.  He's a member of our church, St. Edmund['s] Episcopal Church [Chicago, Illinois] on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, great.
Speaker 1: And I'm standing there with Mrs. Height, [HistoryMaker] Dorothy Height.  She gave a talk at our church, St. Edmund's Church.  She's an absolutely fabulous woman in looks and in what she has to say.  And I was honored to be asked to take a picture with her.  It was a delight for me.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  That's good.
Speaker 1: She was autographing her book ['Open Wide The Freedom Gate: A Memoir'], the story of her life.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of my brother [Claud Raymond Prudeaux] and his wife.  It was taken about a year--he, he died two years ago, and that was probably taken the year before he died.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah, it said 2002 on the back.
Speaker 1: Okay, and that's a picture of me at--in the parish at St. Margaret of Scotland Episcopal Church [Chicago, Illinois] where I served as priest before I retired.  And I'm with some of the parishioners and guests for some celebration at church.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, and (unclear)--
Speaker 1: That's me when I graduated from Xavier University [of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] in 1947.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That's a picture of my mother [Louise Cassimere Prudeaux].  My guess is that was taken in the early '70s [1970s], late '60s [1960s] or early '70s [1970s], in that period--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: I think in the '70s [1970s], early '70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Unless you can think of something in the collection that you brought.
Speaker 1: Did you have my father [George Ernest Prudeaux] there?  It was a picture of my father alone.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  I know we did the one that was in the--pick a couple that you like.  Which ones do you like?
Speaker 1: You're talking to me?
Speaker 2: That center one there.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: We're doing a funeral procession in the street.  This was a request of the deceased person to have a horse-drawn wagon carriage for the hearse.  We didn't go all the way to the cemetery, but we started walking in the direction of the cemetery, and then later by motorcade to the cemetery.  But it was her wish to have her final rites with that appoint--with those appointments.  And it was a unique experience for us and for our funeral home, and I was very glad to be a part of that experience.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Now, the one below it.
Speaker 2: And it's the same thing, of our continuing on the street procession, going toward the cemetery which was in the--quite a distance (laughter), wasn't nowhere near the vicinity of it.  But we were leaving Unity Funeral Parlors [Chicago, Illinois] which is, you know, our establishment, and when we handled her funeral rites.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is a picture of me in my professional work as a funeral director, and I'm guessing that that was taken shortly after my husband died.  So I'm thinking it would have been like '88 [1988] or '89 [1989], 1988 or 1989.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Oh, that's just a--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Just a portrait.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Of me as a priest.
Speaker 2: That's a picture of me and my husband in our home in New Orleans [Louisiana], and that picture would have been taken in the late '60s [1960s].  And me and my husband in the center and to our left would Dr. and Mrs. Hebert [ph.]; he was a prominent dentist here in Chicago [Illinois].  And to my right would have been Mr. and Mrs. Maceo [K.] Sloan of Durham, North Carolina who were down there.  I don't know what we were celebrating, but Dr. Hebert and his wife are from Chicago.  And Mr. and Mrs. Sloan were from Durham, North Carolina, and whatever we celebrating, we were down in New Orleans together in our home.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  That's it.
Speaker 2: I wanted the one with me kneeling down in front of the bishop [Bishop Frank Tracy Griwold, III], being ordained.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, go ahead and give us your description for this one.
Speaker 2: All right, that's my ordination to the priesthood, and that's showing the laying on of hands where all the priests gather around with the bishop for the completion of the ceremony or ordination to the priesthood, St. James Cathedral in Chicago, [North] Wabash [Avenue] and [East] Huron [Street].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty-seven [1987].
