Story_ID: 466546
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir could you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: It's Dr. James B. Williams [History Dr. James Williams], you want me to spell that?
Speaker 1: It's the conventional way of spelling it?  Then sir that's okay, we'll just keep going (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Conventional way.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And what's your middle initial again?
Speaker 2: B.
Speaker 1: B, okay.
Speaker 2: Buchanan, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay and what, what does the B stand for?
Speaker 2: Buchanan.
Speaker 1: Oh, Buchanan?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: May 28, 1919, El Paso, Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Right now I'm retired.  I was, I practiced surgery here in Chicago [Illinois] for about forty-six years though.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The Williams Clinic [Chicago, Illinois], you said you had passed by.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's right, and sir, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: What is what?
Speaker 1: Today's date?
Speaker 2: Oh, July the 15th, right [sic. July 16, 2008]?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  It's--
Speaker 1: Nineteen, I don't know is it 2008, I think it is?
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 1: We're at The HistoryMakers [Chicago, Illinois], it's at 1900, what street?
Speaker 2: South Michigan [Avenue] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) South Michigan.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 466547
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, we ask five lightweight questions as a warm-up sort of, and they only require a short answer.  So, I hope you don't think these are silly questions, but the first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We were poor, so we had to eat what was available, you know?
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Favorite color?  Not really, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, sir, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Well, we used to ski a lot and then used to fish, so I like the spring and the fall really.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Not really, we have a place in Jamaica, but we've had it for about eighteen, nineteen years now, you know?
Speaker 1: Okay.  The last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.
Story_ID: 466548
Speaker 1: Well I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family first, and then I'm gonna ask about your father's [Jasper Williams] side of the family.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name was Clara B. Williams [Clara Drisdale Williams], it was Clara Belle Williams, her maiden name was Drisdale.
Speaker 1: And how do you spell that?
Speaker 2: D-R-I-S-D-A-L-E.
Speaker 1: Okay, Drisdale?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: That's a, she was born in Texas, I think it was Plum, Texas, but I don't know the exact date right offhand.
Speaker 1: Okay, Plum, Texas.  And, from what I was reading, when she died at a hun- at 108?
Speaker 2: Yes--
Speaker 1: Years old?
Speaker 2: Within three months she would have been 109.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause she was born in the 19th century?  It seems like--
Speaker 2: Was born in about eighteen--
Speaker 1: The 1890s?
Speaker 2: Eighteen eighty-five [1885] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Eighteen eighty-five [1885]?
Speaker 2: --or something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, now--
Speaker 2: I'm not 100 percent sure that that's correct but I think it was about that time.
Speaker 1: Okay, well we can, you know, someone can check it out.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: So that's all right, so, circa, 1885?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, in Plum, Texas.  Now is there, have there been stories passed down about the origin of the family or how far back do stories in your family go, on that side of the family?
Speaker 2: Well, her grandparents were slaves, and her mother [Melinda Drisdale] and father [Isaac Drisdale], neither one of them went to school anyplace, her father learned how to read and write, and he taught his wife how to read and write, but neither his wife nor himself had ever gone to any school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, my mother, she won a scholarship to Prairie View [Prairie View State Normal and Industrial College; Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas], and she finished Prairie View when she was nineteen, she was valedictorian of the class, I think there were about forty-five in the class.  And I don't know right where she got her smartness from.  She got a scholarship, a white senator from Texas found out she was pretty bright, so they gave her a scholarship to Prairie View, which paid about half of her tuition at Prairie View.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she worked at the school and was able to finish, she got her degree in 1905, it was.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, okay.
Speaker 2: And my dad finished college at Wiley College [sic. Wiley University; Wiley College, Marshall, Texas], you've heard of Wiley?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: That's where Denzel [Denzel Washington] made the movie about the--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --debate team?
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'The Great Debaters,' right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I went to Wiley for two years.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: But that's where my dad went, he finished college in 1904.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: Well let me go back a little bit and I wanted to ask you what you knew about, where your mother's family was from actually, were they always from Texas as far as you know, or did they have a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) As far as I know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I just wanted to make sure we knew that.  And so, there's no story about them being from some other place coming to Texas or anything?
Speaker 2: Not to my knowledge, I think they were from Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous) and so were my dad's folks, were from Texas too.
Story_ID: 466549
Speaker 1: So, your mother [Clara Drisdale Williams] went to school in Plum, Texas before she went to Prairie View [Prairie View State Normal and Industrial College; Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  And, where is Plum, do you know?  Is that near El Paso [Texas]?
Speaker 2: It's, nah its closer to Austin [Texas] than it is El Paso.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's in the central portion of Texas, just about.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, was Plum a black town?  I'm just asking 'cause there were some black towns (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There were quite a few Bohemians there, you know, in the area that--'cause when we grew up big enough, we'd go down there and pick cotton and most of the people that owned the land were Bohemians.
Speaker 1: Now, actually from Germany?
Speaker 2: I guess so, from Germany.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, there are quite a few Germans in Texas from--
Speaker 2: Right
Speaker 1: --what I understand, yeah.
Speaker 2: See at one time, Texas was part of Mexico, and Texas wanted to maintain slavery, and Mexico I think they abolished slavery about 1839, something like that.  So, Texas separated from Mexico because of their desire to keep slavery.
Speaker 1: Right, that's good information 'cause I don't think a lot of people realize the--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --the effect of slavery on Mexican statehood, you know?  So, well, tell us what kind of personality did your mother have?  She sounds like a determined person.
Speaker 2: Well she was, yes she was very determined, very bright, and she didn't complain because in Las Cruces [New Mexico], where she started teaching, well she started teaching after she taught at Prairie View.  But they had segregated schools in New Mexico, see in Hobbs [New Mexico], Clovis [New Mexico], Roswell [New Mexico] and Las Cruces, all of the towns that were close to Texas had segregated schools, and my mother taught.  That--she was the first black teacher in New Mexico.
Story_ID: 466550
Speaker 1: My dad, he did just like I told you, he finished Wiley [Wiley University; Wiley College, Marshall, Texas] in nineteen and four [1904] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What--
Speaker 1: In fact, I looked at the book that they sent me from Wiley and it shows that he was in a class of seven, there were seven people graduated in 1904 from Wiley and he was one of 'em.
Speaker 2: Okay, well let's go to your father's side of the family.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 1: Jasper B. Williams [Jasper Williams].
Speaker 2: Okay, does B stand for Buchanan too?
Speaker 1: Buchanan, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And he was, my dad was the first president of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] west of the Mississippi [Mississippi River].
Speaker 2: Okay now look, I'm gonna try to put that in chronological order first.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I, first thing I wanted to get is his date of birth and where he was born and getting through school into college and then we'll get him there.  But, what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The exact date of his birth, I'm not sure--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --I'd have to; I could look it up and--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --find it, and let you know.  He was born in Texas.
Speaker 2: Okay, but he wasn't born in Plum [Texas]?
Speaker 1: I think he was from around Cameron, Texas.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay, Cameron, Texas, okay.  Now, okay did--
Speaker 1: And he and my mother [Clara Drisdale Williams] met in 1907.
Speaker 2: Okay, is there, is there a story about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He was--
Speaker 2: --how they--
Speaker 1: --teaching and so was she and he wanted to wait, he had eleven sisters and brothers and he wanted to wait until they got out of school before they got married.  And so they finally got married in 1917, and one of his brothers I remember very well, he was a tall handsome guy, he was a minister and he was president of Paul Quinn College [Dallas, Texas] in Texas.
Speaker 2: Okay what was this brother's name?
Speaker 1: His name was James, the same as mine.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay so his brother James Buchanan, or what--James Williams?
Speaker 1: I'm not sure whether it was Bucha--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --I don't know his middle name, but I know he was a president of Paul Quinn College.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Paul Quinn, that's an A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] school, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's a--
Speaker 2: Paul Quinn College.
Speaker 1: --church school.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  All right, now is there, do you know much about your fa- the history of your father's side of the family?  You know, how far back can you trace them?
Speaker 1: Well, right offhand I can't, I know there were quite a few and they were from central Texas that's where the family grew up mostly.  But, I don't even know the names of all the kids 'cause it's just like I told you, when he and my mother met they, he decided that there were eleven kids in his family and they wanted them all to graduate from college.  And they waited from nineteen--ten years, from 1907 'til 1917 to, you know, before they got married.  And my dad was president of the NAACP.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He was the first president west of the Mississippi and he was president and when he went to El Paso [Texas], well what happened, he and Dr. Nixon [Lawrence A. Nixon] were classmates at Wiley--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and Dr. Nixon and my dad moved from Cameron to El Paso because of the Ku Klux Klan [KKK], the Klan lynched two blacks and they hung one of 'em across the street from Dr. Nixon's office.  And, so they decided that they had to leave Cameron, so then, he, Dr. Nixon and my dad were, went to El Paso, Texas.
Story_ID: 466551
Speaker 1: Was your father [Jasper Williams] finished with college, was he teaching when he became the president of NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]?
Speaker 2: The relationship to NAACP, I'm not exactly sure, but he finished college in 1904.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He finished Wiley [Wiley University; Wiley College, Marshall, Texas].
Speaker 1: All right, well NAACP didn't start 'til 1910, so--
Speaker 2: Is that right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's right, so--
Speaker 2: But he finished--
Speaker 1: So he was--
Speaker 2: --college in--
Speaker 1: --president--
Speaker 2: --I know he, when he wrote for my mother's [Clara Drisdale Williams] hand in marriage, he did it on NAACP stationery in 1917 'cause we still--
Speaker 1: --yeah.
Speaker 2: --have a copy--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --of that.
Speaker 1: Yeah he could have done it then, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And was he president of the Cameron [Texas] chapter or the El Paso [Texas] chapter?
Speaker 2: He was west of the--he was president west of the Mississippi [Mississippi River] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) For the whole region?
Speaker 2: For the whole region.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: West of the Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Oh that makes sense, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And my dad--
Speaker 1: All right so, now who is?
Speaker 2: --had a--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --degree, so when he came to El Paso he applied for a job that they had, the border patrol had as a messenger.  And they gave him the job but one day in order to get rid of him, they asked him to empty a spittoon and he told 'em, he said, "That's not part of my job description."  So he refused it and they fired him for not emptying the spittoon.
Speaker 1: So they were just trying to get humiliate him?
Speaker 2: Pardon?
Speaker 1: They were trying to humiliate him?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: Seems like it.
Speaker 2: --they probably knew that he was president of the NAACP west of the Mississippi so, I don't know how many threats he had but my dad had a pistol under his pillow as long as I'd known him.  He had a .44 that he kept under there and when he came to New Mexico, well he and my mother came to El Paso first--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --because Dr. Nixon [Lawrence A. Nixon], he and Dr. Nixon were friends and they apparently, he used to help in the drugstore for the dispensing of his, to his patients.
Story_ID: 466552
Speaker 1: Do you know doc's, Dr. Nixon's [Lawrence A. Nixon] full name?
Speaker 2: Nixon?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I know, I know him very well, in fact I used to hunt with him sometimes and--
Speaker 1: No, do you know his first name?
Speaker 2: Well, I can find it, but right (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay--
Speaker 2: --offhand--
Speaker 1: --all right, well--
Speaker 2: --I--
Speaker 1: But he--
Speaker 2: --always--
Speaker 1: --was a--
Speaker 2: --I always called Dr. Nixon--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was a general practitioner who finished Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But he and my dad [Jasper Williams] went to Wiley [Wiley University; Wiley College, Marshall, Texas] before he became a physician, and they were friends 'cause he--in El Paso [Texas] he got rid of the poll tax, and he, see what else, oh he had the poll tax abolished in Texas.
Speaker 1: Now Dr. Nixon or your father?
Speaker 2: Dr. Nixon.
Speaker 1: Dr. Nixon did?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: He had a white attorney who took it, took the case to the [U.S.] Supreme Court and--
Speaker 1: Okay now, let's see, oh can you tell me a little bit or more about the lynching, did your father just tell you why?
Speaker 2: They lynched the guy (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah--
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: The guys a--
Speaker 2: --they never did, they just said that they lynched two in a short period of time and one of the guys, they hung him across the street from Dr. Nixon's office.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So, well see if you know the history of the U.S., when Lincoln [President Abraham Lincoln] was assassinated, the president who became, who replaced him was pro slavery.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Johnson [President Andrew Johnson].
Speaker 2: Johnson.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And what he did he--see at one time for the ex-slaves they had guards to protect him, and we had some congressmen and senators from the South but, when Johnson came in he removed he guards that were protecting the ex-slaves, and he brought the Ku Klux Klan [KKK], he supposedly was one of 'em, ones who would influence Ku Klux Klan to come into the South.  And they came in so that they could keep the ex-slaves from getting too powerful, you know?  Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you're right, there's the rise of the Klan came after they abandoned the black militias and the--
Speaker 2: After they what?
Speaker 1: They abandoned, they had black militias at one time that were armed and they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I--
Speaker 1: --they abandoned them and then they actually took the Union troops out too.
Speaker 2: --yeah, I didn't know the, what they--the guards were who were guarding the ex-slaves, I mean I didn't know whether they were black or white, I probably thought they were white mostly, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah there were a mixture, there were black militias, that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, is that right?
Speaker 1: --were formed by the Union Army and then--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --there were also Union, you know, regular white troops as well, so, but they both were taken out of the picture, allowing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: As you said, allowing the Klan to, and the other white terrorist groups to take over again.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And to terrorize freedmen.
Speaker 2: And my dad, he taught school, in fact when he was in El Paso, he had a drugstore see, and all the prescriptions from Dr. Nixon were encouraged to go to his drugstore to get, he wasn't a pharmacist but he ran the drugstore, and--
Speaker 1: And did he have to hire a pharmacist?
Speaker 2: He had to hire a pharmacist.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well the guy who owned the drugstore in El Paso was leaving town, so he sold the drugstore to my dad and he ran it for Dr. Nixon at the time.
Speaker 2: So was Dr. Nixon the only black doctor in that area?
Speaker 1: At that time he was the only one.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And did he practice, did his practice include white clients as well as, or patients as well who were white?
Speaker 1: He had Mexicans, whites, he had, he was very, probably one of the most distinguished physicians that I've ever known.  I used to hunt with him sometimes and he had a good reputation.  He never was admitted to a hospital staff.  He delivered me and my two brothers [Jasper F. Williams and Charles Williams], but he had to do home deliveries and he couldn't go to the hospital.  But he had finished Meharry, I know that's where he went to medical school.
Speaker 2: Now did, was Dr. Nixon an inspiration for you in terms of becoming a doctor?  Did you?
Speaker 1: Well somewhat 'cause I admired him, I mean he was a very unusual individual, you know?  And he treated all of his patients the same, didn't matter what color they were, he had a lot of white and a lot of Hispanic patients.  In fact, when we got ready to build the clinic [Williams Clinic] in Chicago [Illinois], he said, "You ought to build it here in El Paso."  'Cause he delivered my two brothers who were, I had two brothers who were physicians, and he delivered all three of us at home.
Story_ID: 466553
Speaker 1: Now you've got an older brother named Jasper [Jasper F. Williams] right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: He's Jasper, Jr.?
Speaker 2: Jasper, his son [Jasper F. Williams, Jr.] is junior, his son is still living.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He lives here in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Well now he is, I guess.  I guess his son now is Jasper, Jr. but his, he's named after your father [Jasper Williams] right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Your older brother?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Then you, then it comes, do you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) His--
Speaker 1: --come next or?
Speaker 2: --middle name was Jasper Fleming, and I think my dad's name was Buchanan, I think, I'm not a 100 percent sure but I'm pretty sure.
Speaker 1: So he wasn't a junior, but he was, he was named after your father?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yes sir.
Speaker 1: Okay, and then did you come next, after Jasper?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and then Charles [Charles Williams] was the youngest.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Of the three of us, he finished medical school first though, Charles did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He went to Howard [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.], and I went to medical school at Creighton [Creighton University School of Medicine] in Omaha, Nebraska.
Speaker 1: Yeah and what did your older brother do?  Jasper, did he?
Speaker 2: Jasper?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Well Jasper was a field artillery officer, he was a first lieutenant, and after the war [World War II, WWII] they put him in the hall of fame for field artillery officers.  I'm gonna have to find out what that really represented, I knew he went in the hall of fame, but I didn't know for what reason.  And, my dad hated the war so that when Jasper wrote him a letter that he was going to Europe, he knew that the artillery was a fighting unit, and he had a stroke in Las Cruces [New Mexico], and he stayed in a coma for about two and a half years.  When I came from the [U.S.] Army he was in a coma at that time.  But--
Speaker 1: But did he come out of it, did he ever come out of the coma?
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: --he stayed in a coma the whole time.  And they'd give 'em, the doctor would come and give 'em IVs you know, to keep him alive.  But he stayed, he survived even when I came home, he was still alive, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 466554
Speaker 1: When you think about your parents' personalities and their talents, and their dispositions, who do you think you take after the most, your mother [Clara Drisdale Williams] or your father [Jasper Williams]?
Speaker 2: Well, my dad was very high strung, and he didn't compromise much like my mother did.  My mother, well with my dad being president of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], west of the Mississippi [Mississippi River], you know, as soon as that was known, I'm sure he developed a lot of enemies that he homesteaded, you know, out from Las Cruces, New Mexico and they got people to say that he didn't live out there and he shouldn't get his title to the land.  And he took that to court, and finally he did get the deed to the land.  See at that time, if you homesteaded and all you got was position of the top of land, you didn't get any mineral rights.  And he was one of the first blacks out there, but he was, at the time that he had--before he was, before he homesteaded he was a school teacher in Las Cruces, in the high school [Booker T. Washington School, Las Cruces, New Mexico] because he had a degree, you know, and at that time they gave him a degree from Wiley [Wiley University; Wiley College, Marshall, Texas] or Prairie View [Prairie View State Normal and Industrial College; Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas] that included the, a teaching certificate.  And, he found out that Lincoln [President Abraham Lincoln] helped free the slaves he said, so he, on his birthday he was gonna give the students a day off vacation from school, which he did and the superintendent didn't like him anyway so, at the end of the year they fired him and that's when he homesteaded out from Las Cruces there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he talked the probably thirty or more black families into homesteading, you know, he told 'em they'd have to live on the land for three years and put eight hundred dollars' worth of improvements on it in order to get position, well possession of the top of the land.  And he was, when he went to get his title to the land, his, the cattlemen didn't like him and they had two black women who testified that he didn't live on the land, but he went to court and he finally got possession of the title.
Story_ID: 466555
Speaker 1: So you were just telling us that your father [Jasper Williams] was fired from his teaching position in Texas and--
Speaker 2: In New Mexico.
Speaker 1: In New Mexico, in Las, this is in Las Cruces [New Mexico]?
Speaker 2: Las Cruces.
Speaker 1: Okay, and then he decided to do some homesteading?
Speaker 2: Then he decided to do homesteading, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, so he homesteaded?  It was in New Mexico too as well?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, okay, was that out in--
Speaker 2: Right out from, it was, well I think it's about three hours in the wagon to go, and about eight miles from Las Cruces.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, I was gonna go back a little and, now you were born in El Paso [Texas]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right?  And your teachers were, your parents were running a drugstore at that time?
Speaker 2: They were running a drugstore.
Speaker 1: When you were born?
Speaker 2: My dad wasn't a pharmacist.
Speaker 1: I know.
Speaker 2: He was a friend of Dr. Nixon's [Lawrence A. Nixon].  So he arranged, the pharmacist who owned the pharmacy was leaving town so they bought the pharmacy, and actually Dr. Nixon sent most of his prescriptions through the pharmacy, you know?
Speaker 1: Yes sir.  Now, so they, but now, at some point they moved to Las Cruces, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right?  From--now why did they go to Las Cruces after, they had--
Speaker 2: Well my--
Speaker 1: --in El Paso?
Speaker 2: --mother [Clara Drisdale Williams] found out that they were, well needed school teachers in Las Cruces, they had segregated schools in Las Cruces, Hobbs [New Mexico], Clovis [New Mexico] and Roswell [New Mexico].  Santa Fe [New Mexico] and Albuquerque [New Mexico] didn't have any segregation because most of the towns that had segregations were close to Texas and they brought migrant workers, most of 'em which were black in and--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --that's why they did, to keep the schools segregated.
Speaker 1: Okay, so about how old were you when your parents moved to Las Cruces?
Speaker 2: They moved to Las Cruces in 1924, that's when I was taken there, and I was born in 1919, so--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I guess I was pretty close to five when we went to Las Cruces.
Speaker 1: In 1925, okay.  Okay it's 1925, and your father taught for a year before he was fired?  Was that it?
Speaker 2: He was principal of the high school, I think he had to at least have been teaching for a year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My mother was the first black teacher in New Mexico, and when I grew up we couldn't even go to New Mexico State College [sic. New Mexico College of Agriculture and Mechanic Arts; New Mexico State University, Las Cruces, New Mexico], it was segregated.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But your father was the principal of the high school in Las Cruces?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What did they call it?  Did they call it the--
Speaker 2: Washington School [Booker T. Washington School, Las Cruces, New Mexico].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was it Booker T. Washington?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, Booker T. Washington High School [sic.], and this was what they would call a colored high school, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, and he decided that he wanted to give the students Lincoln's [President Abraham Lincoln] birthday off as a holiday?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And that was the reason why they?
Speaker 2: That that was the reason the superintendent fired him at the end of the school year.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, okay.
Speaker 2: And when they fired him, they fixed it so that he couldn't teach in Texas or in New Mexico and that's one reason why he went to the--to get the homestead.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know?
Speaker 1: So that's pretty, that's a bad, pretty bad deal?  Here's a man who's a principal, he gets fired and he's got to--he can't work in the area anymore and he's got to go to, he's got to become a homesteader?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And so but he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, it was interesting, my dad, I don't know where he learned his farming technique, but he farmed for nine or ten years that I know of.  And every year, I don't remember a single year when he didn't get enough rain to get a good crop, he raised everything, vegetables, one year he raised enough cotton to, he got, I think he had three bales of cotton from the cotton that he raised.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: But he had good crops, and the good Lord gave him enough water every year so he, every year he farmed he had a good crop.
Story_ID: 466556
Speaker 1: Now tell us the story you told us off camera, we weren't rolling and you were telling us the story of the little white Spitz dog and the--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, tell us that story, yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, see this little, we had two dogs, one was a little white Spitz, and he was a hell of a dog, he liked to protect the family.  And somehow at night he knew that the cows were, that they had cut the fence and the cows were in the field.
Speaker 1: Now these are the cattlemen, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Who would cut the fence?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: And they would do it so they, they didn't want you there anyway, right?
Speaker 2: They didn't want him there anyway, they wanted the cows to be free to eat the grass that grew on land.
Speaker 1: Now this just like the story in the westerns, in the western movies.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: The cattlemen want the land and the homesteaders, they have conflict.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, go ahead.
Speaker 2: And so, what they did.  Oh this little white dog would come and bark at night to wake us up, and my dad [Jasper Williams] never did go out there 'cause I was kind of happy he didn't 'cause I know that he was, he had a loaded pistol and we just had rifles, and we went out there, you know, to fix the fence and to run the cows out of the field.  And the little white dog would, he would help us get 'em out 'cause he'd hang on to just one of the cows, you know, as they were running.
Speaker 1: He would hang on at the ropes.
Speaker 2: That's right.  When he'd come back he would be bloody from his teeth having cut into the flesh of the cow.  But the, just like I told you, the cattlemen, I'm pretty sure it was cattlemen that killed him, I can't imagine anybody else wanting to kill a dog who was, all he was doing was going down the road going home, and he did that on a weekly basis.  He'd come in and check on my mother [Clara Drisdale Williams] and then he'd go back out to the farm.
Speaker 1: Okay, so your mother was teaching, still teaching?
Speaker 2: She was teaching in Las Cruces [New Mexico].
Speaker 1: Okay, so he would go back and forth between the?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He'd just come in town once a week, and--
Speaker 1: So he was on his own schedule?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he protected us, you know, and nobody could ever touch us, you know?  He was, he protected the house and he was quite a dog, you know?
Speaker 1: What was his name, you remember?
Speaker 2: Tony [ph.].
Speaker 1: Tony, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He was a great friend too.
Story_ID: 466557
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this, we always ask this question.  What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: What are the, what was (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: I still didn't understand what you said.
Speaker 1: I said, sir, what were some of the sights, sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Of growing up?  Well, growing up, we, I spent probably more time with my dad [Jasper Williams] on the farm then.  My younger brother [Charles Williams], it was, had clubbed feet, and he was, a lot of his time he was spending going to the Carrie Tingley Hospital [Truth or Consequences, New Mexico], which was in New Mexico at Elephant Butte.  And he had surgery there after what had been done for him in El Paso [Texas] wasn't quite satisfactory, you know?  And the doctor who did the orthopedic surgery was from El Paso, and he'd come through Las Cruces [New Mexico] and pick him up and take him to the hospital, and he also was a pilot, sometimes he would fly.  And my brother liked the physician, in fact, I'm sure that probably helped influence him too because he wanted to be an orthopedic surgeon, but he was short and apparently they didn't need, he couldn't get a residency.  But, the doctor, you know, he'd pick him up and make sure he got to the hospital, you know, for surgery.
Speaker 1: So you said, sometimes the doctor would fly?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he had an airplane too.
Speaker 1: He had a plane.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So would your brother get a chance to fly back to, with--
Speaker 2: He had--
Speaker 1: --him or, or what?
Speaker 2: --I think he flew, but the doctor got killed in his airplane, he was flying out close to the mountains and a downdraft caught him.  But he made a big impression on my brother because he'd drive by the house and pick him up on the way to Elephant Butte, see?  El Paso is about forty-five miles from Las Cruces and that's about another seventy-two miles to, from Las Cruces to Elephant Butte, you know, where the hospital was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I was just wondering if your brother ever, ever rode in the plane with the doctor too, as they went back home?
Speaker 2: I'm sure he would have invited him but I don't know--
Speaker 1: If he did.
Speaker 2: --that he did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But he knew that the doctor was flying an airplane?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The times that I know of that he was taken to the hospital, he was driving his car.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, well was this doctor the first pilot that you ever met?
Speaker 2: I, let me see, did I meet him?  I'm not sure that I ever met the doctor.
Speaker 1: But you heard about him?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But did it intrigue you, the idea that he was a pilot and had a plane?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, well I was interested in the airplanes, I mean in, we had an old kind of old motor Ford plane that came and landed in Cruces and I went out there to see it.  But, this doctor, I don't remember exactly what kind of plane, I'm sure it was a small plane that he was flying, yeah.
Story_ID: 466558
Speaker 1: Can you tell us your first memory in school?  When you first went to school?
Speaker 2: (Pause) Not really, I remember, I remember when I was, I think I was about ten, the school had outdoor toilets, and one of the guys in the school was smoking marijuana outside, and that's when I first smelled marijuana.
Speaker 1: Now, now what school is this and--
Speaker 2: Washington School [Booker T. Washington School, Las Cruces, New Mexico] in--
Speaker 1: This is Washington?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: In Las Cruces [New Mexico]?
Speaker 2: In Las Cruces.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is where you started school?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did--you started when you were ten?
Speaker 2: No, I started in--I started school when I guess I got to be six or something like that.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, so--
Speaker 2: But anyway, I remember this incident with--when I went out and this guy was smoking marijuana and he asked me, did I want a drag, I told him no, and--
Speaker 1: You were ten years old?  Was the kid--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --was he the same age as you?
Speaker 2: He was a little older than I was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But he was a guy who got in trouble, you know, a lot and--
Speaker 1: Did you know what marijuana was then?
Speaker 2: I had heard, they called it loco weed when I was a kid.  They called it loco weed 'cause they said it made people crazy (laughter).  But we had been advised never to deal with it, you know, and I don't know what became of the guy, he was, I think he came from a broken home anyway, you know?  But, to see, there were outdoor toilets so I guess that's how he could get away with smoking it out there, you know?
Speaker 1: So, how old were you when you started school?
Speaker 2: When I started?
Speaker 1: Yes sir.
Speaker 2: I imagine I was six, five or six.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now when you started did you already know how to read, or did you learn in school?
Speaker 2: Well, we were taught a lot at home, see?  'Cause my two brothers [Jasper F. Williams and Charles Williams], both of them were honor students, my older brother went to Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] and I went to Wiley [Wiley College, Marshall, Texas] because I couldn't go to New Mexico State [New Mexico College of Agriculture and Mechanic Arts; New Mexico State University, Las Cruces, New Mexico].  And my younger brother, by the time he got through, New Mexico State had opened up so he went to New Mexico State, you know?  That's where he went to college.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm talking about when you were a little kid.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: First though, did--was your mother [Clara Drisdale Williams] your teacher when you first started school?  Or did you ever?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: Do you remember your first teacher?
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: I don't.
Speaker 1: Okay, and--but you started in New Mexico right?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: We moved to--well at first, my mother was, tried teaching in Vado [New Mexico], but the blacks didn't want a black school there.  So she didn't teach there very long, she moved from Vado to Las Cruces (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 466559
Speaker 1: --You said Vado [New Mexico]?
Speaker 2: V-A-D-O.
Speaker 1: Okay, Vado, okay.
Speaker 2: It was a town that when I was a kid it was nearly all the people that lived in Vado were black, and some of the land around Vado was homesteaded land, and right now they have a lot of pecan orchards through there.  So I don't know if any blacks still own any land there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So your mother [Clara Drisdale Williams] was trying to teach in Vado and Vado was a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She wanted to teach--
Speaker 1: --she wanted to--
Speaker 2: --but they--
Speaker 1: --but they didn't wanna--
Speaker 2: --they didn't particularly want a segregated school.
Speaker 1: Okay, and that's when you were living in Texas, right?
Speaker 2: Beg your pardon?
Speaker 1: That's in Texas, right?
Speaker 2: Vado's in New Mexico.
Speaker 1: Oh it's in New Mexico?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And see--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --after they didn't want my mother in Vado, she went to Las Cruces [New Mexico].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was the first black teacher in New Mexico.
Speaker 1: So she was, she started teaching before your father [Jasper Williams] became the principal there?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, she did.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so she was teaching at Washington School [Booker T. Washington School, Las Cruces, New Mexico] before--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --before your father became the principal.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So what did your father do before he became the principal of the school?
Speaker 2: Well he was, after he built a--they had a drugstore in El Paso [Texas] and he filled Dr. Nixon's [Lawrence A. Nixon] prescriptions.  And then he and the agent who sold the insurance for the pharmacy got into some argument, and for some reason the pharmacy was burned, and they had accused that the guy probably had it set on fire.  But anyway, my dad moved the drugstore to Juarez, Mexico [Ciudad Juarez, Mexico], and he had to hire a pharmacist because he wasn't a certified pharmacist.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you went from El Paso to Juarez?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, so then he, did he go from Juarez then to New Mexico?
Speaker 2: Yeah he went from Juarez to, well just like I told you, he started working for the border patrol, and I don't know exactly how many years he worked for them.  But he left the border patrol and continued with the pharmacy in Juarez, and for some reason I guess, I don't know whether business was bad, but he finally left Juarez and he came to New Mexico to teach.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, but your mother was already there when he?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: She went ahead of him, into New Mexico?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  I couldn't, I didn't understand that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She was--
Speaker 1: --part.
Speaker 2: --the first, first black teacher in New Mexico.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know, and you told me that and I couldn't understand it because I knew he was a teacher too and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and I thought maybe he was teaching.  So, okay, so now, now I think I understand.
Story_ID: 466560
Speaker 1: Well, it's back to school.  Did you have a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess mathematics was probably my favorite subject, I always made good grades, yes.
Speaker 1: Was school pretty easy for you?
Speaker 2: Yeah it was.  See, my parents [Clara Drisdale Williams and Jasper Williams] were both, had college degrees.  So, I mean they would encourage us, reading, and help us with any problems we had.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what was life like in your family?  What kind of culture did your parents establish in the house?
Speaker 2: Well, my dad was, he became involved with some of the people in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], in fact I remember when Booker T. Washington came to El Paso [Texas] and he and several people, you know, met with him, and--
Speaker 1: Well, it couldn't have been Booker T. Washington, but would it, would it have been--
Speaker 2: Let me see who would--
Speaker 1: --Robert Moton [Robert Russa Moton] or, I mean it, was it the president of Tuskegee [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]?  It would have been Robert Moton, if it was the president of Tuskegee.  Or 'cause (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Was Booker, what was Booker--?
Speaker 1: Booker T. died in 1915.
Speaker 2: He did huh?
Speaker 1: Yes sir.  So, could it have been Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois], with the NAACP?  Did Du Bois come out or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he--
Speaker 1: --James Weldon Johnson or?
Speaker 2: He had a picture taken with Du Bois too.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--
Speaker 2: But I thought he had a picture taken with Washington, I'll have to look, we still have a picture of--
Speaker 1: --he could have but it would have to be before 1915.
Speaker 2: It would, yeah?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I see.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah.  So it's possible.
Speaker 2: He was, he came to--I don't know when he, my dad came to El Paso [Texas], but he was, I was born in El Paso, so was my older brother [Jasper F. Williams] and my younger [Charles Williams], all three of us were born there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you're saying that Booker T. may have come down to El Paso, Texas before you were born and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He may have--
Speaker 1: --met your father?
Speaker 2: --I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I know the, there's a picture of him, I'll have to see what the date on that was--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --You know?
Speaker 1: All right.  So, while you were talking about the household, so your father was in NAACP?  He was the regional president and--
Speaker 2: He was president of everything west of the Mississippi [Mississippi River], you know?  So it included California and New Mexico and all that territory.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, did you have a lot of visitors at home when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Apart from the NAACP?  Not that I recall, I know he would go to some of the meetings, but I don't remember, you know, the exact number that they had.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But what was life like in your home?  What are some of your memories of home life, you know?  How did your parents run the household and what did you all do on a daily basis, did you?
Speaker 2: Well, on the mesa, my dad, I don't know how he learned so much about farming but he could tell you, he could tell you to look at the corn and tell how soon the roasting ears would be ready to eat and he could tell you when the melons were gonna get ripe.  I mean if he had such a huge knowledge of--I didn't see him read that much about agriculture but is it, I'm sure his parents were probably farmers too.  He may have picked up there, but he did a hell of a good job of farming.  In fact, he was lucky because every year that he farmed he had a good crop even though it was dependent on rainfall, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I guess what I'm asking you is that, like what were your family diff- well what were family dinners like?  Did you all eat together at the same table or did everybody just eat on their own or?
Speaker 2: Well, see my mother taught and sometimes she'd, she would, for dinner, for, we would eat supper together but usually the dinnertime, we ate at home, we'd go home and eat and--
Speaker 1: Oh, dinner would be at lunchtime?
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: What I would think (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) lunchtime.
Speaker 1: --is lunch, is what you called dinner and then supper is what we call dinner in--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the Midwest now.  Okay, so--
Speaker 2: And supper--
Speaker 1: I got you.
Speaker 2: --mainly, we would, you know, have it as a family.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did--was there discussion at the table at suppertime?
Speaker 2: Yeah, sometimes, I don't recall right offhand.
Story_ID: 466561
Speaker 1: Now was religion a big factor in your upbringing?
Speaker 2: Was what?
Speaker 1: Religion?
Speaker 2: Well, my dad [Jasper Williams] had several brothers who were ministers, in fact, you know I told you one of 'em was president of Paul Quinn College [Dallas, Texas], he's probably the most articulate minister that I've ever heard preach, he was a tall handsome guy.  And in addition to him, there were three or four other brothers who were ministers too.  But we know his wife real well, and he was a good speaker, so we always made it a point to hear him, you know, whenever he preached.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you attend the local A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church?  Was there an A.M.E. church there?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In Las Cruces [New Mexico], right.
Speaker 1: Okay, what was the name of it, do you remember?
Speaker 2: Phillips Chapel A.M.E. [sic. Phillips Chapel Colored Methodist Episcopal Church; Phillips Chapel Christian Methodist Episcopal Church, Las Cruces, New Mexico]
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Okay, Phillips Chapel A.M.E., okay.  Did you have a, did you participate in youth programs at the church?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, so was it?  So church wasn't like a, it wasn't something that, that dominated your life or anything or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: --or had any kind of--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But it was, but you went on occasion or?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you didn't go every Sunday, but?
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 466562
Speaker 1: Describe your school again, you were telling me off camera that you had like really maybe three teachers right, in school?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: At Booker T. Washington [Booker T. Washington School, Las Cruces, New Mexico]?
Speaker 2: Well we had, you want me to describe the building or what?
Speaker 1: No, the situation, more than, well you can describe the building too.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But I wanna know the situation too, what was it like?  What kind of books did you get?  What kind of facilities did you have?  What kind of teachers did you have?
Speaker 2: Well we had, teachers were pretty dedicated, but we had no library, we had no science courses, you know?  I mean everything was in--for example, when I finished high school there were three students that finished, myself and two others, so the school was not that big, and there weren't that many students in it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what do you remember about the three teachers that you had?
Speaker 2: Well one was, I was trying to remember if I remembered my mother [Clara Drisdale Williams] teaching me but I'm pretty sure she did, and there was a lady, Henderson [ph.], who taught in the high schools and she was, she was very good, she was a very good dedicated teacher and her daughter later got a Ph.D. from the University of Minnesota [University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Minneapolis, Minnesota], and she was connected with Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], but.  And my dad [Jasper Williams] was a good teacher, I don't recall that he taught me, I know he was in the high school and he may have been fired before, you know, he had a chance to teach, I don't know whether he taught my older brother [Jasper F. Williams] even, you know.  But, the teachers were, they were pretty dedicated 'cause of the two other students that finished with me, one became a chiropractor and the female went to college.  I don't know what she finally ended up doing.  And I went on to medical school.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, how many students were with you in grade school?  About how many were in grade school here?
Speaker 2: That's a good point, I can't tell you right offhand.
Speaker 1: Well, you know, was it a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It wasn't a very big school.
Speaker 1: --was it a hundred?
Speaker 2: Oh no--
Speaker 1: No that--
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that, that tells us something there.
Speaker 2: It was a small school.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and--
Speaker 2: And just like I told you, we had no library of any kind, and it did have some good dedicated teachers, you know.
Speaker 1: It was like a one-room schoolhouse?  Or, was it two rooms, or what?
Speaker 2: Well they had a high school in one room and the grade school was in the other part of the, another room, you know, they had two rooms where they had high school and grade school.
Speaker 1: Okay, well that gives us an idea that it wasn't very big.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  But, were there children that wanted to go to school that couldn't go?
Speaker 2: Not to my knowledge, no.
Story_ID: 466563
Speaker 1: Did you ever, ever get a chance to see what the white school looked like?
Speaker 2: Well, the Las Cruces Union High School [Las Cruces High School, Las Cruces, New Mexico], where I, they gave me a diploma from the Las Cruces Union High School, but I'd never been in the building.  We used to be given permission to run track once a year over there, but we didn't go to school there.
Speaker 1: Okay, did they have a pretty nice building?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, sure.  They had a modern building with a library and everything, you know.
Speaker 1: So, they had more than one, than two rooms?
Speaker 2: Well, oh yeah, it was a, the Las Cruces Union High School was a big complex, they had a gym and library, and the way a school should be, sure.
Speaker 1: Now, did you notice the difference when you were in high school?
Speaker 2: Could I, oh yeah, very definitely.
Speaker 1: Now what did you think about it?  How did you feel about it?
Speaker 2: Well we know that the schools were segregated and there wasn't much we could do about it, I mean, you know.
Speaker 1: Well, did it make you feel like it was unfair?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it definitely was unfair, but with my parents [Clara Drisdale Williams and Jasper Williams] having finished college, they kind of supported us at home so that we didn't get short changed, you know, like most of the other students would I'm sure.
Speaker 1: So, when you were in school did you, did you feel that you were getting a, as good an education as the white students there?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, you didn't have the same facilities [at Booker T. Washington School, Las Cruces, New Mexico].  I mean, we didn't have any chemistry lab, we didn't have any--a lot of things that we didn't have, we didn't have a library, number one, and just didn't have the facilities that it would take to make you competitive, you know.
Story_ID: 466564
Speaker 1: When you were in grade school or high school, did you get a chance to go to any of the black colleges [HBCUs] and just kind of see what kind of things they had there to offer?
Speaker 2: Well, I--when my older brother [Jasper F. Williams] went to Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], I drove him down there with another student.  I got to see Tuskegee.
Speaker 1: You drove all the way across the country?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: In a--what kind of car?
Speaker 2: We had a Chevy [Chevrolet], so I drove them down to Tuskegee.
Speaker 1: About what year is this?  Is this in the '30s [1930s] or '40s [1940s]?
Speaker 2: Probably the '30s [1930s].
Speaker 1: Thirties [1930s], okay.
Speaker 2: The end of the '30s [1930s].
Speaker 1: So well you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My brother--
Speaker 1: --were a teenager, right?
Speaker 2: Pardon?
Speaker 1: Were you a teenager at that time?
Speaker 2: Well let me see, I was born in '19 [1919].
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yeah, if it's in the '30s [1930s], you're a teenager.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: And my brother, he finished Tuskegee, and I drove him down there because I met Dr. Carver [George Washington Carver], you know, he was coming out of the woods at Tuskegee when we got down there.
Speaker 1: What did you think of him?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, I'd read his reputation, I know that he was a brilliant guy and he had, I think he went to Iowa State [Iowa Agricultural College and Model Farm; Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa], but he had, if he had gotten everything that he produced, and fixed it so that the money from it would have gone to Tuskegee, Tuskegee would have been a very rich school, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --what was his, your impression of meeting him?  I mean what?  Was he what you expected?  You expected a, what did you expect?  I mean, and what did--
Speaker 2: Well, no--
Speaker 1: --you see?
Speaker 2: He was a--he came out with some plants in his hand, he'd been out in the woods, and I mean it was an honor to meet him 'cause I knew he was already famous, you know, and the school was impressive, I mean Tuskegee was, you know?
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my brother made, he made the honor roll down there and finally was on the, he was one of the, you know, the committee, the people that con-
Speaker 1: The board?
Speaker 2: The board.
Speaker 1: Yes sir.
Speaker 2: He was on the board at Tuskegee.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, so you had a chance to check the campus out when you were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah--
Speaker 1: --when you were a teenager?
Speaker 2: --sure.
Speaker 1: Was that the first college campus you got a chance to visit?  Because I thought maybe you would go to Prairie View [Prairie View State Normal and Industrial College; Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas] or Wiley [Wiley College, Marshall, Texas], just to see the school or something at some point with your parents [Clara Drisdale Williams and Jasper Williams].
Speaker 2: Well I didn't go to Wiley until I was admitted there.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you'd never been on the campus before (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I had went to Prairie View--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --'cause it was down close to my grandmother's home (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  But you never went to those schools when you were a kid just to visit?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Or anything?
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 466565
Speaker 1: So high school you had like just, in your high school [Booker T. Washington School, Las Cruces, New Mexico] you had like less than ten students in the school, or what?
Speaker 2: In high school, I'd say maybe there were probably twenty students.
Speaker 1: Twenty, okay.
Speaker 2: In the school.
Speaker 1: Various grades, all the grades?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: In high school?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you have a basketball team or anything like that?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, we had a basketball team, we played El Paso [Texas], they were at segregated schools, that was the main team that we played was Las Cruces [New Mexico] and El Paso.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you play ball?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I played basketball.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now did you all have a gym that--you didn't have a gym to play in right?  So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, we didn't have a gym.
Speaker 1: --so when did you play basketball when you, when you played?
Speaker 2: On the cement.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it wasn't in a gym.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So a lot of kids today would--have never, would never imagine that a high school.
Speaker 2: Without a gym.
Speaker 1: Yes.  Or a high school with twenty students then.
Speaker 2: Well see, just like I told you there were three that graduated with me, I imagine that there were maybe twenty students in the high school, probably.
Story_ID: 466566
Speaker 1: So when you graduated, you knew you were going to college right?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So it, you said you started off at Wiley [Wiley College, Marshall, Texas]?
Speaker 2: I started at Wiley.
Speaker 1: Okay 'cause that's where your father [Jasper Williams] had gone to school?
Speaker 2: That's where my fa- my father finished Wiley in, in 1904.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, when you were at Wiley now, did you--was Tolson [Melvin B. Tolson] there?  The man that ran the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, Tolson?
Speaker 1: --yeah.
Speaker 2: The guy who was, he was over the debating team?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know Tolson.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What was he like?  Was he anything like the person in the movie ['The Great Debaters'] that Denzel [Denzel Washington] played?
Speaker 2: Yeah he was, I know he had a good debating team even then.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he was a pretty famous, one of the famous teachers there.
Speaker 1: What about, well do you have any stories about him, or, well did he--
Speaker 2: About Tolson?
Speaker 1: Yeah, did he make an impression on you?
Speaker 2: Well, I never took any courses under him.  I knew that he was in charge of the debating team, and that he was apparently a very popular person there, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you ever hear his team debate?
Speaker 2: I never heard him debate, no.
Speaker 1: Now did you know any of the si- any of the kids on the team, on the debating team?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know some of them, but somehow I never heard 'em, any debates in the end.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what about James Farmer's father, Dr. Farmer [James L. Farmer, Sr.]?  He was the president, right?  Was he president when you were there?
Speaker 2: Farmer?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Farmer.
Speaker 2: No, he wasn't president when I was there, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, was he teaching there?
Speaker 2: No, Farmer was a student but--
Speaker 1: Oh, James Farmer?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but they, in the movie they depicted his father teaching there and I've heard other people, his father taught there and at Texas Southern [sic.] and other places but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He may have, but--
Speaker 1: --you didn't have him?
Speaker 2: See, I was in pre-med at Wiley.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And, that may be--have been why I missed him, you know?
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, who were some of your teachers, and who?
Speaker 2: At Wiley?
Speaker 1: Yes sir.
Speaker 2: I'd really have to think about that.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's all right.  I mean--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --but, you were there for two years?
Speaker 2: I was there two years.
Speaker 1: Okay, now why did you leave Wiley?
Speaker 2: Well, I went to the, from there to the University of New Mexico in Albuquerque [New Mexico].
Speaker 1: Okay, now that's right after you left Wiley?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 466567
Speaker 1: --Why did you go to the University of New Mexico [Albuquerque, New Mexico] instead of finishing at Wiley [Wiley College, Marshall, Texas]?
Speaker 2: Well, I knew of the University of New Mexico, and I knew of some students that were going there.
Speaker 1: Well, did you think it was a better school, or what?
Speaker 2: The--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: The university?
Speaker 1: Yes--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I thought it was a better school than Wiley.
Speaker 1: Yeah 'cause I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure.
Speaker 1: I know it's got to be a reason to go--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --from Wiley to the University of New Mexico.  So is that what your--
Speaker 2: I thought--
Speaker 1: --you just talked about?
Speaker 2: --thought that New Mexico was a better school than Wiley, yeah.
Speaker 1: Is that what your parents [Clara Drisdale Williams and Jasper Williams] thought too?  Did they--
Speaker 2: Well, my dad finished Wiley, and my mother went to Prairie View [Prairie View State Normal and Industrial College; Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas], which is a black school [HBCU].
Speaker 1: They didn't express any opinion about it?
Speaker 2: Not to my knowledge.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: So, were there many black students at--there weren't many black students there at the university?
Speaker 2: Where, in New Mexico?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: No there weren't many, Lewis was there, you know he was a musician, he, John Lewis, he was with the Modern Jazz Quartet?
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: He was from, I know he was in school with me.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: He had a, he made a lot of money with the Modern Jazz Quartet.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, MJQ, right, right?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Yeah, MJQ they used to call 'em.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: The Modern Jazz Quartet, yeah.  So you started at Wiley and went to the University of New Mexico, now when (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And then--
Speaker 1: --did you--
Speaker 2: --after I was a Tuskegee Airman I came back to Las Cruces [New Mexico] and got a degree in biochemistry [from New Mexico College of Agriculture and Mechanic Arts; New Mexico State University].
Speaker 1: Okay, now let's just follow the timeline and see if we can--so you, you were drafted right?
Speaker 2: I was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In the [U.S.] Army?
Speaker 2: --drafted, I was drafted from Las Cruces.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what?  Now this is, this you're drafted I guess 19--let's see I've got it here someplace.  Was it 1942?
Speaker 2: Forty-two [1942].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were drafted in 1942.  World War II [WWII] was in full swing?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And, I was drafted--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and see, since I was--I was drafted and they sent me to Boca Raton [Florida].  No at first they sent me to Camp Pickett, Virginia [Fort Pickett, Virginia], to the Medical Corps [U.S. Army Medical Corps], because I was in pre-med.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And they figured that since--when I stopped, I taught one year at Clovis, New Mexico, I was principal of the high school there.
Speaker 1: That's before you were drafted?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --the year before I was drafted.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what happened?  Did?  Let me go back a little bit, now what happened at the University of New Mexico?  You said you went to the University of New Mexico?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And what happened there?
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't get my degree and I worked a year at Clovis--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --in the high school there.
Speaker 1: But sir, what happened at the University of New Mexico that you didn't get your degree?  Did they make it--what was it?  Was it real tough?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Or what happened?
Speaker 2: It wasn't--
Speaker 1: Or did you run out of money, or what was the?
Speaker 2: --I don't really remember exactly what made me just stop school before I got my degree.  I don't recall.  But anyway, I didn't go back, I went to Clovis and got a job there as principal of the high school in Clovis.
Speaker 1: Well, how did--
Speaker 2: --black school.
Speaker 1: --yeah.  Now, I'm interested in knowing how were you treated at the University of New Mexico?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was treated pretty good.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So they even made sure you had food (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They were--
Speaker 1: --and facility and--
Speaker 2: --Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --access to the--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --you had access to the library?
Speaker 2: Oh, very definitely.
Speaker 1: In class did they--could you participate in class?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I enjoyed the University of New Mexico, but I don't know why I didn't go ahead and get my degree there.
Speaker 1: I mean did you run out of money or something or what?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure exactly what it was.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 466568
Speaker 1: But you taught school in Clovis, New Mexico (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Taught school in Clovis, and they were starting the war [World War II, WWII] so they'd started a course in airplane mechanics at Clovis at night.  And I took the, took this course was called aircraft and maintenance, A and E license they call it, which was--they gave you instructions on how to work on the airplane and the engine.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you get your certificate?
Speaker 2: I didn't get my total certificate but--
Speaker 1: Okay, but you knew something about it?
Speaker 2: I knew, yeah.  And I almost had an A and E license which is an aircraft maintenance license.  And so, when they drafted me down at Fort Bliss [Texas], they saw that I'd spent four years in pre-med, so they sent me to Camp Pickett, Virginia [Fort Pickett, Virginia] to the Medical Corps [U.S. Army Medical Corps], and they were gonna put me in the medical administrative officer candidate school, which was ninety-day wonder school.  And while I was at Camp Pickett, I found out I wasn't too far from the Pentagon [Washington, D.C.], so I went to the Pentagon without permission, I just went there and met the major who was in charge of procurement for the Pentagon for the air, it was called the Air Corps [U.S. Army Air Corps] at that time, he was very congenial.  And he told me, he said, "Fine," he said, "we'll transfer you in three weeks," and I was thinking I was going to flight training.  And in three weeks they did transfer me, they sent me to Boca Raton, Florida, which is a resort area where a lot of the Jews would go for vacation, when they couldn't go to Miami Beach [Florida] at the time.  And so, they were getting ready to start the bomber group for the black air force, you know, the B-25 [North American B-25 Mitchell] group, and see they needed people in armament, communications and engineering, and that's what they had set up at the Boca Raton.  And after we finished at Boca Raton, we went to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], that's where I got my commission, at Yale.  I spent three months at Boca Raton and six months at Yale, and I was commissioned as second lieutenant.
Speaker 1: Okay so, what kind of impression did Yale make on you?
Speaker 2: Well we had--I think there were about twenty-six blacks that were being trained for the B-25 group, and I was in engineering, we had some in the armament and some in communications, and they trained about fifteen thousand cadets.  And the few blacks that we were being trained for the bomber group, and Yale was very impressive, they had one black guy who was on the varsity football team when I was there.
Speaker 1: Oh, do you remember his name?
Speaker 2: I don't remember it but he went to work for the Ford Motor Company [Dearborn, Michigan], you know, and he probably would have been an All-American, he was very good.  I never saw him play, I mean I knew he was on the team.  And, I got my commission at Yale, and then they sent me to the--where they made the engines for the B-25, that was in New Jersey, I went there, and then I went to the factory where they made the airplanes, which was out at, in California.  And then after I left there I went to a base in Colorado, where they had a B-25 group for on the job training, and they, the guy who commanded the group he, every day we'd go up and he'd tell me fly co-pilot in the B-25, he was a B-25 pilot, you know?  And while I was there on the job training, he called it, they gave me a superior, you know.  And finally I ended up at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Army Airfield; Sharpe Field, Tuskegee, Alabama] with the bomber group and we had--
Story_ID: 466569
Speaker 1: --About how long did this take from the time that you entered the [U.S.] military?  You entered in 1942, did that take (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I--
Speaker 1: --a year or longer?
Speaker 2: I was at Boca Raton [Florida]--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --for about three months--
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: --and I was at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] for six months, and then they sent me to engine school and to the factory where they made the airplane, and that took about a month for each one of those, and then I was a month on the job training.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's about a year?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's about a year's time so--
Speaker 2: And when I got through I don't know when they promoted me to first lieutenant, but when I went to the bomber group they made me engineering officer for the 619th Bomber group [619th Bombardment Squadron], the B-25 [North American B-25 Mitchell] group.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were an engineering officer?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where were you stationed at that point?
Speaker 2: Well, they first started us at Selfridge Field, Michigan [Selfridge Air National Guard Base, Michigan].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then they moved us down to Godman Field, Kentucky [Godman Army Airfield], which was right at Fort Knox, Kentucky, but the runways at Godman Field were not long enough so they decided they were gonna send us to Indiana [to Freeman Army Airfield, Jackson County, Indiana], you know.  And when they sent us to Indiana, we went down where, close to where the Ku Klux Klan [KKK] was started down there and so--
Speaker 1: Okay, this is Seymour, Indiana, right?
Speaker 2: Seymour.
Speaker 1: Seymour, Indiana, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Story_ID: 466570
Speaker 1: No, I was pretty lucky when I was transferred from the Medical Corps [U.S. Army Medical Corps] to the Air Corps [U.S. Army Air Corps], as it was called at the time.  It was interesting, there were just about twenty-six blacks and there were, they had trained about fifteen thousand cadets and the only segregation that we got when we first went down there was that there wasn't any segregation until they saw some more blacks, and then they put 'em, put us all in the housing together.
Speaker 2: So, when you started, you said there was no segregation?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: And then did you live with the white soldiers in the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: --too?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, even in 1942?
Speaker 1: Can see if there's a picture.
Speaker 2: Well just describe it, it's not here now, so.
Speaker 1: There's a picture there that shows--I was in the W see?  And I was the only black in my squadron.
Speaker 2: So you were arranged alphabetically?
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: I see, okay.  So you were a W, so you were the only black in the squadron?
Speaker 1: And, other than that it was almost no segregation, you know.
Story_ID: 466571
Speaker 1: Well, we were at the point where you were transferred to Seymour, Indiana, S-E-Y-M-O-U-R, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we would--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --that's right.  And, see the Ku Klux Klan [KKK], who apparently was pretty strong in Seymour, so that if you went to town you could hardly get served at anyplace in Indiana.  And then what they decided to do, was the colonel [Robert Selway], who was a West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York] graduate, decided that he was gonna fix it so that all blacks were considered trainees.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And see by then, I was first lieutenant, which meant that I'd been through Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] and Boca Raton [Florida] and I'd also been to the factory where they made the engines for the B-25 [North American B-25 Mitchell] and I'd been to the factory where they made the airplane, and I'd been on job training for a month to a B-25 unit, I was the only black there.  And, so what happened down at Seymour, they wanted to keep the officers' club segregated, and they had a separate club for the black officers, they classified all of the blacks as being trainees, even the doctors, the dentist (laughter), the priest, everybody was a trainee if he was black.  And so, that's what they tried to do, they tried to put all of the trainees in one club and all of the instructors in another.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --they were trying to avoid saying that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Integrating.
Speaker 1: --the whites were going to one club and the blacks were going to another club?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: They called you a trainee and so therefore they put you in a separate club?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's what they tried to do.
Speaker 1: Now, were there any white trainees?
Speaker 2: No.  And see, so what they tried to--they, that's what they tried to do, and so when we refused to, sixty-one of the guys had been arrested before I was arrested.  And then what they tried to do, they tried to put, fix it so that there would be no integration period, even though it--the wire department said that they had an amendment to something that stated there would be no segregation.
Speaker 1: Now let me go back a little bit and just try to get the picture.  So, so did you and the other black officers know that, now you were at Freeman Field [Freeman Army Airfield, Jackson County, Indiana] right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: In Seymour, Indiana?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Did you and the other black officers know that they were getting ready to do this or they had, had they tried to make other officers sign this paper saying that they would?
Speaker 2: No, this, the colonel who was a West Point graduate came out with the bright idea that he would have us sign a statement that we wouldn't object to being shunted over to this other deal.
Speaker 1: Now did you know this colonel?
Speaker 2: Well he was commanding officer of the base, yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you--
Speaker 2: --I knew him.
Speaker 1: Did you like him?  Well, did you think he was a good guy?
Speaker 2: I didn't have much opinion about him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Until--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --I guess most of my opinion developed after he tried to segregate us, you know.
Speaker 1: Now was, well, what happened specifically to you?  They, did they call you into a room and have you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --try--
Speaker 2: They, my--
Speaker 1: --did they try to get you--
Speaker 2: --my commanding officer was a pilot, he was from Texas and we were pretty good friends, you know.  And he wanted me to sign it and I told him I couldn't sign it.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And so when they--when I refused to sign it, they gave me an order under the sixty-ninth article of war to sign it, and when I refused they said, "You're under arrest to quarters."
Story_ID: 466572
Speaker 1: I just wanna get straight what this means.  The first time he asked you to sign it, right?  And you refused to sign it (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Then he ordered you to sign it?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you refused a direct order?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: During time of war.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Which is punishable if convicted, by what?
Speaker 2: By death, you know.
Speaker 1: Now, had you thought all this out?  Did you know what you were gonna do (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah--
Speaker 1: --before you--
Speaker 2: --I know, I knew it was like that.  And we had a black Harvard Law [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] graduate, Coleman [HistoryMaker Mr. William T. Coleman, Jr.], who was giving most of the people advice as to what to do.
Speaker 1: Coleman was his--
Speaker 2: His last name was Coleman.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And he was a black who was editor of the Harvard Law Review, the first black to edit it.  He was later put in the cabinet by one of the presidents [President Gerald Rudolph Ford, Jr.], you know.  But he ga- he was given most of the guys orders and Coleman Young, the mayor, the guy who became major of Detroit [Michigan], he was one of the ones arrested too.  And so--
Speaker 1: How many officers were arrested?
Speaker 2: In the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Black officers--
Speaker 2: --first group--
Speaker 1: --were arrested?
Speaker 2: --it was sixty-one.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And in the group that I was in it was 101 that refused to sign the statement that, you know, that we would agree to be segregated so to speak.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Now did they try to, so that's sixty-one out of how many?
Speaker 2: That was the group that first started initiating the--attempting to integrate the officers' club.
Speaker 1: Yes sir.
Speaker 2: It was sixty-one of them.
Speaker 1: Yes sir, but it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And part--
Speaker 1: --was sixty--
Speaker 2: --of that--
Speaker 1: --okay.
Speaker 2: --sixty-one were part of the 101 that I was with, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I'm just trying to figure out how many--were there any black officers that didn't, that signed it?
Speaker 2: Yeah there were, I think there were about eight that signed it, but I don't know who they were.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It was never disclosed who they we--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --you just don't remember them?
Speaker 2: No, I knew that they claimed that the intelligence officer was the one that given Selway [Robert Selway], the guy who was commanding the base [Freeman Army Airfield, Jackson County, Indiana], he was giving them instructions as to what the guys were gonna do, but I don't have any proof of that either.
Speaker 1: So the eight guys that signed it, did they, was there any conflict between them and the sixty-one that didn't sign it?
Speaker 2: No.  I mean, you know, I didn't, actually I never did actually know who the eight were.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was one of the 101 that refused to sign it, and what they did, they shipped us from Indiana back to Godman Field [Godman Army Airfield, Fort Knox, Kentucky].
Speaker 1: Now Godman is where?
Speaker 2: Close to Fort--it's Fort Knox [Kentucky], it's right at Fort (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In--
Speaker 2: --Knox--
Speaker 1: --Kentucky, Kentucky right, yeah.
Speaker 2: And when we got there they had the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and a lot of the black newspapers had found out about it so they, the war department [U.S. Department of War] was alerted and they had a lot of people who were investigating the incident, you know, 'cause it made the front page of the newspaper.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's on the, the front page of the Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier], I know that and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And the--
Speaker 1: --probably some other black papers.
Speaker 2: --the same day that President Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] died, I think it was April the, I think it's the 12th of April of 1945.  But anyway, the, what they did, I went in without an attorney, I just went in and told 'em why I didn't think that they'd ever be able to fight a war with a segregated army again.
Story_ID: 466573
Speaker 1: Let me go back a little bit now, they, you all were housed in barracks from what I read right?  Is that correct?
Speaker 2: Where, at Godman Field [Godman Army Airfield, Fort Knox, Kentucky] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah they--
Speaker 1: Or did they put you in a jail or they put you in the barracks, which one?
Speaker 2: They put us in barracks (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Barracks--
Speaker 2: --but--
Speaker 1: --okay--
Speaker 2: --they put us under arrest to quarters.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you couldn't leave?
Speaker 2: You couldn't leave.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: And you were under guard all the time?
Speaker 2: Well, when we got back to Godman Field, they had some guys with machine guns that were guarding us, and it was interesting that there were a lot of German prisoners at, down in Kentucky.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And they were standing over laughing and here we were in uniform being guarded (laughter), and there they were legal prisoners and they were getting more freedom than we did.
Speaker 1: But it--yeah I guess that goes without saying as a profound--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --did you all see the irony in this?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  Well, we expected that.  In fact, when we went to talk to the committee, they agreed to do, they agreed to change the name from the Air Corps [U.S. Army Air Corps] to the [U.S.] Air Force and separate from the [U.S.] Army so that they could make their own decisions--
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: --they agreed to that.
Speaker 1: --that's one of the results of the discussion that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you all had?
Speaker 2: And the other one was that that they were gonna integrate the Air Force in 1949, which they'd do.  And see (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So they did that in--
Speaker 2: Yeah, President Truman [President Harry S. Truman] was president, and he came out with a presidential order [Executive Order 9981] ordering all of the [U.S.] Armed Forces to be integrated.  The only one that followed the order was the one that we had put pressure on, was the Air Force.
Story_ID: 466574
Speaker 1: From what I've read, the other officers who were up on charges, the other black officers had legal representation?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But, now were you offered legal representation by the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]?
Speaker 2: I was offered, I could have had Coleman [HistoryMaker Mr. William T. Coleman, Jr.] to represent me too.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I wanted to go to med school and I didn't want anything to interfere with me getting help from the [U.S.] Army to go to medical school.  So, I just represented myself (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you--
Speaker 2: --I went--
Speaker 1: --you didn't think that they were gonna give you the kind of representation that you could give yourself?
Speaker 2: Well, I depended on me to get to med school (laughter), and I didn't know what they were gonna do.  But, what they did, they--when I came out of my hearing, I ran into Coleman Young, you know, Coleman was the mayor of Detroit [Michigan].
Speaker 1: Became the mayor, yeah.
Speaker 2: And he told me, he said, "Jim [HistoryMaker Dr. James Williams], we have a copy of your interview here," I don't know how the hell they got it.  But he said, "We have a copy and we thought it was excellent," and it was interesting, I tried to get a copy of what they had, but the Army said that they had, that all of my records had been destroyed so that I never got a copy of it.  And I didn't, but Coleman called me to compliment me, he said, "It was excellent what you did."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I don't know what the hell, you know.
Speaker 1: How, tell us, kind of walk us through what you actually said.  Now you, you went in by yourself, representing yourself, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I went in there and I just told 'em the reasons why I didn't think they'd ever be able to get a segregated army to function properly.  And I asked 'em, that first of all it's wrong to have it segregated.  And I said that we are--the purpose of us being in the Army is to solve the problems that exist, not to make more for us.  But I don't remember exactly what all I said to 'em.  I was hoping that one day I'd be able to get a copy of that but they did, I did find out that they had a fire in St. Louis [Missouri] and they claimed that that's where the records were burnt up.  But, one of the guys who lives here in Chicago [Illinois], his brother was, lived down there and he, his brother apparently worked in the place where they kept the records and he knew that that was true, that it had been destroyed.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well what was their--what was the response of the, I guess the court to your statements?  I mean did they seem sympathetic or did they?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, they had, they set up the McCloy commission [Advisory Committee on Negro Troop Policies] to study segregation in the Army.  And see, the president [President Harry S. Truman] came out with an order demanding that--the presidential order [Executive Order 9981] stating that all of the services were to be integrated, but nobody complied with it except we had already got in agreement with the [U.S.] Air Force that they were gonna--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --get rid of segregation and that they were gonna integrate it.
Speaker 1: Well it was a slow process with the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well--
Speaker 1: --rest of the--
Speaker 2: --they--
Speaker 1: --'cause the Army eventually, and all of them eventually did it but they, it took some conflict.
Speaker 2: It took about seven years--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --total, and see but for the Air Force, they got rid of the segregation in '49 [1949], that's when B.O. Davis [Benjamin O. Davis, Jr.] was, he was commander of the group down in Kentucky when I was there.
Story_ID: 466575
Speaker 1: Then we finally moved to Columbus, Ohio 'cause I started going to Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] at night taking physics.
Speaker 2: What was that, Lockbourne Field [Lockbourne Air Force Base; Rickenbacker Air National Guard Base, Ohio] or something?
Speaker 1: No, Columbus [Ohio] was--
Speaker 2: Yes, I think it's Lockbourne?
Speaker 1: I forget the name of the base there.
Speaker 2: Anyway, well--okay.
Speaker 1: What's?  What was it?
Speaker 2: Oh, but any--the point is you started going to school at Ohio State when you, after you were transferred to Columbus?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I started going to Ohio State at night taking physics.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Okay.
Speaker 1: And, Davis [Benjamin O. Davis, Jr.] was brought back, and I was transferred to the 99th Fighter Squadron as engineering officer when he came back.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now did you get a chance to know Benjamin O. Davis?
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, I used to play bridge with he and his wife [Agatha Scott Davis], so I, you know, I know him very well.
Speaker 2: What was he like?
Speaker 1: I thought he was an excellent soldier, he had tremendous military bearing, and he was a tall handsome guy and he had, they had claimed he couldn't fly as well as some of the other hotshots.  But that was the only thing that I knew where he was, they tried to not rate him as highly as the other guys.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Now did he su- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But we had some, some pilots who were, you know, hotshots you know?  They'd roll the plane to the left and to the right and all that kind of stuff.  And one of the guys who was from St. Louis [Missouri], was considered one of the better pilots.  He was in an AT-6 [North American Aviation T-6 Texan] and he had one of the enlisted men in the backseat, and he was rolling the plane down close to the ground and the guy apparently locked the stick so he couldn't come out of the roll and it killed both of them, you know.  But he was considered one of the better pilots in the fighter group, you know?  And--
Speaker 2: So the co-pilot can get you both killed if he doesn't know what he's doing?
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: The co-pilot can get you both killed if he doesn't know what he's doing?
Speaker 1: Well no, the, this guy was the pilot, he was in the front seat, but see the guy, the mechanic who was sitting in the backseat fixed it so that he couldn't, he'd control the stick to get it out of the roll that he was in and instead of getting it out of the roll, he went into the ground.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Killed both of the guys, you know?
Story_ID: 466576
Speaker 1: This is Benjamin O. Davis, Sr. [sic.] you're talking about?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Now what, did he support the black officers?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: Or did he have to stay out of there, or what?
Speaker 2: You know, Benjamin Davis' dad was a general.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: You know that, didn't you?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And the son [Benjamin O. Davis, Jr.] was the one who went to West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York].  I don't remember exactly his father's total name but his father was a brigadier general, and B.O. was a three-star until the president [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] gave him the four-star and by that time he had--was showing some changes just like his wife [Agatha Scott Davis], they were, they both died in the hospital in D.C. [Washington, D.C.]
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: You know.
Speaker 1: Now, I was asking you if he supported the intention of the officers, or the officers who refused to sign the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, who, Davis did?
Speaker 1: Yeah, was he on your side, or?
Speaker 2: Well it, they brought him back from combat and he came back, he was commander of the group after we got out, and they had made a decision.  They had set up the McCloy commission [Advisory Committee on Negro Troop Policies] to study segregation and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, so--
Speaker 2: --that was--
Speaker 1: --but he didn't have to, you don't know if he supported you all or not then?
Speaker 2: I'm pretty sure he did 'cause he keep--I saw him when he came back and he congratulated me.  Of course, you know I'd played--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --bridge with him--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and he had, he'd congratulated me for what we did see?  And that's how he got back to command, see he commanded the black group at Columbus [Ohio].  And it was interesting, they didn't want the blacks anyplace because they said we were troublemakers, see?  And, what happened at Columbus, somehow they managed to get in there and Davis was smart enough to have an air show every weekend.  And it was his idea, the Thunderbirds [U.S. Air Force Thunderbirds], you don't know of the Thunderbirds.  Well that was Davis' idea, the Thunderbirds, he told the [U.S.] Air Force, he said, "You should have a demonstration team," and that's how the Thunderbirds got started.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He said, 'cause after he started having air shows every weekend, the people forgot that the guys were black and all they wanted to do was see the air shows, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Similar to basketball.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, on some level I guess?
Speaker 2: But, Davis was, he was a true soldier, the guys said he couldn't fly as well as some of the other guys, but I don't know about that 'cause he survived and, any pilot that lives through combat, he must be pretty good, you know, 'cause he did go on some long-term missions with them.
Story_ID: 466577
Speaker 1: So you were in the [U.S.] Air Force, your last assignment was in Columbus [Ohio] then, right?
Speaker 2: In Columbus.
Speaker 1: And then, this is 1940--what now, '46 [1946]?
Speaker 2: Forty-six [1946], yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, so when you were, when you received your discharge what, what did you do?
Speaker 2: Pardon?  What did I do?
Speaker 1: Yeah, aft- after you were discharged from the [U.S.] Army?
Speaker 2: I went to New Mexico State [New Mexico College of Agriculture and Mechanic Arts; New Mexico State University, Las Cruces, New Mexico].
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And got my degree, I got a degree in biochemistry.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then I went to med school the next year.
Speaker 1: Okay now, now where did you go to medical school?
Speaker 2: I went to Creighton [Creighton University School of Medicine, Omaha, Nebraska].
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Omaha, Nebraska.
Speaker 1: Now, was your--your brother was already there, I believe?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: Charles [Charles Williams], my younger brother, was at Howard medical school [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And my older brother Jasper [Jasper F. Williams] was, he was in the field artillery.  And he came back to the states, but my dad [Jasper Williams] got so mad when he found out he was going overseas, he had a stroke, he was in a coma for two, oh, about two and a half years.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: But, my brother won an award, he won the hall of fame for artillery officers, I don't know what the hell he did to get the honor but he did have a, someday, I'm gonna try to find out.  And he himself was killed flying his airplane, my brother was, and in the plane, his son and his son's girlfriend and my brother were the three occupants.
Speaker 1: Now that's much later, right?  That's in the--
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: That's in the, what?
Speaker 2: That was after he was, he finished medical school.  See my brother, I got him in Creighton, since I was a student there, I knew the priest who had been president of Saint Louis U [Saint Louis University, St. Louis, Missouri].  And it was interesting while Father Crimmins [Harry B. Crimmins] was president of Saint Louis, there's no blacks who could even go to Saint Louis U.  And I told him, I said, my brother's applying, he said, "Oh we're not gonna take him," well I knew he was just kidding me you know?  And that's how he got to Creighton, and he finished med school, and then he went, came to Chicago [Illinois] and took OB/GYN [obstetrics and gynecology] and got--we had started the clinic [Williams Clinic, Chicago, Illinois] here, you know?
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is your older brother?
Speaker 2: Pardon?
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is your older brother, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Jasper.
Speaker 1: Jasper, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: My younger brother finished Howard medical school, and he was in internal medicine.
Speaker 1: Now he finished while you were in the [U.S.] Army right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he finished, I was in the Army.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: When he was, and he was a resident, let me see, I think he was a resident at Provident [Provident Hospital; Provident Hospital of Cook County] in Chicago.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And while I was still in medical school at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay, so now why did you--or what brought you to Creighton?
Speaker 2: Well, one weekend I flew to Creighton and I knew they had a medical school there and with--I applied to Meharry [Meharry Medical College], down in Nashville [Tennessee], and they had a West Indian president there, and when I applied I went for an interview and he was talking to somebody and he looked up at me, he said, "You probably should go into another field," and that was the interview that he gave me.  And I did everything I could to keep from kicking him over, he was bent over and I (laughter), I was, but I didn't, and then I wrote to Howard to get in med school and they turned me down, so I got in Creighton.
Story_ID: 466578
Speaker 1: Now tell us now, what brought you to, was it--
Speaker 2: Brought?
Speaker 1: Did you know Father Marco [ph.]?  You were talking about him before.  Is that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Father Mar-
Speaker 1: --is that what brought you to Omaha [Nebraska], to Creighton University [Creighton University School of Medicine, Omaha, Nebraska]?
Speaker 2: Well I--
Speaker 1: Did you just apply to a lot of schools and--
Speaker 2: I had--what I did, I flew to Omaha, on a, you know, we can, we would get trips on the plane, and I found out they had a medical school so I applied at Creighton and I applied at McGill University [Montreal, Canada] in Canada, and I was accepted at Creighton so that's the one I--and I was refused at Howard [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.] and Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], so quite naturally I took Creighton and--
Speaker 1: So, what was it like?
Speaker 2: Creighton?
Speaker 1: Yeah, what was medical school at Creighton like?  Were you the only black student?
Speaker 2: Yeah, at that time.  I was the first black they had there in twenty-seven years.  In fact my wife [Willeen Brown Williams] lived in Omaha and they thought I was the first black in med school there.  But, I don't, I checked and there were about four others that had finished before I did, but I was the first one in twenty-seven years.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And when I went to Creighton, the blacks in town told me, said that you can't get a tooth filled at the dental school, Creighton had a dentist, dentistry department, and so once between semesters I went up there and told 'em, I walked in and told the lady, I said, "I wanna get a tooth filled," and she looked at me, she said, "We'll pull it but we won't fill it."  And I asked her, I said, "How long has that been going on?"  She said, "Since I've been here, fifteen years," and I told her, I said, "Don't you think that's wrong?" I said, "I'm a Catholic and I'm at this school, they have a cross on the top of this building and I should be at--," and I asked her why, and she said, "Well the students don't wanna be bothered with you."  And it was in a place where all the students could hear this loud talking that she was doing.  And so, a girl, Marilyn Bradshaw, reported it to the president, and he told me that he wanted me to go up and, them to apologize for not treating me, and he wanted me to make an appointment so I could go back to get the tooth taken care of.  And so, what he did basically was saying that they were gonna end, he said they were gonna take a black dental student too.  And the student that they took brought Paul Silas to Creighton, who was an All-American basketball player.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he went on to play with the Celtics [Boston Celtics] and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --he was a great pro basketball player and a coach too.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: I forgot about that, Paul Silas.
Speaker 2: And he'd be, he was the best defensive player.  He was from San Francisco [California] area where this dentist came from.
Story_ID: 466579
Speaker 1: But they supposedly integrated that, and then I talked to Father Crimmins [Harry B. Crimmins] he was the one who was president of Saint Louis U [Saint Louis University, St. Louis, Missouri], when they didn't take any blacks, and he agreed that he would take my older brother Jasper [Jasper F. Williams] who had been in the field artillery.  Well see, he was drilling some water wells at Las Cruces [New Mexico] and he had a pulley on a pump, and the pulley was made out of compressed paper, and he had it run by an engine that was on a belt.  And the engine didn't have a governor on it so the engine ran away and the thing exploded and hit him in the chest and broke about six ribs, and so I got him in med school at Creighton [Creighton University School of Medicine, Omaha, Nebraska].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: He had a pulley made of compressed paper?
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: The pulley was made of compressed paper?  That's what I--
Speaker 1: The pulley on the pump.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You know.
Speaker 2: I've never heard of anything, something like that made of compressed paper.
Speaker 1: I hadn't either.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: See, 'cause I helped at--in the summertime I'd help him work on the--see we bought the rotary rig because my dad [Jasper Williams] had a homestead and I, we would, I told him we ought to put some wells out there and raise some pecan trees, you know.  And that's the purpose, and then he got hurt so he went into medicine.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you know.
Story_ID: 466580
Speaker 1: Was medical school difficult for you?
Speaker 2: For me?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: No.  You know I'd been planning to go to medical school, that's when I, well my dad [Jasper Williams] was not a pharmacist, they called him doctor, but he knew something about drugs, you know?  For example, he taught me more about aspirin than anybody else did.  And I decided I was gonna go to med school, and plus the doctor who picked up my brother [Charles Williams] who was crippled, he kind of influenced my younger brother to go into medicine.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, then you had Dr. Nixon [Lawrence A. Nixon] who was an influence too (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah--
Speaker 1: --right?
Speaker 2: --and I knew Dr. Nixon.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you--
Speaker 2: Nixon, you know, he got rid of the poll tax in Texas.
Speaker 1: That's right, you were telling us that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, medical school for you was pretty easy, you said?  And did you have any--was there any time when it was tough or did they make it tough on you in any way?
Speaker 2: For me?  No.  I mean people were, they were very nice.  I made good grades, I mean there wasn't ever anything that I had to repeat, you know.  And I was the first black surgeon who was trained in a university setup in America.  See, there had been some people like, one of the doctors at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] who got a Ph.D. at the University of Minnesota [University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Minneapolis, Minnesota].
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And, but there hadn't been anybody who had gotten a residency in general surgery coming right out of medical school like I did.  I'd, I had, I was the first resident at Creighton [Creighton University School of Medicine, Omaha, Nebraska], and then the next year they had another black guy who finished Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana], who came to Creighton and he was, he would become the chief resident after I left, you know.  He's dead now but he was later president of the American College of Surgeons, and he did very well (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Do you remember his name?
Speaker 2: Organ, Claude Organ [Claude H. Organ, Jr.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: He has three sons who were doctors.
Speaker 1: How do you spell his last name?
Speaker 2: O-R-G-A-N.
Speaker 1: Oh?  Or, okay.
Speaker 2: Organ.
Speaker 1: Oh, Organ?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  O-R-G-A-N, okay.
Speaker 2: But he was a year behind me, yeah.
Speaker 1: So you moved, now--oh, did you meet your wife [Willeen Brown Williams] in Nebraska?
Speaker 2: In Nebraska, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well tell us about meeting your wife, how, how did that happen?
Speaker 2: Well she was going to University of Nebraska [University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska] and I was externing at a hospital there in Lincoln [Nebraska], and at that time she didn't know how to drive and I taught her to drive.  And then I was in my last year so I told her we, I was gonna leave and go to Provident [Provident Hospital; Provident Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois] see?  'Cause at that time there were very few places that blacks could get internships.
Speaker 1: That's right, I think Homer G. Phillips [Homer G. Phillips Hospital] in St. Louis [Missouri] and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Provident.
Speaker 2: Yeah and so--
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: --I talked to her and then we decided, see we got married a day before I finished med school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That was, finished in '51 [1951].
Story_ID: 466581
Speaker 1: --You moved to Chicago [Illinois] right away too?
Speaker 2: Moved to Chicago.
Speaker 1: And were you an intern at Provident [Provident Hospital; Provident Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I was an intern at Provident.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so--
Speaker 2: And they had some very good doctors at Provident, you know, most of them had trained in Europe, the orthopedic guy there trained in Vienna [Austria], and two or three of the surgeons had trained in, yeah, you know, overseas 'cause they couldn't get training in America.
Speaker 1: So is this about 1950, what?  Was it '51 [1951], '52 [1952], '53 [1953]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was at Provident?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I was at Provident 'til '52 [1952].
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And, I left Provident and then I went to, back to Creighton [Creighton University School of Medicine, Omaha, Nebraska] as a resident in surgery.  I was the first--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --black resident in a medical school in America, they went directly from internship to residency, there had been some doctors who had trained at Minnesota [University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Minneapolis, Minnesota] for example, who had gotten Ph.D.'s, and University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] gave Ph.D.'s and Mayo Clinic [Rochester, Minnesota] gave master's and Creighton gave a master's degree in surgery.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And I got a master in surgery from Creighton, and then after that I went up to the Royal Victoria [Royal Victoria Hospital] in Montreal [Canada], at McGill [McGill University], and I got some training there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you got your master's in surgery from Creighton?
Speaker 2: Pardon?
Speaker 1: And then additional training at McGill?
Speaker 2: McGill.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It--
Speaker 1: So this takes us to about what year?  Where are we now?  This is a--
Speaker 2: Pardon?
Speaker 1: This takes us to about 1954, I guess?
Speaker 2: Let's see, I finished my residency in '55 [1955].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was probably '56 [1956].
Speaker 1: Then you went to McGill, right?
Speaker 2: And then after I passed my boards, I was, went back to Chicago and we, I went into practice with my, finally the three of us, my two brothers [Jasper F. Williams and Charles Williams] and myself, we opened a clinic here in Chicago, Williams Clinic.
Speaker 1: Okay, all three brothers together.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, Williams Clinic is what, 67th [Street] and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Marquette [Road].
Speaker 1: And Marquette, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So--
Speaker 2: And I treated Dr. Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], I was--Eskridge was our attorney and he was King's attorney so--
Speaker 1: So what was his--Eskridge, attorney?
Speaker 2: Attorney Eskridge, Chauncey Eskridge.
Speaker 1: Chauncey Eskridge, okay.
Speaker 2: He's dead now, but.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So he was Dr. King's attorney and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was his--
Speaker 1: --your attorney too?
Speaker 2: --attorney, yeah--
Story_ID: 466582
Speaker 1: So you were established about ten years before Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] came in '66 [1966], King came to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And our clinic [Williams Clinic, Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 1: --Chicago [Illinois], in '66 [1966]
Speaker 2: --started about '61 [1961], I think.
Speaker 1: Sixty-one [1961]?  Okay.
Speaker 2: The new building.
Speaker 1: Okay, the new building?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So you were pretty well established then when Dr. King showed up?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: And had you been a follower of Dr. King's, an admirer--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --of Dr. King's?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, sure.  I knew him, you know.
Speaker 1: Now were you part of, were you active in the civil rights group here, Civil Rights Movement in Chicago, when that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well--
Speaker 1: --was happening?
Speaker 2: I would, I wasn't active to the point that I would get out there and, like King was--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --and those guys throwing bricks at him in Cicero [Illinois], you know, I--but I, what I tried to do, I tried to integrate everything that possibly could.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So through Attorney Eskridge [Chauncey Eskridge], you became physician to Dr. King?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, so what did you treat him for?
Speaker 2: Well, we--
Speaker 1: Well, I don't know if I even should ask, I don't know (laughter).  I don't know if I should even ask if you can tell me, but go ahead and tell me what you can anyway.
Speaker 2: Well it was nothing major, I mean I knew he had been stabbed once, it--he was stabbed while he was autographing some books in New York [New York].
Speaker 1: Yeah about 1961, or so (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: See, I know he--
Speaker 2: I don't remember.
Speaker 1: --was autographing books when a lady [Izola Curry] stabbed him with a pen.
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --with a letter opener.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they took out two ribs.  When I examined him I noticed he had two ribs missing, which talking to some of the people who knew the surgeons that they could have treated him with a chest tube, you know, they--his lung was collapsed.  But all they had to do is put in a chest tube and re-expand the lung and--but they took out two ribs on him.  I know the guys who did it, they had a--one of the guys was at Tuskegee [Alabama] with me, one of the chest surgeons, another guy was from Jamaica or someplace, you know, that was chief of chest surgery at Harlem Hospital [Harlem Hospital Center] in New York.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so--
Speaker 2: That's where they operated on him.
Speaker 1: So you thought that was unnecessary to take two com- two (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --ribs out, to--
Speaker 2: --all they had to do is, they could have put in just a chest tube and then re-expand the lung and that's it.  But I guess they wanted to--I don't know what their thinking was see?  'Cause I've done many chest surgeries but I've never taken out two ribs on anybody.  Most of the time I just go in between the ribs and use a retractor.
Story_ID: 466583
Speaker 1: We had a baby that my brother [Jasper F. Williams] and I operated, it was the first baby in the world--the mother was pregnant with the baby and she was shot.  And the bullet went in the, the child's flank, went through the liver, the colon, collapsed the right lung and ended up behind the bone in the right upper arm.  That's the first baby in the world to survive a gunshot wound to the abdomen and chest in utero, was the one that we did.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I don't think anybody's changed that since then.  And my brother delivered the baby, and he handed him to me, and when I got 'em he wasn't breathing, he had no heartbeat, and I started resuscitating him, and his heart started beating and the kid, we invited him to the conference at the University of Illinois, you know, my wife [Willeen Brown Williams] picked up the mother and the child, the little guy was interested in everything that was going on that evening.  And the mother said he's the smartest kid she had, she had five other kids, you know, but he survived.  And now, he was, that's when we celebrated our twenty-fifth anniversary, and now we just finished our fifty-seventh, so he's, must be about twenty, he's probably twenty-seven years old now.
Story_ID: 466584
Speaker 1: What was Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] like when you--just go back there for a second?
Speaker 2: Well he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I don't think--
Speaker 2: --was--
Speaker 1: --we--
Speaker 2: --a tremendous speaker, I went to his March on Washington--
Speaker 1: Yeah, but--
Speaker 2: --you know?
Speaker 1: --did you get a chance to know him as a person, the way other people don't?
Speaker 2: Somewhat, you know, 'cause usually he was so busy.  When I'd walk in the room here is Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] and all the guys with 'em, Jesse at that time had a big natural, and it was interesting, I thought Jesse was the least dignified of the guys around him.  But, King was a, he was--when my wife [Willeen Brown Williams] and I'd go to hear him speak at the Sunday evening hour downtown, you know?  And, and we'd hear him speak anytime we could, you know?
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And you went to the March on Washington too?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Right?
Speaker 2: I went to the March on Wa- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's prior to Dr. King showing up?  So you were already sort of involved in, before Dr. King came to town?
Speaker 2: Well, when the March on Washington, King gave the speech, you know?  He gave--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --his famous speech there.
Speaker 1: That was in '63 [1963].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And then when he came to Chicago [Illinois] in '66 [1966], he was living on the West Side of Chicago.
Speaker 2: Is that--
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: --right?
Speaker 1: --yeah, in an apartment and that's when you were treating him right here in the city.
Speaker 2: I think so.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 1966.  Now, were--did you--were you the doctor of any other celebrities in the city?
Speaker 2: In the city (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or people that we would know about?
Speaker 2: Do you know a Dr. Rawls [Louis Rawls]?
Speaker 1: Dr. Rawls?  No.
Speaker 2: Rawls had one of the biggest churches [Tabernacle Missionary Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois] here in the city.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, that?  I thought you meant a physician.  He's a minister, yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Minister.
Speaker 1: --Reverend Rawls--
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: --yeah, Lou Rawls--
Speaker 2: --Lou Rawls'--
Speaker 1: --father--
Speaker 2: --adopted--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --father.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Well I took care of him.  It was interesting, he came in to me and he had a cut in the top of his head, said, six stitches up there and I asked him, I said, "Dr. Rawls were you unconscious?"  He said, "No."  He said, "Nothing, that guy hit me in the head with a bucket," and I told him, I said, "If you ever have any changes of any kind in movement or speech, call me right away."  And three months later he called from Mexico City [Mexico], said he couldn't raise his right arm--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --and I know, I told him, I said, "You could possibly get a subdural hematoma from that injury, from being hit in the top of the head."  And so when he came back, he called me from Mexico City and I told him to come in and he came in that night and we put him in the hospital, and he went into a coma while he was--we put him in Provident [Provident Hospital; Provident Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois] and then we transferred him to Mercy [Mercy Hospital; Mercy Hospital and Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois].  And when I sent him to the neurosurgeon I told him he had a subdural hematoma and he put, bore holes, and next day, Rawls is fine (laughter).
Speaker 1: So that means that it's just internal bleeding or something that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's--
Speaker 1: --creates a--
Speaker 2: --between, under the bone and between the brain and the skull.
Speaker 1: And the pressure is what created the--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --kind of short circuit with?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 466585
Speaker 1: Then I operated on Elijah Muhammad's wife, I operated on two of his sons.
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  And my brother took care of Elijah, you know.
Speaker 2: That's Clara Muhammad [Clara Evans Muhammad], right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Huh, Elijah--
Speaker 2: They called her--
Speaker 1: Muhammad.
Speaker 2: --Clara Muhammad, his wife, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, and then two of his sons, okay.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah.
Speaker 2: Now Elijah Muhammad had respiratory difficulty right?  He had--
Speaker 1: Oh--
Speaker 2: Were you his regular physician?
Speaker 1: My brother was, Charles [Charles Williams].
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: He was, Charles was the internal medicine man.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: He was, he had--sometimes I'd have to give him the aminophylline, he was getting an IV, aminophylline, you know, and sometimes there'd be people sitting in the room and I'd say, my goodness I wonder what would happen to me if something happened to him (laughter), while I'm giving him an IV injection.
Speaker 2: Oh, you're talking about the Fruit of Islam, right?  The bodyguards of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: --Elijah Muhammad, right?  So they would be?  They, they would always be present when--
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: --when he was treated?
Speaker 1: Well, it wasn't but one that I was leery about, that was one of his nephews, and he's the guy who committed suicide over in Saudi Arabia, he jumped off a balcony over there.  But he was the one that they were teaching to fly the plane that Elijah bought, you know?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So did, was he the pilot?  Did he fly back and forth between?
Speaker 1: I don't know whether he flew back and forth, but he did learn to fly.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He had a pilot's license.
Speaker 2: You're aware that Elijah Muhammad had, had a house in Phoenix [Arizona]--
Speaker 1: Oh yeah.
Speaker 2: --I think?  Arizona.
Speaker 1: Sure.  In fact, I've been to his house there.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think it was due to his respiratory difficulty that he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah.
Speaker 2: --he maintained that home.
Story_ID: 466586
Speaker 1: Anybody else?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Of the Chicago [Illinois]--
Speaker 2: Chicago.  Well, we took care of a lot of people here [Williams Clinic, Chicago, Illinois], you know?  In fact, it was interesting, I had one patient, I was on the staff at Illinois Central [Illinois Central Hospital, Chicago, Illinois], I was the first black on the staff there.  And I had an airman, he came in and he told me that he was a, one of the paratroopers, I didn't realize there were any black paratroopers in World War II [WWII].  And he gave me a watch and he gave my wife [Willeen Brown Williams] a watch, the Triple Nickel [555th Parachute Infantry Battalion], you know?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: The--and I told his wife when I put him in the hospital, I said, "Your husband's not gonna get out of the hospital," I said, "he's gonna die."  And it so happened he was the only patient that I ever put in saint--in, over there at the Illinois Central that died, that was the only patient in twenty-three years.  That I either operated or saw as a consultant, you know.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: But we were lucky, we had very good care for the patients, you know.  I had a lady that had thoracic endometriosis, she'd have her period and she would collapse her lung and it was interesting.  I'd just heard the doctor from down at Tulane [Tulane University, New Orleans, Louisiana], he said that black women didn't get endometriosis, said they got gonorrhea, and had babies.  And while I was at Mercy [Mercy Hospital; Mercy Hospital and Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois] I picked up maybe twenty-something people, women who came in with collapsed lungs that had endometriosis, you know.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And I should have written a whole bunch of 'em up, but I didn't.  This other patient that had thoracic endometriosis, I mean, I presented a movie at the American College of Surgeons on her, you know.  But it was something they said black women didn't get, you know?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So we were very fortunate.  That little baby that was shot was the first baby in the world that survived a gunshot wound to the abdomen and chest in utero, you know and lived.
Story_ID: 466587
Speaker 1: Okay, so I suppose you were fairly lucky in that you were working with your brothers [Jasper F. Williams and Charles Williams], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you didn't have to worry about being a partner of somebody you didn't know that well or, 'cause you knew your brothers and you trusted them (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well my brother--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --Jasper, you know, he was an OB/GYN [obstetrics and gynecology], and our son-in-law, is a surgeon, you know?  He's a colorectal surgeon and in New Mexico, he's, he trained at the University of Minnesota [University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Minneapolis, Minnesota], he spent eight years after he got his M.D. training, and then he went to Albuquerque [New Mexico] for ten years and he was listed as the best colorectal surgeon in the whole State of New Mexico.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: You know, and--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --he's probably going back to Albuquerque after the first of the year, yeah.
Story_ID: 466588
Speaker 1: So, you were just telling me something off camera about opportunities in Cuba for young doctors, black doctors (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah--
Speaker 1: --up there.
Speaker 2: --we were, my wife [Willeen Brown Williams] and I went to a medical meeting, a radiology meeting that was held in Cuba, and--
Speaker 1: About four or five years ago, you say?
Speaker 2: --yeah, it's just about four years.
Speaker 1: So we're talking about 2002, 2003, (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, it was interesting, on the plane, I saw this black guy, he had Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] on him, his cap, and so I'd been to Ohio State when I was stationed at, with the Tuskegee Airmen in Columbus [Ohio].  And he told me he was football, ex-football player, and that now he was taking these medical students to this school in Cuba.  And he told me, you know, if you know anybody that wants to go to medical school, let us know.  They have to be less than twenty-eight, and they will train 'em, teach 'em Spanish, 'cause all the courses are in Spanish, and then they give 'em real free room and board, and at the end they teach 'em how to take the test so they can pass the test to get in and get a license here in America, for nothing.
Speaker 1: And it costs the medical school here how much?
Speaker 2: It costs you about two hundred thousand dollars.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], my wife and lived here in Chicago [Illinois], and the University of Chicago, charges medical, just plain first-year students about thirty-five thousand dollars.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: That's not medical school, that's just through college.
Speaker 1: Now, what, what do you think of the Cuban medical system?
Speaker 2: Well, the Cuban medical is better than ours.  For example, you hardly hear of any mal- any mistreatment of young kids.  I mean, over here we have a lot of kids that are beaten up by their parents and other people, and we have 40 million people who don't have any insurance or hospitalization.  In Cuba, everybody has free hospitalization and free medical care, and they don't have as much of a problem with drugs in Cuba as they do in Jamaica.  For example, we have a place in Jamaica but it's--I used to walk downtown, but I wouldn't do that in there now.  I mean it's dangerous, you know.  And, but Cuba is a beautiful place, I wouldn't mind owning a place down there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The stuff they tell you about Cuba--and now see, it's amazing, there's more integration in Cuba, I mean, both sides, the Hispanic man and a black woman, and white Hispanics and black men, than any place I've ever been, you know?
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you think they have a pretty good system in Cuba (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah--
Speaker 1: You know.
Speaker 2: --sure.  They have good medical care there.
Story_ID: 466589
Speaker 1: You ran a clinic [Williams Clinic, Chicago, Illinois] for, you and your brothers [Jasper F. Williams and Charles Williams] ran a clinic for many, many years (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you were here for the change when, when they started moving from clinics to HMOs [health maintenance organization] and that sort of thing?  What do think about that system, the HMO system?
Speaker 2: Well, we had the one doctor who was from Africa who went into a HMO and of course he knew that we were getting to the end of our--but--
Speaker 1: Did (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He--
Speaker 1: --the HMO system dis- I mean, how did that affect your business as doctors?
Speaker 2: It didn't affect us that much.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: But right now, doctors are having trouble practicing you know?  'Cause we, in New Mexico, for example, the new--only neurosurgeon in New Mexico City [ph.] had to leave because he wasn't getting paid by welfare or from Medicare, he said he's gonna have to leave to go some other place.  And, I think that's true--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --in most places, you know.
Speaker 1: So then, you said that the development of HMOs didn't hurt you any?
Speaker 2: It didn't hurt us, no.
Speaker 1: --okay, but what do you think about 'em?
Speaker 2: Well, it, just like I told you, 40 million Americans don't have any hospital coverage, somebody's got to take care of 'em, you know?  And, it-- we don't have as many black doctors as we used to have because right now the fees that Medicare pays are so low, that a lot of doctors are not interested in practicing much or anymore, you know.
Story_ID: 466590
Speaker 1: What are some of your volunteer projects?  I know as a--you've been active in the Chicago [Illinois] community, you were for a long time, what sort of things did you do outside of being a physician?
Speaker 2: Well we tried to, just like recruiting people to go to med school in Cuba, I mean, that's something that it's amazing to think that's here's four hundred vacancies where they'd get all that schooling, room and board, get taught Spanish, and they still can't get as many people to go through as they should.  And about the only restriction is that they should be less than twenty-eight.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But they're fixing it so that they can come back over here and practice and get a license, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were you active in the black medical associations in town then?
Speaker 2: Here?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, we have the National Medical Association right?
Speaker 2: The National--sure.
Speaker 1: And what else?  What other groups?  Are there any other groups?
Speaker 2: Well we had the American College of Surgeons, I was pretty active, and we've had two black presidents in the American College of Surgeons.  Dr. Organ [Claude H. Organ, Jr.], I told you was from Texas, he was the last one.  And, it, I mean there're a lot of opportunities open for blacks, it's just like the one in Cuba that I was telling you about--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --that it doesn't cost them anything and right now I still don't know why the, some of the blacks who've been in the program, males, now no females, we sa- we were on a plane going back to Jamaica and we saw two black girls going home for spring break, and one of the girls had two kids and she was in the third year in the medical school with, unmarried--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --with two kids--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --you can't imagine anybody getting that kind of a break, you know?
Story_ID: 466591
Speaker 1: Now you stayed involved in the Tuskegee Airmen groups [Tuskegee Airmen, Inc.] over the years right?  There's a Chicago [Illinois] chapter right?  And you--are you, you're still a member right?
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: --in fact, we're going to the convention tomorrow.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], that's why we came through here.
Speaker 1: So how's it feel to see the guys again that you used to serve with?
Speaker 2: How me?
Speaker 1: How does it feel to see the fellows that you used to serve with, the others in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, two of them, my good friends died in the past three weeks, one of them right here in Chicago, Taylor, George Taylor [George A. Taylor], he died, and Chuck Dryden [HistoryMaker Lieutenant Colonel Charles Dryden], he was from, actually his parents were from Jamaica, but he was in the second class, he was one of three in the second class, he just died about two weeks ago.  And, in New Mexico, there're just five of us who were Tuskegee Airmen, ex-Tuskegee Airmen, and one of the guys who went to get the gold medal [Congressional Gold Medal] with us is dead, and one of the other guys is ninety-four, so, you know, time's taken its toll.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Why do you think it's important that people know the story of the Tuskegee Airmen?
Speaker 2: Well, you see the Tuskegee Airmen has--we fixed it so that the only thing that is totally integrated in America is [U.S.] Armed Forces, that's the only thing that's totally integrated.  And, most of that came from the ability of the fighter pilots to protect the bombers that were going to Berlin [Germany], see?  They had--the blacks escorted over two hundred missions and they supposedly didn't lose any planes, there have been some reports since recently that they did lose some, but I don't know whether it's somebody just trying to get some publicity because for up until now, they've been reports that no, they didn't lose any planes.  And they knew that about 35 percent of the crews on the B-17s [Boeing B-17 Flying Fortress], the B-24s [Consolidated B-24 Liberator] who were being guarded by the fighter planes were gonna die.  And that, the fact that we helped integrate and re- and a record that shows that blacks can fly, you know?  We have a friend that, well he was the first pilot to fly for United Airlines, and he used to fly from here in Chicago, and now he's set up a school down in southern Illinois, the--a flying school to try to help more blacks get involved in flight training, you know.
Speaker 1: What's his name?
Speaker 2: Bill (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We can figure--
Speaker 2: Norwood [William R. Norwood].
Speaker 1: --Norwood, okay, Bill-
Speaker 2: You--
Speaker 1: --Norwood--
Speaker 2: --know him?
Speaker 1: No I don't.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  He sounds like somebody we ought to talk to.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Now sir, sir (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Bill Norwood.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, so now how--
Speaker 2: He was the first black fighter, black pilot for North--for United Airlines, he flew for 'em for thirty years.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  So--
Speaker 2: But now he's opened a school in southern Illinois.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: I have a brochure on him, I'll send you a copy of it if I can, you know, it tells about his retirement and life, you know.
Story_ID: 466592
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: What are my what?
Speaker 1: Some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: Well I sure hope Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] is the president, in fact, I think he would make an excellent president, he's finished Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] with honors, his wife [Michelle Obama] is a Harvard Law graduate, and I don't know whether you saw that thing on the front page of New York Magazine.
Speaker 1: Yes--
Speaker 2: But--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I saw it.
Speaker 2: --he responded to that last night on CNN, and he--it doesn't upset him too much, because he, I'm sure he can, he knows he can expect all that kind of stuff from people.  But, I think if he gets to be president--and I hope that nobody tries to kill him, that's one big danger 'cause I went to the White House [Washington, D.C.] in 1963, August the 1st of '63 [1963], and I met President Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy], 'cause we were trying to get 'em to fix it so that any hospital that got federal funds couldn't segregate black patients.  And--
Speaker 1: So is that during the same time as the march?
Speaker 2: Say what?
Speaker 1: Was that during the same time as the march in '63 [1963]?  That was also in August of '63 [1963] too, so--
Speaker 2: Was it?
Speaker 1: Yes sir, and I, so I wondered if you were down there at the same time for that march, you know?
Speaker 2: No, I saw him, I went with some black doctors from the medical society--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --to see if we could get him to change it so that any hospital bill with federal funds couldn't segregate it.  And he was assassinated in November of the same year, '63 [1963], about four months after we saw him.
Speaker 1: That's right.  Yeah I saw the picture of you and the other doctors standing there with--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --President Kennedy, it's a black and white photo.
Speaker 2: That's right, and he came over, he knew that I'd been arrested so he came over and kidded with me, he said, "Well, if you don't fight for your rights you won't get any."
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And he said that to me while we were in the White House there.
Speaker 1: So you eventually, that charge against you was expunged from your record right?
Speaker 2: Well, the charge was, they dropped some of the charges but they put a two page type written reprimand in my record that stayed in there for fifty years.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Stayed in the record for fifty years.
Speaker 1: And that was eventually taken out of your record right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  That was, that's not that long ago, right?
Speaker 2: No.  Fifty years, fifty years after--
Speaker 1: Yeah, that was in the '90s [1990s], I guess in the mid-'90s [1990s]?
Speaker 2: Yeah that's right.
Speaker 1: That they finally took that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --those two, that two page reprimand out?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And, so you were part of the group that urged President Kennedy to freeze federal funds, the hospitals that were discriminating against blacks?
Speaker 2: Yeah, to--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --to fix it so that no hospitals could, that received federal funds could segregate, you know?
Speaker 1: So that, that happens in '63 [1963], '64 [1964], you have the Civil Rights Act [Civil Rights Act of 1964]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So at least legally, now it's illegal to discriminate.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: But, in your opinion is there still some discrimination going on, today?
Speaker 2: I really don't know.  But I would suspect there was some, sure.
Story_ID: 466593
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point in life, what--is there any major thing that you would do differently now if you could?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  I've done, I've been satisfied with the progress that I've made.  And my son [James Williams II], he, I took him to surgery when he was fourteen, and he is very good, in fact, I went back up to the University of Minnesota [University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Minneapolis, Minnesota] and the girl who was on transplants up there, who was in charge of transplants in Minnesota was a white surgeon female, and she was bragging about what a good surgeon he was.  In fact, she let have the most, three kidneys when they were doing transplants in his first year of training.  That's something that a very few people ever get to do.  And she was bragging about what a good surgeon she thought he was, you know?  Now she's chief of surgery at the University of California in San Francisco [University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California].
Story_ID: 466594
Speaker 1: What today, when you look back on everything, all the things that happened to you and with the Tuskegee Airmen and with the medical clinic [Williams Clinic, Chicago, Illinois] and everything else, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, I don't think there's any doubt that the Tuskegee Airmen were qualified.  See, we have a problem today even, for example, I don't know whether you knew Dr. Zaller [ph.], who practiced medi- he died here.  Did you know he was a cadet at one time, an aviation cadet?  Well let me tell you about that.  See, the [U.S.] Air Force was supposedly integrated in '49 [1949], and Dr. Zaller and another black were down in Tennessee, they were aviation cadets, and Zaller apparently had the highest grades of anybody in the class.  They were the two blacks that were--and both of 'em were washed out and they, they told blacks, Zaller, that he was a hazard to the other pilots and that's the crap that they're telling all of the blacks when they get washed out.  That's just an excuse, see, because Bill Norwood [William R. Norwood], he opened a flight school down in, what, southern Illinois, and the reason for that is that we know that there's been a limited number of blacks who have been, gotten through flight training in the [U.S.] Army because they're still, even though it's supposed to be integrated, you still get some instructors who don't think so.  And, a lot of this, I talked to some of the pilots who've, the last one I talked to was from Delta [Delta Air Lines], and he finished training in a private school.  See, in private schools you probably are not subject to the possibility of getting washed out, you know?  But I talked to some of the senators about that problem, when we know we were having.  I talked to one of the commanders of the Air Force and he told me, he said, this was about six years ago, he said that we don't have but about, but a few blacks who are flying for the U.S. Air Force, said, but one and a half percent of the pilots, black pilots, are members of the flight crews today, one and a half percent?  And that point 3 percent of the pilots were female and I don't know the breakdown, how many black females there were.  But, we know there's a problem.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That well.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that seems like a big problem, and 1.5 percent of the--
Speaker 2: 1.5 percent.
Speaker 1: --of the Air Force pilots today are?
Speaker 2: Male.
Speaker 1: Male.
Speaker 2: Male pilots.
Speaker 1: The male--
Speaker 2: And see, if Zaller, if I'd--I should have worked on his case.  I used to do all of the surgery on his kids, but Zaller was washed out in the first group that were washed out after the Air Force became integrated.  That was in 1950.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: See, and integrated in '49 [1949].
Speaker 1: So they were still washing people out (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah they--
Speaker 1: --unnecessarily?
Speaker 2: --washed 'em out in '50 [1950].  And I don't think it's improved much since then.
Speaker 1: Okay so they still--
Speaker 2: They still--
Speaker 1: Right--
Speaker 2: --have control--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --and they still have a way of cutting their throats so that they can never graduate.  And a lot of the pilots who were flying for the airlines are trained in some of these professional schools that are training pilots.  That's just like these 9/11 [September 11, 2001] people, that blew up the buildings in New York [New York] then, those guys were taking flight training and the only training they wanted was knowing how to navigate and operate.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And anybody with any common sense should have known that they had a motive for that.
Story_ID: 466595
Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask this question again 'cause we seem to be an answer behind on all the questions, but what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Be my what?
Speaker 1: Legacy.
Speaker 2: Well, I'm happy with success with our kids.  I mean, my son [James Williams II] is a surgeon, he's probably better than I was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay so--
Speaker 2: --and our daughter [HistoryMaker Brenda Payton Jones] is a journalist, she would, she wrote for the Oakland Tribune.  But anyway, she's had two of the best articles in the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California], one about the internment of Japanese during World War II [WWII] and the other one about the guy who was blocking the (unclear) train and they cut his legs off.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Both of those articles were rated the best for the Bay Area, you know, and they were written by her.  And then she got a Knight Fellowship [John S. Knight Journalism Fellowship] to Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California], which is good, so I've been extremely happy with the success of our kids.
Speaker 1: And, how many grandchildren do you have now?
Speaker 2: We have three.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The three, and they're doing fine, the youngest one is four, and a week ago we were up in Elephant Butte [New Mexico], you know, we had a pool up there and this guy swims underwater all the length of the pool.
Speaker 1: Four year (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Four--
Speaker 1: --old?
Speaker 2: --years old.  And, the other two who are seven are good swimmers too, and they like to ski, all of 'em are skiers so.
Speaker 1: So you've got like, well I read somewhere you've got like six doctors in the family?
Speaker 2: We (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or--
Speaker 2: --have, I had two brothers [Jasper F. Williams and Charles Williams]--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --and we had our son and three, three--
Speaker 1: What, three nephews?
Speaker 2: --three nephews.
Speaker 1: Okay, um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's remarkable.
Speaker 2: So that's--
Speaker 1: It's--
Speaker 2: --total of seven.
Speaker 1: --and your mother [Clara Drisdale Williams] lived to be 108 years old, right?
Speaker 2: She was--in three months she would have been 109.
Story_ID: 466596
Speaker 1: Our last question is similar to legacy but a little different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I hadn't thought of that (laughter).  But, in my field of surgery I thought I was, could compete with anybody, of course I had good training, I had a master's degree in surgery, which very few surgeons have.  And after that I went up to the Royal Vic [Royal Victoria Hospital, Montreal, Canada], in McGill [McGill University, Montreal, Canada] and they had a Jewish surgeon up there who was taking the internal mammary artery and re-vascularizing the heart, that was the fir- I had an opportunity to be up there when he was doing that, which was very unusual.  And now they can do bypasses, but what he was doing, he got collateral circulation and he got some mock-ups, you know to show that he was getting collateral circulation in the animals that he did 'em on.  I hope we can get somebody in medical school down in Cuba 'cause I think that's a great opportunity that's being overlooked, and still don't know why that some of the black males who were in the program dropped out, I haven't had a chance to talk to the guy from Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio], you know, who takes the kids down there.
Speaker 1: But you wanna be remembered as a good surgeon?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: And?
Speaker 2: And a good parent, yeah.  I think that's important.  I think that's important for all black parents.  I mean, I agree with what Obama's [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] telling the folks that they have to be responsible for their kids.  Of course it's interesting, our kids, we had a motor home and we'd go to skiing in the wintertime, and in the summertime we'd go to Canada, fishing, and both of them liked those things even though they did 'em as kids and they--my son [James Williams II] has a motor home, he still likes to go fishing and skiing.  And plus, the fact, I told you he was an excellent surgeon and has made well.  Just like I told you, he was considered the best colorectal surgeon in the State of New Mexico.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you'd like to be remembered as a good surgeon and a good parent.
Speaker 2: That's right.
