Story_ID: 669386
Speaker 1: All right.  My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] Craig Watkins. It's C-R-A-I-G, last name W-A-T-K-I-N-S.
Speaker 1: And your middle name is?
Speaker 2: Marcus.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right and is there a story behind your middle name?
Speaker 2: Yes--Craig Martin [sic.] was the quarterback for the Dallas Cowboys, and my uncle gave me the middle name.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah. 'Cause it was not Marcus, but it was Craig Martin. He was like, he was like Troy Aikman is today back in the '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Oh Craig Morton you're talking about.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Craig Morton, right.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry, Craig Morton.
Speaker 1: See I'm old enough to realize (unclear) (laughter) Craig Morton, but.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So he gave me the middle name Marcus.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  All right.  Is--and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My date of birth is 11/16/67 [November 16, 1967], and I was born in Dallas, Texas.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm an attorney.
Speaker 1: And you're former--?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I was the former district attorney for Dallas County [Texas].  I served for eight years from 2006--I actually took office in 2007--and in 2014.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And you know, and where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are at my law office [Craig Watkins Law Firm, PLLC], which is 2531 Martin Luther King Boulevard [Martin Luther King, Jr. Boulevard], Dallas, Texas 75215.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is (background noise) 9/14/17 [September 14, 2017] (background noise).
Story_ID: 669387
Speaker 1: (Background noise) Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we ask as kind of a warm up (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure.
Speaker 1: --and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite food?  Yes, it's probably Mexican food (background noise).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Color is green.
Speaker 1: All right. Favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Favorite time of the year is Christmastime, Thanksgiving time.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Yes, that--my favorite vacation destination is going to be Jamaica.
Speaker 1: And the last one is: do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Hm.  I don't know.  Favorite phrase, I don't know (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right we can get back to that if you--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --if you think of something.
Story_ID: 669388
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your family history now.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but we'll start with your mother's side first.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Her name is Paula, P-A-U-L-A, J-O-Y-C-E, Watkins, her maiden name is Clark [Paula Clark Watkins].
Speaker 1: Okay.  C-L-A-R-K (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) C-L-A-R-K.
Speaker 1: Watkins.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born in August 9, 1959, and she was born in Dallas [Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family historically?  How far back can you trace them, and what are the stories on that side?
Speaker 2: Historically--my grandmother [Myretha Smith Clark] and grandfather [Isam Clark], they started out in Marshall, Texas; and then eventually they moved to Dallas.  My grandfather was a carpenter by trade, and my grandmother was--she was a maid.  Historically going back, her cousin was actually the first African American judge elected in--in Dallas.
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: Berlin Breshure: B-E-R-L-I-N, B-R-E-S-H-U-R-E.
Speaker 1: Breshure, how--what's the last name again, Breshure?
Speaker 2: B-R-E-S-H-U-R-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Berlin Breshure. Now Marshall, Texas--that's where Wiley College is I think, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.  Yes.
Speaker 1: And was he a student at Wiley or did he?
Speaker 2: No.  My grandparents didn't go to college.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But her cousin, was he associated with it in any way?
Speaker 2: Not Wiley, I couldn't tell you which college he went to, or law school.  I think he went to Texas in--Texas Southern [Texas Southern University] in Houston [Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: 'Cause that's--that's important.  So, okay, so, so your mother, did she grow up in Marshall herself?
Speaker 2: No, she grew up here in Dallas.
Speaker 1: Oh in Dallas.  In Dallas.
Speaker 2: She did.
Speaker 1: Okay her gra- her parents were from Marshall.
Speaker 2: Yes, and she graduated from Madison High School [James Madison High School, Dallas, Texas], and that's where she met my father [Richard Watkins].  And I always jokingly say that I was at the wedding (laughter) because I was in her stomach at the wedding.  August--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --yeah.
Story_ID: 669389
Speaker 1: What did your mother [Paula Clark Watkins] say about growing up in Dallas [Texas]?  What was Dallas like when she grew up?
Speaker 2: Well you know Dallas, you know unfortunately for Dallas, it has a reputation for not being too friendly to people of color, and what we're seeing now is that a lot of folks in leadership roles are people of color.  And so Dallas is drastically changing from the time when I grew up.  I can remember growing up on my grand- mother's street, which is right down the corner.  And there was a shooting once and the police when they came, they were more interested in talking to the public that were around and were looking at the shooting, more concerned with who had traffic ticket warrants as opposed to there is a dead body there and you know, we need to figure out how this body got here and who did it.  And so, therein lies my philosophical approach, was to change law enforcement totally.  You know I did it for eight years but I wish I could have done it longer because there is so much to do; and unfortunately I lost the election [for district attorney of Dallas County, Texas], and here I sit with you.
Story_ID: 669390
Speaker 1: Now your mother [Paula Clark Watkins] went to--
Speaker 2: She--
Speaker 1: --she graduated from Madison High School [James Madison High School, Dallas, Texas].  Now did she get a chance to go to college (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She, she did.  North Texas [North Texas State University; University of North Texas, Denton, Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay.  North Texas.
Speaker 2: And she went on to get a master's degree and a doctorate degree.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And what did she get her degrees in?
Speaker 2: I don't know, I think it's education.
Speaker 1: Education?  Probably.
Speaker 2: She wa- my mother and father [Richard Watkins] both started as teachers, and she got a master's in education and a doctorate in education.
Speaker 1: So she has like what they call an Ed.D., or?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 669391
Speaker 1: Well let me go to your father.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Richard, R-I-C-H-A-R-D, Duke, D-U-K-E, Watkins [Richard Watkins].
Speaker 1: Is Duke part of his real name, or a nickname?
Speaker 2: No, that's his real name.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Eleven, twenty-eight, forty-eight [November 28, 1948], he was born in Dallas [Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now is there a story behind the middle name Duke?
Speaker 2: No, I always wondered if there was a story behind that, but I haven't heard any stories behind his middle name.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  There is one there, but nobody--you probably just don't know?
Speaker 2: I just don't know what--yeah.
Speaker 1: Don't know what it is.  Yeah.  Once again, what do you know about the Watkins side of the family?  How far back can you trace them--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --and even, are there Dukes on that side of the family--anybody named Duke?
Speaker 2: No, he's the only one.  My grandfather lived in Dallas.  He actually went to Wiley College [Marshall, Texas], graduated there in education and he became a teacher.  He was married to my grandmother, she died when I was very young, but--believe she died at the age of forty-five or forty-eight, and my grandfather remarried.  And I couldn't tell you what his wife did.  I believe she was in the educational field also, and she also graduated from Wiley.  My grandfather moved to Dallas--they lived in Tyler, Texas, and they moved to Dallas.  And this is where they basically had resided for their whole adult life.  And my father is the oldest child; he has a brother who is deceased, and he has three sisters.
Story_ID: 669392
Speaker 1: So once again, what did your father [Richard Watkins] say about growing up, or are there any stories, you know things that he witnessed growing up that?
Speaker 2: You know my father never really talked about it, I just witnessed certain things.  But he would never sit down with me and have a conversation about Dallas [Texas], and how Dallas was.  But I knew that in his employment--he taught for a while and then he worked at Texas Instruments [Texas Instruments, Incorporated] you know for a while.  And I knew that for him it had to be somewhat difficult to get through life and to send myself (background noise) and my brother [Gregory Watkins] to college.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So now he was able to finish high school, right?
Speaker 2: He graduated from high school the same one, Madison [James Madison High School, Dallas, Texas] right down the street; and he went off to college, Bishop College [Dallas, Texas], and then he got his master's degree at SMU [Southern Methodist University, Dallas, Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right from SMU, all right so is there--and did he become a teacher as well?
Speaker 2: Yes he did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He taught for nine years then he left that job and he started a job at Texas Instruments.
Speaker 1: Okay so he, was he in a STEM track [science, technology, engineering, mathematics], was he a mathematician or a STEM (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no--I mean he was in a management role at Texas A&M [Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas], and then he went off to this company called MasTec [MasTec, Inc.].  It was a semi-conductor company.  But he was not an engineer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He just was fortunate enough to get a job at those institutions.
Speaker 1: Now did he--what were his aspirations when he was young?  I mean what did he aspire to do 'cause this is the kind of job you don't plan to do but you end up, you know, in, you know?
Speaker 2: I thought he--from what I witnessed, I thought he always wanted to be a teacher and he was fortunate enough to do that; and then economics played a role in him making a determination to leave that job.  But he had always wanted to be an educator.
Story_ID: 669393
Speaker 1: Now is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: They met in high school [James Madison High School, Dallas, Texas] in--I know that my father [Richard Watkins] used to walk to her house, and at the time the road was not paved and he would walk to her house in the mud.  (Laughter) And when he got there he had to have his shoes cleaned.  And the--I guess the larger story concerning my parents obviously is me because my mother [Paula Clark Watkins] was seventeen years old when she had me, and she was seventeen years old when she got married.  My dad was eighteen years old.  So I've been a part of their history from, from my whole life.  And they were, you know--actually while they were married and having a child, they were able to achieve all these things by going to college and educating themselves.
Story_ID: 669394
Speaker 1: Now when you think about your parents' personalities, their dispositions, their sense of humor, their views on things, what they look like, what they walk like, what they talk like, their talents--who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I think I take after my mother [Paula Clark Watkins] to a certain extent because my mother is very smart, but I take after my dad [Richard Watkins] from the entrepreneurial standpoint.  He was always an entrepreneur.  He--when he left TI, he started his own business; and eventually he you know opened up his own KFC restaurant [Kentucky Fried Chicken].  And now my parents, they're next door and they are still entrepreneurs--they own an adult daycare center [The Bridge, Dallas, Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Texas Instruments [Texas Instruments, Incorporated] was, I remember they were the company that came out with the pocket calculator.
Speaker 2: They did.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and I remember when they were over a hundred dollars.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Back in the--when a hundred dollars represented a week's work for most working people, you know.
Speaker 2: Yes, and that's, that's where he worked for, you know for years.
Speaker 1: And they were the pioneer.
Speaker 2: They were.
Speaker 1: Texas Instruments.  Okay.
Story_ID: 669395
Speaker 1: Now do you have siblings?
Speaker 2: I have a brother, his name is Gregory Watkins, G-R-E-G-O-R-Y, and he also graduated from SMU [Southern Methodist University, Dallas, Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what--now you grew up in the Oak Bluff [sic.] neighborhood, is that?
Speaker 2: Oak Cliff (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oak Cliffs [sic.], okay.
Speaker 2: My brother also grew up there in Oak Cliff, which is the southern part of Dallas [Texas] and it's the--at the time it was the upper class, I guess you would say, African Americans that started moving in that area.  Another story I can tell you is that when we first moved there, we were the only black family on the block, and within a year it was all African American.  Also--
Speaker 1: Now is this the neighborhood that we're in now?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Oak Cliffs?  Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: No this is a different neighborhood.  This is considered South Dallas [Dallas, Texas].  So yeah, I mean you know even in my school it was pretty much all white, but within a year it became all African American.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what year did your parents [Paula Clark Watkins and Richard Watkins] move into Oak Cliffs?
Speaker 2: That had to be--I was probably eight years old, so that had to be 1975.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So in 1975 Oak Cliffs--and had, was Oak Cliffs like a Jewish neighborhood, or did--any particular ethnicity there before?
Speaker 2: No particular ethnicity, it was just all white.  And those individuals all moved out to a town called DeSoto [Texas], which is you know ten minutes away from Oak Cliff, and they started to buy property there.  And then you also had white flight because eventually it became all African American.  In fact, my parents live in DeSoto; they moved there.  And now it's predominantly African American.  It's you know a lot of professionals that live in DeSoto, I also live in DeSoto.  But you know when we moved there--my parents moved there it was all white and then as time passed that went away.
Speaker 1: Now people I know in the early '70s [1970s] when I was in college, those who were coming out of school were talking about moving to the Sun Belt--you know, Dallas, Houston [Texas] and Atlanta [Georgia] you know and there was an influx of a lot of people.  You know, I suppose people are still coming in from the country into the city.  So a lot of black people are coming into the heart of Dallas.
Speaker 2: Most people that I come in contact with are not from here, they are from somewhere else.  You know I think it is more of an economy kind of issue.  The like--I don't know if Chicago [Illinois] if they have a state income tax, but there is not one here, and you can basically buy a house here in Dallas for half of what you may spend in Chicago.  And so, so that's why I think we had an influence--influx of individuals that moved here because they saw opportunity.  I talk to a lot of my friends and they actually moved to a suburb; and I tell them, you know, look Dallas is prime for you, and prime for you to buy certain properties because the properties in, in the suburbs are a little bit more expensive than they would be in Dallas in the southern sector of this county [Dallas County, Texas].
Story_ID: 669396
Speaker 1: Describe the street you grew up in.  Now did you grow up on the same street, or (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I grew up on Caracas [Street].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's called Caracas, C-A-R-A-C-U-S [sic.], and I grew up in that neighborhood, and that's where a lot of my friends grew up.
Speaker 1: So describe it for us, and what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up there?
Speaker 2: It was--you know I couldn't say anything terrible about my childhood.  I mean it was very middle class; and the sights were you had individuals that basically took care of their houses, took care of the lawn and they were professional people.  And my parents and my closest friends, they all got involved with the commu- the PTA [Parent Teacher Association], the community, in making sure that their kids got a proper education.  To this day I can't name one friend that didn't graduate from college.  So it was very middle class, and then you had a lot of individuals that maybe didn't go to college but they could make a living, a good living without a college degree unlike today.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well what's changed today?
Speaker 2: Well you know I mean certain things have changed--even some of my friends that have graduated from college are having a difficult time in finding employment.  And what really prompted me, I've always wanted to be a lawyer, but really prompted me to you know stop procrastinating was my father [Richard Watkins], he was tired of me living in his house (laughter) and it's time for you to you know do something.  Because after college [Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas], I couldn't find a job and so that's when my mother [Paula Clark Watkins] said that there is this new law school [Texas Wesleyan University School of Law; Texas A&M University School of Law, Fort Worth, Texas], why don't you go to law school, you've always wanted to be a lawyer.  And so that's when I decided to go in the legal profession.  My dad always said, "What are you going to do with a political science degree?"  That was my college degree.  And when you think about it, there's not much (laughter) but for the practice of law that you can do with a political science degree.
Speaker 1: Now you can teach political science, or--yeah, I--right.
Speaker 2: You can teach it, but in order to teach it you have to go and get your graduate level and your doctorate degree.  And that's, that was something that I was not interested in.  I wanted to actually practice law.
Speaker 1: Okay, now back to your neigh- the neighborhood you lived in, was there--it turned black pretty quick as you were saying.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Was there like a black business strip or were people focused on going to the suburbs to buy and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: There was not a black business strip.  There was a mall--it was called Red Bird Mall, now it's called Southwest Center Mall [Dallas, Texas].  And that's where most of the professional African Americans matriculated to that mall.  But eventually that didn't last; right now it's just a shell of a mall. But no there were you know black entrepreneurs all in Oak Cliff [Dallas, Texas].  And for example, my dad you know started a screen printing business for tee shirts [T-Shirts Etcetera, Dallas, Texas]--he was one.  There were a lot of realtors, and there were a lot of lawyers and doctors because that's where you know the African American community decided to, where they wanted to put their roots.
Story_ID: 669397
Speaker 1: So where, where did you start school--I mean?
Speaker 2: I started school at Adelle Turner, A-D-E-L-L-E, Turner [Adelle Turner Elementary School, Dallas, Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay, this is elementary school, right?
Speaker 2: Yes; then I went on to, I went on to Atwell--W.H. Atwell [William Hawley Atwell Middle School; William Hawley Atwell Law Academy, Dallas, Texas].
Speaker 1: Is this a middle school or junior high school?
Speaker 2: Yes, middle school.
Speaker 1: Middle school, okay.
Speaker 2: Then I went on to the health magnet [School of Health Professions at Yvonne A. Ewell Townview Center, Dallas, Texas] because I had in my mind that I wanted to be a doctor.  It was a magnet school but then I quickly decided no, this is not what I want to do; and then I went to Carter High School--David W. Carter High School [Dallas, Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what were you interested in, in grade school?
Speaker 2: You know I was always interested in law.  In--surprisingly, one individual, although he was not a lawyer, that impressed me was Ronald Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] because he was a great communicator.  And going into law, I saw that most people in [U.S.] Congress, most people in the [U.S.] Senate are lawyers; and so once I started figuring out where I wanted to be in life, it was leading me to politics.  And so that's how I got into politics eventually after I had been a successful lawyer for some time.
Speaker 1: Now was your father [Richard Watkins] involved in a political organization in Dallas [Texas] at all?
Speaker 2: No but my family was always involved in politics.  They had their finger on the pulse of what was going on in the country.  But they were not involved in politics--none whatsoever.  I don't think they had the stomach for it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now it's kind of surprising your admiration for Ronald Reagan.  Because there weren't--in the '80s [1980s] there weren't very many black people that admitted such an admiration, but (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.  No I mean but that's why I say it's surprising because I saw him, and I really studied him and I saw that you know being a politician is not just being smart and having a law degree.  You have to be able to communicate with individuals, and he was great at that.  That's why I looked at him--you know Reagan and Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] they were both good at that.  Now Clinton was a Rhodes scholar [Rhodes Scholarship] so he had the mental capacity to be the president, and he was a great communicator; and so you know those are the two individuals that you know I saw.  And I was thinking to myself wow, I can do that.
Story_ID: 669398
Speaker 1: Now in your early years, was church important?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, extremely.  We, you know I hate to use the word religiously went to church every Sunday, and my parents were always involved in church.  In fact, my dad [Richard Watkins] is a deacon in the church that I grew up in and my mom [Paula Clark Watkins] is what is called a deaconess.  And so my parents have always been high on religion, and even my in-laws are the same way.  My father-in-law, he's a deacon at his church and they live in Seattle [Washington], and so--and my mother-in-law, she played the piano in their church.  So you combine my in-laws and my parents, and church was always an issue and some things we had to do as we grew up.
Speaker 1: Now what was the name of your family church?
Speaker 2: It was New Hope Baptist Church [Dallas, Texas], N-E-W, H-O-P-E.
Speaker 1: Did you have you know any special roles there as a youth?  I mean were you?
Speaker 2: I did, I sang in the choir my whole time as I went to that church.  I stopped singing in the choir when I went to college [Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas].  But I sang in the choir from, I believe my parents joined that church when I was eight years old.  And so I sang in the choir all the way up until I was eighteen.  And the only reason I stopped was to go to college.
Story_ID: 669399
Speaker 1: Now did you play sports?  You're, you're a pretty big guy; you're about like 6'2"?
Speaker 2: 6'4".
Speaker 1: 6'4".  Okay you're bigger than I thought (laughter) so that doesn't mean you have to play sports but did you, were you into (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes I was on the swim team--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --surprisingly.  I was on the swim team throughout high school [David W. Carter High School, Dallas, Texas] and what I've seen all--was okay.  I have a daughter [Taryn Watkins] who is swimming, she's eleven [years old] and she's one of the top swimmers in Texas.  My son--my middle son [Cale Watkins] also was on the swim team but he is--he chose lacrosse, he's a big lacrosse player.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you see swimming as--or were you able to receive any I guess scholarship support at school for swimming or anything like that?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  I wasn't that good (laughter), but I did notice that there were no African Americans that were on the Olympic team.  And that's something I had in the back of my mind that I maybe could do.  Unfortunately I didn't, but my daughter probably, hopefully will be an Olympic swimmer.
Story_ID: 669400
Speaker 1: Now were you a good student when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was okay.  I was one of those students that--I believe my grade point average when I finished high school [David W. Carter High School, Dallas, Texas] was like a 2.8.  So I was kind of one of those students who saw my way through--see (laughter) as in saw my way through.  And I--if I had applied myself a little bit more, I probably would have been a better student.  That application didn't come until actually I was in law school [Texas Wesleyan University School of Law; Texas A&M University School of Law, Fort Worth, Texas].  I believe my college years [at Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas] were the same--2.8, 2.9--but law school was different because I looked at it and I look back on it, I was more mature and I wanted to do well.  Before, it was more of: okay what I can I do to get by and pass this class.  When in law school, it was totally different.
Story_ID: 669401
Speaker 1: So you grew up in the (background noise) '70s [1970s] and '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I guess, and what did you like to do when you were a kid?
Speaker 2: You know I liked--I, actually you know that's when video games first came out.  I don't know if you remember the Atari, I was one of the first kids that received an Atari for Christmas.  So I liked playing Atari and I also liked--a lot of friends, they had basketball goals, I even had one, in their driveway and so we would go and play basketball you know at my house or someone else's house.  And so those were pretty much what I liked to do.  And I enjoyed school, I enjoyed going to school.  And, and I don't know if you've heard of Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.]?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Well, Jack and Jill used to have an annual Christmas party that I loved to go to.  Now my wife's [Tanya Watkins] a member of Jack and Jill and so my kids get to see that.  My son, my oldest son [Chad Watkins] in college [Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas], he was in Jack and Jill but he got to meet a guy from Houston [Texas] while he was in Jack and Jill going to what they call Teen Conference, and that guy is his roommate now.  So it's a very good organization to bring you know people of color together so they can get that culture.
Speaker 1: Yeah they--from what I understand Jack and Jill, correct me if I'm wrong, is created by black professionals--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --to give their children some other--the children of other black professionals to associate with.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Have you ever heard of the Boule [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So the Boule, I don't know if you know the story behind the Boule, but the Boule started because you know black professionals when they would travel, they couldn't stay in hotels; and so they created this organization where they would stay you know at people's houses because they couldn't stay at a hotel.  And I, you know I'm fortunate enough to be a member of the Boule, and the Boule is you know all professional, professional people that have achieved a certain status in life.
Story_ID: 669402
Speaker 1: Growing up, and--you're involved in the church [New Hope Baptist Church, Dallas, Texas], you're at Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.], swimming?
Speaker 2: Swimming.
Speaker 1: I had a que- (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I played sports when I was younger also.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I played football, basketball and soccer.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Yes I did.
Speaker 1: So were you a fan of the Dallas Cowboys or were there any other teams--?
Speaker 2: Oh obviously.
Speaker 1: Okay, well--(laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah my middle name is--kind of sort of named after a Cowboy [Craig Morton].
Speaker 1: Yeah they always had great teams so--
Speaker 2: They did, yeah.
Speaker 1: --so you know it's not hard to be a fan unlike other parts of the country (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, now when you were in school who were your--did you have any special teachers or mentors, either the grade school level or high school level [David W. Carter High School, Dallas, Texas]?
Speaker 2: I had a Ms. Elliott [ph.], she was grade school and she was Caucasian and she took care--although the school [Adelle Turner Elementary School, Dallas, Texas] changed from majority white to African American, she took--excuse me--she took care to make sure that these African American kids were educated.  In fact, when I became DA [district attorney] I talked to her.  She happened to be on Facebook.  Unfortunately, I believe her husband died and I was going through my Facebook and sent her a note and she called me back.  So she was one of the--if you ask me of all the teachers, I couldn't give you anyone else's name but for her.  That's the only one I would, I would remember by name.
Speaker 1: Okay even at the high school level?
Speaker 2: Even at the high school level.
Story_ID: 669403
Speaker 1: At Carter High School [David W. Carter High School, Dallas, Texas] did you--were you--did you run for any offices in school?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I	If you talk to my classmates they would say to you that we would have never seen Craig [HistoryMaker Craig Watkins] become--in this position because I was so, I was really quiet, I was really an introvert.  And I didn't socialize a lot with my high school friends, and I was just kind of a, one of those individuals that you wouldn't know unless someone called your name.  So you know I was always contemplating when I was there at that time: okay how can I put myself in a position to allow me to do what I want to do?  And so it was one of those situations where I didn't involve myself with a lot of people at that time.  But I you know, obviously you know got to actually do what I wanted to do because it was planned; just didn't happen.  In my thirties--this was a plan all along to run for office, and particularly become the district attorney.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So when you were on the verge of graduation, you knew you were going to college, right?
Speaker 2: Oh I didn't have a choice (laughter).
Speaker 1: High school--yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you took college prep courses I guess at?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't.
Speaker 1: You didn't?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: No I didn't, none whatsoever; just went to college--got into college and--
Speaker 1: So you took the general course in high school in?
Speaker 2: General courses yes.  I mean this was--it was different back then like my kids right now they have pre-college preps for them and they take classes, and they even go towards your hours in college.  But back then we didn't have that; it was generally just go to high school and graduate.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So now did you get any advice on what school you ought to attend?
Speaker 2: No I didn't, actually my mom basically--"Craig, you haven't decided what school you're going to go to, so we're going to take you to Prairie View [Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas]," and that's how I got there.  I went there the summer after I graduated to fill out all the applications, and I had a cousin that also went with me at that time and we were roommates.  But I mean that was one of the best decisions my mom and my parents [Paula Clark Watkins and Richard Watkins] could have made because I thoroughly enjoyed Prairie View.  My son [Chad Watkins] is there, my wife [Tanya Watkins] graduated from there, her parents graduated from there.  So there was a long line of individuals who, fortunately in my life, who actually graduated from Prairie View.
Speaker 1: So you didn't have a problem with going to Prairie View (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: --or with your mother choosing school?
Speaker 2: No I didn't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't have a problem whatsoever.
Story_ID: 669404
Speaker 1: You know the teachers at Prairie View [Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas] basically were from that civil rights era.  Like when you major in political science, most of my teachers were civil rights activists; and so I learned their experience, and I learned about you know all these people of color who you know gave their lives to make a difference in this country.  And I think--
Speaker 2: So this is 1986 right when you started Prairie View--fall of '86 [1986].
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Who were some of these teachers and what organizations did they work with?
Speaker 1: Well see that's another thing, I can't remember any of their names.  But they worked with organizations before they became professors, and so Prairie View hired all of these civil rights individuals (background noise) who came with all this experience.  So I don't believe that they had worked with organizations while I was there, but I do believe that they worked with different organizations before I started Prairie View.
Speaker 2: Now was there a black student organization--I know it's a black college [HBCU]--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: --but was there a black student organization?
Speaker 1: No there was not; they didn't need it (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well you know a lot of schools--a lot of black colleges focused on everything that a student needs to do if they're white rather than what you need if you're black.
Speaker 1: Well, I mean--
Speaker 2: I mean no black history, no--you know that sort of thing but it sounds like you didn't have that situation then?
Speaker 1: No we, we didn't have a black student organization, not that I know of at Prairie View because 90 percent of the students were African American.  So I don't know if--
Speaker 2: But like I said, a lot of those schools still teach everything white people need to know without--excluding black history and culture or excluding any references to black people at all, you know.  This is a phenomenon in the country that's still going on.  You go to some black colleges (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No I mean I was taught black history in my political science classes.  That's what we read; we read Marx [Karl Marx] and you know all of these political leaders.  We read Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], Medgar Evers you know, and I found out that a lot of people didn't really know who Medgar Evers was until the movie came out, which I believe Whoop- was [HistoryMaker] Whoopi Goldberg the star of that movie?
Speaker 2: Oh when 'Ghosts of Mississippi'--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --where it begins with the murder of Medgar Evers.
Speaker 1: Yes.  And so I knew you know everything about African American history; and I believe some of our friends that had gone to you know majority white schools, they just didn't learn that.
Speaker 2: Now did you, were you taught anything about black history in high school [David W. Carter High School, Dallas, Texas]?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I was not.
Speaker 2: Did your parents [Paula Clark Watkins and Richard Watkins] talk about it, or did they talk about it at Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.] or church [New Hope Baptist Church, Dallas, Texas]?
Speaker 1: They would talk about--yes they would talk about black history and some of the leaders at the time, you know.  The Martin Luther Kings and the Malcolm Xs--but yes, that was all engulfed in my tutoring and what I learned.  I was always around black history.  I mean Kwanzaa when it first--I don't know if it first began when I was a kid, but you know I was taught Kwanzaa; and so my fraternity [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity], same thing.  When you go--when you pledge in a fraternity you learn historical figures and what they did and then you learn about people who were in your fraternity and how they made you know a difference and how they changed things.  And so yeah it was all incorporated into what I learned.
Story_ID: 669405
Speaker 1: You pledged Kappa, right?
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: Kappa Alpha Psi [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity].
Speaker 2: Kappa Alpha Psi.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so did you wait a year before you pledged, or did you pledge when you first started?
Speaker 2: While you know when you go to an African American college [HBCU], some majority white colleges you can pledge as soon as you get there.  In African American colleges, and you have to be a sophomore and you have to have thirty hours and you have to have a certain grade point average.  At that time it was 2.0.  Now my son [Chad Watkins] is thinking about it and they have increased it to a 2.8.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did Prairie View [Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas] bring black lecturers to campus to talk about you know careers or about politics or any of that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: No they didn't.  Most of that I got when I came back home to listen to politicians and what they were doing.  You know you had an Al Lipscomb who was--what at the time you would consider one of the premier politicians.  He was on the city council [Dallas City Council], and he was you know, he was always fighting for the African American cause.  In fact, there is a street named after him [Al Lipscomb Way] right behind us.  And so he was you know a motivational civil rights leader and not fearful and took on the establishment to make change.
Speaker 1: Did he have an organization that he represented?
Speaker 2: He was on the city council.
Speaker 1: Yeah but he--you know did anything before he--you know?
Speaker 2: If he did I don't know about that, I just know that he was on the city council and if he had an organization before he became the city councilman, I couldn't tell you that.
Speaker 1: Usually there is an organizational life even before you get elected, I mean even be at the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] or CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] or maybe a Dallas [Texas]--
Speaker 2: Or SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee].
Speaker 1: --some kind of Dallas organizing committee to do--you know.
Speaker 2: I mean I don't know if that's the case.  Dallas is just now coming to the forefront of being this kind of mecca of you know people of color.  You look at Atlanta [Georgia]; we've always said that was the promise land for people of color, and now Dallas is shifting there.  If you look at you know the folks that are judges, I mean pretty much all of them are African American.  And so you know you look not only the criminal courts but you look at the civil courts.  Now that's where--you look at the civil courts, that's where money is spent, that's where money is changing hands.  If you want a judgment then someone has got to pay you; and so I think it's wonderful that we have these individuals with a different perspective on what law is.  And I think that you know when I first started practicing law it was not like that, and I think that it was less about--back then it was less about treating someone fair; it was more about who you knew.  If you have the right lawyer, if you knew the right individuals in the community and then you would you know be given a fair shake.  You know when I first started I was afraid of the criminal justice system.  You know I was--you know even, even being an innocent person, I was afraid to have to face the justice system in Dallas because it was so ruthless.
Story_ID: 669406
Speaker 1: At Prairie View [Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas], were you part of any other organizations other than Kappa Alpha Psi [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity]?
Speaker 2: I mean I was on the debate team.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that was pretty much it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you remember the topics that you debated?
Speaker 2: No (laughter) that was so long ago, I don't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you travel around to the other black colleges [HBCUs] or to the other colleges around (unclear)?
Speaker 2: They actually would come to Prairie View and we would debate them.  I don't recall ever having to travel while I was on the debate team but we would have individuals come from other colleges that we would debate.
Speaker 1: Of course the famous Wiley College [Marshall, Texas]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --from the movie 'Great Debaters' ['The Great Debaters']--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --was here in Texas, too another small black college.
Speaker 2: Yeah and another thing with Wiley, my in-laws, they graduated from Wiley.  My--not my mother--my mother-in-law and father-in-law but their parents graduated from Wiley College.  So, yeah.  And then my aunt, this is a funny thing my mother's aunt--great aunt actually went to high school with my grandfather.  So they all were in Marshall [Texas], and it's just interesting how (unclear)--you meet people that have some of the same you know influences in life, and you meet those people and end up marrying one.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: So now I read here in our research that you were impressed by political science and--at Prairie View, and is there any aspect of political science that impressed you the most?  I know you mentioned Marx [Karl Marx] and you mentioned Medgar Evers and Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and other black leaders, but what--is there a particular story or a particular individual that impressed you the most?
Speaker 2: It's--I wouldn't say it was one individual, it was more of I wanted to be a politician and so in going through that and reading those stories of those what I call change agents, it gave me you know the thought process of what can I do to be a change agent.  And you know also, it was--you look at those characters in those stories, they were very courageous and they weren't, they were not afraid of where they stood or what they did because it was on the right side of things.  And so it's not--excuse me--one individual that I could point to that, you know, really took my attention.  It was you know, it was all of those individuals who went through and, and made a difference.
Story_ID: 669407
Speaker 1: When you were on the verge of graduation, (background noise) did you have a political perspective? Were you more of a socialist or a member of the Democratic Party or, or--you know I don't know what--what was your perspective?
Speaker 2: I was a member of the Democratic Party, and my view from my life experience was, what--how--what can I do to make things right for people of color?  Just not African Americans, but all people who have been marginalized.  So that was pretty much my perspective of you know--if ever--you know at the time, if ever I were in a position to make a difference then I would use that to the full extent.  And I did that when I was DA [district attorney].  I was fortunate enough to do that, not ju- and my view right now is just I hope that someone else will continue.
Speaker 1: Well we're going to get there.
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'm just trying to get you--you know to figure what your mindset was when you left--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --Prairie View [Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas].
Speaker 2: No my mindset was--yeah, what can I do to make a difference, what can I do to make--
Speaker 1: What did you think was wrong?  There are--I'm telling you I've interviewed [HistoryMaker] Armstrong Williams and I've heard Alan Keyes talk, I've heard these black conservatives talk and they--the way they say there's nothing--all you have to do is get a job and there is no--there's really no difference in how you're treated.  Armstrong Williams said, "Larry [Larry Crowe], I've never been discriminated in my entire life."
Speaker 2: I can't believe that (laughter).
Speaker 1: You know I couldn't either but that's what he said.  So what irked you when you were coming out of Prairie View?  What were you concerned about?
Speaker 2: Making things fairer.  I'll give you a story after Prairie View.  I won the election as DA and I hadn't taken office yet because you win in 2006, but you won't take office 'til January 1, 2007.  So I'm driving down the street--and this was a big thing on the Internet.  There was an African American female DA [Aramis Ayala] who had been stopped by the police for no reason.  And so I was driving down the street and stopped by the police, and there was no reason for him to stop me.  And of course when he asked it's, "Where did you get this car?"  And I said, "I bought it" (laughter).  You know, and so no I've seen racism you know as DA.
Speaker 1: Now you're--I'm not trying to get you to DA yet.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But I'm just saying leading up to that.  So you're seeing, you're saying just in everyday life there --are you saying in everyday life you see in the black community in Dallas [Texas] and in Prairie View [Texas] and wherever, you see these kind of--?
Speaker 2: Yeah--everyday life you would see it in--I don't know how I can explain it.  It's like there's always this cloud, like someone's always--like if I go to the mall, someone's always following me in the mall when I was a kid, you know.  Those kinds of things and a lot of times people think, oh this guy is paranoid or crazy.  No, this actually happens and you have to always be on guard especially kids.  My--okay, you don't want to get there yet, do you--you want me?
Speaker 1: Well I've been talking about what your mindset was when you came out of school.
Speaker 2: Yes my mindset was basically--
Speaker 1: That you knew things weren't (unclear).
Speaker 2: I knew things were not right, I knew they were not fair and what could I do to make things fairer.
Speaker 1: You know personal experience is always more powerful than anything else and since we have this opportunity to have this camera, I don't want you to generalize; I want you to tell the stories actually.  So if I mean--did you experience or any of your friends experience something was really radically unfair; or just, or was it just a general withering away of different little hits you know as you--?
Speaker 2: There was not a big issue that came up with my friends and I.  But in everyday life we experienced that.
Speaker 1: You say you were followed in the stores?
Speaker 2: What's that?
Speaker 1: You said you were followed in the stores?
Speaker 2: Yes I was--yes.  And--
Speaker 1: And you knew why.
Speaker 2: Yes, even though I hadn't done anything but I knew I was (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And had the police--what--did you have any encounters with the police when you were a teenager or young adult?
Speaker 2: Never had encounters with the police, none whatsoever.  I was fortunate in that.  You know I only had one encounter but I don't know if I want to tell that story.
Speaker 1: Well it might be the story we--(laughter) what happened?
Speaker 2: Well (laughter) I had a girlfriend and we decided to go to a park, and--
Speaker 1: I know the rest of the story.
Speaker 2: Yes; and the police they come (laughter) and they're both laughing 'cause we were both, "Please don't take us to jail, don't take us to jail, I'm sorry."  But that's the only encounter that I've had with the police.  Outside of that, I don't--I've really never had an encounter just, just from being a perspective; I had encounters with the police.
Story_ID: 669408
Speaker 1: Now were you aware of, and I'm sure there was, some sort of struggle in the police department [Dallas Police Department] for more black police officers (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --for, for better treatment of the black police officers--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --by the white police establishment?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was very aware of that.  I knew that they were trying to hire more police officers of color.  In fact, they actually hired me at the police department.  In fact, I got hired by the CIA [Central Intelligence Agency], but--
Speaker 1: Now wait a minute, go back--back up here, which happened first and tell us the story of?
Speaker 2: Okay.  I believe the CIA was first.  They called and they wanted to interview me.  I go to d- Washington, D.C.--
Speaker 1: Now this is at--this point of time is--?
Speaker 2: I'm out of college [Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas].
Speaker 1: You're out of college, all right.
Speaker 2: I'm out of college; I'm waiting to go to law school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right so this is--
Speaker 2: No actually with the CIA, I was actually in law school [Texas Wesleyan University School of Law; Texas A&M University School of Law, Fort Worth, Texas].
Speaker 1: So this is between 1990 and what?
Speaker 2: Yes.  In 1990 and '94 [1994].
Speaker 1: Okay in that time period.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay so go ahead.
Speaker 2: So I get interviewed by the CIA, they hire me; and go back to law school and everybody's like, "You're crazy, you should have took that job."  I was like no; I mean I've got bigger fish to fry.
Speaker 1: Oh so you took the test and were accepted but you turned it down.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay that's what you're--all right.
Speaker 2: With the police department also, did the same thing.  And I just didn't want to be a police officer.  I mean--
Speaker 1: Well why did you take the test?
Speaker 2: Well it was basically to please my parents [Paula Clark Watkins and Richard Watkins] because they were--you've graduated from college and it's time for you to go to work, and so they wanted me to do that.  I mean they wanted me to look for a job; and the CIA and the police department, you know they called me.  And so that's why I went to the interview but I didn't accept them.
Speaker 1: So they actual- so did they recruit you or did you--?
Speaker 2: No I actually went, they didn't recruit me.  I mean they had a recruiting--the police department, they had recruiting during that time to get more African Americans in.  And I think my parents saw that as an opportunity: they're going to hire more people of color, you can go do this.  And with the CIA I mean it was just me simply submitting an application, and, and they called me for an interview.
Speaker 1: Okay.  They probably knew enough already (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: One can only guess.
Story_ID: 669409
Speaker 1: So this happens before you go to law school and (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well the CIA [Central Intelligence Agency] was--I was in law school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The police department [Dallas Police Department] that was before, that was right after I graduated from college [Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas] and it was--my dad [Richard Watkins] was, you know "We've put you through college, now you need to go get employment somewhere." And I'm thinking to myself, I don't want to do that, I want to be a lawyer; and procrastination on my part is I should have started law school right out of college but I procrastinated and didn't apply until--
Speaker 1: Did you--what kind of counseling did you have in college about career, or grad school?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well I mean all of the teachers explained to me--because most of the political science majors, their track is to go to law school and so they counseled me on, okay this is where you need to go, this is a good school and you'll be treated fairly.  And so they would counsel me on these different schools and all of those schools happened to be African American law schools [HBCUs].  So the law school I ended up going to was not--I was one of--there were three of us in our class in my law school.
Speaker 1: So they were telling you--now there aren't that many African American law schools so I guess they were--?
Speaker 2: Texas Wesleyan [Texas Wesleyan University School of Law], Southern [Thurgood Marshall School of Law, Houston, Texas], you have Howard [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.]--those schools that they wanted to direct me to.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Texas Southern, Howard, Southern University has one too [Southern University Law Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].
Speaker 2: They do.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  There aren't too many after that, I can't think of another one.  I think Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia]--do they have a law school?
Speaker 2: No they don't.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  They have medical school [Morehouse School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia] but no--?
Speaker 2: Yes they do.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So all right.  So--and you were telling me earlier, way early in the--how, that your mother [Paula Clark Watkins] urged you to go to Texas Wesleyan, right?
Speaker 2: My mother did.  She I believe received something in the mail, I don't know how she came about knowing about Texas Wesleyan; and she said there's a law school and they accept in the spring.  Most law schools only accept during the fall; and so, "Here you go, Craig [HistoryMaker Craig Watkins], I mean they will accept you in the spring if you can pass the test and pass the interview."  And so I did that and I started law school in the spring of the year after I graduated college.  So I went from graduating college that summer, and I started in law school 'til January.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So Texas Wesleyan is in--
Speaker 2: Fort Worth [Texas].
Speaker 1: --Fort Worth, okay.
Speaker 2: Now they're Texas A&M [Texas A&M University School of Law]--Texas A&M [Texas A&M University] bought them.
Story_ID: 669410
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is 19--?
Speaker 2: This is '91 [1991].
Speaker 1: Ninety-one [1991].  Okay.  Now was, was--did you find law school [Texas Wesleyan University School of Law; Texas A&M University School of Law, Fort Worth, Texas] to be difficult or easy?
Speaker 2: (Background noise) I wouldn't say it was difficult; it was a challenge because I had to rethink my whole efforts in how you study.  Law school is like a job; I mean you study for eight hours, and so I had to acclimate myself to you know--and condition myself to study for those eight hours a day.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  They--and I've been told by all the lawyers I've interviewed that the first year is the toughest year in law school.
Speaker 2: It's very tough.  I mean, it's the weed out year.  I mean they tell you to look to your left and to look your right and this person won't be here.  So it's really the weed out year.  Once you complete the first year then things get a little easier.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was there ever a time when you thought you weren't going to make it?
Speaker 2: No, no there was never a time that I thought I would not make it because the effort that was there, you know I was confident in the effort and that effort you know proved to be successful.
Speaker 1: Now did you know any of the black lawyers in Dallas [Texas] or any black lawyers in KA Psi [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity]?
Speaker 2: I knew--I was speaking earlier about [HistoryMaker] Royce West and I knew L.A. Bedford [Louis A. Bedford, Jr.]--L.A. Bedford was a deacon in my church [First Hope Baptist Church, Dallas, Texas].  And he was one of the only African American lawyers, he was before Royce; so I knew him and I knew Berlin Breshure who happened to be my mother's [Paula Clark Watkins] second cousin.  So I knew those lawyers and that's who I kind of followed, their careers.
Story_ID: 669411
Speaker 1: Did you have any special teachers or, or mentors in law school [Texas Wesleyan University School of Law; Texas A&M University School of Law, Fort Worth, Texas]?
Speaker 2: (Pause) No, I think the reason being is that it was all majority.  I mean, so I'm sure that some of those other kids or students you know had mentors in law school but I didn't.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you--
Speaker 2: I think I only had one African American teacher (background noise) throughout my law school career.
Speaker 1: Do you remember his name?
Speaker 2: Williams [ph.] was his last name.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So is there any one aspect of law school that you liked better than something else, like contracts--
Speaker 2: Constitutional law.
Speaker 1: Constitutional law.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because the [U.S.] Constitution, when they wrote that document it's lasted time, it's a historical document; and someone asked me about some of the [U.S.] Supreme Court rulings and what I really focused on was the Dred Scott ruling [Dred Scott v. Sandford, 1857], you know that, where they said he was not a human, and--
Speaker 1: Or they said he had no rights that a white man was bound to respect.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes and so that was one case that I could you know point out that really affected me.  When this Constitution says certain things, but then you had this law that was passed down by the Supreme Court that really took away from what the Constitution says.
Speaker 1: Right.  So as you--now did you work while you were going to law school too, or did you just go straight through?
Speaker 2: I worked in the library at law school.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So it gave me time to study but I didn't have a job.
Story_ID: 669412
Speaker 1: Now when you started law school [Texas Wesleyan University School of Law; Texas A&M University School of Law, Fort Worth, Texas], or around the time that--around the time you started was the Clarence Thomas hearings I believe, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Do you remember seeing those on television (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, Anita Hill?  Oh yes, I remember all of that; and I kind of somewhat hate to say it, sympathized with Clarence Thomas because he was an African American, but his rulings are you know totally against what's fair and just.
Speaker 1: So he surprised you in other words.  You thought he couldn't possibly be like this?
Speaker 2: No because he went through something to get to that position.  Hearings and you know Anita Hill--and not to take away from Anita Hill, I think it probably happened and so--and I sympathize with Anita Hill.  She actually is--one of my prosecutors, my--one of my prosecutors who is now a judge, Anita Hill was her professor in law school.  So I sympathize with her because I thought both of them were being victimized for this hearing, and I think anyone else that's not of color would not have had to endure that.  That should have been something private as opposed to talking about--I don't know if I should use this word--well, no, sexual harassment.  If it happened, then yeah, he needs to be held accountable.  But I don't think it should be in front of [U.S.] Congress.
Speaker 1: Now did you have a sense in those days--I get a sense that you were kind of innocent in some ways because you, I don't you really--did you really unders- have any sense as to his qualifications for the job?
Speaker 2: He didn't.
Speaker 1: Right that's--(laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah.  (Laughter) I knew that but he was--I mean after Thurgood [Thurgood Marshall] passed you know they had to get somebody black and that was, in their minds was a logical choice because he was tied to the Republican Party.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so we're talking about--yeah, a black Republican in the--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So yeah I knew he didn't have any experience.  He worked for the what--the EPA, or?
Speaker 1: EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission].
Speaker 2: EEOC.
Speaker 1: EEOC, yeah.
Speaker 2: And what kind of qualifications does that give you to be on the [U.S.] Supreme Court?
Speaker 1: Well it might give you, if you did the job right it would.  But if you're obstructing, the purpose of the EEOC, it kind of disqualifies you from being--yeah.
Speaker 2: It does.  And the only reason I sympathize with him was because he was African American. I know how to go--I've been through things like that; and I sympathize with Anita Hill also because she's a woman and basically she had the courage to go forward like that, and put her name out there in front of the world.
Speaker 1: Yeah I--so this is a chapter that I mean--well, yeah this drama is being acted out on television and it's really embarrassing to a lot of people.  So well he eventually be- goes to the Supreme Court, but actually many people hoped that he would realize I'm in this job forever, I never have to retire and I'm black, and I'm--that's not going to change and I can stay here and I might just be able to do whatever I want to do.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And look at his choice in a mate.  She [Virginia Lamp Thomas] was a Tea Party person and I'm thinking to myself their politics in the Tea Party are just so anti-American, and he's married to that?  So that tells you what his mindset is if (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well the Tea Party think that they're 100 percent you know American, they're the quintessential Americans--that's what they think.
Speaker 2: No.  You know, you look at Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], he came in as president; and what happened?  They get Trump [President Donald John Trump].  Now the one thing about Trump is I don't like his politics, but he's going to you know, you know make so many people upset that they'll figure out, my vote counts, I need to go vote.  So--
Speaker 1: You think there's going to be a positive effect to--?
Speaker 2: The positive of it is, is that there are--a lot of people are going to go vote.
Speaker 1: Yeah there will be a positive recoil.  I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) hope so.
Story_ID: 669413
Speaker 1: So on the verge of graduation in '94 [1994], did you--now did you do a clerkship anywhere?
Speaker 2: No, as soon as I graduated, I received a job with the City of Dallas [Texas] as a prosecutor, and I did that for two and a half years because I wasn't getting enough trial experience.  I wanted trial experience; and so that's when I went to the public defender's office [Dallas County Public Defender's Office], and I got trial experience.  Now mind you, I applied for the district attorney's office [Dallas County District Attorney's Office] three times and they never hired me.  Yeah.  And so I looked back at that, I be- I think that was the best thing that ever happened to me because I would have been you know indoctrinated with the philosophical approach that they used at that time.  And so because I wasn't a part of it, I can come in as the elected DA and you know make systemic changes.
Speaker 1: Now--yeah.  There are two things that happened after you graduate from law school [Texas Wesleyan University School of Law; Texas A&M University School of Law, Fort Worth, Texas] and as you start working.  One is that George W. Bush [George Walker Bush] is governor of Texas; and [HistoryMaker] Ron Kirk is elected mayor of Dallas, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now did you have anything to do with the Kirk election or the campaign?
Speaker 2: No I didn't, I just remember seeing Kirk when he was running, and he was out on the courthouse steps doing an interview and I was kind of standing watching him.  And that's where I learned how to communicate with the media because I saw what he did and how he explained himself.  They couldn't get a word in without him interrupting and basically saying what he wanted to say, as opposed to the media directing the story.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he wasn't letting them lead in with their questions?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: He--yeah.
Speaker 2: No you know, even before they gave him a leading question, he wouldn't answer it.  He would answer what he wanted.  That was one of the first lessons I learned in politics.  When I became the DA, you know I had to perfect that craft because additionally, when I first started getting interviews, I you know was like a deer in headlights.  Okay, you're going to ask me A, B, and C, but I want to talk about D, E, and F; and so I had to perfect it.
Story_ID: 669414
Speaker 1: So you first worked with the Dallas city attorney, is that?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay all right, and with the public defender's office [Dallas County Public Defender's Office].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And by 1995 you're in the public defender's office--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --primarily?
Speaker 2: Yes, and I left in 1998.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what happened in the public defender's office?  What did you--what was your experience like there?
Speaker 2: Oh, I got to try cases and I defended individuals that couldn't afford a lawyer; and so my experience was you know, I can't take anything away from that because I actually got to go in a courtroom and argue for a person's freedom.  So yeah.  And therein lies the reason I was so afraid of the criminal justice system because I saw a lot of people that were innocent that came through.  And I thought to myself, that could be me, and I may be sitting at this defense table and having a public defender argue on my behalf.  Now a lot of public defenders, it's more of just moving a case: let me move this case, let me make this judge happy because I'm moving this case.  Well, I didn't think that way; and I got a lot of flak for it because I was more interested in making sure justice is served as opposed to just clearing somebody's docket.  And I think therein lies the problem with public defenders.  They are just hired to clear a docket as opposed to going in and trying a case and representing their client.
Speaker 1: Yeah it's sort of--almost a stereotypical view that public defenders will come in and ask you to cop a plea.
Speaker 2: Yes and that's--
Speaker 1: That's the first thing, whether you're guilty or innocent or whatever.
Speaker 2: Yeah that's--unfortunately that's true, and so I didn't do that.  I tried cases because I wanted to learn how to be a lawyer; I wanted to learn how to stand before a judge or a jury and make an argument on my client's behalf.
Speaker 1: Were you ever told you were wasting the tax payers' money?
Speaker 2: I was never told that, but I moved to different courts while I was there because I believe--I don't know if this is true or not, I believed some of the judges weren't happy with me in trying these cases because Dallas [Texas], what you--what I saw, is that judges will call the docket and they'll try, they'll let a private attorney go to trial.  But if someone's in jail, they're more concerned with moving the case and, again, saving taxpayer dollars because that person's in jail.
Speaker 1: So it's a private--if I'm wealthy enough to afford my own attorney, they're going to give him more respect than a public defender for the indigent.
Speaker 2: (Unclear).  Yes, yes.  Yes that's what I saw and I hate to say that about judges and public defenders because some of them are great, they really have their heart into it.  But some of them are just you know, "Hey let me move this case for this court because it's costing us money to keep this person in jail."
Speaker 1: So you didn't think that was a good idea to just move these cases through without--?
Speaker 2: No I mean because you had people that were innocent; or they were overcharged, they shouldn't have been charged with what they were charged with.  And so you know I thought that I had a responsibility to this person, and my responsibility is not just to move a case.
Speaker 1: Now did you have any allies?
Speaker 2: (Pause) I didn't; not in the public defender's office, no.  Didn't have any allies with the DA's office that had my same mindset--save for one.  I had one, his name was Heath Harris and he became my first assistant when I was the DA because he saw it for what--he saw the injustices and he was a prosecutor and we just happened to be in the same court.  We matriculated through the courthouse.  My first court was a misdemeanor court and he was a prosecutor in that misdemeanor court.  And then when I went to felony, he was also a prosecutor in the felony court.  So he was someone I could talk to and bounce things off and be honest with him and try to make sure things were done right.  And so that's why over time I--he became my first assistant.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So you were in the--is there a case you can tell us about?
Speaker 2: As DA? I can tell you about DA, but public defender--
Speaker 1: No as public defender.
Speaker 2: Oh that was so long ago, I mean there were so many cases that I dealt with that I couldn't put my finger on any particular case.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, so you were there 'til '78 [sic.] you said?
Speaker 2: 'Til '98 [1998]
Speaker 1: Ninety-eight [1998], I'm sorry, I'm, I'm (mumbles).
Story_ID: 669415
Speaker 1: In 1998, the pub- the public was consumed with another trial, the O.J. Simpson trial [People of the State of California v. Orenthal James Simpson, 1995] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) O.J.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yeah it just--you know I think they, his cri- well it was over by then, right?  Wasn't it over by then, by '98 [1998], or was it still going?
Speaker 2: No it was still going.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  All right.
Speaker 2: It was still--
Speaker 1: So were you paying close attention to that?
Speaker 2: Oh obviously.  One of the arguments I made, I made when I was running for DA [district attorney] was that, are we going to have a justice system where people don't trust it?  And that's the reason O.J. was found not guilty because you had people of color sitting on that jury who just didn't trust the system or the Fuhrman issue [Mark Fuhrman].  They just didn't trust it, so they gave a verdict that went against the evidence.  And so as DA, I always make that argument.  You know, we want a justice system so when the average citizen comes down here and sits on the jury, they trust what we're doing as prosecutors, you know.  They're not going to think that we're hiding the ball or doing something wrong; they'll trust it.  And what we saw is that we saw a spike in the conviction rate because people trusted.  And then you think about it in Texas, I don't know if it is in Ohio, but in Texas before, in order to be called for jury, you had to have a voter registration card and they changed the law in the '90s [1990s] in Texas, where all you had to do is have a driver's license.  And so what did that do?  That brought all these diverse people to sit on a jury when before you just had registered voters.  And when you changed that, then you have a more difficult time in the old system of getting a verdict of guilty when it's deserved.  And so the approach that we brought to the table was, okay if we're going to go and ask that this person's freedom is taken, we're going to have to go and fix all the mischaracters of justice that's happened over the past.  Now I couldn't do it in eight years, but I could do something to you know develop you know the citizens into thinking, no our DA's office [Dallas County District Attorney's Office] works, and we know that this office is not going to convict someone that didn't commit a crime.
Story_ID: 669416
Speaker 1: In '98 [1998], you left the public defender's office [Dallas County Public Defender's Office] and you went to--?
Speaker 2: My private practice.
Speaker 1: Private practice, okay.  So you're in private practice and your office is next door to here from what I understand, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When I started, but a year later I bought this building.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So and now so how did it go?  I mean did you have like a nice (unclear) clients and?
Speaker 2: No my practice was thriving.  I mean it was--you know because I was next door to my parents [Paula Clark Watkins and Richard Watkins], I didn't have to pay rent (laughter) so it was thriving.  We did very well, my wife [Tanya Watkins] and I, 'cause my wife--you know I have a title company [Fidelity National Title Agency, Dallas, Texas] here also and my wife runs our title company.  So she works, she's worked with me since '98 [1998] running our title company; and they also opened a bail bond company before I became DA [district attorney].  But I let that go because I was running for DA.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That would be a conflict of interest then?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right so (cough) so Craig Watkins' attorneys--attorney at law, PLLC [Craig Watkins Law Firm, PLLC, Dallas, Texas].  What does PLLC mean (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Limited liability company--professional limited liability company; it's a corporation.
Speaker 1: Okay all right 'cause I've never seen the P in front of the LLC before.  So all right so in--so your businesses--are there any significant cases that you deal with that you can remember that you can tell us about during this time period?
Speaker 2: When I was in private practice in the beginning?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Right.
Speaker 2: No, there--no.  Yeah there was one.  This kid, he committed an aggravated robbery, African American kid and went to trial on it.  And the DA, they were asking for forty years in prison.
Speaker 1: Now did he injure someone or did he kill someone?
Speaker 2: No he just--well aggravated robbery is when you use a weapon; he used a weapon.  I mean he robbed a--one of those little motels.  It was on video and everything.
Speaker 1: So he had the people at gun point or--?
Speaker 2: Held the people at gun point.  The gun was not loaded.  It was just stupid, stupid mistake.  So we ended up going to trial.  Had no choice because they were offering forty, why would I plead you to forty when we can go try this thing; and we tried the case.  And rightfully so, and the funny thing about it was there was a police officer on the jury and everybody thought I was crazy for putting this police officer on the jury, but he was African American.  And so they ended up convicting him, and he only got five years, you know.  So that's one example of many cases that when you go and you try them, you'll get a better outcome than just pleading someone.
Speaker 1: That's thirty-five years difference.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And he's out of prison now. I mean that was back in the ninety- or maybe 2000.
Speaker 1: Okay that's a classic example.
Story_ID: 669417
Speaker 1: Now in 2002, you ran for district attorney?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What gave you that idea, and who were your supporters and how did it go?
Speaker 2: Two thousand two [2002], I decided that I was going to run for DA.  The idea came from--we go all the way back to [HistoryMaker] Royce West when I was a kid, he ran for DA.  And I thought the climate was ripe for an opportunity for me to win not only as a Democrat but as a re- as an African American.  Because Dallas County [Texas] was all Republican; there were no Democrats in a countywide elected position.  And so we ran and the supporters weren't there because I decided basically in December to run for DA; and there was another opponent--my opponent who was already running for the race, and his name was Peter Lesser.  He was a big civil rights lawyer back in the day.
Speaker 1: Peter what?
Speaker 2: Lesser, L-E-S-S-E-R.
Speaker 1: Now he is not black is he?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so--he's Jewish I believe.  So he was my opponent in the primary.  So I ended up winning the primary with a substantial amount of the vote.  I don't know if Peter got even 35 percent of the vote.  And I was just, I was only thirty-three years old you know at the time.  And so the general election, the DA basically didn't even pay attention to me--none whatsoever.
Speaker 1: Now this is Bill Hill, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now mind you I'm looking at the vote two years earlier.  There was a guy that ran for sheriff, Hispanic guy, didn't campaign, just put his name on the ballot, and he got 49 percent of the vote; he was running as a Democrat.  And so I'm looking at that, hm, you know this tide is changing.  If I ran and campaigned, I may be able to get over that 51 percent.  And I didn't win, but I believe I re- it was 49 point something percent of the vote, and he had a million dollars, I just had not even a hundred thousand, you know.  So I'm thinking if he spent a million and he almost lost then there is an opportunity for me to come back in 2006.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So were you drafted by a group or anything--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --or did you just decide to do it?
Speaker 2: I just decided to do it; no one drafted me, no one called and, "Hey you should run for DA," no one did.  I mean I was young, I was--I had only been a lawyer, if I was thirty-three so I graduate law school [Texas Wesleyan University School of Law; Texas A&M University School of Law, Fort Worth, Texas]--I--I had not been a lawyer for ten years and so I was not the logical choice.
Story_ID: 669418
Speaker 1: Two thousand six [2006] there is this political flip in Dallas [Texas] that the paper called the night of the living dead, you know.  So this is when the Democrats sweep all of the judgeships in the county [Dallas County, Texas], right?
Speaker 2: That's true.
Speaker 1: So how did this take--were you a part of this, or?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah I was the top of the ticket as the DA [district attorney], and when you're electing judges the DA is always the top of the ticket.  Now, reason being is that judges cannot endorse, they can't endorse anyone; the DA can.  So all those candidates that came, I endorsed all of those candidates and used whatever political power I had to make sure that they were elected.  And fast forward to, this was two thousand and--
Speaker 1: Six [2006].
Speaker 2: No this was 2006, but fast forward to 2014, all the d- all the judges that ran, they used to work for me as the DA; and so they all won, all of them.  I just was not fortunate enough to win, but they all won; they all worked for me and I endorsed them all.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So it is referred to as night of the living dead beca- I've got an explanation here but maybe you could explain it better than--?
Speaker 2: It was a changing of the guards.  I mean you were used to having the Republican judges, you were used to having judges of the majority and now all of a sudden you have all these black and Hispanic judges that come from these backgrounds and they're going to bring that to the table, how justice is served.  Then you look at it--if you look at the civil courts, you have all of these African Americans and Hispanics.  The civil court is where money exchanged, they exchange hands.  Okay a jury or a judge will make a ruling saying you have to pay this person a million dollars; and so now all of these people are judges who didn't have any connection to quote unquote the legal community.  So now these lawyers have to figure out, how are we going to make an argument in front of these new judges?  What are we going to do to even make entree into their chambers to talk to them about a case?  And they don't have that anymore.  They don't have those relationships anymore because you have all these new people that were not a part of that world.
Speaker 1: Yeah the pa- I just have to read that in the paper said, the Dallas Observer said that people--this is the Wednesday morning, November 8th and they said that people are walking around like zombies at Dallas County Courthouse [Dallas, Texas] today because of these changes.  The people, they couldn't believe it.
Speaker 2: They couldn't, I mean but it was coming, you saw it coming two years, two years--because I ran in 2002 and lost.  Well fast forward to 2004, we have this, this lady who runs for sheriff [Lupe Valdez] countywide; she's Hispanic and she's gay, and she wins.  So I don't understand why they didn't see it coming in 2006.  You know she won, ran against a sheriff [Danny Chandler] that had been here for years and beat him.
Story_ID: 669419
Speaker 1: Dallas Observer said that the biggest change is going to be in the Dallas County District Attorney's Office, and that's what you were elected to occupy.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: They knew there was going to be a big change, but did they have any idea as to what kind of big change it was going to be?
Speaker 2: Not--I don't think they did.  In fact, when I first got elected I knew that I was going to make changes.  I guess what the most popular change that happened was the what we called the Conviction Integrity Unit, where we basically went back and looked at files to see if there were innocent individuals in prison.  Now I didn't foresee that coming about, but--
Speaker 1: So why did you do it?  I mean, why--?
Speaker 2: Because after a while in office, I saw that we were failing miserably in how we dispense justice in Dallas County [Texas].
Speaker 1: So the practices in general weren't really conducive to justice?
Speaker 2: No.  And so my idea was to look at some of these cases specifically dealing with DNA because you can't question that; it's science.  And so that's what, how we started.  We started looking at DNA and we were able to exonerate individuals for crimes they didn't commit; but then what we saw--
Speaker 1: Well let's kind of explain how this works.  Now this is, there's a precedent for what you're doing.  I think the first time it was done was in Chicago [Illinois].  It was something called, organization called the Justice Project [Medill Justice Project] out of Northwestern University [Evanston, Illinois], which is just north of Chicago that pioneered the use of DNA to--and with the assistance of the governor of Illinois, a Republican actually, George Ryan.  They were able to stay the executions of fifteen men and then finally exonerate them.  Oprah Winfrey congratulated George Ryan on national television and they--you know and brought--
Speaker 2: I remember that.
Speaker 1: Yeah all this was going--so this is part--you're aware of all this at this point.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So DNA had been established already as a way to really determine if there's biological evidence, you know you can compare the biological evidence with the individual's DNA to determine if he was even there or not, right?
Speaker 2: Well Dallas, what Dallas did, you look at historically other counties in Texas, they would destroy the DNA; but Dallas didn't, they kept it.  You know we can go all the back to the '70s [1970s] and '80s [1980s], but they kept that DNA.  And so we were able to go back and test it, and it proved that these individuals didn't commit the crime that they were convicted of.
Speaker 1: Now wait a minute, slow down--let's go back to this first point.  You said in other places in Texas would destroy the DNA.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Is this to ensure that unjust convictions would stand, is that what you think?
Speaker 2: I don't know if that's the case.  I think that it was more a way of getting rid of evidence that is in storage 'cause they don't want to have pay for it.  You have to look at it from the taxpayer.  So I don't believe they did it to keep people in prison for something they didn't do, I thought, I think that their motivations were very different.  And what I see, what I see is Dallas has--we have all of these exonerations.  You would have the same--in Harris County [Texas], in Baylor County [Texas], you would have the same exonerations, but they didn't keep the evidence.  Fortunately for the prior DA's they did and so I was able to go back and look at it unlike some other offices.
Speaker 1: Okay so you appointed a special unit, right--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --to do this?
Speaker 2: It is called Conviction Integrity Unit.  It was staffed with two lawyers and an investigator and a secretary; it was very small.  I think the budget on that was you know four hundred thousand [dollars].  Comparatively that's not a lot of money when our total budget was almost 40 million.  So it was a small operation.  And I know that in New York [New York Office of Attorney General] they have a conviction integrity unit [Conviction Review Bureau] that staffs several attorneys; and I know that after we started ours, we started to see that other district attorney's offices followed suit and established their own conviction integrity unit.
Speaker 1: Now were--how many people--you know what was your--who--can you remember the first case that you overturned?
Speaker 2: There were thirty-eight cases, and I believe the first one I did was Christopher Scott.  I can't--yeah that's the first one I did.
Speaker 1: Now that--this is, from what I understand, Christopher Scott's case was a non DNA case.
Speaker 2: Yes.  So he was not first, oh god, who was first (pause)?
Speaker 1: Well were there many non DNA cases that were turned over too?
Speaker 2: We did after we started DNA.  We started--
Speaker 1: No were there many non DNA related cases--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --that were turned over like--?
Speaker 2: For--so--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --when we, when we formed this unit, it was kind--somewhat of a laboratory.
Story_ID: 669420
Speaker 1: We started with DNA, and then we also saw problems within the investigative techniques that were used by the police--eyewitness identification for example.  So what they would do is they would subtly suggest to the victim who to pick.  Also what you would see in those identifications was that okay you know you may have five pictures and only one's in black and white.  So that's going to draw your attention to that picture.  And so what we did was to advise the police department: let's go to the double blind system.  You get a police officer who has nothing to do with the investigation, and you present one picture each--not at the same time.  You present that to the victim and let them basically make a determination who they think it is.  When before it's like all the pictures are there and then you know subtly--the investigator is subtly saying that this is probably the person that committed this crime.  So we changed that.
Speaker 2: Now one of the--correct me if I'm wrong but one of the myths about criminal investigation is that eyewitness accounts are--
Speaker 1: Terrible.
Speaker 2: --really strong.
Speaker 1: No--terrible, and we saw that.
Speaker 2: So I'm getting robbed by say you and I'm under all this stress, I think you're going to shoot me, you know, you tell me to look away first of all; and then later on I come and say it was him.  And then another brother comes in who looks something like you, I mean I may not--now wait a minute, now I'm not--?
Speaker 1: I mean eyewitness identification is--the perfect example of someone being robbed.  Normally what you find is that the person that is the victim is more focused on the gun than the person that's robbing them, and they are in such a state that it's very difficult for them to pick someone out in a line up especially if they didn't know the person.
Speaker 2: Now if this--is this the reason for so many descriptions of medium sized black men being--with medium complexion and medium hair and all--you know being fingered for crimes?
Speaker 1: I mean, yeah obviously that's one of the stereotypes that we as African Americans find; and so the training comes down to police officers.  So I could change things when I was district attorney, but changes need to be made in investigative techniques of police officers.  And you have a certain, as a human being, as an individual you have a certain way of looking at people and a way at looking at life.  Like you for example, if we just met in passing because you're African American I will look at you and I'll know what you look like.  Well if you get you know an Anglo, they may just see a black guy and it's the wrong description.  And so all of those things need to be you know taken into account on how we dispense criminal justice (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah because even--I even--a friend of mine's brother was convicted of a crime, he's your complexion, I'm much lighter; a light skinned guy did it, but he got convicted 'cause he's black.  (Unclear) saying they're not even the same complexion--when they finally did straighten this out the people didn't look--the brothers didn't look anything alike.
Speaker 1: It happens.
Speaker 2: Both African American, but.
Speaker 1: Yeah I had the benefit as being DA to see how things work, and see--I'll say, I say as I've seen behind the curtain to see how things work and how unfair they are.
Story_ID: 669421
Speaker 1: So we still have a lot to do in our criminal justice system.  You know I can give you a whole litany of what we need to do from the investigative side to harsh sentences to the prison industrial complex and how that needs to change.  But yeah, there's a lot to do.  And some sentences--for example drug cases, nonviolent, it's kind of like for example because drugs are illegal, right, you get convicted of selling those drugs but you can go down to your local liquor store and buy you a bottle of vodka.  And those--that is, to me is just as harming, in fact it's more harming if you become an alcoholic you can die of that (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah it can be just as lethal or more lethal.
Speaker 1: Yes it will be lethal.
Speaker 2: Especially for other people too.
Speaker 1: If you're driving yeah.  And so the whole drug thing to me is--you go back to Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] who implemented all this you know the silent majority and how we're going to start this war on drugs, and we're not winning that war.  And what we need to do is just change the mindset and the culture.  What I say is, how about legalizing it and just taxing it.  You know what--that money could go towards education as opposed to us building all these prisons.  If you go, if you drive down a major expressway in Texas, you're going to see a prison and to me it's just a waste of human life and a waste of taxpayer dollars.  How about on every expressway you see an opportunity for higher learning because a lot of people, most of them in prison are uneducated.  So how about let's just make sure that we get these people educated so they can be taxpayers as opposed to them being a tax burden.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah there's--yeah somebody suggested that privatization of prisons is a way for entrepreneurs to get taxpayers' money for warehousing criminals, you know.
Speaker 1: That's a terrible idea.  You know there have been cases where judges have basically--I know, can't remember the judge's name where he would sentence individuals for long stints of prison and--because it was a private prison.  It turns out that prison the authorities are the owners of the prison; they were giving him all kinds of campaign contributions.  Well he was basically feeding the beast for them; and so that's just a terrible idea for us to privatize prisons.
Story_ID: 669422
Speaker 1: Now the Christopher Scott case, I read about it online, and anybody can read about it.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You made a partnership with a public defender named Michelle Moore that was significant, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Michelle Moore worked for the public defender's office [Dallas County Public Defender's Office] and in order for us to go through the exoneration process, you have to assign a lawyer to that individual that we're thinking about exonerating.  Now I didn't choose Michelle; someone from the public defender's office chose her to represent him, and so that's how that happened.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  But she was an example of a public defender--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --that was interested in exonerating.
Speaker 2: Oh yes, and now she's a DA [district attorney]--elected DA in some small county [Burnet County, Texas].  But yes, she was instrumental in us focusing on certain individuals that had been wrongfully convicted.  A lot of times they would write her--the inmates would write her, and then she would bring that to our attention and then we would take a look at the case.
Speaker 1: Now in the Christopher Scott case, this seems to be a case, once again I haven't gotten it straight, I read it last night--but it seems as though paperwork got lost in the shuffle.  There was another man that committed a crime and actually confessed to it and written a letter, right?  But it got (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know, I don't know if it got lost in the shuffle, I just think people didn't pay attention to it that were in positions of power because they had gotten their conviction.  And so those people that were in power before us, they didn't want to put a black mark on what they were doing.  And so that's why that never came to light until we got--
Speaker 1: So it's a very deliberate ignoring--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --of evidence that could have saved someone's life.  I mean you know a long prison term is a waste of your life.
Speaker 2: It is, and it's even worse for the people that are in authority like your DAs that will turn a blind eye to that.  I mean, why would you risk someone's life just because it may be conducive to politics?  And at that time that was major politics.  The Republican administration tough on crime and so what we need to do is get someone because if they do this, this is their mindset, if they didn't do this crime they must have done something, so let's go ahead and get this person to take them off the street because he may commit a crime somewhere else.
Speaker 1: Yeah, this feeds into a theory that Michelle--
Speaker 2: Moore.
Speaker 1: --no, wrote 'The New Jim Crow' ['The New Jim Crow: Mass Incarceration in the Age of Colorblindness'] from Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio], Michelle [Michelle Alexander]--gosh I can't think of her last name; and Charshee McIntyre wrote about this back in 1980s, the criminalization of black people, (unclear) you're already guilty of something.
Speaker 2: You know why that is, I mean you look historically when the Emancipation Proclamation, slaves were free so you couldn't get that free labor, and so what they decided to do is put these stringent laws in place.  For example, loitering by a black person and they would imprison--incarcerate those individuals because those individuals would provide free labor.  So it was just a different way--
Speaker 1: Chain gang--
Speaker 2: --it was just a different way--
Speaker 1: --even to the extent of picking cotton on plantations.
Speaker 2: --yeah, yeah, it was just a different way of--another form of slavery; and I think our system is somewhat still like that.  You know prisons shouldn't be--I think you should have an element of punishment, but it also should be an institution of learning.  Because you know what I would say is that this person that you're convicting today, they may spend some time in prison but at some point they're going to come back and live on my street.  And so what are we going to do with that time that you're in prison?  Are we going to train you to, for a skill or are we going to send you to higher education--higher learning or are we just going to house you?  And so if you just house them, they're going to come back and live on my street. What are they going to do--that's all they know is criminal activity.  So, our argument was look let's make sure that when we incarcerate these people that they are at least trained and educated.
Story_ID: 669423
Speaker 1: Your term as a, as a prosecutor from twen- 2007 to 2015, that's eight years, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I mean is--you have a lot of--I mean you start gaining national support. I mean Eclipse Magazine named you as a Super Lawyer.  You won the NAACP Texas Hero Award in 2007, so people--I mean Texas Monthly did a feature on you; you're featured on '60 Minutes.'  So, well tell us about a case where the DNA evidence or how that really works--just walk us through a case where the DNA was used.
Speaker 2: Okay so this is how we did it.  What we would do is, we have a lab here in Dallas [Texas] and we would go and--once the case is brought to our attention, we had a lot of cases from the Innocence Project in New York [New York], got a lot of cases from the public defender's office [Dallas County Public Defender's Office], we got a lot of cases just from individuals writing us a letter to say, can you look at this case.  So what we do if there was DNA then we would go get that DNA, but that's not the be all and end all.  We would actually reinvestigate the case from start to finish to make sure you know that we were right when we exonerated these individuals.  Think about it: if we made a mistake on exonerations, they will never happen again.  So an exoneration took at least a year before we got to that point to where we were ready to exonerate someone; and that's where people get it confused, they think that it should be quick--there's DNA, go test it.  No.  We reinvestigate the case, and then we try to find out who actually the case--committed the crime; and we did that in a couple of cases.  There was one guy who was called the North Dallas rapist, and the individual that was in prison didn't do it.  So we actually went and found this man who did it and we prosecuted him.  Because the law in Texas, you would think about the statute of limitations but if there is DNA evidence that is stored and saved, the statute doesn't run.  So we were able to go back twenty years and put on a successful prosecution of the individual that committed this case.
Story_ID: 669424
Speaker 1: You're getting so much attention--Ebony magazine Power 150; Dallas Morning News 2008 Texan of the Year, did--did you start to think, I've made it (laughter)?  I'm now--?
Speaker 2: You know, you know what happens is that when you first get all this attention it does go to your head.  But then after a while you'll have a humbling experience and say that you know, this is not me, I'm just holding this position right now.  There is some other higher power that said we want you to be here and so you--yeah I mean it goes to your head, but then you have to come back down to earth and say, you know what I can't let people--just like you can't let people tell you bad things about yourself, you can't let people tell you the good things about yourself and let that go to your head because you won't be that productive.  So no, it goes to your head.  I think any politician or any person in positions of influence, it goes to their head for a while and then they will come back down to earth.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Two thousand eight [2008] is the year Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] was elected president, you were on, featured on '60 Minutes' and so what was that like; and how did you find out, were you surprised yourself?
Speaker 2: At that point there had been in so many stories about me and my tenure as the DA [district attorney] that it was not surprising.  I think it was more surprising to other people who weren't in the environment that I was in (background noise) because it was always someone coming out to try and interview me or talk to me.  And I was even on 'The View,' and so '60 Minutes' (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And that's the women's talk show?
Speaker 2: Yes, and so '60 Minutes' was just another interview to me.  So no, it was not surprising.
Speaker 1: Were you asked any tough questions--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --during this period of time?
Speaker 2: No the only tough questions I've been asked have been with the local newspaper (laughter), but no one has ever asked me anything that I couldn't answer or that I didn't want to answer.
Speaker 1: Yeah, there was an article that came out in 2009 called 'The Last Temptation of Craig Watkins' [Zac Crain]--what was that about?
Speaker 2: Okay.  What was that about, tell me what that article was about?  I can't--I remember the headline, but I can't remember what it was about.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I don't--I haven't read the article but that's the name of it, and it was--and I take it in D Magazine, which is like the Dallas [Texas] magazine--city magazine.  Yeah with--?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Actually they put me on the cover for that story and they called me on the cover--what was the movie Denzel Washington played in and he was a big drug dealer?
Speaker 1: Oh right, 'American Gangster'.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: They called me not American gangster but they called me something American to reference that movie.  And so I don't know--I don't remember the 'The Last Temptation'--I remember the headline but I don't remember exactly what it was about.
Story_ID: 669425
Speaker 1: They did reference [in D Magazine] that, that you--DNA testing had freed you know many wrongly convicted men in--so how many actually were exonerated?
Speaker 2: Thirty-eight.
Speaker 1: Thirty-eight, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And this is in eight years?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Yes.  It was thirty-eight.
Speaker 1: And were any of them of death row or?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  No, none of them were on death row.  Now Texas--or Dallas County [Texas] was pretty good about prosecuting folks that are going to death row 'cause what we would do is the prosecution would--the guilt, innocence part of it was not an issue; you still have to go through that, but the sentencing side of it is--that's the issue because what the defense would do basically is show the jury okay why shouldn't this person be put on death row.  Did he have a bad childhood; was he addicted to drugs; is he mentally ill?  All of those things go into the sentencing part, but the guilt, innocence phase--it's pretty much a slam dunk for the prosecution, at least in Dallas.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they've always done that--I didn't create that, that's always been the case.
Story_ID: 669426
Speaker 1: In 2009, you were also called a rock star DA [district attorney] by somebody.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And so this is the kind of you know--so but how did--I mean, so for eight years I mean this--so what was the criticism from the other side, what were they saying, that you were releasing guilty people?
Speaker 2: I mean I don't--
Speaker 1: That you really weren't proving they were guilty?
Speaker 2: --I think it--the criticism from the public really wasn't there.  I think the media, they were not happy with me because I pick and chose who I wanted to talk to in the media.  There was really no criticism as it relates to how we prosecuted things.  Now personally they would criticize me, they would say, oh "[HistoryMaker] Craig Watkins owes a hundred thousand dollars in taxes."  Those were the types of criticisms that I got.  I got criticized because someone stole my car out of my garage and they criticized me for keeping my garage open, but I live in a gated--my house is gated, so if I choose to leave my garage open--and then they criticized me because I left my key in my car.  I always kept my key in my car because I didn't want to try to find it the next morning; it's the best place for it.  You know, so I would have never thought that someone would ram my gate (laughter), come in and steal my car.
Speaker 1: So you--we were discussing this on the porch before we got started.  Is this the incident you're talking about where somebody actually--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --rammed your gate?
Speaker 2: They rammed my gate; and my house is big so I wouldn't know if someone is going into my garage, I wouldn't hear it 'cause I'm on the totally opposite end.  And so they rammed my gate and stole my car; and to me that's odd because how would you know--if you're just trolling to steal someone's car, how would you know first of all that there would be a key in that car so you can drive it off.  And the funny thing about it is, is they found my car like two blocks away--you know it was only two blocks away.  Nothing was stolen out of it, my wallet was still in there and so I'm thinking, did they see my wallet and my badge 'cause I--you know you have a badge and they just got scared or something.  But no, those were the things I got criticized on.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now this is a time of a stress for your family you were saying too (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Oh my god, yes.
Speaker 1: 'Cause you were getting calls and threats.
Speaker 2: Not just that, I mean it was--you get all kinds of calls.  You're constantly in the media; I travelled, oh, so much making speeches about what we did.  I can't tell you, I wish I had gotten frequent flyer miles you know because I flew everywhere; and you know they tried to criticize me on that.  Is he ever at the office?  But my job was basically not only for Dallas County [Texas], but for the country and to work my position as the DA into the fabric of other places and so that's why I did it.  You know the down side to it, like I told you--I was telling you on the porch is my oldest son [Chad Watkins], he's nineteen and he was six [years old] when I got elected.  So my wife [Tanya Watkins] took care of our kids and family while I was all over the place.  Even at the DA's office [Dallas County District Attorney's Office], I would stay late with some of my assistant DAs just to--hey we're going to do this, that and the other.  So yeah, it was very stressful.
Speaker 1: Now in 2010 you were accused of using eighty-five thousand dollars in campaign funds to--for other reasons other than the campaign.
Speaker 2: But that was another criticism.  You know I think they referenced the tuxedo that I bought.  Well I mean I'm going to these dinner parties, and this--that's part of the campaign.  I mean it's kind of like when they would criticize presidents for spending a hundred dollars on a haircut.  You know have you seen that?  It's like, well, I'm campaigning that's why I need a haircut; and I need a tuxedo because I'm going somewhere that's going to be campaign related and so I spent that--I spent some of my campaign funds.  So they would constantly go through my campaign funds and it always something--you know they couldn't, I believe they couldn't get me on anything, anything else but it was always something financial.  You look at other campaign expense reports and you see the same thing.  I mean like our state senators, they buy new cars every year because this, you know they have to drive back and forth to Austin [Texas]--it's a campaign issue.  But none of those individuals get criticized and I did.
Story_ID: 669427
Speaker 1: So you're doing a lot of public speaking, you're getting threats and criticisms, but you're also getting accolades, and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and you know you're seeing progress, but you've got a lot of enemies.  I just imagine a state like Texas when both Governor Bush [George Walker Bush] and Rick--
Speaker 2: Perry [Rick Perry].
Speaker 1: --Perry, yeah, bragged about the number of people who were convicted you know and sent to death row in the state.  So, tell us about the campaign in 2014.
Speaker 2: The campaign in 2014 was not in full force like it should have been.  I could have done better in campaigning, but I didn't think that the person that ran against me [Susan Hawk] had a chance in the world 'cause I knew all of her stor- all of her history.  My wife [Tanya Watkins] actually represented her when she was running for judge and so we knew everything.  The media would call me and they would want me to go on record about her issues, and I never would.  And didn't raise as much money because I believed that a lot of folks that--thought in their minds that this is a given, he's going to win this election.  Not only was I surprised but I think the general public, they were surprised that she beat me.  But, yeah, it was humbling.
Speaker 1: Was it a close race?
Speaker 2: Yeah it was only--she only beat me by three thousand votes; yeah, it was close.  Therein lies what everybody is asking me, am I coming back, you know am I going back to the DA's office [Dallas County District Attorney's Office] 'cause you should have won.  And those are questions that we pose every night in my family.  Should I go back, is it worth the pain and sacrifice and struggle that we all we went through?  Are we better off for it?  Obviously yeah--I mean financially yeah; but are we a healthy, more healthy as a unit, as a family.  And so there are a lot of things that I missed out on, and my goal at this point is my family.  And may change before it's time to file in January but I have to you know--just like I put all of the effort into being DA [district attorney], I need to put just as much effort or not--if even more into my existence and my family.  And my kids are starting to grow up and go to college--you know I have to think about that.
Story_ID: 669428
Speaker 1: Have you thought about any other public office other than DA [district attorney]?
Speaker 2: I've been questioned about that.  Some want me to go to [U.S.] Congress and there are, were--some people are recruiting me for that.  But--I've actually been to Congress, I testified before the U.S. Senate.  I've seen how it works and you're constantly flying back and forth to D.C. [Washington, D.C.], and then if I'm going to be a freshman congressman, I'm going to be sitting somewhere in the back of the aisle and no one is going to listen to me because I'm a freshman.  And so it's kind of like, the longer you're there the more you move up.  And so I mean I'm turning fifty [years old] in November and do I have that many years to try to move up so I can have a say so, so I can have you know a voice.  So that would be the last thing on my mind.  If I were going to run for anything, it would be either the attorney general for the State of Texas or for DA; those are the only two.
Story_ID: 669429
Speaker 1: Do any of the individuals that you exonerated stay in touch with you?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I see them at events all the time.  In fact, this guy right here--this watch I have was given to me by an exoneree for Christmas; so yeah, they stay in touch.  They're very--I mean these guys are good guys; they are very committed to the criminal justice system in making it better.  And so this is--you know some of them go out and they frivolously spend because they have a lot of money--they frivolously spend it, but then others don't, you know.  So no they're still in touch, in fact if you go to my--
Speaker 1: Now are they compensated by the county [Dallas County, Texas] for their wrongful conviction (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, the state.  The state.
Speaker 1: By the state?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Eighty thousand [dollars] a year, free healthcare, free education.  They get a lump sum up front, but then for the rest of their life they get eighty thousand a year.  This is the best compensation package in the country.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, no they are very well off.
Speaker 1: Is that comparable to the amount of money it takes to incarcerate them a year?
Speaker 2: No it's thirty-six dollars a day--per day to keep a person in prison.
Speaker 1: And that comes out to how much a year you think?
Speaker 2: Whatever that is times--how many days in a year?  Fifty-two is it, or that's weeks.
Speaker 1: Three hundred and fifty some days--
Speaker 2: Yeah, whatever it is.
Speaker 1: --three hundred and sixty-five days in a year.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, so times thirty--let's just say thirty.  That's how--that's what, nine hundred thousand [sic.]?
Speaker 1: Yeah it costs much more to keep them in jail (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It does.  So, yeah.  But no they are very well compensated.  We went to Austin [Texas], we argued--in fact we were recognized--my office was recognized by the state senate [Texas Senate] on the senate floor, and that gave the idea to all the other Das [district attorneys]: oh okay maybe we need to do this.  But, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now did you win over anybody in those eight years, anybody that thought that it was a bad thing to try to reverse these convictions?
Speaker 2: You mean from a political perspective or just from just a--?
Speaker 1: Yeah I guess a political and moral perspective.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I mean morally--I mean like I can't walk through the grocery store even today without someone saying, "Oh you're [HistoryMaker] Craig Watkins."  Just think when I was in office, I couldn't go anywhere; and all these people even Anglos: "I mean I didn't think you would do what you did, but that's a good job," you know.  So no, we won over a lot of people.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now did you leave like a path for others to follow?  Are there people that would train in your office that are trying to continue the work?
Speaker 2: They are all judges.  I mean, as we were speaking about on the porch, all those individuals that worked for me that were trained and tutelage by me, the upper management staff they all ran for judge and they are all judges now, so (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who are some of them?
Speaker 2: You have Tammy Kemp, you have Hector Garza; it's several, it's from the civil court and--so there're forty-two judges in the criminal court and just about the same amount in civil court.  So all those people you know at one point worked for me.
Story_ID: 669430
Speaker 1: And your, your practice [Craig Watkins Law Firm, PLLC, Dallas, Texas] today is basically--do you do criminal cases or what?
Speaker 2: The majority of my cases I do are personal injury, but I will take a criminal case every now and again--it depends on what kind of case it is.  I don't take sexual assault cases at all.  I just don't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Why not?
Speaker 2: Because I just don't believe--I just don't believe in that.  I just think that--I don't know if they're guilty or not, but I just can't fathom my mind wrapped around trying to defend a person that's been accused of that kind of crime.  I have a daughter [Taryn Watkins] so--and especially if it's against a minor, I just can't, I just can't, can't do it, I wouldn't put my heart into it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay so--what are your--well I asked you kind of your future plans are.  You may run for something, you may not; you're still mulling it over.
Speaker 1: Still mulling it over, but for the foreseeable future my plan is I'm getting ready to open an office in Tyler, Texas.  I'm closing on a building within a month or so; and, and if I choose not to run then I'm just going to expand my practice throughout the state.
Story_ID: 669431
Speaker 1: Now in 2016, the Dallas County [Texas] DA Susan Hawk quit to focus on mental health issues--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --that she was having herself.
Speaker 2: She had more than that, I mean she had more health issues.  She was strung out on drugs, and she had affairs with African American ministers.  So she was just not fit--she was not fit to be a judge, but she was; and then she became DA [district attorney].  And what's funny about it is the newspaper knew it--they knew it and they still endorsed her.  I just wouldn't go on record about it, but they asked me to.  They thought, you know, let's get rid of Craig [HistoryMaker Craig Watkins].
Speaker 1: Do you have any reflections on Texas politics?  You know, you saw it in your lifetime--you saw it flip from being like a liberal Democratic state at least characterized that way to becoming a more right wing reactionary state.
Speaker 2: I think Texas is going to go Democratic in my lifetime.  I just think the mood is right for that.  It may--we may see someone win statewide here in this next election cycle because of Trump [President Donald John Trump], and a lot of people will go vote just to vote against him.  So no, I think Texas will become a Democratic state.  When you are winning 45 percent of the vote as a Democrat and you have no funds, no money, you don't have a war chest--that tells me if someone came along with a war chest and a great message they could win something statewide.
Speaker 1: So as we sit here today is there a, after what happened to Susan Hawk, is there--who's the DA?
Speaker 2: The current DA was appointed by the governor [Greg Abbott].  Her name is Faith Johnson.  She happens to be an African American female which was a smart move on the governor.  She's a Republican but because Dallas County [Texas] is so centered on African Americans and Hispanics, he thought that would be the best move to ensure that when an election comes up she would have an opportunity to keep her seat.
Speaker 1: Okay so the next election would be 2018, is that--that true?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right so you're mulling that over as we speak.
Story_ID: 669432
Speaker 1: Now when, when you look back on everything you've done up to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could?
Speaker 2: Yes.  If I were going back, and if you're talking politically, if I were going back I would be--I was more of a person that would want to kick the door in as opposed to building consensus, getting everybody on your team to get this thing done.  I just kind of bum rushed it and, and I look back on that and I regret that 'cause I think I could have gotten a lot more done if I built consensus and that's something I would do differently.
Story_ID: 669433
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: I think the biggest issue we have in our community: education and the criminal justice system.  My hope is, is that in this country especially in Texas is that we actually fund our educational system.  So we spend, we're spending almost forty dollars a day to incarcerate someone but we only spend eight dollars a day to educate them.  And I'm like can we transfer that; and then the criminal justice system and the industrial complex that are housing all these people of color maybe justly, maybe not.  But then we don't need a prison population like we have to make our community safer.  So those are my major issues: education and criminal justice.
Story_ID: 669434
Speaker 1: When you reflect on everything you've done to this point, what do you think your legacy is so far?
Speaker 2: Yeah I think my legacy is going stem--I mean there are so many things that really weren't discussed, what we did at the DA's office [Dallas County District Attorney's Office], but I think it's going to basically be cruxed on the Conviction Integrity Unit and freeing individuals that didn't commit crimes.  I would hope that someone at some point would come and do a more in depth story about how things worked and how we changed those things.  I just signed a contract with CBS, and they want to do a TV series on me, and so hopefully doing that TV series more things will come out of the changes that we made.  Another example: minor crimes, nonviolent, we had a deal called a memo agreement where you would come in, you would pay a fine and do a little community service and then we'd dismiss the case, so keep it off your record.  Then, then we would expunge it so you didn't have a criminal record.  Now these are for people that are between seventeen and twenty-five [years old], so it's young.  Just think about when you're seventeen, I think about when I was seventeen, I did a lot of things that I just didn't get caught for.  I wouldn't have the opportunity in this justice system that we had before I got there to grow up, to be mature and to make a difference.  So that's why we did that.  One college kid that I can remember had some hydrocodones or something.  Now this kid's in college.  Now I could convict you and put you on probation, but I'm going to ruin your life and you have a whole life in front of you.  Although you did something stupid, let's make you--punish you for what you did, but then let's give you an opportunity to clean your record so you won't go through life with this you know X on your back.  I've had clients since I've been back, these guys--some guys have been out of prison for twenty, twenty-five years but they still have that X on their back and then they get laid off and they can't find another job.  Now they were fortunate enough to get a job for twenty-five years, but now because they have that criminal history and they're laid off, they can't find jobs even though they've been legitimate for twenty-five.  And so those kinds of things are all things that need to change.  I don't think we should label someone a criminal forever.  But for murder and sexual assault--yes, label them a criminal.
Story_ID: 669435
Speaker 1: Now are you in favor of the death penalty?
Speaker 2: No, and that's one regret I have.  Because I tried a case, I tried a death penalty case when I was DA [district attorney].  Another mistake I made was I let our office pursue death penalty cases and that's--like you asked me before what could I change--that would be one thing I would change 'cause I don't think as a human--we're just, if we're using our government to takes someone's life, we're just as worse as a criminal, you know.  Who's--and I actually witnessed an execution and when I saw it, it's like okay this guy committed a crime--a heinous crime, but how does that make me feel?  So I look at the family: how does that make you feel that he's been executed.  It doesn't take anything away, it doesn't make you feel better, you know.  I rather have a guy spend the rest of his life in prison than to make it easy for him.
Speaker 1: Now was this when you were the DA that you saw this (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  It was--I don't know if you've been to an execution chamber but it's probably half the size of this room. So the warden is standing next to the guy, there's a mic [microphone] right here, he's laying down on the gurney with his hands out, they've got the needle in there.  So the warden is there and the guy makes his last statement and the warden gives a little sign to go ahead with the execution.  This warden just (nods head) did that.  This guy [George Rivas]--I don't know if you remember the Texas Seven, the guys that broke out of prison, they went on this crime spree.  This was maybe ten, fifteen years ago--he was one of those.  He just--and they say executions are inhumane, which I believe they are, but what I saw was a guy go to sleep.  He started snoring.  The only reason you knew he was dead is because he's turning blue, you wouldn't have known that he was dead. But the first drug they give you puts you to sleep, then they give the other drugs that will kill you; and then they pronounce him dead and close the curtain.
Speaker 1: So now there are different ways to do this I guess because there was a case in Ohio a couple of years ago where a man [Dennis McGuire] suffered like excruciating torment--
Speaker 2: I didn't see that.
Speaker 1: --you know in--on a gurney in Ohio.  But I--
Speaker 2: I didn't see that at all; he just went to sleep.
Speaker 1: There's no--
Speaker 2: I'm sure it happens.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So I guess there are choices that states can make in terms of what they use--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --for lethal injection, or?
Speaker 2: Yeah they do, but Texas is like--the drug combination they use, I forget what it is but I don't know if the other states use that combination--it's three drugs, I know that for a fact.  I don't know if there are any states that still do the electric chair, there may be.  But I can imagine that had to be horrendous 'cause you've got smoke coming out of the guy's head and you know he's shaking.  But this was--if, if you were going to execute someone this was probably the humane-ist way I've ever seen.  This was my only one--I only saw one, so.  So yeah I just think as a--I just think it's terrible for us to kill people.
Story_ID: 669436
Speaker 1: We're not in a hurry necessarily, I'm just saying if there are any other aspects of the DA's office [Dallas County District Attorney's Office] you want to tell us about other than the (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I think you got it.  Yeah, yeah.  My first day, that's another story, is sitting at my desk and a prosecutor comes in and they want me to sign this thing saying we can destroy all the evidence, the DNA--that was my first day and I said no.
Speaker 1: So did they see it coming, did they see you coming?
Speaker 2: I don't know, I mean 'cause I really hadn't formulated the thought of doing this conviction integrity [Conviction Integrity Unit], I mean that was still in the process.  But I was like no I'm not going to do that, but they asked me to.  In fact, at the DA's office I couldn't tell you the lay of it because we have a parking garage with the judges and the DA, and that elevator goes up to the eleventh floor and it comes out on my office.  And so I would walk from the elevator to my office, and every now and again I'd go to the restroom.  But I couldn't tell you because it was that toxic when I got there.  Yeah, it was that toxic.  So, I could give you a mouth- earful but I think we got to--we better stop 'cause I'd get to talking about things.
Speaker 1: You're sure there's not anything else you want to say about it?
Speaker 2: No I think we got it.
Story_ID: 669437
Speaker 1: Tell us about your family.  You've got a--your son's in college now, and (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.  My wife [Tanya Watkins]--
Speaker 1: Yeah you met your wife in--?
Speaker 2: I met her at a picnic.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean she graduated from Prairie View [Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas] also.  But there was an alumni picnic and I met her there.  We've been married--okay she's going to get mad at me--we've been married twenty-three years.  I have three kids, my oldest son is Chad [Chad Watkins], he's in college; my middle son is Cale [Cale Watkins], he's sixteen; and then I have a daughter [Taryn Watkins] that's eight--I'm sorry eleven, she's eleven [years old].
Speaker 1: Okay.  She's like sixth grade, or?
Speaker 2: Yeah she's in sixth grade.  She's the swimmer so we hope that--we're trying to push her towards the Olympics; and my middle son, lacrosse.  My wife is upset about that because you can't get a scholarship in lacro- (laughter) they don't give scholarship for lacrosse so she's trying to get him scholarships.  But he'll probably get an academic scholarship, he's like number five in his class.  Yeah he's very smart.  My son we just let him take his car back, we waited 'til he was a sophomore to get a little bit more mature.  So he's got his car in college and he loves it, he loves it; and he wants to pledge in my fraternity, and I hope he does you know.  To keep the legacy going, my paren- my dad's [Richard Watkins] a Kappa [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity], my wife's a Delta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority], my mom's [Paula Clark Watkins] a Delta, her mom's a Delta, her sister is a Delta; so it runs deep.
Speaker 1: A lot of red or white in the household I guess (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yeah.
Speaker 1: And you said you were a member of the Boule [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity] too as well, right?
Speaker 2: I don't re- I hadn't participated in it; I can tell you off camera about that.
Story_ID: 669438
Speaker 1: What advice would you give other young aspiring lawyers that are in the public sector 'cause what you did was--and it seems to be unique amongst Das [district attorneys].  I mean we interviewed Thomas Todd [HistoryMaker Thomas N. Todd], I was telling you that, years ago, who was a federal prosecutor in Chicago [Illinois] and the first thing he did was sue the City of Chicago which shocked everybody.  But you know as a conscious black person you know when you have that kind of position, he used it for--
Speaker 2: What I would tell them is if you're in the public sector, get your experienced--get enough experience and then strike out on your own 'cause I believe in entrepreneurship.  My dad [Richard Watkins] I told you, entrepreneur his whole life; and I believe that you have a choice either you're going to--as a lawyer either you're going to work for someone else and make that person money, or you're going to go out and do your own thing to make yourself money.  Now a lot of folks say, "Well that's difficult, Craig [HistoryMaker Craig Watkins].  It's easy for you because you used to be DA."  Well I wasn't DA until 2007, 2006--all the other time I was just a private lawyer.  And so private sector is--or the public sector, use it to get your experience and then go out and represent individuals, or start your own law practice and have people that work for you.  But then also, if you have a mindset of public office, you know set yourself up so you can participate in that.  And like when I ran in 2002 and 2006, I was in a financial position where I could pay, I could use my own money to run for office.  And so I always say to young individuals, if you're going to go into public office, make sure you have something--some money.  That's the hardest thing to do is go ask people for money.  I don't know--I hated that, you know.  That was the worst part of being a DA: going and getting on the phone, like I would spend eight hours on the phone just asking for donations, and that's, that's really, that was really difficult and painful for me.
Story_ID: 669439
Speaker 1: Now is there anything we haven't--
Speaker 2: I think you got it (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) touched since?  Okay well I've got one last question, it's sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Well I want to be remembered as a good husband and a good father.  You know, all this other stuff the DA [district attorney] and all that kind of stuff--that would just be something after, like if--on my obituary: good husband and good father, he did this for his family, and then oh by the way he was the first African American DA in Texas.  That's how I want to be remembered.
