Story_ID: 421034
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Neculai Burghelea.  Ma'am, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Certainly.  I am Jolette, J-O-L-E-T-T-E, A. Westbrook [HistoryMaker Jolette Westbrook].
Speaker 1: All right, and what does the A stand for, if I--
Speaker 2: Ann.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My date of birth is twelve, ten--December 10th, 1956, a very good year.  And I was born in Buffalo, New York.
Speaker 1: All right, and what, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am an attorney.
Speaker 1: All right.  And you hold the position of?
Speaker 2: Currently, I hold the position of director of the Massachusetts Energy Facilities Siting Division [sic. Massachusetts Energy Facilities Siting Board] of the Department of Telecommunications and Energy [Massachusetts Department of Telecommunications and Energy].
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is February 13th, 2007.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are currently in one of the hearing rooms at my office, One South Station, Boston, Massachusetts.
Story_ID: 421035
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that I'm compelled to ask by management, and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes, I do have a favorite food, and that is salmon, but only wild salmon.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's quite a distinction, okay.  And do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I do, I like the color yellow.  It reminds me of very happy thoughts and very bright things.  I like yellow.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: My favorite time of the year is Thanksgiving because there isn't the commercial association that Christmas has.  And I think that it's a time that families can spend together and reflect on their blessings, reflect on their lives together, and be thankful that they have each other.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I don't have a favorite vacation destination because I like to travel.  To me travel is education.  So anywhere that is interesting, places that I have not gone to, that's where I like to go.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: No, I don't (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I have a quote that I live by, but that's not--is that what you're referring to?
Speaker 1: Well, that could be.  Why, what, what, what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: --what is the quote?
Speaker 2: The quote is: nothing works unless you do.  I, I think that it hold so much meaning, and I'm not--to me, it doesn't mean the physical work.  It, it means that as a society, we have to work together.  We have to be respectful of people.  We have to love one another, as the greatest teacher said, "Love your neighbor as thyself," or, "Love thyself as your neighbor" [Mark 12:31].  And so therefore, we all have to get along here on this earth; and we have to help one another; we have to be there for one another, and that's why that's my favorite quote.
Story_ID: 421036
Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Quinton Westbrook] side, but we'll start with your mother's side of the family.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Certainly.  Her name is Mary, M-A-R-Y, Lue, L-U-E; her maiden name, her birth name, was Loveless, L-O-V-E-L-E-S-S [Mary Lue Loveless Westbrook].
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her date of birth, June 14th, and around 1917.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: Well, I know that her father's name was Pink, P-I-N-K, Loveless [Pink Loveless].  And her mother, who we used to call Grandma King [Mary Alice King], Grandma King was part Indian [Native American].  Grandma King was, I believe, from the Blackfoot tribe, and that tribe may have some origins in Florida.  Grandma King was a very interesting person.  She was tenacious.  I can remember toward the latter years of her life she had had both legs amputated, and I do believe she had an arm amputated as well.  But her spirit you just could not kill.  She always had stories for us.  She would always tell us to listen to our mother, just a very good teacher, and that's what I remember about her.  That's my grandmother and grandfather.  I do not remember ever seeing my grandfather.  And my mother had siblings.  And one sibling is still alive, and that's my Aunt Bea [ph.].  And we stay in regular contact.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that's what I remember about my mother, mother's family.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you said that your grandmother, you suspect that she was from Florida, or did you, did you know--
Speaker 2: I--
Speaker 1: --or do you have--
Speaker 2: I, I suspect--that is what older siblings have communicated to me, that the Blackfoot tribe had origins in Florida.  I have never validated that, but that's what I've been told.
Speaker 1: Okay, but as far as you know, was your grandmother born in Buffalo [New York] or in--
Speaker 2: She was actually born in Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Tennessee, oh, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: All right, all right, okay, is there a story as to--was your grandfather born in Tennessee too?
Speaker 2: Unclear; I really don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And is there a story that comes down from your grandmother about what, you know, why--how she ended up in Buffalo?
Speaker 2: I do believe that she moved to Buffalo after my parents moved to Buffalo and after she got sick.  I think she was in Tennessee until she got sick and needed more constant care.  And then she actually lived with my mother some of the time and then with my mother's sister some of the time.
Story_ID: 421037
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Mary Lue Loveless Westbrook] talk about, or did she talk about growing up in Tennessee and what it was like?  She have any stories?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, and, and I actually remember that we would go to Tennessee.  I would say we would go every year.  And both my mother's family and my father's [Quinton Westbrook] family, they were farmers in Tennessee.  And I remember that Uncle Harry  [ph.] tried to teach me how to call the hogs.  I still can't call a hog to this day.  But he could go to the fence, call the hogs, and they would respond.  It, it was the most amazing thing to me.  They would actually come over and see him.  I, I remember that.  That was fun.  And then Uncle Harry had a horse named Midnight, and I used to love to ride on Midnight, such a genteel horse.  I also remember, and I guess this is sort of funny, I remember that my mother's family had indoor plumbing, and my father's family had outdoor plumbing.  They had an outhouse.  When we went to Tennessee, my mother would not stay with my father's family.  And I think that--well, there are six of us, six girls in the family.  I think sometimes we stayed with our father's side of the family sometimes with our mother's.  But I have to be honest with you: I preferred the indoor plumbing.  It was something about walking through the fields to the outside, with the snakes, with everything else, with all the sounds at night, got me a little concerned.
Speaker 1: Now what part of Tennessee is this?
Speaker 2: It was outside of Memphis [Tennessee].  And I still have relatives in Memphis to this day.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now did your, your mother go to school there too in--
Speaker 2: My mother went--
Speaker 1: --in Tennessee?
Speaker 2: --to school in Tennessee, correct.
Speaker 1: Do you know the name of the school?
Speaker 2: That I do not know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let's see, so, when did your mother--well, he--she got married I guess first.  Then--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --left--
Speaker 2: My mother met my father in Tennessee.  And then they moved to Buffalo [New York], and that's where they started their family.
Speaker 1: Okay, now is there a story as to how they met?
Speaker 2: She didn't tell me (laughter), so I don't know.
Story_ID: 421038
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full, full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Certainly.  His name is Quinton, Q-U-I-N-T-O-N, and the last name is Westbrook [Quinton Westbrook].
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his date of birth?
Speaker 2: He was born in January 6th, around 1916.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where was he born?
Speaker 2: He was also born in Tennessee.  I think he was born in Ellendale, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what do you know about the ancestors on his side?
Speaker 2: His mother was Grandma Ella, E-L-L-A [Ella Westbrook].  And what I remember about her is her red hair.  She had very long red hair.  And I remember some of his siblings, aunts and uncles: Uncle Velt, V-E-L-T [Velt Westbrook]; Aunt Allie Mae [Allie Mae Westbrook], and they were all in Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's about all I know about my father's side of the family.
Speaker 1: Did they farm for a living?
Speaker 2: They farmed as well, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did he grow up in the same community as your mother [Mary Lue Loveless Westbrook], or did he move there later?
Speaker 2: I think they were close in Tennessee.  I think they were close.  And I'm not sure how they met, but eventually they did, and I'm happy they did.  And they moved to Buffalo [New York].
Story_ID: 421039
Speaker 1: Now did your father [Quinton Westbrook] or, or mother [Mary Lue Loveless Westbrook] have a chance to finish high school and that sort of thing, or did they--in Tennessee?
Speaker 2: In Tennessee, I do believe that--I know that my mother went to school.  I'm not sure she finished high school.  I'm pretty sure my father did, and he later went to St. Lawrence University [Canton, New York] and took classes.
Speaker 1: Okay, is that in Buffalo [New York]?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: Is that in Buffalo, St. Lawrence?
Speaker 2: St. Lawrence, no, it was near the Canadian border.
Speaker 1: Okay, so near Buffalo (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, near.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 421040
Speaker 1: What were your parents' [Mary Lue Loveless Westbrook and Quinton Westbrook] personalities like, and who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Well, people used to say to me growing up that I was Quinton Westbrook's daughter, and now I can appreciate why they said that.  He was just a wonderful, wonderful father, role model, provider.  He worked very hard.  And what I--one thing I remember is that when I was--and I think this happened--he did this for all of my sisters.  When I was maybe fourteen or fifteen, we got in his VW [Volkswagen] truck.  He loved those VW trucks.  And we went to the Erie County Correctional Facility [Alden, New York].  And we went in, and I saw inmates; I saw people behind bars.  And my father said, "This is not a place you will ever go to."  He said, "You don't do anything wrong; you respect people; you respect the law, and you don't end up here."  That made such a deep impression on me.  And I, I think I'm jumping the gun here a little bit, and I don't mean to go out of sequence.  But I think that act by my father made, and it still has an impression on me today.  I started off doing criminal law in my career.  And every time I would walk into a prison in the State of Massachusetts or walk into a courthouse and walk into the lockup, I, I could always remember the time that my father took me to, to the county jail and said you will never be here; just respect the law; respect other people.  And I, I just wonder what would happen if the people who are behind bars, if they had that opportunity, if they had that role model, if they had that figure, to take them into a correctional facility when they were young, very impressionable, and say this is not a place where you will be going because you are going to walk the straight and narrow; you're gonna do the right thing.  And that's why I think as a society we have to try to help where we can.  So, that's a--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --long way of saying I think that I take after my father in terms of his work ethic.  I'm not afraid of hard work and neither was he.  He worked two jobs to support our family.
Story_ID: 421041
Speaker 1: How many siblings do you have?
Speaker 2: I have five sisters, yes (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was interesting growing up in Buffalo [New York].  Picture this: six girls, a mother [Mary Lue Loveless Westbrook], a father [Quinton Westbrook], one bathroom, even though I, I think my father had enough--at some point time he had another bathroom put in downstairs.  It was like, he could never get in.  So, it, it was, it was a fun, fun household.  Everyone was always doing something.  But one thing that, that I remember, and it, it was, it was sad growing up because by the time I was six and just really beginning to enjoy my sisters, the oldest [Quinnette Westbrook Mathias] was leaving for college.  And then about every two years, someone else would leave for college.  And, and that's the other thing I, I, I want to point out about my father.  I didn't appreciate it when I was growing up.  But now looking back, here is a man who moved to Buffalo with limited means, very limited means, started Westbrook's News Agency [Westbrook News Agency], also worked as a principal guard at the Erie County jail [Erie County Correctional Facility, Alden, New York] and was later in life promoted to a lieutenant, a person who didn't have the degree from Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] or another well-recognized educational insti- institution, but sent all of his girls to college.  That, that was not an option in, in our household.  I, I do want to make that clear.  It's not do you want to go to college after high school.  It's, you're going to college.  For the longest time, I didn't even know that most people stopped their education after high school.  I just thought college was something that everyone did; it was just a natural progression, like you go from kindergarten to first grade.  Well, you go from high school to college.  So, he sent us all to college.  And after my oldest sister, she was allowed to go to Buffalo State College [Buffalo State, State University of New York, Buffalo, New York], and after that my parents said, "When you go to college, you must go to a college outside of Buffalo because we want you to have the experience of living on your own.  We've taught you well.  We're not concerned that you're going to get in with the wrong crowds.  We've taught you well, but we want you to mature even further, so you go away to school.  You learn how it is to be on your own."  And so we all had to go away to school, and it was, it was heart-wrenching for me the first year.  I, I went to a private school in--a private women's college outside of Albany [New York], Russell Sage College in Troy, New York.
Speaker 1: Okay, we don't want to get into that yet.
Speaker 2: Oh, sorry (laughter).
Speaker 1: But I'm gonna, we're gonna, we can go--but, but that's, that's interesting about his aspirations for all of you.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 421042
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?  And, and where do you rank in terms of the sisters?  Are you the oldest or youngest, or--
Speaker 2: I'm the youngest, and I--
Speaker 1: You're the youngest.
Speaker 2: --tell my older sisters about it all the time (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Earliest childhood memory, yes.  My earliest childhood memory is in kindergarten.  Mrs. Maureen [ph.] was my teacher.  And I was always the tallest person.  I, I was, I grew very quickly in height, and I was always the tallest person in my class in grade school [P.S. 93, Southside Elementary School, Buffalo, New York].  And what I remember in, in school was the teacher could not reach something on an overhead shelf and asked me to do it.  And I was so proud of myself that I could reach it and--
Speaker 1: This in kindergarten?
Speaker 2: --retrieve it.  In kindergarten, I did that.  I was, I was really tall.  And of course, now in retrospect--I'm maybe embellishing a little bit--the shelf probably wasn't that high.  It seemed high to me at the time because obviously I was shorter.  But I, I do remember that, for whatever reason.  I was just proud of myself that I could get it when the other kids could not.  In terms of family and the neighborhood, we lived in a community whereby everyone knew everyone.  I mean, they knew I was Quinton Westbrook's daughter.  And we all had bicycles, and I can remember that I was riding down the street and going in each driveway and coming back down.  Well, on one occasion, my either back or front tire of my bicycle caught the edge of grass of one of our neighbor's lawns.  Oh my goodness, they were on the phone to my parents [Mary Lue Loveless Westbrook and Quinton Westbrook] (laughter).  I got into so much trouble. Again, but it was respect.  The, that neighbor took a lot of time and effort to keep the lawn well-manicured.  That was not a place for my bicycle. So, I, I do remember that, and I, I remember playing with my sisters a lot. That, that was fun.  Being in a big family, we got to play together a lot.
Speaker 1: And you were the baby, so that probably--
Speaker 2: Oh, I was the baby, and I was spoiled.  I, I--and that's okay (laughter).
Story_ID: 421043
Speaker 1: What were some of the other sights, and sounds, and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, I just thought of this when you, when you mentioned a smell.  On Fridays, my mother [Mary Lue Loveless Westbrook] would not cook meat.  We always had fish on Fridays.  And we went to the local fish market.  And I used to love to go to the fish market because they would have prepared seafood.  And inevitably, one of the vendors at the market would give me a piece of cooked shrimp or a piece of fish.  Oh, I, I used to love it.  And then after we had went to the fish market, my mother would take me to a department store, which was sort of connected to the fish market, and we would always get cherry-dipped ice cream cones.  I love them to this day.  So that's was big fun.  Fridays were fun.  Sundays, well, we, we knew what we did: we went to church.  And we were there for Sunday school, for morning service, and then my mother would have dinner at two o'clock, and that was dinnertime on Sundays.  We had a big dinner at two o'clock so that everyone could eat, play a little bit, and go back to church in the evening.  But I can remember the Sunday meals were fantastic.  My mother was a great cook.  She made homemade bread, oh, and cherry pie, oh my goodness.  I, I am so sorry that I did not get her recipe for cherry pie before she passed away.  It was scrumptious--so cherry pie, the, the homemade bread.  Our, our house always smelled so wonderful because she just was such a fantastic cook.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what, what was the name of your church?
Speaker 2: New Hope Baptist Church [Buffalo, New York].
Story_ID: 421044
Speaker 1: What other things did you like to do?  Did you--were you a, a reader growing up, or did you like, more--
Speaker 2: I, I was a reader.  I played a lot with my sisters, and they were my friends as well.  And I didn't really play a lot with the neighborhood children.  So when I wasn't playing with my sisters, I was inside reading.  I was never really very artsy, even though I wanted to draw, and I tried, and my parents [Mary Lue Loveless Westbrook and Quinton Westbrook] were kind enough to send me to drawing school.  But, I think they saw the handwriting on the wall with that talent, so I didn't do that.  And I played the piano growing up.  I took piano lessons for many years.  And I think that was about the extent of my childhood.  I spent it indoors.  Ironically enough, even though I grew up in Buffalo [New York], I never cared for the cold weather.  My parents would always encourage me to go outside, but I, I just preferred staying inside.  I, I went skiing a few times, but I, I was more of a homebody growing up.
Story_ID: 421045
Speaker 1: Do you remember ever going over the falls [Niagara Falls]?  I guess, I guess that had to be a--
Speaker 2: On Sundays after dinner, if we had time, we would go for a family drive.  And that family drive--we were only about twenty minutes away from the American side of the falls, and we would go there.  And it was fun because not only did we get to see the falls, but the drive itself was fun.  I can remember Elaine [Elaine Westbrook Lewis], one of my sisters, she actually taught me about road signs, what the symbols meant and the like.  I can remember there were many roadside stands along the way, selling hot corn.  It, it was fun.  So yes, we did spend a lot of time at the falls.  And we would also travel to the Adirondack Mountains for vacation.  I remember going to New York City [New York, New York] a lot, maybe once a year growing up and probably doing the same thing every time we went, going to the Empire State Building [New York, New York], seeing the UN [United Nations Headquarters, New York, New York], but it was, it was fun because I was with my family.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Seem like they, your parents had, had a, a large picture vision for their children.  You know, I mean they wanted really to educate you.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, and I, I want to say that my, my mother [Mary Lue Loveless Westbrook] was very influential as well.  And she was the one who handled the discipline.  I could sort of sweet talk my dad [Quinton Westbrook] sometimes and not get into trouble.  But my mother, nothing got by her, absolutely nothing.
Story_ID: 421427
Speaker 1: Tell us about school.  Now where did you start kindergarten?
Speaker 2: I started kindergarten at Public School 93 [P.S. 93, Southside Elementary School] in Buffalo, New York.
Speaker 1: And how did you like it?  Did you like kindergarten?
Speaker 2: I loved kindergarten.
Speaker 1: 'Cause you could reach everything.
Speaker 2: I could reach things, and, and I got to interact with, with new people.  I can remember that the first day I was a limit--a little intimidated because there were lots of people that I didn't know, lots of people who didn't live on my street.  So it was a little intimidating, but I, I grew into kindergarten.  I was a--I can remember, I was a good reader.  Even in kindergarten I was beginning to eat--to read then.  And I enjoyed it.  I stayed at P.S. 93 for kindergarten, first, second, and third.  And I can remember second grade was traumatic.  I was in Mrs. Miller's [ph.] class.  And Mrs. Miller came into the classroom crying one day.  And there was a television set, as I re- recall, which, which now seems odd to me that we would have a television in second grade.  Maybe they, they rolled it in.  I'm not sure about that.  But it was the day that the president [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was assassinated.
Speaker 1: What is that, 1963?
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-three [1963].  And I, I, I remember that and also about Public School 93 I remember my third grade teacher was very, very strict.  At the time I didn't like it (laughter), but it was a good education.  So I walked to school.  I walked to P.S. 93.  I'm trying to think.  I think Heloise [HistoryMaker Dr. Heloise Westbrook], who is the sibling next in age to me, we overlapped at P.S. 93, so I walked with her.  But it was about maybe, it probably was a twenty, twenty minute walk to school.  And we actually had to cross streets, now that I think of it, and one fairly major street.  But it was not an issue.  And from Public School 93, after that-- that stopped at third grade--I went to Public School 74 [P.S. 74, Hamlin Park School; P.S. 74, Hamlin Park Claude and Ouida Clapp Academy, Buffalo, New York].  That was a little bit closer to home, but again, I walked.
Speaker 1: Now did you have a favorite subject in grade school or--
Speaker 2: In grade school I would have to say it was math.  I, I quite enjoyed math.  I, I seemed to be able to grasp the concepts.  And so I, I liked things that I could do, and I could do math.  So I would have to say that was my favorite subject.
Story_ID: 421428
Speaker 1: What was your personality like as a little kid in grade school?  Were you--
Speaker 2: I was shy.  I'm, I'm still shy, but I was really shy then.  And I, I probably had two or three friends that I would talk to and really associate with.  But besides that, I didn't, and, and forget boys.  I just could not talk to them at all, even in grade school.  So, it was mainly girlfriends.
Story_ID: 421429
Speaker 1: You were in Pu- Public School 74 [P.S. 74, Hamlin Park School; P.S. 74, Hamlin Park Claude and Ouida Clapp Academy, Buffalo, New York].  Were you there through, through eighth grade?
Speaker 2: I was at Public School 74 through sixth grade, and I do remember my sixth grade teacher.  He was a reverend.  And I remember that one day in class, it was toward the end of the school day, and he wanted to expose us to different things.  And this new thing was chocolate-covered ants.  I, I, I don't know.  When he said he had them, I, I, I think I froze and just couldn't think of why he would want us to eat an ant that's covered in chocolate.  But the teacher was friends of my parents [Mary Lue Loveless Westbrook and Quinton Westbrook], and so I, I guess I thought that I had to do it because my parents would expect me to do it, and I ate a chocolate-covered ant.  And, and I'm still here (laughter); I survived.
Speaker 1: What did it taste like (laughter)?
Speaker 2: I, I, I'm sure I held my nose and just swallowed it, so I, I don't have a recollection of the taste at all.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: But I, I know I ate it (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, that's, that's--yeah, he created a memory there with that one (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right, that's right.
Story_ID: 421430
Speaker 1: And after sixth grade [at P.S. 74, Hamlin Park School; P.S. 74, Hamlin Park Claude and Ouida Clapp Academy, Buffalo, New York] they opened a middle school in a town called, it was in Riverside, New York [Riverside, Buffalo, New York].  And it was a suburb of Buffalo [New York], but I had to take a bus to school.  In fact, I think I had to take two buses to school.  It wasn't a school bus.  It was the public bus transportation system in Buffalo.  I took one bus, and then I had to transfer.  And I went to West Hertel Middle School [P.S. 94, West Hertel Academy, Buffalo, New York] for seventh and eighth grade, and--
Speaker 2: It's called West--I'm sorry--
Speaker 1: West Hertel, Hertel (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Hertel?
Speaker 1: H-E-R, yes, T-E-L.
Speaker 2: Okay, Hertel, okay.
Speaker 1: Middle School.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And at that school--it, it's funny because I haven't thought about some of these things in, since I don't know when.  But as I'm mentioning West Hertel, this is what comes to mind: I'm on stage in the auditorium, with a white dress on that's trimmed in blue.  My teacher helped me prepare for a public speaking contest.  And at West Hertel, or at that time, I had made it I think to the level where if I prevailed and won this round, I would go to a national speaking contest.  Now picture this: I'm on stage, and first of all, I was very nervous getting on stage and lots of people, lots of people I didn't know, adults, children, the like; I'm very nervous.  I was able to compose myself.  It was going wonderfully.  I was--inside I was just jumping up and down, it was going so well.  I was almost finished.  A buzzer went off.  I exceeded the time limit by maybe five seconds and was disqualified.  I, I was so disappointed.  But it wasn't anyone's fault.  I had worked with my teacher on the timing so that it would not exceed the time limit, and I was just a little slower than what I had done in rehearsal.  So I, I--that is my memory from middle school.
Speaker 2: That's real--they, they were that strict, where if you didn't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They were that strict.  They were that strict.  If you were over the time limit, that was it.
Speaker 2: That's pretty bad.  That's 1969, then right, I guess (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, I'll--
Speaker 2: Is that--
Speaker 1: Around--
Speaker 2: Probably, yeah, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: All right.
Story_ID: 421431
Speaker 1: You mentioned the assassination of President Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy].  Did, did your--do you remember what your family--how your family re- reacted to the assassination of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] in '68 [1968]?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Well, the memory I have is they were--I can remember some tears; I can remember them talking about what would happen, whether or not there was ever anyone who could fill the shoes of Dr. King.  They talked a lot about the fact that he had done so much, and they questioned the violence.  And, and they just could not get a handle on why anyone would kill anyone else, much less a person of that stature.  So there, there was sadness in the household, lots of sadness in the household.
Story_ID: 421432
Speaker 1: Did you live in a, in an all-black community in, in Buffalo [New York]?
Speaker 2: It, it changed.  It was an all--it was not an all-black community when we moved in.  I would say by the time I was in high school [Mount St. Joseph's Academy, Buffalo, New York] it was an all-black community, or I would say 95 percent.
Speaker 1: And were the schools all-black, or where they integrated along the way?
Speaker 2: They were, they were integrated.  I, I remember 93 [P.S. 93, Southside Elementary School, Buffalo, New York] I do believe was integrated as well--74 [P.S. 74, Hamlin Park School; P.S. 74, Hamlin Park Claude and Ouida Clapp Academy, Buffalo, New York] not so much, and definitely West Hertel [West Hertel Middle School; P.S. 94, West Hertel Academy, Buffalo, New York] was.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now why did you have to go so far away to go to middle school?  I mean to--was there--where you had to be bused, was there, there, was that part of a plan or something to--
Speaker 2: I want to say yes.  And thinking about it, I don't remember any seventh and eighth grade school anywhere near my neighborhood, so it probably was some grand plan.
Story_ID: 421433
Speaker 1: Now where did you go to high school?
Speaker 2: I went to high school.  I went to an all-girls high school, Mount St. Joseph's Academy in Buffalo [New York].
Speaker 1: Now is this a Catholic school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: And, and your, now your parents [Mary Lue Loveless Westbrook and Quinton Westbrook] aren't Catholic, right?  So--
Speaker 2: Parents are not Catholic, that's true.  But they had heard stories about what was happening at the public high school.  And the public high school was maybe, by car, twenty or twenty-five minutes away from the house.  They didn't like what was happening.  In fact, what I remember them saying is that they heard of an incident where a student was pushed down the front stairs of the school.  That, they could not tolerate, so they said you are not going to public school; you're going to a Catholic school.  And at first I wasn't enamored with the idea.  We had to wear black dresses.  They were pleated at the bottom, and, and we had white collars, and white cuffs.  And inevitably, when I got on a bus to go to school and I had on my uniform, someone would offer me their seat.  They thought I was studying to be a nun.  And so, it was, it was an experience, going to Mount St. Joseph's, but the education was good, I mean, good emphasis on math, good emphasis on science.  But--
Speaker 1: Was it hard to get used to the Catholic protocol?
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't--I had to take religion, if I recall correctly, the first year.  And then because I was Baptist and went to a Baptist church [New Hope Baptist Church, Buffalo, New York]. I didn't have to take it after that.  I had to go to Mass once a week.  Well, there was a school Mass at school.  But, to answer your question, yes, it was difficult to get used to it.  And looking back, I think that it just became something that I had to do.  I didn't question right, wrong, good, bad; it was just something that I had to do, so I did it.
Story_ID: 421434
Speaker 1: Now, did you have a favorite subject in high school [Mount St. Joseph's Academy, Buffalo, New York] that--
Speaker 2: I think in high school it was algebra.  And also I remember that I had the opportunity to get involved with photography.  I'm, I'm not sure how that started, but I can remember that I would walk around with my camera.  And I thought I was so cool because I had a real camera, and it had interchangeable zoom lenses and the like.  I thought I was a hot ticket.  And I would go to basketball games, Buffalo Braves [Los Angeles Clippers], Boston Celtics.  I took fantastic shots.  I remember Bob Kaufman, Randy Smith, Elmore Smith, Etu McAdoo [sic. Bob McAdoo], just everyone, and I would take their pictures.  And I even think Bob Kaufman, and I think Randy Smith autographed pictures I had taken of them.  But I got into photography, and I really enjoyed it a lot.  I would develop my own pictures.  And I, I don't want you to think by any stretch of the imagination that there was some fancy setup at home.  We were simple folks.  And what would I do?  Go in the bathroom, put a towel over the window, put a towel under the door so that absolutely no light could come through, and I'd go to town in the sink. And I would develop at home.  And then I think the school had an enlarger, so I would take my negatives and print at school.  And it, it was big fun.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you developed the film at home, and then--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --developed the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And, and then--
Speaker 1: --print the photos at, at school?
Speaker 2: At school, correct, correct.
Speaker 1: I just started thinking about your poor father [Quinton Westbrook] trying to get in the bathroom (laughter).
Speaker 2: Right, right (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, well, that's, that's something.  So, so you kept up with the Buffalo Braves and the other sports teams?
Speaker 2: Oh, big, big basketball fan, huge, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  They had a good team.  Randy Smith's one of the best, and McAdoo, and--
Speaker 2: That's right; that's right.
Speaker 1: It was a good team, yeah.
Speaker 2: And then Ernie D.
Speaker 1: Ernie DiGregori, yeah.
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: That's right.  So, that, so that kind of spiced up high school a little bit, I guess.
Speaker 2: Oh, it did; it did.
Story_ID: 421435
Speaker 1: The other thing in high school was in my, I think it was senior year, the, the classes took a trip, or every--the senior class took a trip.  And for me, or my class, it was a trip to Brazil.  And I honestly didn't think that my parents [Mary Lue Loveless Westbrook and Quinton Westbrook] would let me go.  I didn't know if they could afford to let me go because they were paying tuition.  And I remember stories where they said the tuition was sometimes a little burdensome, but they would make the sacrifice and keep us, keep me in high school there.  But I did go to Brazil.  We went to Rio de Janeiro [Brazil], and we saw all of the sights in Rio.  And the nuns went with us.  And it was my--I'm trying to think if that was my first trip out of the country or my second.  It, it may have been my first trip out of the country, and it was, it was wonderful; it was wonderful.  I learned a lot.  I learned that people are different, but, but not only people, but cultures are different.  And I can't--I learned that I, I couldn't go to Brazil and expect to find everything that I found in America.  I couldn't go to Brazil and expect to hear the same people talk with the same accents, and in fact, they talked in a different language.  But that did make an impression on me, that there's more to life than Buffalo, New York, than Mount St. Joseph's Academy [Buffalo, New York], than Niagara Falls.  And I think that helped to whet my appetite for travel, and since then, I've, I've done a lot of travel.  I've traveled with my sisters.  I've traveled on my own, and, and it's been great.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's something.  How long did you stay?
Speaker 1: In Brazil, I think we stayed probably a week.  It wasn't a long time.  I do believe it was over the Easter break, school break.  And yeah, that was my first passport.
Speaker 2: That sounds like quite a gift, you know, your parents were able to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh yes, yes.
Speaker 2: --pull off, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yes, it was.
Story_ID: 421436
Speaker 1: Was there any teacher at, in high school [Mount St. Joseph's Academy, Buffalo, New York] who served as a, or anybody else in the community that served as a mentor to you, or a role more, or (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. In high school, I would have to say that Reverend Joseph Moore, who was the minister of our church [New Hope Baptist Church, Buffalo, New York].  I, I could remember going to church, looking at this man, and wondering how he did everything that he did.  He helped the, the people.  He visited the people who were sick in the hospitals; he took communion to them; he was in church day in, day out; he presided over funerals; he presided over weddings.  And he seemed like the most calm and put together person there was, and that, that always struck me.  I would see him in the pulpit.  He'd get excited, you know, during Sunday service sometimes, but then, he--that calm demeanor would return.  And I, I guess I thought to myself, I, I wonder if I could learn to take things as they come; put them (clears throat)--excuse me--put them into perspective.  And he's, he did that for me.  He, he was my role model for that.
Speaker 1: Now you seem so composed and so calm, and you were drinking herbal tea a little while ago.  Now did, did you have a, did--was that ever an issue for you, being able to control your temper, or, or, or to make sure you were calmed down, or not getting too excited?  Was that an issue?
Speaker 2: Well, internally.  I'm not sure that I ever exhibited it on an external basis.  But there were many times when I, I felt the anxiety inside, and I, I didn't want that.  I wanted to learn to be more relaxed inside.  And, and I never really talked to Pastor Moore about my perceptions of him, so I have no idea if he was nervous inside too.  But, but even now--I, I, I don't mean to digress and again, move ahead.  But this past weekend I played--I, I play tennis a lot, and I play in some of the local tournaments--and I played in the Bass River tournament [Bass River Tennis Club, Beverly, Massachusetts] this past weekend.  And we were playing in the semifinals.  And it was that feeling of anxien- anxiousness inside that I, geez, it, it came back, and I'd--all of these memories.  I started thinking about the last time I was anxious, which, it's been a while ago.  And it was, just brought back some childhood memories, and I, I just like, I don't want to be that way.  I want, I want to put everything in perspective.  And interestingly enough, when I got into the car, and I, I will say that my partner and I--it was doubles--we lost the semifinals in a three-set, seven-five tiebreaker.  I got into the car.  My daughter [Mary Ann Aaron], she goes to all my matches.  And she knew I was upset, and she said, "Mom, it's just a tennis game."  I said, "Bingo."  This ten year-old kid has it.  It's just a tennis game.  And all of a sudden, everything was put back into perspective for me.  But it, it's, it's just interesting how things can be taken out of perspective and, and elevated to a place where they should not be.  And sometimes it's a little child that can make everything right.  So, sorry to digress (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --but, okay.
Story_ID: 421437
Speaker 1: You were telling me off camera that you had an interest in theater.  Now did that--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --manifest itself in high school [Mount St. Joseph's Academy, Buffalo, New York]?
Speaker 2: Actually, theater manifested itself at Public School 74 [P.S. 74, Hamlin Park School; P.S. 74, Hamlin Park Claude and Ouida Clapp Academy, Buffalo, New York].  I was in plays in school.  I don't recall the names of the plays, but I remember walking across the stage.  I can remember going to rehearsals, and I enjoyed it.  I enjoyed--it was a way for me to talk to people and not be nervous, because somehow I think in my mind, I thought it wasn't me.  It was this other me, the theater person who was out there on stage.  And it was big fun.  So I did that in, at 74, and then I did some public speaking in middle school [West Hertel Middle School; P.S. 94, West Hertel Academy, Buffalo, New York].  In high school, I don't recall doing any theater work in high school, and I don't think that theater came into my life until after law school [Northeastern University School of Law, Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you have a sense when you were in high school of the country's going through like a black arts explosion in a lot of ways.  A lot of theater groups were starting, and dance groups were getting, getting off the ground.  Did, did, did you have a sense of that in Buffalo [New York] in those days?
Speaker 2: I did, and, and after--actually, there were some very active theater companies, musical companies, and I always wanted to sing.  In fact, one day I came home from piano lessons, and I said to my mom [Mary Lue Loveless Westbrook], "Mom, I don't want to take piano lessons anymore."  Sometimes that--you know, I shouldn't be so (laughter) bold with my mom, but she said, "Well, you're going to take them for another year at least.  And then if you want to switch, we'll do something else.  What do you want to do?"  And I said I want to sing.  And we went to plays sometimes, the family, and I would see people on stage.  They would sing.  They would sound so beautiful, and I wanted to do that.  So, I took piano for another year.  And my piano teacher was also a voice teacher, a singing teacher, so I started taking singing lessons.  And there was an audition in Buffalo.  I don't recall what it was for, but it was for a play.  I think it was a black production company, and I--'Summertime' was the song.  That was the song I was going to do for my audition.  And there was a pianist there.  All eyes were on me.  I was so ready, rehearsed it with my teacher.  Piano gave me my cue.  I opened my mouth.  Nothing came out, not one thing (laughter).  It was, it was awful.  It was so traumatic.  I was in tears in like a second.  I couldn't handle it, I, I just couldn't.  And the director, he said do it again, feel free; do it again.  And the piano started again, and I heard my cue.  And I probably got out maybe two bars, and I just couldn't finish.  So that was it for my singing career (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) We're gonna pause and change.  I guess sometimes it's just not meant to be.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) No.
Story_ID: 421438
Speaker 1: High school now, when you were a senior, then what did you project as your career?  Did you have any idea?
Speaker 2: No, I had none.  Sort of the idea of saving the world entered my mind, but I didn't quite know how, how I was going to do that.  So, I started applying for colleges, and after going to an all-girls high school [Mount St. Joseph's Academy, Buffalo, New York], I was determined to go to a coed college.  So I applied to several and had decided on Boston College [Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts].  I thought that would be a great fit for me.  And I had been accepted, and then sometime--I think it was July, end of July, early August--almost the time I was ready to go to school, my parents [Mary Lue Loveless Westbrook and Quinton Westbrook] got a letter and apparent- and I guess there had been some problem with on-campus housing.  And I still had a spot in the school, but I would have to live off-campus.  Well, that did not work for my parents at all.  So, they had friends at Russell Sage [Russell Sage College, Troy, New York].  My sister, one of my older sisters had graduated from there.  And they called and asked if there were any spaces available, and they said a couple, have her fly up for an interview.  So I went to Russell Sage for an interview.  And much, much to my dismay, they accepted me.  I did not want to go to an all-women's college.  I'd just gone to an all-girls school, did not want to go to an all-women's college--went kicking and screaming, and, but my mother and was very, well, she just said I'm going.  I, I really didn't have a choice.  But my father more, was more diplomatic and said, I'll tell you what, if you, you go for one year, if you don't like it at the end of the year, you may transfer to any college that you want to go to.  So I thought that was a fair deal.  And I went to Russell Sage, and I have not regretted one minute, maybe because, maybe it was just who I am, that shy person.  I could get up at eight o'clock in the morning.  I, I was never one--I, I mean my hair does what it wants to do.  And so I could go into class eight o'clock in the morning, not worried about, you know the engineer who is cute being in the class because he wasn't there.  It was all women.  But not only that, it was a time when I got to talk about my ideas in a classroom.  And I can remember that I, I just felt more accepted in that type of environment.  I didn't feel like I was competing with men.  And I think it gave me time and an opportunity to grow into my own and have more confidence to then go out and be competitive with men, women, and the like.  I grew a lot, a whole lot in college.  Many people, I think if you would talk to them about me, they will tell you that I've never fully grown up, and there's a part of me that probably never will.  I like being a kid.  I, I like doing spontaneous things and the like.  I, I hope that's always a part of, of me.  But academically, I just excelled.  I, I, I, I really can't articulate it.  It was almost everything I did I was able to excel in.  During that time, it, this college was very small.  It only had, I think there were eleven hundred women in the entire school, and so my class was very small.
Story_ID: 421439
Speaker 1: And I can only remember maybe four or five people of color in my class.
Speaker 2: This would mean African Americans or of--
Speaker 1: Of--African Americans; I, I think there was an Asian person, so it, it was not a lot of diversity, but yet and still to the college's [Russell Sage College, Troy, New York] credit, we had--what did we call it--an inter- intercultural center, whereby they were trying to promote diversity.  Well, in my senior year, and, and I, for whatever reason, maybe encouragement of friends, decided to run for president for the student government.  And I was elected president of the student government.  And during that time, shortly after I was elected president, the school had made a decision to close the intercultural center.  Well, I decided just to take matters into my own hands.  I read about and heard my sisters talk about the Civil Rights Movement and the sit-ins and the like.  So I was like, we're gonna have a sit-in at the intercultural center.  Now just imagine this: small town--
Speaker 2: This (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) not a lot of diversity.
Speaker 2: This is Troy, New York, right?
Speaker 1: Troy, New York, and I'm having a sit-in at the intercultural center--newspaper--oh, probably only one town newspaper, but the newspaper was there.  And I don't remember the entire article, but one thing sticks with me, is when the president of the college said--it was in print--he said, "I'm so disappointed in Jolette [HistoryMaker Jolette Westbrook] for having the sit-in."  I didn't feel good about the sit-in at that time, but the intercultural center was not closed.  And so, I wonder if that brought some needed attention to the fact that there wasn't a lot of diversity on campus; we needed mechanisms; we needed tools to try to promote diversity.  I don't know, but I will say, that the president and I, we worked very well together.  Sort of after that bumpy start, we worked well together.  I honestly think to this day that he respected me, and I, I certainly respected him.  And it, it was just another good experience for me, another way that I was able to grow in college.  And--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So the, the president was a male, and the, the--
Speaker 1: Oh yes.
Speaker 2: All the students were female, but the faculty was mixed in terms of--
Speaker 1: The faculty was mixed.  Without giving a numbers--without being--oh, I can't be precise, but my recollection is that except for the nursing school, most of the faculty members were men.
Story_ID: 421440
Speaker 1: What is the origin of Russell Sage College [Troy, New York], and who is Russell Sage?
Speaker 2: It's, I, I don't--I think I knew at one time, but I do not recall, so I can't tell you the origin.  But I will tell you this: again, to the school's credit, not too many years ago, I received a letter in the mail because they were considering going coed.  And they asked the alumni to vote on whether or not they wanted it to remain all-female or go coed.  And my vote was to remain all-female.  The college listened to the votes, and the school remained all-female, because just an overwhelming number of people wanted it to remain.  And so, I, I think there are other people like me who went to Russell Sage who really got something special out of an education where the setting was all women.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  What, what do you think the major advantage is, you know?
Speaker 2: Well, there was less distractions, to be quite honest.  RPI, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute [Troy, New York], where all the engineers and all the men were, it was a bus ride away, fifteen minutes away.  So it was almost like we could take the social part, in, in terms of the dating and the like, get that out of the classroom.  That wasn't even a factor.  We went to class to explore what we were learning about, to talk about new ideas.  It, it helped to focus our education, helped to focus our thinking, and at least for me, helped to build my confidence.
Story_ID: 421441
Speaker 1: Did you get involved in theater in, in college [Russell Sage College, Troy, New York]?
Speaker 2: No, I, I was, I was busy in college.  I was, I played varsity volleyball, and we actually went to the state championships in my junior year.  So no, I did not get involved in theater.  I did do something very interesting.  In one January term we would go for one semester and then have concentrated study for January.  And then another semester I did a pictorial history, again, drawing on my photography skills.  I did a pictorial history of the Bloomsbury Group.  A friend of mine, we, another--I think I was a junior at the time--we went to England for J-term, as we called it, for January.  And we mapped out a route whereby we went to, took pictures of, wrote stories about authors like Virginia Woolf, Lytton Strachey.  And it was such a nice experience.  I enjoyed the travel.  I just enjoyed traveling.  I think it was the first time I had oxtail soup.  And again, just another vehicle was available for me to go out and spread my wings.  It was great.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this, a pictorial history of the, what group you said?
Speaker 2: Of the Bloomsbury Group.
Speaker 1: Bloomsbury, okay.
Speaker 2: Right.  That was, as I said Lytton Strachey, Virginia Woolf, Quentin Bell.  I can't remember others in that group; a group of writers basically.
Story_ID: 421442
Speaker 1: What was your major in college?
Speaker 2: It started as undeclared.  It went to English.  And I left the college with a B.S. in criminal science.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so was, was your father [Quinton Westbrook] an influences in terms of your majoring in criminal science?
Speaker 2: I think that he was.  But also, I, I think what's really sparked my interest, was I took a, a course in constitutional law.  And even to this day, it's amazing to me how one document can be interpreted in so many ways.  I, I do remember the head of the criminal science program at Russell Sage [Russell Sage College, Troy, New York], he pushed us.  I, I, I have to admit sometimes I, I got--he was a very well-known, well-respected criminal attorney in the, in the area.  And he wanted us, for example, to see an autopsy.  I, I, I, I, I couldn't do that.  I, like, faint at the sight of blood. I'm, I'm not the person to do that.  But he did try to push us.  He pushed us with our mind.  He just helped us to look at both sides of a coin.  It was like, don't accept the first thing you hear, ask questions.  See if there's another way.  So I think he also influenced me in first getting a degree in criminal science.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what, what was his name again?
Speaker 2: Dr. Barsamian [J. Albert Barsamian].
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: And I can't help you with the spelling of that one (laughter).  So he, he was a good influence.
Story_ID: 421443
Speaker 1: When you were a senior in college [Russell Sage College, Troy, New York], where, what, what were your plans?  Had you planned to go to graduate school or to law school or?
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't know what my plans were.  I thought maybe I could use my criminal science background, get a job maybe in a forensic lab or something, but again, that stuff made me a little queasy.  I had, back then, I really felt that I had really big shoes to fill, a, a, a father [Quinton Westbrook] who was very successful by also sisters, siblings.  I had one sister who was, who had already graduated from law school, another sibling going into medical school.  And so my world became medical school or law school.  And again, because I don't do well in medical situations, I opted for law school.  And the other thing that helped me was, because I worked very hard in, in, in college, and I thought well, can I--do I want to keep going to law school or do I want to take a break?  Well, that question was answered by my parents.  There's no breaks, you go.  So you, you just do it, and you finish with it.  So there's not a question later of, how am I going to pay for it?  You just, you're in the mode of school.  You just keep doing it.  Whatever you're doing to pay for it, you just keep doing it.  I, I worked during college, like, in the cafeteria or as a RA [resident advisor], things like that.
Story_ID: 421444
Speaker 1: So I decided on law school, and I chose Northeastern [Northeastern University School of Law] in Boston [Massachusetts] primarily because of their co-op program.  And what I mean by that is, after going to school from September, I think we had to go through August.  Then we could take three months and work in the field, so the class was split in two.  Half would do internships, and half would stay in school.  And we did that for the remainder of law school.  So it was about a year and a half of in school for three months, doing internships for three months.  And that helped me get a feel for the type of law that I wanted to practice.  And so that was, that was a good fit for me.  I did my--some of my co-ops I, I worked at the parole board in New York State.  And the one that really, I think, shaped my early career was with legal services.  I worked with Greater Boston Legal Services [Boston, Massachusetts] during my internships.  And there are courtrooms in the state, at least back then--I don't know if they're still applicable--whereby if you had taken certain courses, you could go into court and work on certain types of cases, as long as there was a supervising attorney.  And so I, I worked on divorce cases.  I think that's primarily what I did.  And I liked being in the courtroom.  But more than that, it was talking with the people I was going to help.  And sometimes the stories would be very sad.  And even back then it was hard for me to sort of separate my work from my life, to say, listen to maybe what turns out to be horror stories during the day.  And then at five o'clock pick up a briefcase and say, oh, well, I can now go to my happy life.  That's not the way it worked for me, because there are people who are hurting, people who needed help.  And I, I think I remarked earlier in our conversation that I, I knew I wanted to save the world, and I really started off thinking that I could save the world.  And the more cases I did in law school and out of law school, the more I realized that I couldn't save the world and that I needed to narrow my sights.  And if I could really touch the life of one person, then I was, I've, I've done a good thing.  And so that's how my focus of life changed from law school to now.  It's, it's like, as much as I would like to save the world, I, I sort of have to pick at it by helping one person.  Then maybe I can help two, then three, and I can move.  I guess I no longer have the illusion that I can save the world, but I, I do believe that I have helped, and, and that does make me feel good.
Story_ID: 421445
Speaker 1: Was there any aspect of law school [Northeastern University School of Law, Boston, Massachusetts] that was tougher than, than you thought?
Speaker 2: What was very tough for me initially was the thinking on my feet in the classroom.  There was the Socratic Method, whereby the professor could call on you and question, question, question.  And somehow that didn't feel very comfortable to me, and that was difficult.  But I had to learn to respond.  I had to learn how to think on my feet, so that, that was difficult.  The, the, the book, reading books, I've, I've always liked to read, so that wasn't a difficult part.  It was more the, as I said, thinking on the feet and responding quickly.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So you, you graduated with a J.D. in--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --what, what year was that when--
Speaker 2: I graduated in 1981.
Story_ID: 421446
Speaker 1: Now you had worked as an intern in this co-operative situation (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: So did you have an arrangement with a firm that--did you know a firm that you were gonna try to work for?
Speaker 2: No.  After--I think the way it went, there was some, like a college--not a college, but a job fair, whereby there were different law firms, different public entities that came to the school [Northeastern University School of Law, Boston, Massachusetts] to interview.  And I was very interested in working for the public defenders in New Hampshire.  Why New Hampshire, I'm not sure.  But I remember talking with the person, and he said, "You know, you may have a difficult time."  I don't remember what small town it was in New Hampshire.  He said, "You may have a difficult time because there are not a lot of black people in this particular town.  It may be tough for you."  I decided not to go to New Hampshire.  Instead, decided to work with legal services in Michigan.  Interestingly enough, the director of that program basically gave me the same message, that you may encounter racism; it may be difficult for you here.  But I decided I wanted legal services.  I was going to Michigan.
Speaker 1: So the place you, you selected was a place I guess out in the rural communities of Michigan or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Rural community.  Where I lived, most nights I never took my key out of the front door, I mean on the outside.  I didn't lock the doors, nothing.  I, I, I just, it was very rural.  I, I didn't worry.
Speaker 1: So there's no traffic (laughter)--
Speaker 2: What's that?
Speaker 1: No traffic out there?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no.
Speaker 1: Now what, what town were you in?
Speaker 2: I lived in Bay City [Michigan] and--
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now Bay City, that's not Upper Peninsula [UP], is it, or, or is it?
Speaker 2: It's not quite, but it's in the northern part.  It's not the UP.  But my office was in Midland [Michigan], and then we serviced communities north of that.  And I was in a small office.  And there was one other African American attorney in the legal services system, but he worked, I think he was in Saginaw, Michigan.  So our offices weren't close by.  But it, it was, I found that people who needed help, they, they seemed for the most part to look beyond the color of my skin; help was help.  I, I was just, just trying to think if I ever had a client who was a person of color at that agency, and I'm, I'm just not sure anymore.  But--
Speaker 1: What about Native Americans or--
Speaker 2: I'm, I, I was thinking Native American.  Again, I, I don't recall having a client that was Native American, but I could be mistaken.  It's been a, a few years.  I didn't stay in Michigan for a long time.  There was a very controversial case.  And I'm not saying that they were connected, but the tires on my car were slashed.  I went to get my car one day.  And I just was very uneasy and knew that I could not live somewhere where I was that uneasy.  And again, I'm not even sure if they were connected, but I left.  And I ended up back in Buffalo [New York] for a little bit until I decided what I wanted to do.  And then I came to Boston [Massachusetts], or back to Massachusetts, and worked for legal services.
Story_ID: 421447
Speaker 1: You came back to, to Boston, to Boston Legal Services [Greater Boston Legal Services, Boston, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Yes, I--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --came back.  I didn't come back to Boston Legal Services.  I actually worked for Mass, Massachusetts Law Reform [Massachusetts Law Reform Institute, Boston, Massachusetts]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --which provided support staff for legal services offices throughout the country.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then I worked for Southeastern Mass Legal Services [Southeastern Massachusetts Legal Assistance Corporation].  And that was tough and rewarding.  What I did there--and, and actually let me backtrack.  Before I went to Southeastern Mass Legal Services I worked with a small law firm.  And I think the experiences there will stay with me for the rest of my life.  It has changed me in so many different ways, and let me explain.
Speaker 1: What law firm was it?
Speaker 2: It was a law firm.  The name of it was Dawkins, D-A-W-K-I-N-S, and Quarles, Q-U-A-R-L-E-S [Dawkins and Quarles], two African American attorneys, Henry Quarles, Quarles and Reuben Dawkins.  And Mr. Quarles, when I started working for him, I don't know his age, but if I had to guess, he was seventy-ish.  Had made, he had made such a contribution to the juvenile law system in the state.  He's just a wonderful teacher and mentor.  He took me under his wings.  I, I never could call him by his first name, just out of respect.  It was always Mr. Quarles.  And interesting enough, he never called me by my first name.  He called me--well, not my first name alone--he called me Lady Jolette [HistoryMaker Jolette Westbrook].  If we were in court, that's how he would address me.  If we were in the office, just the two of us, that's how he would address me.  We had I think some of the toughest cases.  We took court-appointed cases in the areas of, basically, abuse and neglect of children, care and protection cases they're called in the state.  We had care and protection cases, and we had criminal cases.  And most of them were court-appointed, and so the court would say whether or not we were representing the mother or the child or the like.
Story_ID: 421448
Speaker 1: I can remember--a, a, a couple of cases stick in my mind.  One, I was representing a little girl who was bruised.  She had been beaten, such a sweetie.  And this is when I said it's hard for me to separate my work from my life.  I couldn't do it at all in these cases.  I can remember in the courtroom having the brother on the stand, and I was cross-examining him.  I, I couldn't let it go until he said that he had hit that little girl, which I believed was the case, in which the evidence had led me to believe.  But yet and still, after it was all over, I had to say to myself, so tell me what good came out of this?  You were able to get a confession from someone on the stand.  The little girl is now going to be taken out of her home.  And of course, then the other side of me will say, well, the good thing is that that little girl is going to be protected, and that's true.  But the, the other questions would follow: well, what about her family?  Who is she going to live with?  How will she be cared with?  How will it scar her to be in a foster care setting?  And, and these are the types of cases that I dealt with for years.
Speaker 2: Now, now in that's, this particular case, was the brother the primary care provider for the little girl?
Speaker 1: No.  The brother was just in the home.
Speaker 2: Was he--how much older--was he older than her?
Speaker 1: He, oh, he was much older.  He was much older, and so the parents would go out.  The brother, sibling was at home to care for the young child.  And it just wasn't working and, unless the brother was out of the home, you know, then it would be okay for the daughter maybe to go back to the home.  But there was just not a lot of cooperation with the family as a unit, and this little girl did have to leave the home.  And I, I, I mean, I witnessed just in, in the courthouse, where--and, and I'm not saying all my cases--but where children would be told that you can't go home with mommy and daddy, and their reaction.  I, I mean it--oh, I would be in a probation office and you know, see all this.  It, it, for me, it goes back to the family.  There has to be a strong family unit.  I mean, maybe if the parents were able to control this brother, and some people maybe you can't control, but I just wish it could have had a better ending.  Somehow I wanted to wave my magic wand and make this family unit complete, make everyone happy so this little girl didn't have to leave her home.  That--I, I don't know.  That, that was just an example of a case that was really--that created a lot of tension between what my legal responsibilities were and what I was feeling personally.  I just couldn't separate myself from that case at all.
Story_ID: 421449
Speaker 1: Another case that sticks in my mind is a young person had been picked up for solicitation, possession of a hypodermic, possession of controlled substances.  And judge was in--well, judges have a tough time, but he set a very high bail on this young woman.  And I immediately appealed it to superior court.  It was a long bail hearing in superior court.  And they--I think it was knocked down to five hundred cash, which, which is where I thought it should have been in the beginning.  Well, I spent all day in court on this case, felt good about the result.  I thought it was a fair result.  And, and that's what I tried to do, is to rees- achieve fairness, some equity.  I thought it was a good result.  I knew I had to be in court on another matter the next day.  And so I went back to the law firm [Dawkins and Quarles] and gathered my stuff to work at home, left, came back the next morning, and I walked into the courthouse.  And one of the guards said, "Hey, Westbrook [HistoryMaker Jolette Westbrook], I have a friend of yours in lockup."  Went into lockup, same person had been picked up.  And I had to sit down, and I spoke with Mr. Quarles [Henry Quarles].  And I said, "Why are we doing this?  Are we making a difference?  Are we helping anyone?"  If we work hard, try to achieve some just results, and then it's all for naught; we just have to do the same thing again.  And we talked for a long time, and not only that day, but many other days about contributions we were making.  And in my heart of heart, I just wanted to believe that I was doing something to help one young person.  But it, it was, it was hard to see.  I mean, yes, at the end of a case I'd get a thank you, usually from the parents.  And I mean the young person would be appreciative, but you know, I, I, I didn't know whatever happened to them.
Story_ID: 421450
Speaker 1: One day, maybe about six or seven years ago, I was walking in downtown Boston [Massachusetts].  And a woman came up to me with tears in her eyes, and she said, "Do you remember me?"  And I, I said something like, "I'm, I'm sorry; your face looks familiar, but I, I can't place you."  And she said, "You represented my daughter in juvenile court," and she said, "I just want to thank you."  She said, "You provided such a good role model for her that she turned her life around.  She graduated from college."  And I came back to my office; I closed the door, and I cried.  That's the one--it came back to me.  I helped at least one person.  It, I mean it, it, it may not be a big thing to anyone else, but for me, I was able to take someone by the hand and help them, just like my father [Quinton Westbrook] and mother [Mary Lue Loveless Westbrook] took me by the hand and helped me.  And I just wish that, for every young person out there, that there was someone to take them by the hand and help them. I just, this, it's just not enough that's being done in my opinion by those people who have achieved some success in life.  And, and that's the thing.  In my opinion, you don't have to have a lot of money.  You don't have to have a prestigious career.  You, you just have to have compassion and know that it's tough out here for the kids.  When, when I represented kids in criminal court, what I heard time and time again was, okay, I'm gonna go out; I'm going to get--I'm going to take what I want because if I don't take it, there's no guarantee that in the future, number one, I'm going to be alive to get it.
Story_ID: 421451
Speaker 1: And I'm like, what, what happened to the mentality of this is society where we have fourteen and fifteen year-old kids, kids who are worried about dying, who are worried that if they walk out in the street, they could be gunned down, gunned down?  Why, what, what happened?  What did we do wrong?  What did I do wrong?  I, I can't point the finger at anyone else.  Maybe there was more that I could have done.  I get very passionate about young people and what the society is not doing to help them.  I get very upset when I read about what's going on in the public school systems with--it's, it's the whole fabric of our society, I believe, is eroding, and I don't know the solution.  And, and it just bothers me a lot, and I, I wish I could do more.  And you may ask, because I've asked myself, well, missy, if you feel this way about young people and trying to help them, why are you in a job that deals with--that doesn't deal with young people?  And the answer to that is that I knew that I could not separate myself from my work.  I, I don't, as my, as my father [Quinton Westbrook] said, I don't have thick skin.  And you know what?  That's okay, because I think this world needs some of the thin-skinned people like me to make it a better place, so it's okay.  So, I love what I'm doing.  I think that I still, I'm a public servant.  In my job I contribute to society in different ways.  But yet and still, I can give back; I teach.  I like--I, I teach children's church.  I, I, I do what I can to help young people.  If I get a call from a friend--can you talk with my son or daughter?  Can you--they don't seem to be getting it.  Can you spend some time with them?  Well, yes, that, that's part of my role as, as a human being, as a, as, as a African American, as a black woman, whatever you want to call me; that is part of my role, to help, just like I've been helped.  I have no idea what your question was, and I'm sorry (laughter).
Story_ID: 421452
Speaker 1: So you were with--
Speaker 2: Oh, Dawkins and Quarles (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Dawkins and Quarles--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Henry [Henry Quarles] and Reuben [Reuben Dawkins]--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --Henry Quarles and Reuben--
Speaker 1: That was before you, you worked for South--
Speaker 2: Legal Services.
Speaker 1: --Southeastern--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Michigan Legal Services [sic. Southeastern Massachusetts Legal Assistance Corporation].
Speaker 2: And, and I would (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, that's--you, you said it changed your life, and it was--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it, it did, because it, it reinforced the fact that even though I cannot singlehandedly change the world, I can--I have to keep trying to pick at a little piece to help, because the problem is huge.  I saw it in juvenile court; I saw it in criminal court.  And I think prior to that, I had blinders on.  I thought, well, you know, it's not really that many kids who are in trouble with the law.  Don't know where I got that from, but that was--
Speaker 1: Yeah, juvenile--
Speaker 2: --wrong.
Speaker 1: --court will--
Speaker 2: Yes, it'll--
Speaker 1: --I mean a visit to juvenile court by any--I think everybody ought to go once--
Speaker 2: Oh--
Speaker 1: --just to see the number--
Speaker 2: I quite agree.
Speaker 1: --of cases, if nothing else.
Speaker 2: I quite agree.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's just--
Speaker 2: And, and so from there, I, I went to legal services.  And that actually was another very emotional job in the sense that--
Speaker 1: So how did you manage to leave?  What, what happened that you left--
Speaker 2: With Dawkins and Quarles--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --well, Mr. Quarles actually got ill and could not assume his caseload.  And I handled cases for quite a, for--I don't know if it was a year, months or what, after he got ill.  And then I realized that I needed to get a little more stability in my working life.  I knew that I still wanted to do some sort of public service work.  I knew I had enjoyed the legal services work that I did in the past, and so I sought more legal services jobs.
Story_ID: 421453
Speaker 1: And this one was different.  Maybe I did a couple of divorces, but my primary work was, I worked a lot on elder issues, elderly abuse; housing evictions, tried to keep people in their houses; lots of, some disability work, tried to get people their rightful benefits from various agencies.  And again, it was day in, day out assisting people who were in real need.  I mean, lots of these people, if they were evicted from their homes, they had nowhere to go but on the street.  So--
Speaker 2: So is this, this a public-funded--
Speaker 1: Legal services, yes.
Speaker 2: Southeastern Massachusetts [Southeastern Massachusetts Legal Assistance Corporation]?
Speaker 1: When I, when I worked for legal services, there were a lot of public funds, and I think that's still the case.  There are grants that are given to legal services offices by various entities.  So it wasn't a money-making proposition by any stretch of the imagination.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So I, I stayed there, and, and I, I worked there for--I, I, don't remember--maybe a couple of years.  And I actually ended up managing three offices: the Brockton [Massachusetts], the Fall River [Massachusetts], and the New Bedford [Massachusetts] offices.
Speaker 2: So this is from 1985 to what?
Speaker 1: No, this was actually, I, I think it was, seemed like in the '80s [1980s].  But yes, it had to be the '80s [1980s]; it was in the '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: Earlier than '85 [1985]?
Speaker 1: Or, or thereabout.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, thereabout.
Story_ID: 421454
Speaker 1: And so when I left SEMLS, Southeastern Mass Legal Services [Southeastern Massachusetts Legal Assistance Corporation], I do believe that I stayed again in public service.  I, I did a couple of things during that time.  I worked in the consumer division [Massachusetts Executive Office of Consumer Affairs and Business Regulation] at the Department of Public Utilities [Massachusetts Department of Public Utilities].  I was the director of the state-run Lemon Law Arbitration Program.  I did a couple of things in that time span, career, career-wise.  And then I ended up at the Department of Telecommunications and Energy [Massachusetts Department of Telecommunications and Energy], where I am today.
Speaker 2: Now that's, that's 1989.  Is that, is that correct?  I've got--
Speaker 1: Well, I actually came to the Siting Board [Massachusetts Energy Facilities Siting Board] in '91 [1991].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I think in '89 [1989] I was in the consumer division at the DPU.  And then I may have made a--I think I was the director of the Lemon Law Arbitration Program for about a year.  And then I came to where I am in 1991.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right, so, now, now what--can you kind of give us an examp- well, an idea of what, what do you do here in this office?
Speaker 1: Well, what do, what I do here is whenever developers want to construct major energy facilities, such as generating plants, or they want to build major transmission lines or a gas pipeline, it's the office that I work in that actually hears the evidence.  We sit as the presiding officer.  And after we hear the evidence, we question the witnesses, and we write a decision as to whether or not an entity can construct a facility in this state.  The process is a long process.  It may take up to three years, depending on the complexity of the case.  And we look at environmental issues.  For certain cases we look at whether or not the facility is needed.  In the very controversial facilities, which, because energy is such a, a major topic, we find that many cases are controversial, and we have what we call an adjudicatory hearing, whereby anyone who can demonstrate that they may be substantially and specifically affected by the proceeding.  For example, maybe they're going to--maybe they live across the street from a proposed facility and could see it and could hear it, they could petition to intervene in the case and become a party in the case.  So they are quasi-judicial matters that we hear here.
Story_ID: 421455
Speaker 1: Well, we're living in an age where there are alternative sources of energy are being developed and are--well, they've been developed for many years, but now they are actually going into use.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, can you give us an example of maybe some of the, the, I guess--are they petitions before the, your body [Massachusetts Department of Telecommunications and Energy] or?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And I, I will just clarify that I am the director of the siting division.  Prior to that I was the general counsel to the Siting Board [Massachusetts Energy Facilities Siting Board], and the Siting Board is actually the nine, a nine-member board appointed by the governor that votes and actually makes the final decision.  So we, as staff, will hear the case.  We take care of all of the day-to-day functions for the board.  We hear the case, and then we issue a, what we call, a tentative decision, which is a draft decision.  And that is, we present it to the board in an open meeting, meaning the public can come.  And the board deliberates and decides whether or not to accept the tentative decision as written, amend the tentative decision, or to reject it.  So getting back to your question, renewables, yes, it's, there are lots of new technologies.  And as you pointed out, they've been around, but they're coming into commercial use.  And one notable case is the agency that I work for, we approved construction of the transmission lines that would carry power from the first proposed offshore wind farm in the U.S. to the electric grid.  That decision was approved by the board and was subsequently appealed to this, to the Supreme Judicial Court, which is the highest state court, which is where all of our decisions, if they are appealed, that's where they're heard.  The court handed down a decision in December of 2006, stating that the board's decision was the right decision based on the evidence that was presented.  The court affirmed the decision, and, and thereby the developers, when they meet the conditions that we made out in, in our decision, they can construct the transmission lines.  So that's one example.
Speaker 1: But--
Story_ID: 421456
Speaker 1: What possible objection would people have to a wind farm?  You know, it wouldn't, it won't pollute (unclear) I mean, you would think.  But what, what's the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well they--
Speaker 1: --yeah, what is the opposition there?
Speaker 2: Well, you're right in the sense that the, it wouldn't be emissions like a fossil fuel plant, like even a gas fire plant, a clean gas fire plant.  It wouldn't have the same emissions, but yet and still you have to remember that there are other environmental impacts.  There's marine life, and there was concern about impacts to recreational boating.  I mean there would be wind towers in the middle of a water body.  So there were many environmental concerns raised, and all of those issues were looked at.  We, we look at several, and there are other state agencies that, that look at others.  But it was, it was an interesting case because it was the first time that this agency [Massachusetts Department of Telecommunications and Energy] has dealt with an offshore wind farm.  And even though the wind farm itself is in federal waters, and therefore the feds have jurisdiction over the wind farm itself, since we had jurisdiction over the transmission lines, we had to look at components of, of the wind farm.  So it was a first for us.  It was exciting.  Another first involves offshore L and G, liquefied natural gas facilities.  We've been involved in those.  Biomass is another technology that is up and coming.  So it's--part of the attraction of my current job is that no two cases are the same.  We're always thinking.  We're always applying the law to new fact scenarios.  And, and I find that very exciting, I do, so that, that has kept me here.  But this is a job where I'm, I am pretty passionate about energy issues, about environmental issues, because I think it's helping to protect for the future.  And since it's the children who will be living in the future, and I care passionately about children, I, I still feel like I'm doing my part.  I'm a public servant.  I'm very happy doing what I do.  I've never really been attracted to going to the major law firms.  That's just not me, and, and I've learned to make peace with that.
Story_ID: 420142
Speaker 1: Now you started this in 1990--you started this, this particular job in 1991.
Speaker 2: Correct, I started--
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: --in 1991 with this agency [Massachusetts Department of Telecommunications and Energy] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were, were you appointed or, or, or how did it--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --how did it happen?
Speaker 2: I, I was hired.  And I worked in various roles as hearing officers, acting assistant general counsel, as acting director, and then, then in the role of director for a little over a year now.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there, are there, I mean, in terms of the kinds of put, put, petitions that come to your office, are you optimistic that the country is going to adopt alternative sources of energy fast enough to make a difference?
Speaker 2: I think that, yes, there will be adoption of new technologies.  How quickly, I think that is still somewhat of, of a question.  I think that we're almost at a point of no choice.  I think there are many people who recognize that fixes have to be made.  And maybe we've waited a little too long to try to be innovative, to get cleaner technologies to protect the environment.  Yet and still, there's a place for, for example, fossil fuels when we need energy quickly, for example.  And technology has come a long way with gas and oil to make them much cleaner.  I think there has to be a balance.  I don't think that necessarily renewables can handle the megawatt load that will be necessary to run the grid nationwide.  But I think that there has to be a balance.  And it, it's funny, because when I said that, what ran through my mind was, isn't that life?  Doesn't that sum up life?  There has to be a balance.  It seems like things get out of kilter when the pendulum swings too far one way or the other.  It's, there has to be a balance.  So that's, that's what I see.  I, I see us balancing the renewable with some of the traditional technologies, but it, it's exciting; it's really exciting.  I, I feel like, I, I feel like I'm really on the forefront of this energy issue, and I like it.
Story_ID: 420143
Speaker 1: So, what are your future plans?  Do, do you think that you'll retire from this agency [Massachusetts Department of Telecommunications and Energy], or, or do you have other plans?
Speaker 2: I, I don't know what I'm going to do because I never say never, because when I do I get into trouble.  I never say never, and I look forward to opportunities.  Like if a door opens, I, I, you know, weigh whether or not that's good for me.  But if I had a wish list, I, I would like to stay within this agency until--I'd, I'd like to see some more renewables get permitted.  And I'd like to see the whole energy situation balance out a little bit.  And then I wouldn't mind acting.  I enjoy the theater.  I'd like--I did a little bit of it, don't know if I could ever make a living at it, but I--it's, it's fun.  I, I like to--I, I don't want to say I, I like to entertain, but I like to share.  May- maybe that's why I like performing.  I, I like to share, and that would give me an opportunity to do such.  So, I don't, I don't know where life will take me, but I'm open to it.  I want to continue to help where I can.  I want to continue to teach where I can.  And I, I don't know if there's much more to say than that, in terms of the future.
Story_ID: 420144
Speaker 1: Are you organizationally--I mean what's your organization life?  Are you a member of organizations outside of work that are boards or--
Speaker 2: Well, outside of work, everything seemed--a lot seems to be connected to work.  For example, it's not, it's not energy, but I did serve on the governor's Judicial Nominating Commission, whereby I was one of several commissioners who interviewed candidates who wished to become judges in the state.  As I indicated earlier, I am active in my church.
Speaker 1: What, what's the name of our church here?
Speaker 2: Osterville Baptist Church [Osterville, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Can you spell that for us?
Speaker 2: O-S-T-E-R-V-I-L-L-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then I, I do what I consider very fun stuff.  I've coached basketball teams for the Y.  I am currently coaching, or I will be coaching again in the spring my daughter's [Mary Ann Aaron] soccer team.  I coach--I was the assistant coach this past fall, and I'll be the assistant coach again in the spring.  And I just have to say the coach is wonderful, but since this is on tape, the fall season, the kids played their hearts out.  They did not--they had not won any games.  We got to the last game.  I got a call from the coach saying that she was tied up at work; could I take over?  And I got to the soccer game, and there was another mom who was, who's very knowledgeable about soccer, and I asked her to give me a hand.  But anyway, we won the last game of the season, so (laughter), very glad to put that on tape.  We won one game in the fall season.  But again, there's an opportunity there.  There's an opportunity to teach children if--for example, I, I talked to the girls.  They, they may get upset about they missed a, the goal or something like that, and, and we'll talk.  It's--and again, I, I, I have to draw on my childhood and my experiences because that's the only thing I have to draw on.  But I know that growing up, if I was frustrated about something, my parents [Mary Lue Loveless Westbrook and Quinton Westbrook] would never say, "Oh, it'll get better," or "Don't worry about it."  And, and I should retract that.  They may say that; they may have said that, but they would put an explanation with it.  They would, they would ask me to talk about it.  They would say, "Well, why are you feeling like that?"  Or, "What do you think you could have done differently?" So that if that situation arises in the future, you could have a different result because isn't a definition of a fool a person who does the same thing over and over, and they expect a different result?  So, the, the, the talking through problems that my parents helped me with, when I'm coaching teams, I, if there's a situation that arises, I, I try to talk with them, to explain.  They're, they're children.  They, they are impressionable.  They can be molded.  They need guidance, not only at home, but in every aspect of their lives.  So I, I have fun doing things like that.
Story_ID: 420145
Speaker 1: And I'm happy to report that as of yet I have not been thrown out of one of my daughter's [Mary Ann Aaron] basketball games, but I may be getting close.  I, I think it was when I offered the referee my glasses, because I really think he made a bad call.  But it's, I, I work hard.  I have to work hard.  As a single parent, it's hard.  My, my husband [James Aaron] passed away.  And I think as a, as a, as a widow, that brings in yet another dynamic.  And so, and, and I feel that I have to be mother and father to my daughter.  And so, one thing that is so important is that I make her sports games, her basketball games.  I mean that, that's how we can connect.  I think parents and children have to find different levels on which they can connect.  It can't always be on the same level, not always, you know, schoolwork.  Well, yes, I help her with her homework, but fun stuff, the games.  We, we can, we can talk about what happened at a basketball game for weeks.  It's exciting.  I enjoy it.  It's, it's becoming a part of her life.  I, I think--but now I'm getting to, into my philosophy as a parent--that parents have to be involved in their child's life.  I don't understand how anyone can be a parent who sits on the side lines, to use a sports metaphor, and expect their child to be comfortable in their growing up.  Parents have to be active.  And, but please, don't get me wrong.  I've had this discussion with many people.  And those, they will make comments like: well, you can do that because you, you have a decent job; because you don't worry about where your next meal is going to come from; you have--your refrigerator is full, whereby mine may be empty.  Number one, my refrigerator was not always full; and number two, there's no guarantee for any of us in life that our refrigerators will always stay full.  But over and beyond that, even if your, you don't know where your next meal is coming from, that does not stop you from putting your arm around your child and saying I love you, or putting your arm around your child and asking them how did their day go; do, do they have anything that they want to talk about.  I don't know.  It, it's almost foreign to me that parents take these roles.  And, and even if, for whatever reason, a parent maybe doesn't have the ability to help a child, I'd like to think that there is extended family that would help.  And, and again, going back to how I was raised, Grandma King [Westbrook's maternal grandmother, Mary Alice King], Grandma King was there with us.  And even though she didn't have any legs, she was in a wheelchair, but yet when she said, you know, "Honey, what, what's wrong?"  We could talk to her.  When she said listen to your mother [Mary Lue Loveless Westbrook] and listen to your father [Quinton Westbrook], we obeyed that because we knew that she was connected with us; she was a part of our lives; we were all woven together.  And I, I would like to see that happening more today with parent, with extended family.  Again, it's getting back to the children.  And I, I know that I've talked about this issue now several times during this tape, and I think that you can see where my heart lies.  It's, it's all about the kids, all about the kids.
Story_ID: 420146
Speaker 1: We always ask this question: what, what are some of your hopes and concerns--I know you've already addressed it on some level--about the African American community today?
Speaker 2: My hope is that we can join hands, stop the violence.  I'd like for every child to go to bed with a roof over their head and the same roof over their head, versus moving from shelter to shelter, and a full tummy.  But the violence, both in the community has to stop, within the home has to stop.  It, it's, it's senseless to me.  I, I, I've never grasped the concept of why one person would want to hurt another, and especially if it's a family member.  I, I just, I, I don't get it.
Story_ID: 420147
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could do it over again?
Speaker 2: That's a good question (pause).  And I could say that maybe I would have wanted to handle, to work in the juvenile courts a little longer.  But for--if I change one thing in my life, everything else would change.  And I like the perspective that I have on life.  So I think that it's all of what has happened, the way that it has happened, that has turned me into the person I am today.  So I would be hesitant to say oh, yes, I would like to do this because it, it may affect something on the other end that I wouldn't like the results.  So, I, I, I don't know.  Short of saving the world, no (laughter).
Story_ID: 420148
Speaker 1: Well, I guess likewise, when you look at everything you've done to this point is, what today would you consider to be your legacy, if you had to, you know?
Speaker 2: I would say it would be the teaching, teaching about two principles: teaching about respect and teaching about love, because I believe if those two principles are engrained in a person, then there is no violence.  And I, I--don't misunderstand me.  People should have different opinions.  That's not what I'm talking about.  I'm talking about ensuring that different opinions are expressed in a very appropriate and healthy way.  So, I want to say that teaching, teaching about love, teaching about respect, I, I think that would be my legacy.  And I would be very proud if someone years from now would say, "I, I remember her, and she taught me this, or she taught me that."  I, I would be very proud and very honored.
Story_ID: 420149
Speaker 1: We talked about, you know, being a parent, but, so your, your family, right, now consists of you and your daughter [Mary Ann Aaron], right, your immediate--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --family?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And, and you said your father [Quinton Westbrook] had passed.  Is your mother [Mary Lue Loveless Westbrook] still alive, or?
Speaker 2: Life is interesting, and I, I will tell this story.  My father died very unexpectedly on January 23rd, 1991.  In fact, it was a few days after his funeral that I interviewed for a job here [Massachusetts Department of Telecommunications and Energy].  So he died on January 23rd, 1991.  My mother died on January 23rd, 1994.  I got a call from my doctor--I was pregnant at the time--who wanted me to come into the hospital to induce me on January 23rd, 1997, to have my daughter.  So it was the death of both parents and then the induction for my daughter to be born all on January 23rd.  So that's a real long way of saying both of my parents are deceased.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it's, it's, it's my daughter and I at this point, yes.
Story_ID: 420150
Speaker 1: Is there anything I have not asked you, you think, that we need to address before we, I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: Well, one thing; I may have touched on it, but I, I talked a little bit early on about travel.  And for--I, I just think it's interesting how I, and, and I can only personalize it, how I held such a narrow view of the world for so long.  There is so much out there.  I went to Malawi, which borders Mozambique.  And actually I had an opportunity to see some of the refugee camps in Mozambique.  This started--well--
Speaker 1: Is this recently or, or what?
Speaker 2: --what happened was in the '90s [1990s].  My husband [James Aaron] got a phone call, and he was asked to work with a government in Malawi.  And I decided that I would stay here and practice, but I would visit him in Malawi.  And he would call on a regular basis.  And I can remember, when he called he would say things like, "We've just hired a houseboy, we just hired a gardener."  And I was furious.  I'm like, "A houseboy?  Why are you using such archaic terms?"  And he said, "Come on, take a step back.  That is a defined job role in this country."  And he said, "We're gonna hire many, many people in this role and that role."  And then what I later found out was that the average Malawian at that time made the equivalent of a hundred U.S. dollars per year.  But the people they were hiring, they paid U.S. wages to, so these people were making a ton of money.  And, and once I understood, I was like, "How many more people can you hire?"  But beyond that, the first time I went to Malawi, it, it--I, I don't think I can articulate it.  I cried for days over the level of poverty.  Nothing I had read, no other country I had ever traveled to, prepared me for what I saw.  I--It's, it's, it's indescribable, the level of poverty.  And sometimes I wonder if people in this country could see firsthand.  And, and they probably don't even have to travel to Malawi to see what some other people are going through.  I think there would be more compassion for our fellow brothers and sisters, I really do.
Story_ID: 420151
Speaker 1: But in Malawi it was not only the poverty, but the AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] epidemic.  We were, when my husband signed his contract, we were told that basically if we got into any serious accident or had a serious injury, the likelihood is that we would die because there wasn't really adequate medical facilities, even though his contract had a provision where we would be airlifted to South Africa.
Speaker 2: Now--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --can you give us his name, and, and who did he--
Speaker 1: Oh, certainly.
Speaker 2: --work for?
Speaker 1: James Aaron, and he was a consultant.  At that time, he was consulting for De Leuw Cather [De Leuw, Cather and Company] out of Washington [D.C.], De Leuw, D-E-L-E-W [sic.], C-A-T-H-E-R.
Speaker 2: Okay, and what did, what did they do?
Speaker 1: Well, they provided support for--one umbrella of their office provided support to help governments to develop infrastructure.  And my husband did a lot of work with highway safety.  So he went to meet with the ministers of transportation and the like to try to develop infrastructure.  So it, it was, it was an awakening.  I, I can remember talking to him on the phone once, and I said, "Am I hearing gunshots outside?"  There was a civil unrest, gunshots right outside the house.  So again, there's a big world out there, and in America I think we get very comfortable, and we don't see what's out there.  And I, I just think it would help everyone's perspective if they did see it.  So that, that's something I, I just wanted to add.
Story_ID: 420152
Speaker 1: Well our last question is similar to legacy but a little different.  How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as a person who is not afraid to give, both to my family and to my community.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you.  It was enjoyable.
Story_ID: 419604
Speaker 1: From left to right is my sister, Shirley [Shirley Westbrook], Quinnette [Quinnette Westbrook Mathias], and in my mom's arms is Elaine [Elaine Westbrook Lewis].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Can you give us their names, father and mother's full names?
Speaker 1: Certainly.  My mother's name is Mary Lue Westbrook [Mary Lue Loveless Westbrook] and my dad's name, Quinton Westbrook.
Speaker 2: This a photograph of me with my sixth grade class at Public School 74 [P.S. 74, Hamlin Park School; P.S. 74, Hamlin Park Claude and Ouida Clapp Academy] in Buffalo, New York.  Dr. Hilliard [John T. Hilliard] was our teacher, the Reverend Dr. Hilliard.  And I am in the front row, the fourth from the right.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me at the baccalaureate ceremonies at Russell Sage College in Troy, New York.  I was president of the student government, and as such, at the baccalaureate I gave a speech.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my father giving me a kiss upon receipt of my juris doctorate degree from Northeastern University School of Law in Boston, Massachusetts, in 1981.
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of me.  I am guessing about the time but I would assume somewhere in the early '70s [1970s], maybe even the late '60s [1960s].  I look very happy.  I really can't tell you what I'm doing, but I have a smile on my face, so that's good.
Speaker 2: This is my father, Quinton Westbrook, in his uniform.  In addition to running the Westbrook's News Agency [Westbrook News Agency] distribution business, he was also a guard at the Erie County jail [Erie County Correctional Facility, Alden, New York].  He started as a guard and eventually was promoted to a captain's position.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me and my mother, Mary Lue Westbrook.  And we are all smiles because I have just received my juris doctorate from Northeastern University School of Law in 1981.
Speaker 2: This is a photograph of me at the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] Camp Forty Acres in Angola, New York, about one hour from Buffalo [New York].  I am on the top row, the second from the right.  And this picture was taken in 1964, and I was at camp for all summer.  It was an overnight camp.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Is that you here?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me.  I'm not sure of the exact date, but I do remember the coat.  And I did like that coat a lot, and obviously, I very much like hats as well.
