Story_ID: 15143
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, interviewer for the HistoryMakers, the videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir could you state your name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My name is Lloyd G. Wheeler. The last name is spelled W-H-E-E-L-E-R. The first name is spelled L-L-O-Y-D. Excuse me, scraping my throat.
Speaker 1: What does the G stand for?
Speaker 2: Garrison.
Speaker 1: Excuse me while I scrape my throat. Now this thing--I don't know, I can't clear it for some reason.
Speaker 2: Pause for a second. (Pause in interview). Sir, can you give us your date of birth and the year of your birth?
Speaker 1: I was born August the 26th, 1907.
Speaker 2: Can you give us today's date?
Speaker 1: Today is July--
Speaker 2: It's the 23rd.
Speaker 1: 23rd, 2002.
Speaker 2: Where are we at this time?
Speaker 1: I am in my home at 215 East 81st Street, Chicago [Illinois].
Story_ID: 15144
Speaker 1: What is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: A favorite color is pretty hard for me to define. I suppose a red, some shade of red would be.
Speaker 1: Okay, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: If I say my favorite food, I might be--I might be going counter to what I am permitted to eat. I have no special food likes of any kind. I like all foods, but at the present time, there are certain foods even though I like them, I am not supposed to eat them for certain medical conditions.
Speaker 1: Okay, what are those foods?
Speaker 2: Which is that?
Speaker 1: What are the foods that you like the most, but can't eat now?
Speaker 2: I like steaks, casseroles, and hard for me to say what foods I like because I like them all, but I just don't eat them all, for medical reasons.
Speaker 1: Okay, I just wanted to get in some of the ones you like but can't eat anymore. What is your favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I would say spring is my favorite time of the year.
Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Not anymore, I used to enjoy going down to my wife's home in Virginia, which was not a commercial vacation spot, but an enjoyable one. I never catered to the commercial vacation spots. It was usually always a family situation that I was involved in.
Speaker 1: What part of Virginia did you-?
Speaker 2: Southern part.
Speaker 1: Can you name a town in that part of Virginia?
Speaker 2: Yes, her home was in a place called Victoria, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Now, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I can't recall a favorite saying or I can't recall one right now.
Speaker 1: Is there something that you say all the time, that people might remember you by?
Speaker 2: That's hard to say, "Glad to say hi to you", something like that.
Story_ID: 15145
Speaker 1: What was your birthday again?
Speaker 2: August 26th, 1907.
Speaker 1: You were born where?
Speaker 2: I was born in St Joseph, Missouri.
Speaker 1: And your mother's name, can you state her name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Madge, M-A-D-G-E, Ann, A-N-N, Thomas, T-H-O-M-A-S
Speaker 1: And, do you know her birth date and where she was born?
Speaker 2: December 3rd 1883 in, (pause) as well as I know that name I can't recall it right now, it will come back to me.
Speaker 1: Your father?
Speaker 2: My father was born and raised in Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: And his name?
Speaker 2: Hiram H. Wheeler.
Speaker 1: And the H stands for?
Speaker 2: Hannibal.
Speaker 1: And he was born here in Chicago [Illinois] in what year?
Speaker 2: 1881.
Speaker 1: Did your mother and father have a story about how they met?
Speaker 2: I never heard the story from either of them, but I have heard it from other people. The mating was--the meeting was very coincidental. My father was a student at the University of Illinois [Urbana-Champaign], playing on the football team. And, during the off-season he would play basketball with a local group of boys who were not necessarily in college. At some point they scheduled a game in Broadlands, Illinois which is twenty-five miles southeast of Champaign and Urbana [Illinois]. And at those games, they were largely attended by the local farm folks on a Saturday afternoon. It was their recreation. On one of those Saturday mornings, one of the women students from the university went with the team to Broadlands and at some point she met my mother who was there attending with the rest of the farm families. Her name was Maudelle Brown [Bousfield], who at some later date became the first black principal in the Chicago [Illinois] school system. Going back to this meeting, she was introduced to my father, and as things often do, they apparently had some interest in keeping contact with each other. And as a result thereof, in 1905, she and my father got married.
Story_ID: 15146
Speaker 1: Are you the first child?
Speaker 2: I am the oldest.
Speaker 1: Okay. How many other brothers and sisters do you have?
Speaker 2: Four.
Speaker 1: Can you name them?
Speaker 2: I have twin sisters both of whom became married. One sister Mabel Jane, married a Doctor Kersey and at some later date-
Speaker 1: How do you spell the doctor's last name?
Speaker 2: Kersey, K-E-R-S-E-Y, and at some later date the marriage was terminated and she married a William Mason. My other sister was named Madge after my mother, Madge Ann. and she married a dentist named Dr. Curtis Bush.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your brother?
Speaker 2: I have a brother who is deceased and his name was Edwin, and he died in 1987. I believe I have another brother still living. His name is Hiram H. Wheeler after his father.
Speaker 1: Are your sisters still living?
Speaker 2: I have one sister who has died, that one being Mabel Mason and I have a sister still living, who is Madge Bush.
Story_ID: 15147
Speaker 1: Your mother [Madge Thomas Wheeler] and father [Hiram H. Wheeler], they both have interesting--in that they know a lot about their background they know from whence they came so, I'd like you to take your time, and tell us about your family history first on your mother's side, then on your father's side.
Speaker 2: My mother, check that one, my mother--my mother's father George Thomas died when she was eight years old. She and her mother were unable to maintain the farm, maintain the eighty acre farm they lived on without help of some sort. When my mother was ten, my mother, at least I should say her mother, married a second time. Mind if I ask a question? What is it you want to know about them?
Speaker 1: Oh, just the background, your great grandmother was born in 1827, and you had story about her, I just want to hear the stories, so, I just want you to talk about them.
Speaker 2: As a youngster I used to go out to Broadlands, Illinois, about twenty-five miles southeast of Champaign-Urbana, [Illinois] where my mother's grandmother lived.
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: Her name was Sarah Wilhoit.
Speaker 1: She's the one who was born in 1827 right?
Speaker 2: That's right, Sarah Wilhoit was born in 1827.
Speaker 1: In Virginia I believe right, or-?
Speaker 2: Tennessee, Greene County Tennessee. She never knew who her parents were, but she was raised by the Wilhoit family.
Speaker 1: Was she born in--in slavery?
Speaker 2: Yes, she was born in slavery. But she never knew who her parents were, and the Wilhoits became her unofficial parents. My grandmother, my great grandmother Ernest. Excuse me. My great grandmother Sarah Wilhoit, eventually married a man named Ernest and in the course of time they all moved away from-.
Speaker 1: Tennessee.
Speaker 2: Excuse me for cutting in like this. I'm missing some gaps I'm trying to fill in, not very well.
Speaker 1: Earlier you said that your grandmother Sarah Wilhoit's daughter was conceived by her master.
Speaker 2: Yes, Yes.
Speaker 1: And was her master Mister Wilhoit?
Speaker 2: Wilhoit yes,
Speaker 1: So she had a daughter by her master which was pretty common in those days.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, definitely so.
Speaker 1: Happened a lot. So then, she later married someone, after slavery. Did she talk about the end of slavery, and what that was like, did she ever talk about that with you? What she was doing when she found out slavery was over?
Speaker 2: I have heard my mother's mother, in other words my grandmother, state that when President [Abraham] Lincoln promoted the--boy my memory is something terrible.
Speaker 1: The Emancipation Proclamation, don't worry about the titles of these things.
Speaker 2: Okay. Proclamation of Emancipation, that the Wilhoits gave them a spring wagon and a mule and wished them well, because the [Civil] War had completely bankrupted them. And they ended up in an area close to Broadlands [Illinois] called--the name escapes me right now. Incidentally all this is written down.
Speaker 1: If you can't remember a that's okay, keep moving. So they settled in Illinois, in downstate Illinois?
Speaker 2: They settled-
Speaker 1: Or Illinois?
Speaker 2: They settled in a town across the Illinois border
Speaker 1: In Indiana.
Speaker 2: In Indiana, but because of the disastrous floods of the Wabash River, they finally had to give up their land and they went eventually to the area that's Broadlands, Illinois.
Speaker 1: And so then the family then consisted of your great grandmother, her daughter, and her husband.
Speaker 2: Her husband was George--what'd I say?
Speaker 1: Thomas?
Speaker 2: Thomas at that point. George Thomas died when my mother was eight years old.
Story_ID: 15148
Speaker 1: So Mr. Wheeler, did your grandmother talk about how she felt when slavery was over, how she felt about trying to start a new life and that sort of thing, after 1865?
Speaker 2: My mother's mother you're talking about?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: No, no, I can't--I can't be specific about things she, 'cause I did not have that much contact with my--I didn't live with my grandmother, you know, I only saw her when, the times I would go out to where the farm was, you know, and spend a little vacation something like that.
Speaker 1: Sir, did she tell you any stories about slavery?
Speaker 2: No, I don't recall any stories, but one thing that did impress me very much was, that on one of my visits out there to the farm, out there where they were living in Broadlands [Illinois], that they had a nice great big two-story house and I used to hear--I used to hear, my great-grandmother [Sarah Wilhoit] at night, talking out loud and I used to wonder what it was. And when I asked my grandmother what it was that she was talking about, says, "She's got a Bible up there and she's trying to learn to read." And she was practically ninety then, and out loud she'd read a word and I'd hear her go to another word, you know she was trying to learn to read.
Speaker 1: So she was determined to learn to read.
Speaker 2: Determined to learn to read, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right. Can you remember any other stories that she might have told you about those days? It's, its special to have someone in your family--.
Speaker 2: Well the only thing that I can remember was that my grandmother Ernest--that is my great-grandmother. I can remember her used to saying that even though she grew up in the Wilhoit home, that she was never mistreated. Says she remembers that about them. They never mistreated her, yeah, so I've always remembered that as being very significant.
Story_ID: 15149
Speaker 1: Your grandfather [George] Thomas, I guess it was, what did he do for living?
Speaker 2: He was a farmer, yeah. I don't remember I don't even remember him but--.
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) 'Cause he died when your mother [Madge Thomas Wheeler] was young.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he died when she was eight years old and she would have been eight years old in '91 [1891] yeah in '91 [1891] or '92 [1892] because her birth month was December you see, so it could have been in the year of '92 [1892] as well as '91 [1891] I don't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay, Now what about your grandmother? Did she, were you close to her at all? Did you talk to her?
Speaker 2: No because, except when I went out to the farm out there you know she lived out there, we lived someplace else. We lived in the town of Urbana [Illinois] because my father was working for the University of Illinois [Urbana-Champaign] at that time and so basically we were not in daily contact with each other at all.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Or not in frequent contact either.
Speaker 1: But did she, do you remember any stories she might have told or any things that she passed on to you?
Speaker 2: No I really can't, I really can't, I really can't, no.
Story_ID: 15150
Speaker 1: Now your father [Hiram H. Wheeler]'s side of the family, that's another story so can you talk about your father's ancestry, and where he came from?
Speaker 2: Well, this is a story told by so many people I could be challenged on almost anything I say because I got, I've showed you, that we've got a will that goes back to 1811 you know, was written by one of my ancestral grandfathers, you know, and so there's so much written about them generation by generation that I couldn't say anything but just maybe, be accused of altering some facts. There's any awful lot of history on that.
Speaker 1: I would just ask you to just say what you know .
Speaker 2: All I know.
Speaker 1: You're not going to be--
Speaker 2: My father died--my father died in 1918 when I'm only eleven years old and I never knew much about the family, hardly nothing about the family from him. Because at my age of eleven you know you don't pick up much you know, information like that and so it was his family--his family--his family was largely unknown to me until at some later point when things began to unfold that I didn't know about, you know. Because my mother [Madge Thomas Wheeler] was, my mother was not a Wheeler either she grew up out in the country you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, but Mr. Wheeler like, tell us what you do know about it and I mean we know you don't know everything so don't--don't worry about that.
Speaker 2: Just tell us what you know.
Speaker 1: Well, well,
Speaker 2: Now that, this, there's a story, let me just inject this. There's a story that Dempsey Travis writes of one of your ancestors, a white ancestor, created a will back in 1811.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's right, he was a Wheeler.
Speaker 2: What was that about?
Speaker 1: What was what about?
Speaker 2: The will. What was the story behind this will?
Speaker 1: Well, behind this will, this John Wheeler, back in those days, said that at his death he wanted his Negroes--he had three Negroes, as he puts in his will--to be, be, be you know, immediately, to put in my words, to be given their freedom immediately and they should be sent off to eventually to the state of Ohio within a year's time, where they could pursue a life of freedom and you know. That's what it was saying, yeah. I'm skipping over, but basically that's what it was.
Speaker 2: So what happened, were they sent off?
Speaker 1: Oh yes. According to the will they had to be freed, and they were freed. Oh yeah, he died in 1819. He wrote the will in 1811.
Speaker 2: So did they move to Ohio?
Speaker 1: Oh yes. They eventually got to Ohio by way of Pennsylvania and see, the one who wrote the will had a son, also another Wheeler, you know.
Speaker 2: What was his name?
Speaker 1: His name?
Speaker 2: If you can't remember it's okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: All right. So this other, the son--.
Speaker 1: And so this son on the way to Ohio in the company of somebody, I don't know who it was--he was too young to be by himself, at least he's not that young-- but anyway he comes through Pennsylvania, it seems like he was in Pennsylvania for a period of time doing something, I don't know what, but he and a German girl, somewhere got together and they got married.
Speaker 2: Okay now this is the white son of the first Wheeler or is this a colored son a black son?
Speaker 1: Well now, let's see if we can get that straight
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: The one who wrote the will was an Englishman, obviously he was an Englishman, he wrote the will and he had a concubine, as was a commonplace thing that was done back in those days, people don't like to admit that they took place but that--but that was a pretty general thing back in those days.
Story_ID: 15151
Speaker 1: I'm talking about the one who wrote the will [Lloyd Wheeler's paternal grandfather Lloyd Garrison Wheeler, Sr.].
Speaker 2: Keep rolling.
Speaker 1: Obviously, he had a concubine who--and they had a son who was one of the negroes mentioned in the will. Okay. And so, his so-called three negroes were to be released from slavery at his death.
Speaker 2: Were they all three his children?
Speaker 1: Yeah, they were his children. He claimed they were, anyway. All three his children. That they would be given their freedom, at his death. He died in 1819. This one that was named Hiram, I guess his name was, they were to be manumitted to the state of Ohio, where they could live in freedom and all like that, for the rest of their lives and so on and so forth, but on their way to Ohio, he married a German girl. See? He married a German girl. And they eventually had, I think that's where my grandfather, the lawyer here you know, they were his parents. I got an ancestral chart someplace. I am not like this, I am hateful of myself for letting myself do this. Because I thought I had an extremely volatile memory, but I'm struggling, I'm struggling.
Speaker 2: That's okay, Mr. Wheeler. Tell me, did your great grandfather and the German woman, did they live in Ohio?
Speaker 1: They lived in Ohio.
Speaker 2: What town was it?
Speaker 1: They lived in (pause) one of those northern Ohio towns. I can't--I know it as well as I know anything and I can't call it to save my life.
Speaker 2: How did the family end up in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 1: Back in 1850--back in 1850, there were a lot of runaway slaves. They would leave the South, cross the Ohio River, and go on north on the way to Canada. So it seems that my grandfather's family were pretty active in that anti-slavery movement, you know? And so [U.S.] Congress passed a law--Congress passed a law, the Fugitive Slave Law of 1850, in which, even though you were in Ohio, if you caught an escaped slave, you were bound by law now, to return them back across the river, you know? And so, they were pretty active in that thing, and so, the heat got on them so bad, the whole family just moved out to Chatham [Ontario], Canada. And so, does that get to-?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that gets them to Canada.
Speaker 1: From Canada, the one who was my grandfather, eventually came to Chicago by way of Detroit [Michigan]. Now there are some people who say he spent a little time in Detroit. I haven't been able to confirm it, though I accept it as a fact because, probably it's true. And then he came on to Chicago, here.
Speaker 2: Okay. About when was that, you think, the 1870's?
Speaker 1: No, not that late.
Speaker 2: During the [U.S.] Civil War?
Speaker 1: No, It was before the war was over. It was over in 1865. But in 1865, he was living in Chicago, and I cite the fact that in 1869, four years after the war was over, he was admitted to the practice of law here in this state, see. I'm trying to kind of, get close to where it was, yeah.
Speaker 2: Now he was an associate of John Jones?
Speaker 1: John Jones was married--I showed a picture of him married--how do I want to put it? John Jones was a whole generation older than my grandfather. John Jones had a niece, Rainey Petit, which he raised as a daughter. And that niece and my grandfather got married. She was my grandmother.
Story_ID: 15152
Speaker 1: You're related you know, through, to John--
Speaker 2: To John Jones through my [paternal] grandmother, who was a niece of John Jones. And what little research I've been able to dig up, I think that John Jones had a brother, who was the father of this so-called niece, you see what I mean? You know how things were back in those days. Families were broken up, scattered all over, you know? Black families were not allowed to be intact for very long. I guess you kind of understand. So that's the way in which that relationship works.
Speaker 1: For the sake of those who will be watching this tape, many, many years from now, can you tell us in your own words, who was John Jones?
Speaker 2: John Jones was born down in South Carolina. His plantation name, I can't call it for the moment, but his mother was a free black woman. Under the law, if your mother was free, then you, who might otherwise be a slave, was born free. And so he was really born free, you see? But, he had quite a history. His mother got him out of South Carolina some way and eventually got him into Memphis, Tennessee, where he learned the tailoring trade down there. Eventually, he got to Alton, Illinois, I don't know what all. And eventually John Jones ends up in Chicago with his wife Mary, who he met in Alton, Illinois.
Speaker 1: In Alton, Illinois there's a famous-
Speaker 2: Lovejoy Press?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Elijah [Parish] Lovejoy published the 'Abolitionist'.
Speaker 2: Exactly so.
Speaker 1: In Alton, a mob burned it up.
Speaker 2: Hold on, the central air or something has started. (interruption in tape)
Speaker 1: Where were we?
Speaker 2: Where they came, and eventually end up here in Chicago.
Speaker 1: John Jones and Mary Jones.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: In Chicago, what was the significance to the city of Chicago?
Speaker 2: I have a number of lengthy articles that have been written about John Jones. He was an extremely highly respected man here, because he was a man over thirty years old before he learned how to read and write. But he learned quickly, and he prospered in the tailoring business. And he also was in other businesses. I was surprised to know that he was an entrepreneur of various kinds. He had some boats I think, at some point on the lakes out here. He was just a fellow you know, who was interested in every little venture that might be promising to him. Anyway, the thing that he was remembered for the most was the fact that, he not only became wealthy and he owned I think, three pieces of property in what is downtown Chicago, right now. The main one, was the one at 219 South Dearborn Street [Chicago, Illinois], which was where he built that four-story building. Built it, owned it, and occupied it. Then my grandfather [Lloyd Garrison Wheeler, Sr.] married John Jones' niece, and they--(pause).
Speaker 1: He had his offices there, his law offices?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my grandfather kept his law offices there, until 1903. True. But my grandmother died in 1917, which is considerably after the dates that we're talking about right now. My grandfather died in 1909. John Jones died in 1879. That's a pretty big gap, from 1879 to 1909. And then my grandmother died in 1917. Now that's the span of life of those people.
Speaker 1: Tell me about your grandfather. He passed the bar in 1869?
Speaker 2: 1869, April the 20th.
Speaker 1: This is Hiram Hannibal?
Speaker 2: John Lloyd Wheeler, no not John Lloyd. Lloyd Garrison Wheeler. He's the senior. He had a son, who was my father's brother, who was Lloyd, Jr. Then I come along, my father's son, I'm Lloyd the third.
Story_ID: 15153
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your life here. Were you born in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I was born in St. Joseph, Missouri, where my father [Hiram H. Wheeler] was teaching school, and that was a miserable, low-paying occupation. About the best a black man could get, other than just pure old, unskilled laboring jobs. Back in those days, we're talking about almost a hundred years ago. Blacks had a hard way to go, a hard way to go. And so, from what I understand, even though I was born in St. Joe Missouri, we left there within a few weeks after my birth where he went to Tuskeege [Alabama], to take a teaching job down there. So, he didn't like--didn't like--didn't like teaching at all. So, he decided to give it up and go to Wisconsin, and buy a farm. And he was encouraged in that because my mother [Madge Thomas Wheeler] grew up on a farm. She knew everything about a farm, I mean a farm was her life. Back in those days, that was one of the most prestigious occupations a person could be in. Farming was very, very prosperous back in those days. Very prosperous. Oh, yeah, you have no idea now the way farmers were able to live back in those days,if you were a farmer here in this part of the country. I don't know one thing about the South. Not one. I don't know one thing about the South. Except I was born in Missouri and was there about two weeks I guess. And I spent maybe a couple years, when I was still more or less an infant down in Tuskegee. That's all the South I know anything about.
Speaker 1: Most people in those days were farmers.
Speaker 2: They were farmers, but farmers was the thing everybody wanted to get into. It was such a, such a, extremely good life. Farming life was great. That's the farming in this part of the country. I don't know a thing about anything south of Champaign [Illinois]. I don't know a thing about that kind of farming. Cotton farming, tobacco farming, and those things. I never even saw tobacco grow. I never even saw cotton grow, until it was almost time for the war, I guess. World War I. Never knew anything about those things. My whole life--my mother can only tell you about this part of the world; my father can only tell you about this part of the world. We don't know a thing about (pause). We're not bragging; I'm only trying to say, that neither my mother nor my father have any experiences with living in the South.
Speaker 1: So he went to Wisconsin to farm?
Speaker 2: He went to Wisconsin to farm. And the reason he went up there, because, the big railroad, the Sioux Line Railroad [Company], had agents all across the South trying to get people to move up--up there because they wanted to build up the population and kind of build up the trade for the railroad. And they talked him into (laughs) going up there to Wisconsin which he did to go up there, and that happened to be about 19, I would say that would be about 19, that would be about 19 let me see, when would that be? That would be part of 1907 and I guess that would be about 1911 or 1912 something like that when we moved to Wisconsin. At least my memory of this world at all I think began in Wisconsin and I don't even remember that, but I've been shown a picture of me as a little tot running in a field out there which I was told was up there in Wisconsin, so anyhow a disastrous forest fire came through--like you see these pictures of these forest fires now--wiped them out, didn't have a thing left, wiped them out. And so then of course he was called upon his best resources to do something, because you know my father then had a family. At that time he had a family of three children, myself and my two sisters [Mable Wheeler Mason, Madge Wheeler Bush]. And so we'll make a long story short, he had made somewhat of a name for himself when he went to the University of Illinois [Urbana-Champaign] some years earlier and played on the football team down there. I was told that he played the position of a quarterback, however you might know that I never saw any of the games. And I've had the experience of having one or two people who were able to tell me how they had seen him play, all like that. Anyway, so he became very popular, extremely popular, well-known for his football days and so, he eventually went down to the university where he was going to school. Told them this plight he was in, so they gave him a job. That's how we happened to live out there.
Speaker 1: That was in Champaign, Illinois?
Speaker 2: Yes Champaign, that was actually Urbana [Illinois], same difference. Two towns, just alike.
Speaker 1: Urbana's the University of Illinois that's right.
Speaker 2: Well it's spread out somewhat now. Champaign is getting some more parts of it. But anyway Champaign's a little bigger than Urbana. Champaign has the Illinois Central [Railroad] Station that helped Champaign to grow a little faster than Urbana. Okay so that's how we get down into, that's how we get down to the fact that he was employed there by the university and World War I begins to stir. World War I begins to stir, and even though he was a family man, a wife and at that time four children now, he was not going to be drafted, but the spirit in those days was, you know, "Let's all get together and win this war." (laughs) so he--the University sort of maneuvered him into a nice spot with the YMCA, [Young Men's Christian Association] and their R and R work--rest and recreation for soldiers, where he wore a uniform but carried no gun you know. But he was, he wasn't about to be drafted, but this was all a part of this spirit, back in those days.
Speaker 1: So he had some kind of civilian duties, I mean, some sort of duties with the Y[MCA] during the war?
Speaker 2: Back in those days the Y[MCA] conducted all the rest and recreation that the soldiers had all around everywhere, yeah.
Speaker 1: So he was in the Army but he was in charge-
Speaker 2: Well he was assigned to them, and I mean he wore a uniform he looked just like them. He looked just like them in that he dressed like that did and all, that except he couldn't carry a gun and they would be assigned right to the battle areas you know. Rest and recreation, that's what they--they had a different outfit that did this in World War II. I forget what it's called right now but it wasn't the YMCA.
Speaker 1: USO [United Service Organizations].
Speaker 2: USO, yeah.
Story_ID: 15154
Speaker 1: Did you grow up in Champaign-Urbana [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah I grew up there
Speaker 1: Okay now I want you to think back--.
Speaker 2: I spent the first, I spent the first sixteen years of my life except for about the first three or four years, when I'm an infant you know, something like that.
Speaker 1: Now--.
Speaker 2: My memory of anything begins really down there.
Speaker 1: So give me you know, try to think back and tell me about some of the sights and sounds and smells, of growing up in that part of the country, and in that neighborhood. Who lived there and what was going on, you know?
Speaker 2: Well since my father [Hiram H. Wheeler] was a poor man, poor from the stand point the fire took everything that he had. He had nothing left, not even a job. (laughs) So we were situated in a very ordinary working-class neighborhood. And Champaign-Urbana didn't have any other than two classes of people. You had that class and then the University [of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign] class. Basically. There might have been a little intermediary here and there but basically that's all you had. So, yeah, that's where I grew up in an area like that. I have fond memories, fond memories of growing up. And I went two years to Urbana High School.
Speaker 1: What did the neighborhood look like? What did your house look like?
Speaker 2: Well, when we first moved there, they threw a brick through a window I was told.
Speaker 1: They, meaning who?
Speaker 2: Somebody, we don't know who. They. Somebody. We have an idea who did it, but anyway a brick was thrown through the window. We lived in an area, which, in the whole town of Urbana, back in those days, there weren't but a half a dozen black families lived there. Maybe out on the edges of the town there might be several families. Most of the black families lived in the Champaign part. Anyway, so, our neighbors would be mostly all white. Everybody in the school we attended would be white almost, except myself, my sisters [Mable Wheeler Mason, Madge Wheeler Bush], and maybe two or three others. Yeah. Grew up totally in the white community, you might say. Except we're going to a black church. In Champaign.
Story_ID: 15155
Speaker 1: So did you have--I mean did you have any trouble in school because of your race?
Speaker 2: No. Oh, I mean nothing that was significant. Nothing that was significant. No. You see, first of all. My father [Hiram H. Wheeler] had a reputation with the University [of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign]. They knew of him having been a student there going, and playing football. And university officials gave recognition to that when, he got into troubles later on in life and he went back. They always were glad to do something for him, because they had remembered him from being a student down there, you know. That helped out a whole lot. That helped out a whole lot.
Speaker 1: What did your father teach?
Speaker 2: He actually didn't teach there, but they gave him a job in the College of Agriculture. He more or less kinda--he kinda was the, I don't want to say--(pause). Well, he had a desk which sat out front of the various offices around there, you know. He was the contact person or something like that. Then he worked back with the area that deals with farmer's bulletins and farmer's reports and all like that. They had just rows and rows, and walls and walls of that stuff, you know. He worked with them. They were always doing all kinds of research on all kinds of things dealing with agriculture, and he was in that set-up. Very interesting.
Speaker 1: 0kay, What did your mother [Madge Thomas Wheeler] do?
Speaker 2: Nothing.
Speaker 1: She was basically a housewife?
Speaker 2: Back in those days, women didn't hardly do anything, except some very special jobs, something like stenographer or something like that you know.
Speaker 1: You said she knew a lot about farming herself.
Speaker 2: Knew all about it. She grew up on a farm. And they were a big farm. That farm she grew up on was 320 acres at one point. And they grew corn and oats, primarily, and they then they also somewhat grew clover. And such things as, such things as, anyway. You don't hardly see oats anymore; you still see corn. But you see soybeans. Soybeans weren't even heard of back when I'm talking about. And then of course they would grow a lot of hay because, they didn't have tractors and all that mechanism stuff. I'm talking about a long time ago.
Speaker 1: They had to feed the animals.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah, oh yeah, I should say. Cows, they had--tey were self-sustaining. They had enough cows there to give 'em milk and butter, you know, they had enough animals there. Big old broad, big old bay horses they called them. I don't know if you know about those kind of horses or not. Wide-back horses. Strong as they could be. Bay mares they called them. I was somewhat of a farm boy myself I can talk about it oh yeah, that was, back in those days and oddly enough, oddly enough, they would have to have help at certain times during the year. And this may seem a lie to you but, you take in the summer time a lot of these boys who grew up, a lot of these white kids who grew up in Kentucky--farm boys you know, looking for some kind of work--they would come across, come around the countrysides and see if any work was available. And they used to have some of those folks working for them and staying in the same house with them. They'd have a bedroom and these were white kids that'd come out of Kentucky. Yeah, they didn't mind. A lot of things lot of things don't seem like they should have been, but they were oh yeah, sure.
Story_ID: 15156
Speaker 1: What kind of a little boy were you when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh I don't know I was a fellow who wanted to please everybody I don't know how to say this. I don't know much about me until my father [Hiram H. Wheeler] died. I was, I was, never the star student of the class but I always was a runner-up trying hard. And I'd run across a teacher now and then who didn't like it because of what I am (laughs). Every now and then I'd run across it but I won't go into those stories but anyway. By and large it was it was a town that treated us well.
Speaker 1: Well tell me one of those stories.
Speaker 2: (laughs) Well let me give you an example. I remember one day in class we were having an arithmetic lesson. So the teacher would pass out papers for us to write our answers on. And then she'd put the--this particular class was long division and she'd put some long division problems up on the board and ask us--this was in the fifth grade--and ask us to solve them. Well so, at some point she said, "When you're finished put your pencils down on the ledge of your desk there and wait 'til everybody gets through." And so when I finished, I put my pencil down and the teacher says "Lloyd Wheeler, why aren't you working on those problems?" I says "I'm through." Oh boy, she didn't like that you know, "All right." (laughs) Little things like that happen, you know. I could cite you several other things they'd always--you know. One day she said to me, the same teacher, we were having--teachers used to have the students to sing--they don't do that in class anymore at least I haven't come across it--teacher would have a period were he'd teach them how to read the notes in a simple notebook you know, and sing, you know and here I am singing my heart out. I love to sing--(end of tape).
Story_ID: 15157
Speaker 1: The song--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so this teacher stopped the singing, said "Lloyd Wheeler why aren't you singing" and I said "I am singing" and said "No you're not. Now the next time your father comes up here and talk to me about you, I'm going to tell him how you just sit up there and won't even sing". And I'm singing my heart out but I mean this is the little antagonisms that you dealt with. I not going to tell you all those things. But by and large I got along great, I got along great.
Story_ID: 15158
Speaker 1: My father [Hiram H. Wheeler] died in 1918 when I'm just eleven years old and at--
Speaker 2: How did you feel when your father died?
Speaker 1: I was very sick. I couldn't even go to his funeral. The flu had us all, that influenza, had the whole family down. He, he's as well as you are and three days later, he's in a coffin. That old flu just came through that fast. It was a terrible thing.
Speaker 2: 1918.
Speaker 1: 1918. And of course I was terribly, I was affected by it. Didn't kill me, but for many years I had after-effects of some things that that flu did to me. It was a terrible thing. An awful disaster. But I don't know how (pause). My father had died, and my mother [Madge Thomas Wheeler] has got--I had a brother [Hiram H. Wheeler, Jr.] who was born two or three weeks after my father died, so there was a family of five. My mother. She was only about twenty-six years old I guess, and she was left a widow, five children, no income, nothing at all. Horrible, horrible conditions she faced. I'm the oldest, and of course, fortunately, I was one who seemed like, felt the burdens that she had. Very keenly. And I wanted to get out and get all those jobs I can, of all different kinds. I used to get all kind of little jobs to do, you know. But anyway, her health broke, back in those days. She had to have an appendectomy, a couple of years after my father's death. In those days an appendectomy was not as well known and as well treated as it is today. You were bed-bound for almost two weeks, once you got operated on for an appendectomy. Of course during that two weeks it was pretty rough, but those are things I'm not going to put on the record, cause I don't want to. But it was tough. We had a tough, tough, tough life, trying to make it. A tough life.
Speaker 2: So, what was the source of income? What source of income did you have at all? Was there a pension from the school?
Speaker 1: No, no. Back in those days? No.
Speaker 2: Nothing from the [U.S.] Army?
Speaker 1: No, nothing. It was awful tough going, but of course, back in those days, you had a garden. You would make sure that you grew enough food to eat some and save some you know. You had a couple cherry trees and apple trees in around the yard and all like that. And, you had a mother who was extremely resourceful, who knew how to take a little and make a lot out of it. Yeah. It was tough going, awful tough going.
Speaker 2: Did she sew or do anything to bring income in?
Speaker 1: No, but in, let me see, in 1923, we did move to Chicago, [Illinois], which was a good move. And, once here, I was able to get a better job, you know. I was able to get a job at this insurance company I was telling you about.
Speaker 2: So you were about sixteen then?
Speaker 1: Yes I was exactly sixteen. And I would come in after school and work a couple of hours, that's all.
Speaker 2: And did you have relatives here in Chicago?
Speaker 1: Yeah, my father's family was here, cause he grew up here, you know. He was born here in 1881. And he was the youngest of five children. Yeah.
Speaker 2: And they were pretty well-to-do?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. Well, no not at that time cause see, my father's father [Lloyd Garrison Wheeler, Sr.] died in 1909. He died in 1909. And by that time he didn't have anything left over out of all the economic cycles, ups and down that you go through, you know. He didn't have anything left. That was tough, we had a tough life. But we had a whole lot of friends who made life easy for us.
Speaker 2: Where did you live in Chicago when you moved here?
Speaker 1: 4900 block on Vincennes Avenue. My mother's parents bought a building there. Because, he [maternal grandfather George Thomas] had become sickly. He couldn't farm anymore. So he decided to give up farming and move to the city. And so, we all lived in the same building. A two-flat building.
Story_ID: 15159
Speaker 1: When you were in school, what were your ambitions? Did you have any dreams of what kind of occupation you wanted?
Speaker 2: Before I came to Chicago [Illinois], farming was the big thing in my life. Farmers lived well. They lived well. And before World War I, I mean they lived well. But after World War I an economic slowdown took place. A real economic collapse. Things really went in reverse for a lot of farmers. But I grew up with the idea that farming ought to be a nice thing to be into. But it never got any further than just a wild dream.
Speaker 1: So, were you interested in any other kind of--.
Speaker 2: No, I had nothing to be interested in, I hadn't been exposed to anything. I hadn't been exposed to anything. Nothing at all.
Speaker 1: All right, so, you got here at age sixteen, you soon got a job at Liberty Life [Insurance Company]?
Speaker 2: That's right, just coming in two hours after school and working. Which was a nice deal, you know. That was a big help. Big help. I don't want to go into all the economic troubles that the family has had since then. I don't really want to go into all that because they cut deep. They hurt a lot of people. Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, you worked at Liberty Life Insurance, right?
Speaker 2: That's what it was, at the time I went.
Speaker 1: Where were they located?
Speaker 2: 35th [Street] and [Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] Drive [Chicago, Illinois], right where they're at. I stayed with them until I got my degree in insurance from the University of Illinois [Chicago], I got my B.S. degree. I had it in the insurance curriculum down there which was basically one of actuarial mathematics. There was really a lot of math in that stuff. I got my degree down there.
Speaker 1: You were in high school at that time, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I graduated from Hyde Park High School [Chicago, Illinois]. My father graduated from that same school, too.
Speaker 1: I haven't been in Chicago that long, but it seems to me that there weren't that many black people at Hyde Park High School at that time.
Speaker 2: No, when I was there, there were 2200 people altogether, and I'll betcha I couldn't find ten who were black. I don't think so. That's right, I doubt if I could even find ten. I doubt there were even ten, yeah. And that's been another situation of mine. All through all of my schooling, I'm a tiny minority from the standpoint of race of the students there. That was true in the schools down in Urbana High School [Urbana, Illinois], the Hyde Park High School, it was true at the University of Illinois. Yeah, I have been totally surrounded by that kind of a situation.
Story_ID: 15160
Speaker 1: What adults had the greatest influence on you as you were coming along? Were they your teachers, or the people you worked for at Liberty Life [Supreme Liberty Life Insurance Company]? Who did you look up to?
Speaker 2: Well I suppose, these people down at Supreme. They were the things that impacted on my life more than anything or anybody else. That's definitely so.
Speaker 1: What are the names of some of those people?
Speaker 2: Well, the man who was president at that time was one Frank L. Gillespie. A big man, he weighed over three-hundred pounds. Nice-looking man. Over three-hundred pounds. And what I call a super salesman. And he was--he was intelligent. He had been to some sort of a special school in Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], a music school or something for a period of time. Very intelligent man. And, he had a way about him, that you just adored the guy, just being around him. Frank L. Gillespie. Yeah, he died just two years after, (pause). Let's see, he died in 1925, yeah, he died just two years after I started there. Then, other people in time became--there was a Dr. M. O. Bousfield, when I spoke about my wife [Margaret Smith-Wheeler] meeting my father [Hiram H. Wheeler] at this scrub game that these guys were playing down there in Broadlands [Illinois], and he was introduced by--what's her first name, Maudelle. Maudelle Brown [Bousfield] eventually became the wife of Dr. [Midian O.] Bousfield. So these people, oh yeah.
Speaker 1: So they all took an interest in you?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, oh yes. 'Cause they knew other family, I mean, they didn't just pick me out of the dark. They knew other family. Dr. Bousfield, and then there was Earl Dickerson, who was an attorney, and Ellis Stewart, and a man named Carey, who seemed to know the family from Tuskeegee days of some sort. I couldn't go into that right now, but anyway,
Speaker 1: How do you spell his last name?
Speaker 2: C-A-R-R-Y [sic].
Speaker 1: And what about Bousfield?
Speaker 2: He was medical director.
Speaker 1: How do you spell his name?
Speaker 2: B-O-U-S-F-I-E-L-D
Speaker 1: He was medical director of Liberty Life?
Speaker 2: He was medical director, that's true. He was not in the office all day, neither was Dickerson in the office all day. Dickerson was an attorney, you probably have heard of him anyway. But my point is, I was able to be more or less surrounded by people of accomplishment. And they took an interest in me, too. I liked that very much.
Speaker 1: You've mentioned a couple of occupations, a director, a director of medicine, a lawyer at Supreme Life, at Liberty Life. Can you give us an idea of how many occupations an insurance company you know, has within the--how many jobs an insurance company has? 'Cause I don't think that most people think of a doctor working for an insurance company, or a lawyer.
Speaker 2: No, they didn't work in the sense that they would be at a desk all day long, but when agents bring in applications, some people have to have medical examinations. His role would be to conduct those examinations or to arrange for other doctors to conduct them and so on and so forth know what I mean? And the same way with attorneys. Most attorneys, Dickerson too, they would have a main office somewhere else, but they would also, they would also, I mean there are a lot of legal matters that can come up in the insurance business. A lot of legal matters, that would have to be referred to some attorney. So you would have an attorney as a part of your setup, things like that. Then we had a director of agencies. You'd have to have agents to go out and get your public to sign up for your policies and all like that. A director of agencies. So that would mean that you would say, set up an agency in Detroit, Michigan, where you'd have to put a manager in charge. And that manager would be responsible to the director in the Chicago office, you see. And so on around the country. And what else? Well I mean in general, if you got a great, big company, you have the thing expands to a whole lot of people who deal strictly with finance. On a small company, like a young company just getting started, you wouldn't have anybody who they would have--primary to that, you would have somebody downtown someplace. Just like a very young company wouldn't have any need for a full-time actuary. So, you would, there would be actuarial firms who would do whatever necessary actuarial things had to be performed for our company. Those sort of things.
Speaker 1: So what kind of jobs did you perform when you were sixteen?
Speaker 2: Oh, coming in after school, taking care of the mail. Doing things like that. Insurance companies get an awful lot of mail in, an awful lot of mail. A lot of mail comes in, a lot of mail goes out. And so, you might have to have somebody on a full-time job to take care of the supply room, because there's an awful, awful lot of paper and stuff that goes on in an insurance company. And you have to have a supply room where all that is readily available and it's so arranged that you can find it without any trouble.
Speaker 1: These were the days when people used typewriters?
Speaker 2: All we had were manual typewriters. Yeah, that's all we had back in those days, just manual typewriters.
Speaker 1: Carbon paper?
Speaker 2: That's all we had back in those days.
Speaker 1: I know it makes a difference, 'cause people--.
Speaker 2: At some point we had little dictaphone machines begin to come on the market. Little round cylinders, you know. An officer or somebody could speak into it, and it would come out on this thing. And you would take that capsule over to a machine that would transcribe it, where a secretary would type as they were listening to that thing.
Story_ID: 15161
Speaker 1: I was asking about Hyde Park [High School, Chicago, Illinois], what kind of student you were at Hyde Park.
Speaker 2: Same way, I just got by. I mean you know, I would get up in the morning. School started at eight o'clock back in those days. I would walk over to the 51st Street L [elevated train] station and catch the L to go to the Jackson Park station at Stony Island [Avenue], you know. Be at school by eight o'clock. School would be out at about 2:20 in the afternoon. At 2:20, when school is letting out, Hyde Park, there would be streetcars lined up. Back in those days, streetcars. And I'd catch a streetcar to go to 35th [Street] and [Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] Drive to be there by three o'clock. I had to be there [Supreme Liberty Life Insurance Company] by three o'clock. That's the way it went for me.
Speaker 1: That basically was you routine?
Speaker 2: That was my routine, yeah. The job was the most important thing to me in those days. It was the most important thing.
Speaker 1: You were I guess the principal breadwinner for your family.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Yeah I was. No question about it. However I had two sisters [Mable Wheeler Mason, Madge Wheeler Bush]. One was a very industrious person. She was, she enjoyed fine needlework and she learned that in school. She would get a lot of nice jobs from people who wanted various kinds of needlework done. She was very good at it. Make a little money. It was rough. I'm not trying to kid you at all, it was rough going. We had a rough time. I'm not going to go into all that but, nobody would believe it but, you're going through such a rough time. So you just grit your teeth and know you gotta make it. But we had to go through some rough times.
Story_ID: 15162
Speaker 1: Tell me what your mindset was as you graduated from high school [Hyde Park High School, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: When I graduated from high school, I had had a little experience working there at the insurance company [Supreme Liberty Life Insurance Company]. And I didn't know one single thing about what went on in an insurance operation. But I kinda got the spirit of that thing. So I decided--I decided that I was going to learn actuarial working in school. That's what made me make my decision. It was--I still didn't know about all the other stuff that goes on. I knew about handling the mail and things like that. But what made the business go, I didn't still know anything about it. But I was impressed--I was impressed by all the people I came across. And I said, something about this thing, I think I ought to be able to learn this too. So I decided I was going to take that, and I got my degree in that down at [University of] Illinois [Urbana-Champaign].
Speaker 1: Did you have a hard time trying to get into college?
Speaker 2: Back in those days it wasn't hard to get in. Back in those days. No.
Speaker 1: Did you work on campus?
Speaker 2: I have never peeled so may potatoes, skinned so many tomatoes, washed so may pots and pans in my life. That's how I went through school. No money, but you got three meals a day. That was the most expensive part about going away to school, eating.
Speaker 1: Were you involved in the traditional school activities?
Speaker 2: No. I didn't have time for it. Whenever the university was giving a little banquet or something like that someplace, and they needed some help, I got word through my sources, and I could maybe make five dollars. That's where I went. Oh, well. I look back at those things, but they were hard times, I gotta tell you, they were hard times.
Speaker 1: Did you have any influential teachers or instructors at the U of I?
Speaker 2: When you say influential--.
Speaker 1: Well, that influenced you, that you can look back on and say, "I'm glad I had that instructor"?
Speaker 2: I don't know, there seemed to be a sort of a spirit of, kinda, you know, don't, don't push him out of here. There kind of seemed to be that spirit. I don't know where they got it from. But I had nothing but good will-good will coming my way, most of the way through.
Speaker 1: Any activities that you took part in on campus?
Speaker 2: Were you involved in sports?
Speaker 1: None, none whatsoever. I had to work seven days a week to eat. That gave no time for any sports. And on top of that I used to mop the dining hall on certain week nights. And I don't get home until late to where I'm living. And to try to study, it's hard. I mean it's rough going. I wouldn't want to go through it again. I know that. I certainly wouldn't want to go through it again. It's rough.
Speaker 2: Did you have a girlfriend on campus?
Speaker 1: No, you had, in the first place, no. When you say a girlfriend, I mean you're friendly but you can't take 'em-. When you go to the show you gotta sit up in the peanut gallery. Things were not really conducive.
Speaker 2: They had a segregated theater?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. But anyway, I just didn't have time because I really didn't want to lose my job where I was able to eat seven days a week, three meals a day. That kept me working. I'd have to go in there before class, go in there at midday, and go in there at night, after dinner. Or before dinner 'cause like I say sometimes we had to peel potatoes, peel tomatoes, cut carrots, do a whole lotta things you know.
Story_ID: 15163
Speaker 1: When you graduated from college, what were you thinking of doing?
Speaker 2: When I graduated from college [University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign] with my B.S. degree, I got a telegram. A telegram from the insurance company [Supreme Liberty Life Insurance Company]. "Congratulations, you may start to work next Monday." Now let me tell you. That was in 1932, the very bottom of the Depression. The stock market crashed in 1929. It kept on going down until 1932 when it hit bottom. Awful rough times--awful rough times. And so many of the students were kind of long in the face when they graduated because, they didn't know what they were going to do. There were no jobs back then. And here I get a telegram, I can start to work Monday. (laughs)
Speaker 1: That was real good news.
Speaker 2: Oh, I should say it was. Now they hadn't contributed one dime to paying my expenses going through school. I just--just a determination I thought I'm just going to go through this anyhow. I didn't, I wasn't the star of the class I learned my work but that was it.
Speaker 1: So you got a chance to come right back to Chicago [Illinois] to the place where you were in high school with Liberty Life, so what did you start off doing when you-
Speaker 2: Oh don't remember.
Speaker 1: Was it in sales or--?
Speaker 2: No, I, at some point I spent two or three years out with sales but they were not my forte at all sales. I would have starved to death being a salesman.
Speaker 1: You're not a real aggressive person.
Speaker 2: No but I had technical knowledge that was useful very useful, and I knew how to use it .
Speaker 1: So you basically served in more managerial type functions?
Speaker 2: Eventually--eventually. You don't walk in, walk over the people now I'll tell you right now. There's people who've been there and they intend to stay there.
Speaker 1: They're in place.
Speaker 2: And they're going to see to it that you don't bother them that goes on for a long time I got to tell you that. Oh yeah, yeah. That's one of the things that, a lot of people can't stand that sort of pressure but I decided that I was going to stay there no matter what.
Speaker 1: Were there attempts to get rid of you while you were there?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't like to have you ask me questions like that. I never know what's going on. There are maybe some elements here and there wish they could push me out, you know. They got somebody else they want to bring in, you know. I mean that thing goes on as a normal thing that goes on, so, I mean that thing goes on as a normal thing that goes on. That just goes on normally.
Speaker 1: Did you basically enjoy it?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, very much so, very much so.
Speaker 1: What was the thing you enjoyed the most about working for Liberty Life?
Speaker 2: (pause) Well, I mean being able to take my assignments and carry them out. I mean that's always a pleasure to be able to do that and to feel like you're getting some recognition from some sources. You feel like you are yeah, cause some sources are recognizing that you're trying, you know.
Story_ID: 15164
Speaker 1: I don't know why I let you talk me into all this sort of stuff, but things that are very intimate, in your personal lives you know, yeah, I don't know (laughs). All families have their problems you have to know, I guess you do know it. All families have their problems.
Speaker 2: Yes sir.
Speaker 1: And all families see various individuals in different ways. They don't all see them in the same way, and so that's why I say when you get on--get on record like this, you don't know what kinds of things you're stirring up here and there and everywhere, you know. And I might say that the families that I know are no different from anybody else's family when it comes to that yeah--yeah. That's right. So I suppose I'll hear a lot when some of them see this, you know--you know, and maybe something worse than that. So I don't like to be too far out on a limb on some of these things. Some things you have to just live with and die with.
Story_ID: 15165
Speaker 1: Tell me about your career at [Supreme] Liberty Life [Insurance Company]. Who was in charge of you when you got there?
Speaker 2: Frank L. Gillespie who was the president at the time .
Speaker 1: Well, I know he was when you were in high school, but you said he died two or three years after you got there.
Speaker 2: That is right, and when he died, Dr. [Midian O.] Bousfield was named the president and of course he, (pause)--Dr. Bousfield, he's not involved in the routines of the business but a company has to have a president and he's a good front man for the company. He was a very fine person. I got along fine with him. Very fine person.
Speaker 1: Day-to-day sales and operations was run by someone else I suppose.
Speaker 2: Well, the agents all around the country were under the influence of a man named Carey, C-A-R-E-Y I think is the way he spelled his name Carey. Yeah. He was pretty good at it. And he had his assistants. You see, in the beginning a company is very small I mean, you're trying-you're trying to get enough business coming in to make the company kind of build up and grow. So you don't have the set up when you first start unless you got a big (unclear) business into someplace that you can get a hold of. I mean you're starting off from a nub, you know and you just hope that you've got enough people with the qualifications that can take these applications for insurance, process them properly, and issue a policy of insurance to them. You've got to have enough people who know how to set up the reserves that the law requires you to have once you sell insurance in Illinois. You have to have a limited amount of that sort of stuff but it's nothing like when Supreme at one point had issued seven million weekly premium policies. That's a whole lot policies to keep up with. We had the other policies the larger amounts. We've had as much as people with one-hundred thousand dollar policies. You know what I mean? But you can't start off your first day with things like that and know how you're going to handle those things. That's something that you have to learn how to deal with.
Speaker 1: It kind of snowballs.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah. That's right.
Speaker 1: How did Liberty handle all this growth?
Speaker 2: Well, as we got growth then we would bring more staff in, that's true, we would, yeah. Yeah. I mean we had a lot of people. Yeah. That's the only thing I can think of. We had to bring more people in. 'Cause there's a limited amount of work that some one, or few people can do. You have to bring more people in. And you have to hope that your expenses don't eat up all of the income that's left after you pay your death claims and your sick claims, and set up all the necessary reserves. You hope you have enough to pay everybody, if you don't, you have to let somebody go.
Story_ID: 15166
Speaker 1: In the black community, there are several traditional businesses, one is funerals, you know, aside from the professions like doctor, lawyer and accountant. We always need those kind of people. But in terms of a business, an organized business usually our funeral homes that does well. A beauty culture-type and barbering does well. You don't see as many real estate firms and that sort of thing. But we do see life insurance, you know, especially first part of the century, emerging as something that's every important for people. And I think  it got started in a very simple way. Can you talk about the importance of life insurance to the black community?
Speaker 2: Well. It's more important than blacks really want to pretend like it is. In the beginning, not true with our company [Supreme Liberty Life Insurance Company], most companies started out selling these weekly premium policies. We call them industrial policies. The big white companies like the Metropolitan [Assurance Company], the Prudential [Financial, Inc.] and all those companies, they started out that way too, many years ago. Most of our companies started out selling these weekly premium policies. But now these companies here, got smart. What they decided to do, they decided to call their policies burial policies. And the black public back in those days, they were only concerned about enough money to bury somebody. And that was usually a very small amount. So, they were able to sell a lot of those weekly premium policies under the name of burial insurance. And they did quite a, quite a big business doing that. But in our company, we started out with what we'd call the ordinary insurance, which were policies you sold by the face amount of insurance. A thousand dollars face amount, five thousand dollars face amount, all like that. That's what we started out with. And of course that called for a little different organization than if you had agents going in and out of homes collecting nickels and dimes for this burial insurance. So, there was a difference in the organization in both companies. Now eventually our company did join that weekly premium crowd because that's really where the market was. But we didn't start out that way.
Story_ID: 15167
Speaker 1: Did the Depression like really affect [Supreme] Liberty Life [Insurance Company]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the Depression affected us. I guess the--I'm trying to think what depression are you talking about. There was a depression that began in 1929.
Speaker 1: Yeah, (pause),1930 was a struggle, that's the depression that I'm talking about.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, we all had our problems, we all had our problems. And this is where our lawyers were of invaluable assistance to us. Our lawyers and actuaries, because we had to do things that were unheard of in order that the states might continue to let us do the insurance business. Yeah, I won't go into all of those things but,
Speaker 1: Well, give me an example of one of those things at least.
Speaker 2: One thing that we did, we had our agents go to all the policyholders homes and ask them would they sign this statement here which would save the company, that 50 percent of the cash value that's in my policy be re-classified as an asset for the company which would be transferred into it's surplus. See what I mean? So if you had a policy with $1500 cash worth of value in it, we would borrow no more than $750 on our policy even though we could do $1500. And that $750 that we can't borrow, we would transfer that to another account. It would become a part of our assets. And that's the way we were able to show enough reserve that we could keep on going. All kind of things were conjured up in order to stay in business.
Speaker 1: So you were dependent on the goodwill of the community?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah. Most said, "Oh yeah well sure, we'd be glad to do that"
Speaker 1: So were black people proud that they had their own life insurance company?
Speaker 2: Oh, of course, yeah, absolutely, definitely so, as a matter of fact, yeah, very proud. Now they were very proud but there are some few you know, who "Well these guys don't have enough experience I don't think I wanna trust my money", you find some of that too, you know. But there are enough who see no hope--no hope, in helping to build up something like this. They're for it .
Story_ID: 15168
Speaker 1: What were some of the milestones at [Supreme] Liberty Life [Insurance Company]? You know we talked off-camera about the acquisition of Liberty Life, the merger of Liberty Life and Supreme Life.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well--
Speaker 1: What are some of the other milestones?
Speaker 2: Well, the death of Mr. [Frank] Gillespie was our first really important milestone.
Speaker 1: Was he the founder of Liberty Life?
Speaker 2: Well, he was the one who went to others with the idea of forming an insurance company. And the law of Illinois at that date was that organizers of an insurance company had to have a surplus of one hundred thousand dollars in cash. Now you can do that by selling stock, you can sell stock. And you sell stock at such a price, that the par value of that stock can be accumulated, until it amounts to one hundred thousand dollars. Then you have met the requirement. Follow me? Then in 1929 when we allowed two other companies to merger with us--that is, the Supreme Life [Insurance Company] of Columbus, Ohio and the old Northeastern Life [Insurance Company] of Newark, New Jersey--both companies were serious, serious troubles with their surplus, serious trouble. So we thought that all three of us together could work out of the surplus policies.
Speaker 1: All three of you together could meet the surplus by combining.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was the thought. And of course to meet the surplus requirements you have to meet certain reserve requirements. Certain reserve requirements too, in our business. You have to meet certain kinds of reserves because, you buy a policy and you may never make a claim with us for fifty years. All of this time you're paying money into us. So the state requires that some part of that money has to be put in the reserve to help pay that claim when it comes due. You get the idea of what the reserves are for. Now, in 1942, or [194]3, the man who was then president died. Harry Pace, Harry H. Pace was a very prominent insurance man. He operated the Northeastern Life Insurance Company of Newark, New Jersey. And before that he'd been in the South where he had been in various financial institutions. So he was well known in the financial world well known. And so he died. He was president at the time that he died, he was president of the company. We survived that, we survived that, and I don't know, you asked about different points. (laughs) Every month was a critical point, every month I mean every month was critical. It's hard to say when the most significant one was but, anyway--
Speaker 1: So it wasn't easy to stay in business.
Speaker 2: Oh no, it was a hard business--it was a hard business. So I don't know from then on we came to a point where Earl Dickerson became the company's president. And he was a nationally known lawyer. You probably have heard of him, nationally known. His interest, his interests were in civil rights you might say. And his attention was largely devoted to that. And so he surrounded himself with people who could kind of pull him along, you know. And the next, the next big important thing was Johnny [John H.] Johnson. Johnny Johnson began to put money, a lot of money into the company, and so he finally invested a couple of million dollars I guess into the company, but you do it by buying stock. So he finally got enough stock where he had enough proxy votes to vote him and his people in and running the company. And so he's been more or less the top person all along since then. (laughs) Every change in president will bring some changes and everyone can be a disaster. It can be a help. You never really know.
Speaker 1: I don't think that a lot of people know that John Johnson was really a--
Speaker 2: Yeah, some people think that he owns it He doesn't own it. He just owns enough stock. It's a stock company. It's a corporation and the corporation has a board of directors. The board of directors, they're the ones who elect the president. And so as president you have to work with your board of directors because the board will out vote you on things if you're not careful. But everybody is pleased. Everybody felt good that he's the top person because financially, he can be called upon for help, they think. Whether he'd do it or not, I don't know, but anyway they're satisfied. But he doesn't own the company, he's just its major shareholder.
Story_ID: 15169
Speaker 1: What were your favorite moments at Liberty Supreme Life [Insurance Company]?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know I guess my favorite moment was when I was elected president. That had to be a favorite moment?
Speaker 1: What year was that?
Speaker 2: '79 [1979] I think it was, '79 [1979].
Speaker 1: '73 [1973] was it?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I mean I didn't have any idea anything like that was going to happen, but there was a need--there was a need for some change in top management and so I was the one that got pushed in
Speaker 1: So did you enjoy being president?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yes indeed, I enjoyed it very much.
Speaker 1: Did you think when you got the position oh boy now it's time for me to do what I really wanted to do all along?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, you don't do it quite like that. You may want to do things but you find out the road isn't always that clear. You have a lot of obstacles to get over.
Speaker 1: So it's different on the other side of the fence.
Speaker 2: It's different, it's definitely different. Yes it is, definitely different. But I felt pleased that they thought enough of me that they wanted me to be president. I didn't expect to be re-elected year after year, but, it's a job that you had to be on the job not only eight hours a day, but eight and nine hours a day. You had a lot of things to do, a lot of things to do.
Speaker 1: And you were president until you were eighty-three?
Speaker 2: More than that. Let me see. '91 [1991], how old would I be in 1991? Born in 1907, eighty-six.
Speaker 1: So you retired in what year?
Speaker 2: In 1991. In 1991 when I retired I would be, how old? I can't think, I can't think. I used to be good at math. You had to be, to work actuarial science. You had to be kind of sharp in math. I can't even think anymore.
Speaker 1: (unclear) Eighty-three.
Speaker 2: Eighty-three?. That's right, eighty-three, that is correct. But every year you had to some up to the board for re-election, you know. They kept on re-electing me so I said "All right, here I am". But it was hard, I mean, very, very hard. Very, very difficult. Hard times.
Story_ID: 15170
Speaker 1: Tell me about your community involvement, family life here in the city of Chicago. You got married here in Chicago, right? After you came up here and started working.
Speaker 2: I got married here. I fooled around, World War II was kind of off in the distance. And, two things, I had to sign up for the draft and so I said "I've got this problem--talking to myself--I have always been a person who was deeply interested in my mother [Madge Thomas Wheeler]'s situation". She was a widow, she was left a widow with five children. No income. No resources of any kind. And I was the oldest. And a lot of things came my way, of family matters, that wouldn't have if I wasn't the oldest. I just sort of fell into the situation of finding myself deeply concerned about the welfare of her in particular, because she was a wonderful mother. A wonderful mother. And since I had no father, and only eleven years old when he [Hiram H. Wheeler] died, didn't have a chance to really know him, you know, that well. I took a great deal of pride in people saying "He's the man of the family". You know, made me feel important. And I began to act the role, I guess, to the consternation of maybe some of my brothers and sisters, but I telling you like it is, you see. So, they got married, all of them but me. And I said, "Well, since my mother has no source of income, I'll just stay and make sure, 'cause she's meant too much to me." And the other thing was, if I go out here and get married, and I get drafted, you gotta go to the Army. And I got a wife to support. I said, the Army doesn't make those kind of provisions. They'll give you something for your mother, but that's it. So I said, "Well, I'll just sit this thing out for a while. So I didn't get married until I was thirty-six, almost thirty-seven years old. That's when I first got married, thirty-seven.
Speaker 1: So how did you meet your wife [Margaret Smith Wheeler]?
Speaker 2: Well I--she had family around Chicago [Illinois] here, who we all had a lot of respect for and everything. So I mean, it wasn't just somebody, you know, out of the blue that came along, you know.
Speaker 1: What was her name? And how did you all meet?
Speaker 2: Well we met through association with different family members. They had a--they had a, well in some respects he was a son of some others and maybe a nephew of others, who was a doctor. And his father was a doctor. And we were all in this same running group together, you know what I mean? So we got to know each other that way. And so, I knew that she had been divorced from her husband, when she lived in Virginia. And that was the other part of the family that lived down in Virginia. And so we all kind of got together that way. It was kind of one of those things where people knew each other. And so anyway I knew she had these two little boys. So I said, here I am, thirty-six and either I got to go out here and marry one of these little flip things out here on the street, and you don't know what's going to happen, or get somebody who's already settled. I decided on somebody who was already settled. That's how it happened. It worked out very good. It worked out very good.
Speaker 1: You acquired two step-sons [Garland Davis and David Davis].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you had some children together.
Speaker 2: We had one son [John Wheeler].
Speaker 1: Is he a Lloyd?
Speaker 2: John Lloyd. Well anyway, anyway, it was very nice. We had forty-five years of a very beautiful marriage. Very beautiful. Very beautiful marriage. Very beautiful. I was very fortunate that I made the move I did, because at thirty-six, or even close to thirty-seven, you're taking an awful chance with some of these ladies out here. I just wouldn't do it.
Speaker 1: Your first wife died.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she died--she died. She had a bad heart. She was seventy-five I think, when she died, I think. Yeah, she was seventy-five. So I tired of being a widower. And after a while, I decided to re-marry [to Helen Quinn Wheeler]. And I made another fortunate move. Very, very fortunate for me.
Speaker 1: And you are a widower again, at the present time.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but no more marriages though. Two beautiful ones and that's it. So for four years now I've been making it alone. It has a lot to be desired, but I prefer this.
Story_ID: 15171
Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you about the black community of Chicago [Illinois], the Bronzeville community that you--that was thriving I guess, if you want to call it that, during your tenure at Supreme [Liberty] Life [Insurance Company]. And I guess for most of it, at least half of it, I guess it was thriving. Then it started--things started to change. Can you talk about what the community used to be like and what it's like now?
Speaker 2: Well when I was sixteen years old, that's after we left Urbana [Illinois], came up here. I had just turned sixteen. I had never lived in a black community, never been around large groups of blacks, and when I got off the Illinois Central [Railroad] train at whatever that station was, the 43rd Street station, and I said, "Oh dear". I wasn't used to an observation like that. Everywhere I turned, they're everywhere, you know. And so everybody was normal you know. I'm coming into a new experience in my life, believe me, I am. A new experience. But it didn't take me long to fall in line with it. But to answer your question, the black community didn't extend, probably any farther than 43rd Street in those days.
Story_ID: 15172
Speaker 1: We're talking about Chicago [Illinois]--what it used to be like compared to what it's like now. And you started--
Speaker 2: Well as I said, we had a black belt that's true, because real estate here in the city had decided that they were going to confine the black community to a certain area because they could, they could be forced to live in these old broken down buildings and, and they could get a high return out of them. That was all that was involved. They wanted a way to force more return out of all those broken down buildings. And they said well, we'll not let blacks live beyond this line. They'll have to crowd in on some of these buildings here and that was a disgrace. It was a crime. You'll find, you find here's a three-flat building someplace sitting up someplace and maybe the thing is already kicked out and all that sort of stuff and so an agent comes along and he puts a black family in, in on each floor that's all right. But then on top of that, he will say "Now I guess now I'm going to have to push another family in so we're going to have to have two families living in this apartment." And they kept on doing that. It was made a horrible living existence here, horrible and that was, that was what the black belt did until there were forces that were able to go outside of the so-called black belt, that that thing began to break down. But to a lot of people who made a lot of money out of those overcrowded situations that people were forced to live in. Because with black folks constantly coming into Chicago from the South, they would, the real estate people would not let them live anywhere but in this certain area and it made an awful, awful situation here.
Speaker 1: Now that's the pressure that Lorraine Hansbury wrote about in 'Raisin in the Sun'.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yeah, that's right.
Speaker 1: And when Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] came here to try to relieve.
Speaker 2: Well yeah, of course he came along after, but way back, way back, oh, I guess in the '40s [1940s] perhaps, I don't remember what the day was, you see all these white neighborhoods outside of the so called black belt had these restrictive covenants on property. In other words the property owners would agree that they would not sell lease, or anything, any property to anybody to live in or to reside therein if they were workers, anything like that. You know. Terrible thing, all of them had that. Now one good thing about our company [Supreme Liberty Life Insurance Company] was, the insurance company was, it was a case of [Earl] Dickerson also involved, [Carl] Hansberry moved into a place on 60th Street and the neighbors began to tell him that he can't stay, because they all had the restrictive covenant. He'd have to give it up. And so Hansberry got together with Dickerson and some others and they fought that case. It went all the way to the United States Supreme Court. And then the United States Supreme Court declared restrictive covenants on property of the nature we're talking about, were not valid, they were not valid. And that broke the whole thing open.
Speaker 1: And this was Lorraine Hansberry's father?
Speaker 2: There was a relationship, I don't know whether that was her father or not. Might have been an uncle or something. But that's what finally broke the thing open, 'cause these real estate people were making millions on forcing people to live in an area that wasn't designed for that many people. They were going to make them live there anyway. And so, that accounted for a lot of the conflicts between people, you know, as this thing finally began to break up. That's a significant role that our folks played, my people, the insurance company played, when they allowed Dickerson to spend his time fighting that restrictive covenant.
Speaker 1: Was it projected that business would get better, as people spread out a little bit?
Speaker 2: I suppose that could have been in somebody's mind, but the thing was, that you can't keep on forcing people to live under these inhuman conditions. The conditions these folks lived under, were just inhuman. In some of these places these guys would put a whole family in a room. They've got a five or six room apartment, put a family in each room. And all the other floors, do the same. And it was impossible, absolutely impossible, so it was going to break open one of these days but the Supreme Court finally, because of this Hansberry case, and because of the legal talent that we were able to put into it, that the Supreme ourt finally decided that they were un-lawful, and not to be permitted.
Speaker 1: Was Supreme Life involved in community development at all?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, yes. We would make mortgages some place that, if that's what you mean. The white real estate people just did not want to let the black community expand. And so, if you wanted a place, not in the community, the question was, where are you going to get your mortgage? And so that thing finally broke down. It was a long process, but it finally broke down. If you got a mortgage it usually was an extreme high rate of interest, disagreeable terms, but you still were able to break it.
Story_ID: 15173
Speaker 1: When you look back on all this, what are your hopes and aspirations for today's black community?
Speaker 2: I don't know if I'm the one to make this prediction or not, but when I moved here [Chicago, Illinois] eleven years ago, I got a telephone call from some reporter downtown, who said he wanted to come out here and talk to me. I said "Okay, whenever you want, call me". So he called back later. So he said "Look, I think I'm not going to be able to get out there, can we make that interview over the telephone?" I said, "As far as I'm concerned if you want to, got something you want to ask me over the telephone, I'll try to answer it." So he says, "Okay, tell me, why did you move out into that building that you're in, when you could have gotten such a nice, beautiful home out in one of the suburbs?" I said, " I moved here because I like it here." (Laughs). That's what I told him. That let me know there was a hope that blacks would push out into the suburbs and make less problems for whites in here, you see what I mean. And he asked me outright, "Why would you rather move there than out in a nice beautiful home out in the suburbs?" I said, " I like it here." (Laughs) So, right now, politics is making a whole lot of things happen which I don't know. It's hard to say, I don't know where the trend is, for a while I thought the trend was to the suburbs. I'm not so sure whether that's the trend now or not. I'm not so sure.
Story_ID: 15174
Speaker 1: What happened to Supreme [Liberty] Life Insurance Company?
Speaker 2: Okay, you say what happened to it? It doesn't exist anymore? Is that what you mean?
Speaker 1: Well, the building's closed--.
Speaker 2: Okay, it doesn't exist anymore, so we couldn't make enough money to have a surplus, and set up the required reserves. In other words, you pay all your expenses, and pay all your claims, and do all those things you have to do, and then you set up the reserve, and you hope you have some surplus. Now we were getting to the point, where no--we were not having any money to go into surplus. As a matter of fact, we were having to take money out of surplus, to help maintain that reserve. So, the thing that we did was, we had a deal with another company for them to take over completely all of our policies, which would mean then, that we call that a re-insurance. That this other company would re-insurance all of our policies. And for them to do that, we had to send them all the reserves that we had behind those policies, which may have run, forty, or fifty million dollars. I don't know at this point how much it was. Quite a bit, quite a bit of reserve. And then they could operate on their own, the other company. When we pay out that much in reserve, we're down to practically nothing in surplus. Now what we got left, we got some real estate. You see most of that reserve was in cash and securities, and stocks and bonds, mostly bonds and stocks, things like that, Now we don't have any reserves. So we got some old buildings. The insurance department told us to get rid of those buildings, sell them as fast as you can, and then eventually, you're no longer in the insurance business because all your policies are now being handled by the other company. Then you're not a life insurance company anymore. So, we'll have to take your title away as a life insurance company, and as soon as you get rid of all your assets, then of course, whatever authorities are involved would take over.
Speaker 1: When did this happen?
Speaker 2: '92 [1992] I think it was. So it was just a case that we couldn't make enough money to meet our reserve requirements and also to have surplus, that was a problem. So rather than let the company get into serious trouble, shareholders suffered a loss but policyholders didn't suffer any loss at all.
Speaker 1: You think there's a future for black insurance companies in the country anymore, or in the black community?
Speaker 2: It's hard to say, it's hard to say, there might be, there might be. There are two or three companies still existing, the Golden State Mutual [Life Insurance Company], out in California, and the North Carolina Mutual [Life Insurance Company], down in Durham, North Carolina. There might be one or two others that I don't know about, but, it's going to be rough going, it's going to be rough going. I'm not too sure that there is a real future in that particular industry for blacks. I think it's going to be doubtful.
Story_ID: 15175
Speaker 1: Were you able to do some good things at Supreme [Liberty] Life [Insurance Company]? And can you tell us what you think your legacy will be?
Speaker 2: (Laughs), No, I can't tell you that, I don't know, that's getting to be too personal, I couldn't get into that.
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Madge Thomas Wheeler] get a chance to see, well she did, she got a chance to see you become successful?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, yeah,.
Speaker 1: How did she feel about your career?
Speaker 2: My mother? Well she was very pleased, Extremely pleased, extremely pleased. But then my mother died, when did I tell you, she died in '89 [1989]? Let me see. She died let me see, when did she die? She was just about ninety-seven when she died, she was born in '83 [1883] So--
Speaker 1: '79 [1979], was it '79 [1979]?
Speaker 2: Anyway, she would have been ninety-seven her next birthday, and '83 [1883] was her year of birth. Let me see, what is this?
Speaker 1: She was born in 1883 right? She was ninety years old when she died
Speaker 2: Wait a minute, my mother was born in '83 [1883], and she was ninety-seven, that would be 1979 or 1980, am I correct?
Speaker 1: That's '80 [1980].
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, she was very pleased, very pleased.
Speaker 1: Were you able to really help her?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, I helped her, I had to help her. She and I had seen so much, by me being the oldest of her children, I was so much more involved in things than anybody else was. I was right with her till the very end.
Speaker 1: So you're proud of being able to help?
Speaker 2: Oh yes indeed, she was my mentor, if I might say, a very fine woman, very fine woman, she was really my mentor. I would go to her for many things. I might get a little raise down at the company, I'd go to the phone before I got home. "Well, I got a little raise". "Well that's nice, I'm glad to hear that". You know, I mean, she was important to me, very important, and I know I was important to her.
Speaker 1: Close developmental relationship. Is there anything that we haven't asked you that you think you'd like to share with us?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know what you haven't asked me. You've been down the line here. I don't really know, I don't know. I do want to point out one other thing, my mother was not a Wheeler. My mother was a farm girl, she grew up on a farm. She knew nothing but farming. She lived on a farm until she was twenty-one years old, and then within a year after that she got married. And then when she got married, of course, they were going to do something up in Wisconsin, except that fire came along and burned them out. Except for that, she has had no farm life at all.
Speaker 1: She really missed it.
Speaker 2: Oh yes, yes. Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did she grow vegetables around the house?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, yes, we couldn't have made it if we didn't have.
Speaker 1: When she moved to Chicago [Illinois], did she grow anything in the yard?
Speaker 2: No, we didn't have a yard to grow anything in.
Speaker 1: That's part of the problem with the community you were talking about, all the space taken up.
Speaker 2: So, she's been important to me, she's been a person I could talk to about matters that were important to me. If my father [Hiram H. Wheeler] were living I probably would have gone to him, but he was not living so, yeah, she was the one that I normally gravitated to.
Story_ID: 15176
Speaker 1: It seems to me that history is very important to you. Those who are viewing this can't see it, but we are surrounded by historical material, old photos, papers and research. How did you get so interested in history?
Speaker 2: I don't know how I got so interested in history, I don't really know, but, as I got a little older, as I moved out of my teens, I came in contact with so many people who knew my grandparents, and the ones on my father [Hiram H. Wheeler]'s side, my father's father [Lloyd Garrison Wheeler, Sr.], the one who was the lawyer here, and John Jones the history clubs began to pull me in, almost, I don't know, way, way back and, they more or less threw all this stuff at me, I couldn't get away from it. I can't think of her name right now, at the library, I called her name a little earlier.
Speaker 1: Margaret Burroughs?
Speaker 2: No, not Margaret Burroughs, no, not her. Anyway.
Speaker 1: Vivian Harsh?
Speaker 2: Yeah Vivian Harsh, I knew her you know, and of course, she was pulling and tugging at me all the time, dragging me out to Graceland Cemetery [Chicago, Illinois] where the old folks were buried, and that's really how I got involved in this thing, is because once we moved to Chicago, and they associated me with the older families, they pulled me right in. Oh yes. I couldn't run from them. They made me a member of the Negro history club.
Speaker 1: Association for the Study of Negro/African American
Speaker 2: History [now Association for the Study of African American Life and History]?
Speaker 1: Something like that. Yeah they had things going. We're talking about a time, when the exploits of my grandparents were still pretty fresh in the minds of so many people. And here I'm carrying the same name, there must be something between us, so they just pulled me right in.
Speaker 2: Do you remember Carter G. Woodson?
Speaker 1: I've even met him, but do I know him--I don't know him. He has quite a history too. Every year I used to go to his affair, the affair they had every year. What do they call that thing?
Speaker 2: The Association For the Study of Negro History.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I used to go to that thing. I haven't gone in the past two or three years. But this is how I got my interest. These other folks made me take an interest. When I came out of Urbana [Illinois] here you know, my father had died, he never had, at my age of eleven, how was he going to tell me about his family in Chicago here, not anything much, you know.
Speaker 2: Do you think it's important to people, to preserve their history?
Speaker 1: Oh yes, indeed, it means everything in the world, indeed so, they should, I think it's very, very great. But once I got here, and these folks associated me right away, with the old family, even now, they're constantly after me about this, that, and the other thing.
Speaker 2: And before that time, you really didn't have a--
Speaker 1: I knew nothing about the family here, I didn't know a thing about them. I know down there in Urbana, down there on our wall, I know we had a picture of Frederick Douglass, I used to wonder, why do we have Frederick Douglass's picture? Well that's all right, leave it there, that's all right you know (laughs). But through my father, I never learned anything about the family, nothing. I'm too young, I'm too young. I just made eleven when he died. And so, I didn't know anything at all. But once we got to Chicago here and they began to associate me with the old family, then of course everything was just shoved right at me, you know. I didn't miss anything then.
Story_ID: 15177
Speaker 1: In light of the importance of history, and attempts to preserve the projects like the one you're participating in right now, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I don't know, I've never given it any kind of a thought. I suppose that if I did anything that is worth remembering, I will be remembered. But I haven't conducted my life in a way, that I'm going to make history, that I know I'm making history. I haven't done that. Things have come to me, just more or less by necessity. I think the greatest thing that ever happened to me, was my association with Supreme [Liberty] Life Insurance Company, I think that was the greatest thing that ever happened to me. It was great. I'm deeply grateful. Very, very, grateful. What life would have been like, had that not happened, I don't know. Because it was through Supreme Life, I've met more really important people down through the years, who have come through Supreme they're always interested in looking at more, you know. I never would have met so many different kinds of people that I have met had I gone somewhere else. If it had not been for Supreme, I don't know what life would have been like, I don't know. I would have made a living, maybe, but all this stuff that we're talking about right here would have been out of it, I'm sure. Don't even know if I could have pulled all this old family history up or not, I don't know.
