Story_ID: 15178
Speaker 1: Your name?
Speaker 2: William Sylvester White. W-I-L-L-I-A-M, S-Y-L-V-E-S-T-E-R, White, W-H-I-T-E.
Speaker 1: And, I need you to--first I also need the date of your birth?
Speaker 2: 7-27-14 [July 27, 1914]
Speaker 1: Boy, sir, you are in very good shape.  Fourteen.  Fourteen?
Speaker 2: (Nods for yes)
Speaker 1: And--and then I'd like to have your professions since you've had several of them.
Speaker 2: Law.
Speaker 1: Judge?
Speaker 2: Judge.
Story_ID: 15179
Speaker 1: I'd like to know what your favorite color is?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Okay, your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Ice cream.
Speaker 1: Okay, any--any favorite flavor of ice cream?
Speaker 2: Chocolate.
Speaker 1: Chocolate, okay.  Your favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: About this time of year.  Fall, early fall.
Speaker 1: And your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Anywhere that it's warm.
Story_ID: 15180
Speaker 1: Can you give me your parents' name and your siblings' name in order?
Speaker 2: There are no siblings.  My parents' name was William Sylvester White, Sr. and Mary Matilda Houston White.
Speaker 1: Now were you born--you said you were born here in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you can you tell me how--were your parents from Chicago or where were they from?
Speaker 2: They were from--one was from Kentucky.  Bowling Green [Kentucky] and my father--my mother was from Atchison, Kansas.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you--did they tell you any stories--with your mother, do you--did she ever share with you any stories growing up, of her growing up with her family or--?
Speaker 2: Yes, I mean she--yes, yes she did.
Speaker 1: Can you tell me some of those stories?
Speaker 2: I was afraid you were gonna ask me that.  Just general stories about her childhood. She mentioned how she went to Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee].  How she'd have to go to there--being from out--she was out in New Mexico.
Speaker 1: Did she grow up in New Mexico?
Speaker 2: (nods for yes)
Speaker 1: Okay, that's okay.  So can you tell me about what you knew of her family.  Did you know much about your mother's family?
Speaker 2: My grandfather was killed in a fight.  It was told to me that he was hit in the stomach by a guy and he probably would not have died now, but he died then--with the knowledge of medicine then.  My mother's mother had about six kids and she packed them all on this Santa Fe Railroad from Atchison, Kansas and went to Bowling--I mean went to Las Vegas, New Mexico--without any--without any--so far as I know without any knowledge of anybody there that would help her or anything, and she--from that location she raised six kids and she bought her home--did quite all right.  She was a boarding housekeeper.
Speaker 1: And so your mother was one of those six kids?
Speaker 2: (nods for yes)
Speaker 1: Did you--
Speaker 2: She was a twin.  Willie and Tilly.
Speaker 1: And your mother was Willie, right?
Speaker 2: No, Tilly.
Speaker 1: She was Tilly, oh.
Speaker 2: Matilda?
Speaker 1: Okay, Tilly, okay, was her nickname.  Did she talk about growing up in New Mexico and what it was like or?
Speaker 2: Not much.  Not much.
Speaker 1: And, okay.  Now she--you said that she went to Tuskegee--she went to Fisk.  Did she talk about, you know, how she then came to go Fisk or what?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she went to Fisk because my grandmother had heard the Jubilee Singers and she thought that's where I want to send my daughter and so she went to Fisk.
Speaker 1: And did your mother talk about any--any of those things growing up going to Fisk or anything?
Speaker 2: No, she didn't.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Describe what your mother was like, though?  What kind of person was she?
Speaker 2: I have a picture I can show you.
Speaker 1: We'll--we'll do that later.
Speaker 2: She was short, more heavy than she wanted to be, about the same color I am.  A public school teacher and she went to the University of Chicago after she finished Fisk and got her degree from there also.
Speaker 1: So, what--tell me--describe the person besides that she was a little overweight.  Was she a quiet person?  Was she a serious person?  Was she fun loving?
Speaker 2: She was kind of quiet.  I guess that's the reason I don't have much to quote from her, but she was intense when she was moved.
Speaker 1: Can you give an example of her being intense when she was moved?  Do you have some memory of that?
Speaker 2: I remember I got a spanking. She bought some--went down to Stop and Shop and bought some sweet bread, some--something real sweet to eat and she said--told me she got off the--I got off the El at 63rd [Street] and South Parkway [Chicago, Illinois] while she was riding on to Cottage Grove [Avenue] and she told me don't forget--don't put this down and forget it.  Of course I took the-took the parcel and put it down and forgot it and I got a wearing out for that.  I--I deserved it though.
Story_ID: 15181
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your father [William S. White, Sr.] a little bit.  Now, you said he was from--originally from where?
Speaker 2: Bowling Green, Kentucky.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what do you know about his family and growing up?  Did he--was he more talkative?  Did he share more?
Speaker 2: He was more talkative but there wasn't as much to share.  He was more talkative and then he lived longer.  He lived until a few years, until he was eighty-seven and I'm eighty-three, I mean I'm eighty-six.  He was a pharmacist.  He went to Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] also and when after he finished Fisk he went to the University of Chicago School of Pharmacy.  What was the question?
Speaker 1: What you--I was asking about his family and you were saying you didn't know as much--it wasn't as much.  He was more talkative, but there was not as much--.
Speaker 2: Well he always talked about how he was working for white folks down in Bowling Green, Kentucky and he was--the white folks--white person was an engineer. He worked as a houseboy and at the age of about fifteen he--they were going to ship the horses they had to Louisville [Kentucky].  He was--management transferred him to Louisville running on the road. And my father--they needed somebody to ride with the horse and so my father in the boxcar with the horse went to Louisville and that's how he got acquainted with a larger picture than he could achieve in Bowling Green.
Speaker 1: Now, your parents obviously met at Fisk.
Speaker 2: (nods for yes)
Speaker 1: Did they--did they ever share how they met or how they came to--to get married or what attracted them to each other?
Speaker 2: No they didn't.  They didn't say what attracted them to each other, but it was rather obvious what attracted them, but anyway my mother [Mary Matilda Houston White] got out college ahead of my father and she went to work in Texas--Atchison, Texas [sic] as a school teacher and my dad had to stay in school until he finished. That was in 1908 and that's all.  He stayed in school until he was 1908 until he went down to Texas and they kept up the relationship and then when he got able he arranged for her to come to Chicago.
Story_ID: 15182
Speaker 1: Did they [White's parents] talk about going to Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] and what it was like then?  Did they ever share that with you?
Speaker 2: There were a lot of Fiskites around Chicago [Illinois] at that time. In our few blocks I can name a lot of--but it happened they didn't--they didn't talk about that.
Speaker 1: Did they talk about the experience--what it was like going to school then?
Speaker 2: When you put it that way, I don't think they did.  They didn't say, now this is the way we did things in those days.  They didn't ever say that, but they said we did it.  This is what we did.
Speaker 1: Well, share some of the things that they said?
Speaker 2: (shakes head for no)
Speaker 1: Okay.  Don't worry.  You had mentioned that that there were several Fiskites living on the block.  Who were they?
Speaker 2: Well there's Estelle Webster McNeil (ph.) that lived over on Langley [Avenue].  There was Mrs. Mary Smith.  Mrs. Mary Robert Smith that lived on Rhodes [Avenue].  There was Minnie York Rose (ph.) that lived across the street there's like that.
Speaker 1: And did your parents--was it assumed that your father [William S. White, Sr.]--I mean I know you said you're father--your mother [Mary Matilda Houston White] followed him here, but was it assumed that he was going to come to Chicago?  I mean how did that move even happen?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Did the University of Chicago have something to do with it?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No, it was once they got here, okay, okay, and--okay.  So they came here--they came to Chicago, do you know about the year?  1908 is when your mother finished.  So 1908, what happened in--?
Speaker 2: After my dad finished.
Speaker 1: He finished, okay.
Speaker 2: What was your question?
Speaker 1: Do you know when they--when they--when actually he came here?  Did he come here in 1908?
Speaker 2: Between 1908 and 1911 he was--he went to the School of Pharmacy at the University of Chicago--University--Illinois University and then after 1911 they married.  When at that point it was I don't know.
Story_ID: 15183
Speaker 1: You're the only child?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So I wanna move to your growing up here and what it was like and you know what--what even your childhood was like growing up.  Well, what I'd like you to do is maybe share with us some of--one of your earliest memories?
Speaker 2: I lived, first lived at--on Vernon [Avenue], 66th [Street] and Vernon [Chicago, Illinois] and then when I was six, five, I moved to 6342 Eberhardt [Avenue] and when I was there almost all my neighbors were white.  I know I remember this because I could've--a girl sat--sat on my steps--you know, the steps down and I told her move 'cause she has no business sitting on steps and she called me a nigger and I never heard the word before.  So I came in and told my mother [Mary Matilda Houston White].  My mother told me to go back out there and tell--call her a dirty white trash.  I didn't do it because she was gone when I went back there (laughter), but I remember that.  I never thought--I never thought that dirty white trash was enough for--was bad enough.  I'd later learned some bad words but they were never bad enough but I don't know, it didn't feel like I was getting even when I called her a dirty white trash.
Speaker 1: And how old do you think you were around then?
Speaker 2: Five.
Story_ID: 15184
Speaker 1: What was your family life like at that time?  Do you know--your mother [Mary Matilda Houston White]--well I'm just saying what was--what was it like growing up?
Speaker 2: Well my mother--Johnny Williams' mother down the street took care me on--and my mother was teaching and I was going to school.  My mother taught--I--as far back as I can remember my mother was a teacher and I would go over to her house and sleep.  I only went to school a half a day from kindergarten in those days.  I guess it still is, and I would sleep the other half day over to her house until I got out of kindergarten and then I went--gee, I get mixed up.  I think--I was thinking that Margaret Brown took me to grammar school.  Yeah.  What do you wanna know?
Speaker 1: Well, I was just wondering, you know, what it was--you know any other childhood memories you'd like to share?  You were saying your mother, you know, worked from the beginning of what you remember.
Speaker 2: She was a teacher yeah.  I don't remember.
Story_ID: 15185
Speaker 1: Tell me what schools you went to?  You went to elementary--.
Speaker 2: I went to grammar school and high school and college.
Speaker 1: I know but which ones?
Speaker 2: James McCosh Grammar School, Hyde Park High School [Chicago, Illinois], and the University of Chicago.
Speaker 1: And, okay, do you, let's say was there any favorite teacher that you had, like you know I wanna say  more between--in grammar school did you have any favorite teacher?
Speaker 2: My grammar school, my kindergarten teacher.
Speaker 1: And why?  What was her--well I don't know if you remember her name, but do you remember why you liked her and what--why?
Speaker 2: She was pretty.
Story_ID: 15186
Speaker 1: How would you describe yourself as a young person?  Where you quiet?  Were you introspective?  Were you a dreamer?
Speaker 2: I wasn't a dreamer, but I was introspective.  I was a schemer.
Speaker 1: And when you say you were a schemer, just give me an example of that?
Speaker 2: Well there's a fellow that could beat me up and I decided that there would be--it wouldn't be natural for--it wouldn't be pleasant for him to beat me up every day, so I schemed and I made friends with him (laughter).
Speaker 1: Any other way you would describe yourself?
Speaker 2: I was a fast runner.  I later was on the Hyde Park [High School, Chicago, Illinois] track team.
Speaker 1: Okay, let's--were there any, you know--did you have any dreams of when you were young about what you wanted to be?
Speaker 2: I always said I wanted to be a lawyer.  I didn't know what a lawyer was, but I said that I wanted to be a lawyer.
Speaker 1: And--what--you know--that--I'm wanting--I just want to get a sense of what it was like growing up?  Were you--you know, was your--I mean both of your--your mother [Mary Matilda Houston White] and father [William S. White, Sr.]--your father, now what was his profession?
Speaker 2: He was a chemist, a pharmacist.
Speaker 1: Pharmacist, okay.  So, would you say your environment--your home environment was pretty studious or was it--?
Speaker 2: Good.
Speaker 1: Good, okay.
Speaker 2: Studious I guess.
Speaker 1: That really?
Speaker 2: That--my father was a student.  You would think my mother was.  My father was the one that helped me with algebra and whatnot, but he was good.
Speaker 1: And your mother, she--you said she went to the University of Chicago?  Wasn't that pretty--pretty significant back then?
Speaker 2: It's significant now.
Speaker 1: I know.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: It was significant when you came along (laughter) that's what I'm--so was there any--I mean did she talk about--I'm just trying to get a sense of some story behind this.
Speaker 2: She didn't talk much.  She really didn't.  I can't remember her saying--ain't I great, I went to the University of Chicago or--or acting like it.
Speaker 1: Okay, but I'm trying--okay, then let me, you know at the time that you were, you know a conscious young man--I'm just trying to get a sense of--you know, I know you were--were a good runner.  You were on the track team, but what other, you know, what was it like growing up?  What was Chicago like?  What you were like?  I'm trying to get a sense of--.
Speaker 2: We thought that we were better than maybe anybody else.  I thought I was better than most kids, but I didn't want to act haughty.
Story_ID: 15187
Speaker 1: What was Hyde Park High School [Chicago, Illinois] like at that time?
Speaker 2: Well there were about three or less kids per class--that's black kids.  We had good basketball players, Killer Johnson, I mean, yeah, Killer Johnson and Al Johnson. Wasn't--the track team--the basketball team wasn't much good.  But it was--we had--we had--we were represented--were good on it.  Oh, I guess--I belonged to the ROTC [Reserve Officers Training Corps] in high school.  I got into it by a fluke and they wouldn't let any Negroes be officers there.  That quickly changed but during all the time I was there was no Negro officer in the ROTC.
Speaker 1: Now, when you--anything else about, you know, growing up.  Let's see you were in high school when, what--?
Speaker 2: 1927 to 1931.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So Chicago was pretty hopping at that time in many ways.  Were--there were--at that time that was a little bit before the great migration really began when people were starting to move in, you know blacks were trying to--were starting to move in and--.
Speaker 2: It was the end of the migration.  The First World War migration.
Speaker 1: That's right, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Most of the kids were from the South, down south, most of the Negro kids.
Speaker 1: And you said that you had some sense about yourself as being better?
Speaker 2: (nods for yes) Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: And just describe that a little bit?
Speaker 2: Well, I said to my friend and I said to a friend of mine, it was in high school I told my friend this.  I said, "Oh, gee, there was a whole lot of nice people up at the place where we went for the summer," and I described the teacher and whatnot who were very nice to us and when I was describing it to him I realized that I was describing middle-class America, and I didn't mean to be holding myself apart, but I just admired them and I thought they were nice.
Speaker 1: Now what places would you go for the summer?
Speaker 2: Idlewild [Michigan] and a place--a place just outside of Idlewild called Pentwater [Michigan], P-E-N-T-W-A-T-E-R.
Speaker 1: Now describe those places because they are very well known but some people don't know them, but describe what types of places they were?
Speaker 2: Pentwater is just a home--a home of a woman who did that and she cooked and you know, was our housekeeper for the summer.  We'd would go up there--we went up there for three weeks, one week like that.  Her name was Bryson.  Mr. and Mrs. Bryson.
Speaker 1: And what about Idle--Idle--?
Speaker 2: Idlewild?  It was for the hip--hip cats in those days.  I can remember seeing a woman drive her Dodge car down the--down the dusty road and she was just swerving--.
Story_ID: 15188
Speaker 1: You said you were proud?
Speaker 2: Of the fact that I got out of grammar school when I was twelve years old.  I knew that I ahead of the rest of the people that was in my class.
Speaker 1: Now you were talking about Idlewild [Michigan] when you grew up, and so what was that?
Speaker 2: Well, just crazy teenagers and I guess they were older than that.  I--I was watching my cousin Minnie [Houston] who was older than I was. She would go up there with us and--they would go up with the kids and drive fast and drink--I thought acting crazy.
Speaker 1: Now for those people who don't know, what was Idlewild and where was it located?
Speaker 2: Idelwild was right outside of Baldwin, Michigan.  It was on the Lake [Michigan].  It was a colony of about, I guess about two or three thousand Negroes up there and it was like a summer resort and it had restaurants and had a night club up there and like that.
Speaker 1: And do you have any memories of the time you spent there?
Speaker 2: We didn't spend there--we spent a lot of time with Mrs. Bryson and then drove up there to spend some time.  We didn't ever speak--we never were overnight guests.
Story_ID: 15189
Speaker 1: What was Chicago [Illinois] like?  I mean you said that either you--you were--you lived on Eberhart, South Eberhart [Avenue].  What--I would say up until the time you graduated from high school?
Speaker 2: Up until the time I was in the [U.S.] Navy.
Speaker 1: And what--you said--was that community--was it all--did it turn--you said it was mainly--you were one of a few blacks.  Did it stay that way or did it change?
Speaker 2: It stayed that way a long time considering what it was--what had happened.  I think when I graduated from grammar school, it was almost all white and it was--the change was gradual when--when I graduated from college it was still a few whites left in the neighborhood and that's a period of how many years?  Seven, ten years, about ten years.
Speaker 1: And do you have any other memories of Chicago and what it was like, you know, back--back then when you were in high school?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  I can remember a boy, he--some boys about my age were going to get a job at being ushers at the Regal [Theatre, Chicago, Illinois] and boy that was hot stuff.  I remember some boys, a little bit older than I was, they had a job at the Savoy Ballroom [Chicago, Illinois]. Yes, I remember.
Speaker 1: And tell--what were those places like, you know for people who--you know--realize this is for younger people.  A lot of our people just have no knowledge of the history and so what were--what were--share--share with us a little bit what the Savoy was like?
Speaker 2: If I could just have you keep--sit back, 'cause when you move forward you get out of the light.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: Or what the Regal is like.
Speaker 1: Well the Regal was a fine theater.  There was an orchestra and--and with the shows--Balaban and Katz Theater. The Savoy was a ballroom.  I remember when they had two orchestras at the Savoy.  Louie Armstrong and somebody else--not Erskine Tate, but they had two orchestras alternating, playing.  What did you ask me?
Speaker 2: I was asking what--what, you know what it was like both at the Savoy and at the Regal?
Speaker 1: First class is about all I can say.
Speaker 2: Now, do you have--I mean did you ever--did you actually--did you usher at either place?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Did you ever see a show at either place?
Speaker 1: Oh, yes, I saw shows at the Regal--at this--and on the stage they had the--'cause they had--on the stage they had four acts that would be about that I think, the length of it and they would have the Negro acts.  I guess when they played the Savoy--the Regal Theater, they were doing quite all right--Buck and Bubbles [Buck Washington and John Bubbles].  I can't think of the name of them right now but they had acts.
Story_ID: 15190
Speaker 1: You graduated from Hyde Park High School [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now were you a good student?
Speaker 2: Fair.
Speaker 1: And where were--was it anticipated that you were going to go straight to college?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So how--how did you ended up--how did you end up--what was the decision about where you were going to go to college?
Speaker 2: My folks took me down to Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee], let me look it over.  I looked it over and they were starting--well, there was a new--at [University of] Chicago was a new plan under [Robert M.] Hutchins where they let you go as fast as you wanted to go and so forth.  So I decided to go--that I would go to Chicago.  It was a tough decision but I decided that and I guess I thought that the Fisk would be a school--at that time I was thinking about going there--of pretty boys and I wasn't pretty.  That together with--.
Speaker 1: So what was the application?  Was it like now that you apply and you get in, or did they--was it a test, was it an essay?  What was the difference back then?
Speaker 2: These people apply now and they wait and wait to hear from them.  I didn't wait, I applied and pretty soon I got my info--my approval of my application, but I don't remember any--and this is during the Depression mind you.  I guess the Depression was pretty bad then. When we had the alphabetical agencies, the WPA [Works Progress Administration] and NYA [National Youth Agency] and what not.
Speaker 1: So now when you--what did you think--you--at this point and time when go to school, you still wanted to be a lawyer?
Speaker 2: (nods for yes) Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay, and--.
Speaker 2: I never said I wanted to be anything else.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What fascinated you about the law?  Why--why was that of interest to you?
Speaker 2: For one thing they made more money than anybody else, even on WPA, the WPA lawyer made more money that the WPA non-lawyer.  Then they said it was tough and I wanted to go there.
Speaker 1: And what did that represent, things being tough?  Did you, were you one to really not take on a challenge, 'cause when I asked you how you did in high school you said fair?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: But then, why--why would someone who did fair in high school want a challenge?
Speaker 2: I don't know, but I did and that stuck with me.  I wasn't a great shucks as a law school student even but when I heard something was tough, I wanted to take it.
Speaker 1: And--.
Speaker 2: I guess to prove it to myself that I could do it. Then why didn't I do better?  I don't know.
Speaker 1: And how was then the experience at the University of Chicago?  What was it like?  I mean obviously you were still--did you live--you lived at home?
Speaker 2: At home, at 6342 Eberhart Avenue.
Speaker 1: So how is that--so the home environment didn't change?  Your mother [Mary Matilda Houston White], was she any help in terms of helping guide you through process? No?
Speaker 2: (shakes head for no) She let me alone.  Really left me completely alone--she paid for it.  That was the main thing wasn't it?  That was important wasn't it?  See the public school teachers were given vouchers, that's a piece of paper that means that I will pay you when I get the money.  That's what the city gave them and the University of Chicago would cash them.  So I went through the University of Chicago for the first few years on vouchers.
Speaker 1: Now how was that whole experience--now this--I have one question though.  You--it says on your resume that you started in 1937--'35 [1935]?  No, wait a minute--I saw some dates here.  I saw '35 [1935] and '37 [1937]--.
Speaker 2: Well '35 [1935]--.
Speaker 1: You finished--I'm sorry--you finished--I see, okay, but this is like--let's see you got--okay, I--I got it, okay.
Speaker 2: See law school was you didn't have to go through four years of law school then.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay that's what I was--that's what I was confused about.  Now, so when--okay--the University of Chicago, how many blacks were there at the same time that you were a student?
Speaker 2: Three were there.  They got out of school--they graduated.  Oh, no more than that, four, yeah four were there.
Speaker 1: Out of how many students?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A hundred.
Speaker 1: Do you know how many--what their names were?  The other three?
Speaker 2: Bob [William R.] Ming, Truman Gibson and Joe Atwell (ph.).
Speaker 1: Is Bob Ming--is he still alive?
Speaker 2: (shakes head for no)
Speaker 1: I thought not, but, oh Truman Gibson we are supposed to be interviewing.  Now, so was there much camaraderie between--you know amongst you or did you feel a sense that you had a role to play as it relates to your race or you were just there to study and--?
Speaker 2: We had a fraternity and the fraternity had a role.  Did you ask me what fraternity?
Speaker 1: I wanna know what fraternity
Speaker 2: Kappa.  Kappa Alpha Psi.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You felt--you felt keenly that you were a Negro and ought to do well.  By that time I was confident that I would--the University of Chicago didn't hold any threat over me. I mean--the toughness of the University of Chicago [Law School] didn't impress me any cause I had been through the undergraduate school.
Speaker 1: Now, you took--you did take two years off between--between undergrad and law school?
Speaker 2: (shakes head for no)
Speaker 1: No? 1935 it says--.
Speaker 2: I got--I got--.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's right so it was two years--so law school that's what was confusing, okay.
Speaker 2: It was three years--three years.
Speaker 1: So it was three--no because you said--.
Speaker 2: 1931 and 1935--.
Speaker 1: '35 [1935], and then '35 [1935] to '37 [1937] for a law degree.  You were saying you didn't have to go for three years back then.  That's what you were saying to me.
Speaker 2: You--what did you say?
Speaker 1: You--you didn't have to go for as many years in--in law school then?  You--was law school two years instead of three?
Speaker 2: No three years then.
Speaker 1: Oh, should be '38 [1938].  Okay, so did you--you didn't take any time off in between?  You just went straight?  Okay.
Speaker 2: No, I took time off.  I graduated in--in January of '31 [1931].  January because I had half a year back then and I played hooky for one whole semester from '31 [1931] for a whole semester from '31 [1931] and January to '31 [1931] October.  I didn't let my folks know.  I still can't type.  I took a course in typing and I--I played hooky the whole semester.  I'm sorry I did.  I should feel happy, but I--I don't I feel--I feel handicapped.  I--.
Speaker 1: Now, Mr. White so you--how was--how did law school differ from undergraduate school?  I mean you said that you--you know you knew you could handle it, but I'm just wondering how it differed?
Speaker 2: It was tougher.  I can remember I said to Truman, he says, "How are you getting along?"  I said, "All right."  He says, "I doubt that I'm getting along all right, particularly in criminal law."  He said, "Well you get along with criminal law you ought to pass all of it because (unclear) is tough." And it was tough, grades were tough.
Speaker 1: Was there any time that you questioned whether you were really wanted to do?  You know that's what you wanted to do, was it different?  Was it different from what you thought?  Was there any course that was your favorite course?
Speaker 2: I liked practice--practice, there was some--there was a procedural course.  The procedural evidence, I liked that.
Story_ID: 15191
Speaker 1: You graduate [University of Chicago Law School] in '37 [1937] and at that point in time what do you do?
Speaker 2: Edith Sampson, did you know her--was married to a fellow named Joe Clayton and he was supposed to be a whiz bang of a lawyer.  In fact he was a whiz bang of a lawyer.  So I got a job with him.  He paid me five dollars a week.  Isn't that a shame?  I wasn't worth any more than that either.  I never felt so--I almost gave up--well I did give up practicing law.  I stopped and became a social worker.  I can't give you the dates but I was a social worker for about six months and then Bob [William] Ming got a job in Washington [D.C.] with--going to Howard [University], teaching at Howard--Howard and so I went down there, and asked him to give me a job.  He couldn't give me one but he said you can use the office.  So I used his office until 1939.
Story_ID: 15192
Speaker 1: An administrator of NYA--National Youth Administration.  It's a long story, but anyhow the fellow who was the NYA administrator was appointed United States Attorney and Charles Browning said to me one day when I was around, he said, "How would you like to be Assistant United States attorney?"  I said, "I'd like it.  I'd like to president of the United States too," but I--I it really seemed that far away from me then.  Boy did Truman Gibson and all the rest of the big shots tried to get the job, but my stuff helped.  Charlie Browning's recommendation helped and I got the job.
Speaker 2: That's fabulous.  What year was this?
Speaker 1: 1930--well, two years after I got out of law school ['39] 1939.
Speaker 2: That's very impressive there.  So you worked--you had gone to D.C. to--?
Speaker 1: No, I didn't go to D.C.
Speaker 2: But I thought that you said that you know when you--didn't you say I was working and so and--in Howard [University]?
Speaker 1: No, Charles--Bob [William] Ming went to Washington, D.C.
Speaker 2: He went to Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: I didn't go though.
Speaker 2: But he--I thought he said, do you want to--something about using his office or something and--.
Speaker 1: Earl Dickerson here in Chicago said I could use his office.
Speaker 2: Oh, Earl Dickerson, okay, sure.
Speaker 1: And--.
Speaker 2: Well, can we turn the tape back on?  That's one of your better stories and you had me cut it off! Why did you do that? (laughter)
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Now what did you want me to tell you?
Speaker 2: Well--I--I--wanted--you told the story, but you told it off camera about getting your job that you--.
Speaker 1: The way I got my job--I went to--Charlie Browning came up to me and said to how would I like to be Assistant United States attorney, and I said, "The Assistant United States Attorney, I'd like to be president of the United States, Senator--there a lot of jobs I'd like to get but I don't--Assistant United States that more"--well I didn't say it was more than I could hope for but I thought that. And they held up the job for a long time.  In fact, I think he asked me that in the early part of the year in 1939 and it was way in the fall of 1939 before the appointment was made, but I understand there was some talk upstairs--some in house. And I got the job.
Speaker 2: So, how did that feel?  That was a big deal?
Speaker 1: It was.  For example they had pictures of outstanding Negroes in Chicago [Illinois] and they had my picture there and they had a Negro--American Negro Exposition--gee it's funny how of all things for the Negro--and my picture was there along with all the rest of the big shots.  (Laughter).
Speaker 2: So did you--were you--were you here or were you in Washington?
Speaker 1: Here.
Speaker 2: And so how would--tell me what that whole experience was like, because this is the beginning of your professional career in many ways as a lawyer?
Speaker 1: How was it--what was it like?  Well first place I was--I was in the civil division and I would recommend for people they would go into the civil division rather than criminal division because it was so much broader than the criminal division and I stayed there longer than I should.  I stayed there--see I was--the war [World War II] came along and I went to the war--.
Speaker 2: Sit back.
Speaker 1: And--what was I saying?
Speaker 2: You were saying that you stayed in the position, you know--.
Speaker 1: Longer that I should.  I stayed there about fourteen years I think.  See there was about four years out for the war and then I came back--you can take the same job here that you left.  Tony Gassway (ph.) held my job while I was gone. When I came back I said "I'll take it back" and he gave it to me (laughter).
Speaker 2: Did you--what--what type--do you remember any--anything that happened during those fourteen years or any case that you worked on that was, you know, particularly known or that you took particular pride in--in working on or?
Speaker 1: Tell you what, I didn't take any pride--pride--pride.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Okay.
Speaker 1: I can't, it's too dark.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I tried those cases against Newby (ph.) and somebody else for sedition during the war. It's a crime that can only be committed in time of war.  I didn't feel proud of that.  What did I feel proud of?  I had food and drug cases.  Not from--not drug, the illicit kind, food and drug--and I could--pretty soon I got so I could almost try them with my eyes closed 'cause I--it was just routine right--one right after the other.  I developed the Federal Tort Claims Act too.  It was under my--while I was there they passed the Federal Tort Claims Act and I--it was in the early steps--early developmental steps of that case of that law.  Gee, it's been so long.
Story_ID: 15193
Speaker 1: You're very modest though.  I mean really when you think about--.
Speaker 2: Yes, I am.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you're very modest.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) But I really can't think of those things, really 'cause things were not important to me then.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And it's hard for me to go back.
Speaker 1: Where you single like this or were you married?
Speaker 2: Single.  No I got married in 19--oh, 1939.
Speaker 1: '39 [1939]?  Well '39 [1939] was the year I thought you got appointed?
Speaker 2: Yes, but it--I got married later in the year.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: I got the job and then I got married.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well that made sense then.  (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you were talking about--let's talk about your predecessor a little bit.  Did--did--there was other black person who had held, you know who had held the position--Assistant [United States attorney].
Speaker 2: I didn't--I really didn't know him.
Speaker 1: Okay, but just talk about his--his--who he--what he--what his was and what he was like?
Speaker 2: Oh, J. Gray Lucas was--was his name.  He was a very self-aggrandizing--aggrandizing man.  He was very pompous.  I didn't like him, (laughter) even though I didn't know him.
Speaker 1: So now, did you--but working for the government back then, as--as a black person was--or a Negro--was a big deal.
Speaker 2: Yes.  They said that other people--other black guys who were appointed like Charlie Lomax was appointed--something, they sent him out here for him to break in with me--although he's with [U.S. Department of the] Treasury.
Speaker 1: So, now you said that--was there anything else that--that occurred during that time you know, that you said you could do a lot of the cases with, you know food and drug cases in your, you know, with--in your sleep.  Was there anything else that you learned about being a lawyer that you thought was particularly good for training?
Speaker 2: Yes, I thought it was very good for learning, as I said the first [Federal] Tort Claims Act for--and the procedural matters.  Once again I like procedure, putting interrogatories and whatnot to--so that by the time it came down to trial, there wasn't very much to try.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, were there other blacks in your department or Negroes in your department?
Speaker 2: One black was appointed while I was there. That's Jim [James] Parsons.  He was appointed.  It broke my heart that he was appointed.
Speaker 1: Well why did that break your heart?
Speaker 2: 'Cause I thought I was going to be the first Negro federal court judge, and left the U.S. Attorney's Office when I did because I thought it would be the--it would make me a person of preferment.  I wanted to get my political ducks in a row, but Jim Parsons didn't do it after he was--got to be judge.
Speaker 1: And he was--that was--he was important--Judge [George] Leighton was before him?  No, Judge Parsons was, okay.  Yeah, several of my friends clerked with Judge--Judge Parsons.  Now, so you decided to after, you know, these--well, you know what, before we do that, I want to go to the time that you spent in the service.  So you worked for--you--you start working at the U.S. Attorney's Office in 1939 and you worked for how many years?  Four years before--five?
Speaker 2: Six years I guess.
Story_ID: 15194
Speaker 1: The war [World War II] starts and you are recruited?  Drafted?
Speaker 2: Yeah, drafted.
Speaker 1: Okay.  At what are you about this time?
Speaker 2: Thirty.
Speaker 1: Weren't you too old to be drafted?
Speaker 2: Thirty--I was thirty something.  Thirty.  I thought I was  (Laughter).  I told them I was, but they said you're in just the same.
Speaker 1: So, now then how did that work then?  I mean were you--?
Speaker 2: All the boys in the U.S. Attorneys' Office were leaving to go to the Army or Navy, and they were getting press spots in the paper about them going, so I said to a guy I knew named Bob Logran (ph.) who was correspondent for the United--not the United--the Associated Press and--what's the other one?
Speaker 1: There was the Associated Press and--you mean the black press.  No?
Speaker 2: Anyhow--.
Speaker 1: Right, right, AP, you--okay.
Speaker 2: I said, "Well listen, don't you forget me when I go in the Navy, I want you to be sure to put something big in the paper about me."  So sure enough they put something in the paper about me going into the Navy and I give that guy credit for my becoming an officer in the Navy, 'cause I went up to Great Lakes [Naval Training Center] and everything went along so, and little did I know they remembered at that time Adlai Stevenson and some of the boys in the Navy were planning to make some Negro officers.  That's a damn shame and they were--one of the good thing about it was my friend Mummy (ph.), that's the fellow that--a good friend of mine--
Speaker 1: Could you just sit back?
Speaker 2: --was in the Navy too.  He'd go in the Navy--he wasn't married so he went into the Navy early and he was in the--he was in the group--there were thirteen of us--the Golden Thirteen, and he was one of those who was supposed to be commissioned.  They took us--they took us--they took me out of boots.  I graduated from boots and when I graduated from boots they sent us over to a special--over to Camp Lawrence.
Story_ID: 15195
Speaker 1: When I was in the Navy, he was--I was--oh, the put--sent us to Great Lakes [Naval Training Center] and we were there trained under an officer by the name of Dilly (ph.), Ralph Dilly and when we were done a set date we were supposed to get our commissions. And they didn't have one for Mummy and nobody ever knew why Mummy didn't get one.  I got one.  Everybody but Mummy and another fellow got one.  I don't know why.  Now Mummy says that he thinks it's because he worked with--who was the fellow that had the Red Caps--the Red Caps--(unclear)--Townsend.  A fellow by the name of [Willard] Townsend, was head of the Red Caps, just like [A.] Philip Randolph was for the Pullman porters, but I don't know that Mummy really knew why he didn't.
Speaker 2: Sir, what were the Red Caps.  I hate to sound stupid, but what were the Red Caps?
Speaker 1: The Red Caps were the Negro stevedores who--when you go to--.
Speaker 2: (unclear)
Speaker 1: When you go to the station to catch a train, they may have a porter there--porter.
Speaker 2: They were porters?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Oh, I understand for the trains, okay.
Speaker 1: And just like Philip Randolph was for the--
Speaker 2: They--he was then--this Townsend was an--he represented the Red Caps.
Speaker 1: And the--because Mummy was going to school with a Red Cap, they thought that he might have been tainted, I guess.
Speaker 2: Well, did you feel as part of this group that there was something special, 'cause obviously you didn't willingly want to be enlisted, but you went along, but did you know that you were special at this point, the group that it was--you know that you represented the first?
Speaker 1: Oh, yes, sure.  We were made very aware of that.
Speaker 2: And--.
Speaker 1: I mean our picture was taken, we were on the page in 'Time' magazine and--.
Speaker 2: Now, why do you think more is you know heard or talked about with the Tuskegee Airmen than the Golden Thirteen?
Speaker 1: The Tuskegee Airmen did something.  The Golden Thirteen, they didn't do anything.  They were just aboard ship and had a few--some shore installations but we didn't do anything.  I was public relations officer for the Negroes in the Navy but I had to scramble like the devil to get enough good stuff to put in the paper.
Speaker 2: And, so was it in some ways you know--do you get this training just to sort of sit, because that almost happened to the Tuskegee Airmen, really, too?
Speaker 1: They fought.  They went over there to--.
Speaker 2: But they had to fight to fight?
Speaker 1: Yeah, fight to fight.
Speaker 2: Right.  And, now how was it you know being in the Navy?  You know a lot of times--did you ever go--I mean see at least the Navy--with Navy it's very close quarters especially if you are on a submarine, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, but--what was the question with the Navy's close quarters?
Speaker 2: Well, I said it's close quarters as opposed to the Army 'cause there's this, you know, here it says that you know, that the Army did more you know than the Navy, but then it quotes you as saying, the Navy is more democratic than the country it serves, and that sort of caught my attention because I didn't understand--I didn't understand that statement?
Speaker 1: That was at the end of the war [World War II] wasn't it?
Speaker 2: It just says the statement.  It doesn't say--it says that now there are more than three thousand black naval officers and they have walked through a door that the Golden Thirteen opened, but you are quoted as saying that the Navy is more democratic than the country that it serves.
Speaker 1: Well, that was in--that was later.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Well there was--for example there's a--there's a doctor, a Negro doctor and he was having some trouble getting along with his commanding officer.  And I said, "You'd better stay in the Navy because I think you'll find the Navy much more democratic than the nation it serves."  I mean the Navy went all out for this equal opportunity business.. For example, jobs and what--assignments--what--what?
Speaker 2: The only thing is that earlier in the article it said that most of the Navy--you know the Golden Thirteen and this is you it's the same thing with the Tuskegee Airmen that a lot of the, you know and in other parts of the service, that a lot of the jobs people were trained, but a lot of the jobs that they ultimately were given were menial jobs.  So why would you make that statement about it you know--you would have more?
Speaker 1: Well, you go in the Navy and you'll find Negroes going to service schools and to enlisted ranks and--and to for the commissioned officers they had--for example I--I knew a commissioned officer that was over in England.  He was--. (pause)
Speaker 2: (unclear)
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: (unclear)
Speaker 1: I know.
Speaker 2: Here's what I mean.  Negroes have ranks and have occupations in the Navy that I don't think they get in civilian life.
Speaker 1: That's fair enough.  Now, are there any memories--.  Are they gonna start that now--we've been doing the very well with the noise.  Are there any memories that you would like to share at the time there in this you know in this initial group--I don't know if you remember everyone's name or you know but are there you know anything that you would like to share or tell us that would be insights, 'cause not many people, you know, know of this story.
Speaker 2: They don't?  I thought everybody knew it.
Speaker 1: Maybe, maybe the military people but I'm just telling you outside of that--
Speaker 2: Incidentally, that quote about the Navy being more democratic than the nation it serves was written to me in a letter by an enlisted man who complained bitterly about the segregation in the Navy, but he stayed in long enough to see a change.
Speaker 1: So, is there anything else about the Golden Thirteen you'd like to share?
Speaker 2: They didn't do anything.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) They didn't do oh, gosh (Laughter)--.
Speaker 2: I don't about--if you want to put that in but they didn't do anything.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Now, okay.  Now, okay so you were in for how long, sir?
Speaker 2: Three and a half years.
Speaker 1: Three and a half years, okay.  And did you like--what did you learn about the--was there--you know here already--you had gone to law school, you have worked in a very high-level job, you know, you during the time that you served as head of you know public relations--a public relations officer and so where there other things you learned, you know 'cause each--a lot of times in life each--each experience is a learning experience.  I'm wondering if there were things that you learned during that time that--?
Speaker 2: Keep your mouth shut and do as you're told.
Speaker 1: And so it was sort of a demeaning experience? (Laughter)
Speaker 2: That's right. That's the one way to get along.
Story_ID: 15196
Speaker 1: You come back and you go back to your old job [Assistant United States attorney] after three and a half years.  Now what was that experience like?  You were happy to be back, I bet.
Speaker 2: I sure was.  What was the experience like?  I wondered whether I should go back or not and take the old job, but then playing it safe I took the old job.  It was then there was another job about 19--.  How old it was--I think--1947, '48 [1948] something like that.  I took the old job and then I left to become a precinct captain, foot solder in the Democratic organization of Cook County [Illinois]. And I stayed in that until I took a job as a--a state's attorney and then my sponsor lost my--I tell you I went over to the State's Attorneys' Office and asked for a job and he took too long in saying yes, so I went home and started a private practice and then Claude Holman said to me, "Are you working on that job over there?"  I said, "No I didn't take the job and he didn't--give it to somebody else." And he said, "They don't want anybody else.  They want you."  So I went over there and I took the job and then Gutek (ph.) lost.  I---yes, Gutek lost.  Yes, Gutek lost.  Gutek was the State's Attorney.  He lost and I was--I--didn't have a practice, didn't have a job either.  So I really got that one (unclear).  I was made Assistant Deputy Director of the Department of Investigations of the City of Chicago.  The salary was good and it really wasn't much work--wasn't much work and the reason I got the job is because Irv Cohen who was--who had been in the U.S. Attorney's Office with me had been made Commissioner of the Department of Investigation.  So I was made his assistant and what else was I saying?
Speaker 1: You were saying that, you know I wanna go back to when you were precinct captain.  What was that role--who was your sponsor at that time and what was the--?
Speaker 2: Claude Holman.
Speaker 1: Claude Holman--Claude Holman? And what were the politics?  Who was in charge--who was in--was [William] Dawson--he wasn't around?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Dawson was around.
Speaker 1: Yes, Dawson was around, okay, and what did that whole experience because you--had you been politically active up to that point?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what--what did you learn from that experience, you know being precinct captain, because it's a little more you know, down in the trenches than you (laughter) than you had been experiencing (laughter) to date?
Speaker 2: Yeah, like Truman Gibson was a poet who said, I don't see how Syl stands it, be precinct captain.  I got to be a judge and he didn't it (laughter).  What did you want to say?
Speaker 1: Well,  was just asking what you learned from that experience cause you had been you know operating up here sort of?
Speaker 2: You have to take--sometimes you have to be humble in order to be haughty.
Speaker 1: So when you left--when you said you did that, now that was before you went this Assistant State's Attorneys' Office right?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: It was after?
Speaker 2: After.
Speaker 1: Okay, after.
Speaker 2: I'd lost--I was an Assistant State's Attorney.  Then Gutek lost.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That put me without a job.  I got to be Deputy Commissioner for Investigation.
Speaker 1: For the City?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and after that--.
Speaker 1: Hang on a sec.
Speaker 2: After that it was the--. (tape interruption)
Speaker 1: Well then you went from there to Director of Department of--you had a variety of positions with the State?
Speaker 2: Yeah, those were all simultaneous.
Speaker 1: Oh, they were--oh, they were--simultaneous--you're right, they were simultaneous, okay.  What these were appointments?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Who--who was governor?
Speaker 2: Governor [Otto] Kerner [Jr.].
Speaker 1: Oh, Governor Kerner?
Speaker 2: He had been assistant--he had been United States Attorney and he knew me and he appointed me.  Ted Jones was supposed to get it but I beat him out.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) And so, there was a lot of this competition happening here (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Only one slot, that's the problem when there's--the qualified people and only one slot, right?  So, okay, so you did that for three years, you held a variety of sort State positions.  Did you--was there anything that stuck out during that period that you liked or enjoyed?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was--that was--some point where I was really on my own.  I could really do as I saw fit--run the department as I saw fit.  Kerner was a very good boss in that regard.  I could run the department as I saw fit.  Course there had to--governmental--the restraint of government--there are just so many ways you can a run a Department of Registration and Education and I ran it well.  One guy who was there--he's dead now, said one thing.  He could say I was really--he was a wonderful--controlled the purse strings--unofficial you know they have a guy in every administration that sits in the middle and governs the money going here and there. He said one thing you could--ran a clean ship.
Speaker 1: Now, then how did your appointment come off as Judge for the Circuit Court [of Cook County]?  How did that--how did happen?
Speaker 2: Two years after I was in the job of--the--I was--two years after I got the job, Director of Registration, Edith Sampson's name came up, and Claude Holman told me that maybe the thing for me to do if I wanted a job was go down there and tell the folks that I don't want--didn't want to go before the governing body of the Democratic Party--Democratic Central Committee that I didn't want the job--'cause I said--I was--wait my turn and so I did.  I hated doing that. My tongue almost--anyhow, anyhow I did, and then two years after that--four years after I was appointed, I was appointed--I was--I was selected to be judge.
Story_ID: 15197
Speaker 1: You were saying when you first started with the Circuit Court [of Cook County, Illinois] you were hearing pre-trial motions and it was sort of like, you know?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean it was nothing.  I didn't have a chance to wear a uniform, you wear a robe, I didn't--it was just nothing.  Anyhow, it was the worst job I ever had.
Speaker 1: And so then--but, you were--you know you were a judge--I mean--.
Speaker 2: I was a judge, sure (laughs).
Speaker 1: --and then it was like the worst thing you have and it's like what is this?
Speaker 2: And so pretty soon there I was appointed to the criminal court and that was swell, I enjoyed it immensely--felt the lawyers, you felt the tension, at least I did.  It was a better job--had some important cases and after that, I was a year with that, then they shipped me back downtown and I got to--had law jury, that was a good job--a good job.
Speaker 1: Now what did you like about that job?
Speaker 2: I liked my office (laughter), the--it wasn't as good as the criminal court--the tension and what not, but it was a good job, and then I heard that there was a vacancy in the juvenile court.  I don't know why, 'cause the guy didn't retire.  Anyhow, he left for some reason.  So I applied for the job--that is I went and told Claude I wanted it. And I went and told Claude I wanted it and let's see what did I do?  Maybe I didn't do anything else.  I must applied for it--I don't know what else I did but I--I got the job and I was there for twelve years.  Meanwhile Claude died and I applied for this--I applied for the job of [Illinois] Appellate Court Judge and the rest is history.
Speaker 1: Now, I wanna ask you just two--two things come to mind.  One, who is Claude--who?
Speaker 2: Claude Holman.
Speaker 1: Oh, Claude Holman, okay, you had mentioned him before and the other thing is that you had also talked about some cases when you were in--you know as a criminal--you sat on the criminal courts and I was wondering what that you were particularly proud of--and I wondered--liked or you know and I was wondering if you remember what those were?
Speaker 2: Could I just have you sit back?
Speaker 1: I liked--what did I like about the job?
Speaker 2: No, about the cases.  The cases in the--you said you were in the court?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I don't know what it--.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I--I remember one case--one case.  I took my wife to go to Europe right after I tried that case and I went to Old Bailey [London, England] and there I saw a case very similar to the case I was trying in Chicago [Illinois].  I told the judge that.  I think he was very interested.  What--what was it that you asked?
Speaker 2: I was asking about, you know a case that you particularly liked when you were, you know sat on the criminal court?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that was a case that--.
Speaker 2: What was that?
Speaker 1: That was a case--that was on trial for months--or weeks anyhow.
Speaker 2: What were the issues of the case, or what was the case about?  Was it a criminal case, was it fraud, was it--what?
Speaker 1: No, not fraud.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry, criminal--I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: It was a criminal case.
Speaker 2: You said Old Bailey?  Somewhere--
Speaker 1: I went to Old Bailey in London.
Speaker 2: Oh, and they had a similar case?
Speaker 1: Yeah, a very similar case.
Speaker 2: Oh, that's interesting.  Okay.
Speaker 1: I thought you asked me what kind of case.  It was a case where they were--kidnapped a guy and they kept him for a long time and harassment and it wasn't harassment, but I don't know what it was, but they kidnapped a fellow and they held him a long time.
Story_ID: 15198
Speaker 1: When I was reading the material on you, it talked about all the work that you did for the juvenile court system and I'd like to--you to address that issue.  Why--you know--I mean obviously you came into this job [Judge of the Circuit Court of Cook County, Illinois] as a consummate professional, but what, you know, you've really sort of made your mark here with the juvenile court system and I was wondering, you know, why or was it just that's the way you are you are a consummate professional or that you took a real interest in--in what was happening within the system?
Speaker 2: It was the latter (laughter), yes, I'm a consummate professional and no, I don't know, I guess I--I guess I threw myself into the work and like, I was there at the right time.  See it wasn't long after the [Gerry] Gault case ['In re Gault'] that I was there and the juvenile court system was just getting used to 'Gault'.  You know 'Gault'?  It was a case that says that you had to give juveniles the same rights you give adults, and for example, I asked--I told the Chief of Police once in Chicago, "You have to get your men in here if you expect me to hold the people--hold them after arrest."  He said, "Why get them in here?"  I said, "Because that's the law."  He said, "Well we haven't been doing it."  See, they were--they were--they didn't even prove probable cause for making the arrest, and the--just read out the charges and you are charged--anyhow they were just--and then they were having the children accused of crime, held in the Audi Home [Juvenile Detention Facility, Chicago, Illinois] home and the Audi Home was a jail, and I abolished that. My God, it was so many things.  It's been twenty years since--since I was there but that's--that's some of them.
Speaker 1: Now, then how did the opportunity come about for you to go to the Illinois Appellate Court?
Speaker 2: How did it come to me?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: It didn't come to me, I went and got it and ran for it.  What do you mean?
Speaker 1: That's right, I'm sorry.  That's right--because that's what I want to talk about because you--this--this whole thing with being precinct captain, you know, did it blaze the ground for you to really know how to work the system--the judicial system to get elected?
Speaker 2: (shakes head for no)
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: It taught me how people--what some people have to do to get elected, but--a whole lot of judges out here have never been a precinct captain or know what a precinct looks like.
Speaker 1: So what were you most proud of?  Let me ask this.  What were you most proud of in your accomplishments first as a juvenile court judge and then--first step, what were you most proud of?
Speaker 2: I guess I made the system stop putting--putting non-delinquents in the [Cook] County Jail, that is the juvenile court jail.
Speaker 1: So where did they go after--where were they going?
Speaker 2: That's what they asked me.  I said, "I don't know but you are not going to put them there."  "What will we do with them?"  "I don't know.  That's your problem."  (Laughter) But they--they--what did they do with a dependent child?  I mean that's the same question, but I--I really don't know.  What do they do with them now?  They put them everywhere they put dependent children.
Speaker 1: Now from 1980 to 1991 you served as Judge of the Illinois Appellate Court and I was wondering how you found that experience versus serving on the Circuit Court?  Did you prefer it?  Did you--?
Speaker 2: It was a nice--it was step down towards retirement.  You only work one day a week, although you work everyday, but you know you are only required to be there one day a week. It's the best job in the world.
Story_ID: 15199
Speaker 1: Remember when you were telling me when you were young and you always wanted to be a lawyer and you got your--you know you were very singular and you also got your wish. Are there things that--are you happy with the way, you know your life (unclear)?
Speaker 2: When faced with the same question I come up with the inability to answer.  I mean the question is, what job would I prefer to have rather than this?  I don't--there isn't any job better than I have, being a judge, and looking at the progression as I went up the steps, I don't anything better.
Speaker 1: And why do you think you know for young people coming along, why would recommend a judicial--I mean a legal--going into the law.  Why do you think that's important for African Americans?
Speaker 2: Incidentally I have a granddaughter that's been admitted to the Bar in California.  I think it's a marvelous tool because you can do with it what you want.  You can be a social worker and you can be a--something in the law or you can turn the wheel around almost any way you want.
Story_ID: 15200
Speaker 1: What hopes do you have for--for the, you know for our race?
Speaker 2: I started to say not much (pause), but that would be kind of a flippant answer. (pause) I guess to continue along the same line that they're continuing.  The thing that I worry about is that there pulls apart--I'm afraid that the blacks are being left behind and there's a certain segment of blacks that were crossed--we should leave these others behind and I don't see anything that's gonna stop it.  Like Oprah Winfrey is on a show. That's great, she goes up here--up to Indiana to her home up there.  I don't have much hope.  They are being pulled apart.  Well what is there to be hoped for?  What is there?  You are shaking your head, but what is there?
Speaker 1: Well I'm not sure either.  I tend to sometimes to have that concern myself, but--let me ask you--what are your views then on the Civil Rights Movement?  Do you think that it had--the Civil Rights Movement in its last reincarnation--do you think that it was a positive or a negative for the black man and--?
Speaker 2: I think it's positive--obviously, I think it's a positive, not obvious, I do think it's positive.  Bless [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.]'s heart.  He was the right time, the right place and whatnot.  He had his finger on the right thing when he was--thought maybe he had gone far enough and he ought to get on economic issues, but I don't know.
Story_ID: 15201
Speaker 1: Who would have considered a role model in your life and why?
Speaker 2: (pause) I would say my father [William S. White, Sr.] if I would have to have any--except he gave up too--very easy.  I never thought of that.  I would say Earl Dickerson but he was too high falutin'.  I don't know.  I hadn't realized that I didn't have one.  I don't know.
Speaker 1: Now, what as a lawyer--who--who did you--who would you say--what lawyer, African American or non would you--did you admire and why?
Speaker 2: That I admired?  So far as you talking about his court behavior?  Oh golly, I've forgot the guy's name.  I won't even mention him.  See at the time I liked guys for their--pick them for their certain roles, but overall--I guess that the reason I didn't turned out so bad.
Story_ID: 15202
Speaker 1: I would like to know what you would want to be remembered for?
Speaker 2: A nice guy, smart, but not real smart.
