Story_ID: 15924
Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson.  I'm the interviewer and Scott Stearns is the videographer.  And I'd like to have you start out by stating your name and spelling it for us.  And I'll--and I'd like to have your date of birth.
Speaker 2: My name is Addie Lorraine Wyatt.  I was born--.
Speaker 1: You need to spell it.
Speaker 2: A-D-D-I-E, L-O-R-R-A-I-N-E, W-Y-A-T-T.  Do you need the capitalization?  Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: And your date of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born March the 8th, 1924.
Speaker 1: And we'd like to have today's date.
Speaker 2: Today's date is June 1st, 19--2002.
Speaker 1: And we'd like to have the location where we're at, the address.
Speaker 2: We're at my home here at 8901 South Chappel, Chicago, 60617.
Speaker 1: And also your profession?
Speaker 2: I am a servant of the most high (laughs) God.  I'm the former International Vice President of the largest union in the AFL-CIO [American Federation of Labor-Congress of Industrial Organizations].  That's United Food and Commercial Workers union.  I'm also a ordained clergy.  I'm the founder of the Vernon Park Church of God [Chicago, Illinois] with my husband.  And he and I pastor that church for forty-three years.
Speaker 1: And we're going to--but when you describe yourself, would you describe yourself as a religious leader and union organization or activist?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 15925
Speaker 1: I ask five questions of everyone.  They're a little 'People' magazine-ish, just short answers, but I'd like to know what your favorite food is?
Speaker 2: What my favorite food?  Oh, so many of them, but I like macaroni.
Speaker 1: Macaroni or macaroni and cheese?
Speaker 2: Macaroni and cheese and fried chicken.  Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, I'd like to know what your color is?
Speaker 2: I have many.  There are some people who think that I love purple, and I do, but I like most colors, pink.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation.
Speaker 2: Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: Favorite phrase or saying, favorite saying?
Speaker 2: Favorite--I can't hear you.
Speaker 1: Oh, favorite phrase or saying.
Speaker 2: Oh.  I am hopping, but not stopping.
Speaker 1: I am hopping, but not stopping.  Oh, that's cute.  That's nice.  (Laughter)  That's a recent one, isn't it?  Okay.
Story_ID: 15926
Speaker 1: I'd like to first start out by asking you about your family.  You know, I'd like to start with your mother, Maggie.  And I'd like to have you tell us, you know, well, say her name, but I'd like you to talk about her background and what you know about her background.
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Maggie Cameron.  And the first memory of my mother, I guess I was about two years old.  And that was when my sister under me was being born.  I didn't know that I was two at that time, but I remember things that took place.  And my mother was shocked that I remembered these things.  And she told me, "That's unbelievable because you were only two years old."  So I remember my mother from two, a very beautiful woman.  That's she on the piano there, a very beautiful, loving mother.  And she was a former teacher, but also a seamstress who did excellent work.  And she made all of our clothing for us, thank God, because many days we were very rich.  We just didn't have any money.  And she really made life better for us because we always had lovely things to wear because lovingly, she made our clothes.  There were eight of us.  And, of course, there are only four of us left now.  But my mother died at a very young age, thirty-nine years old.  She had five children that were underage.  I was the second child.  And she, at the time, I guess I was twenty years old when she died, she gave me her five children and asked my husband and I take those children and to finish raising them.  And this we did with a marvelous blessing to have those children in our lives.  They were wonderful, sweet children.  But my mother trained us all the time that we were little, to learn and respect each other.  And she reminded the children, even when I was very young, that I was their second mother and that when I gave instructions to them, that they were to take heed to those instructions and follow through.  Well, little did we know that I would be young when I take on this responsibility.  But they were a loving, wonderful family.
Speaker 1: Where did she hail from?
Speaker 2: My mother was from Vicksburg, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Did she talk at all about growing up in Vicksburg?  Was she a conversant person or was she sort of quiet?
Speaker 2: We didn't talk very much about growing up, you know, in Vicksburg.  I visited Vicksburg once or twice when I was a child and vaguely remember Vicksburg.  But we lived in Brookhaven, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: And how far is Brookhaven from Vicksburg?
Speaker 2: I'm not too sure.
Story_ID: 15927
Speaker 1: Your father, his name?
Speaker 2: His name's Ambrose Cameron.
Speaker 1: And what do you, what do you know about his background and his growing up?
Speaker 2: My father was a very interesting, but frustrated young, black man.  I later learned that that came about because he was so eager to do great things and racism placed a limit that he just could not take.  And he fought against it.  It made him a very angry, frustrating person.  Yet and still, he was very talented, very knowledgeable.  He was a tailor.  My mother [Maggie Mae Cameron] was a seamstress.  My father was a tailor.  And he'd did pressing and worked for a tailor shop in Brookhaven, Mississippi.  When we were very young, I guess I must have been about five or six years old, he had an incident in Brookhaven with a white man there.  And he had to leave Brookhaven by night.  We didn't understand that at that time, but later on we learned something about the story.  And my mother, in the year of 1930, she brought five of us to Chicago [Illinois] from Brookhaven to join my father here.  We came to what we thought was the land of hope and free, and we almost starved to death because jobs were hard to find at that time.  And my mother could not teach here as she taught in the South.  And so she would do domestic work and sewing.  And, of course, my father, he would do pressing or tailoring work wherever it could find it.  And that was very limited.  That frustrated him terribly to not be able to support his family when he was willing to do so.  He died at a young age too.  He was about forty-four or forty-five years old when he died.
Story_ID: 15928
Speaker 1: Tell me the incident that happened when you were two that you have memory of, your mother [Maggie Mae Cameron].  You said she was giving birth.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What did you remember about that?
Speaker 2: One thing that I remembered is that the neighbors, as they usually do in the South, came over one day and they were going to assist me in my dressing and preparing and my hair.  And my hair has always been short cropped, but my mother never braided it, and--in these little braids.  She would always make a little bob and then put a little bow ribbon on.  And when the neighbors came, they braided my hair in these little French rows.  I didn't like that.  And I've always been a child to protest against things that I didn't like, even if I got a spanking for doing it.  And I protested.  And the neighbors were trying to help my mother because my mother was with child, you know, on that day.  I fought against it and then they would shake me and spank me.  And I would sass them.  And I went out in the streets across from our house.  And the other neighbors heard me crying and protesting and just fussing.  And they would come over to tell me to shut up.  Well, one thing that they did--I later learned was something that really angered me.  I was the black child.  My mother was a fair-complexioned woman.  My father [Ambrose Cameron, Sr.] was a black.  And the neighbors would call me the little black one because all of the other children were light complexioned.  And I would sass them.  At that time black was not beautiful in our minds, you know.  And so, I, remember these episodes that took place on that day, my anger, my frustration.  Later on, I discovered that one of the frustrations was that there was a new baby in the house.  But I just thought it was these things that were happening to me with the neighbors, you know.  And my mother--later on when I told her about this day, she said, "You couldn't remember that."  I said, "Yes, I did."  She said, "You were only two years old."
Speaker 1: Well, that's amazing.
Story_ID: 15929
Speaker 1: Do you know the origin of your family name--I mean your father's name, Cameron?  It's a, you know--do you remember the origin at all?
Speaker 2: I really wished I knew.  And here of late, I have longed to know it with the desire to research to the extent that I could to find out because it was something very beautiful about my family in that the way that they related to each other as family.  The way that they handled themselves.  And I know that my father [Ambrose Cameron, Sr.] was not a high school student.  My mother [Maggie Mae Cameron] was, but my father was not.  And my grandmother was not.  And I am the third generation from slavery in my family.  But their, speech and the way they conducted themselves made me to wonder what that background really was like, you know, especially coming from the South.
Speaker 1: Did your--did you know much about your father's side of the family?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No, so, okay.  Do you know where he was from originally?  Was is Mississippi?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Louisiana.
Speaker 2: Somewhere in Louisiana.  But I knew his mother.  His mother and my mother, they lived together for twenty years, mother-in-law and daughter-in-law.  And the thing that I just marveled at, when I would hear them say that they had lived together for twenty years and never had an argument, a mother-in-law and a daughter-in-law.  And that was something I carried with me so that I could say that I lived together with my mother-in-law for twenty-two years, never had a falling out.
Speaker 1: Now, do you know how your parents met?
Speaker 2: My mother was teaching school in Brookhaven [Mississippi].  She would come during the summer months and stay with her aunt.  [Chicago, Illinois] Alderman Lorraine Dixon's father and mother knew my mother and my father when they were young people.  And they told me some of these things.  And she would come to Brookhaven and teach school.  And she met my father while she was there in Brookhaven.  And one of the years she didn't go back home.  She married him.
Speaker 1: Now, let's go through your siblings and, you know, in birth order.  You're the second, but can you go through the, names?
Speaker 2: Yes, I have an older brother, Ambrose, Jr.  And Ambrose is two years older than myself.  And then I'm number two.  Then number three is--I have my sister, Edna.  Edna's two years younger.  We're all two years apart.  And then under Edna was Emmett.  And then under Emmett was [William] Willie James.  We call him 'Mickey.'  And then under Willie James was Bluett.  And under Bluett was Audrey.  And then the baby, Maude.
Speaker 1: Now, can you--so you were actually the oldest daughter.
Speaker 2: Oldest daughter.
Story_ID: 15930
Speaker 1: And can you tell some more stories of your time in, sort of Brookhaven [Mississippi]?  I would like to ask you one question before that.  I'd like you to take yourself back to that time, you know, of your early years.  And I'd like you to tell me what, either sights, smells or sounds remind you of growing up in Brookhaven?
Speaker 2: Sights?
Speaker 1: Smells or sounds.
Speaker 2: The sights were the beautiful trees, the flowers, the cattle and the vegetables and things that we grew.  And we always had plenty to eat because we produced our own, with the exception of just a few things.  We had mud, which I hated because during the summer months, it was very hot.  You'd have to walk in that hot mud in your bare feet.  These are things that I really disliked, you know, when I was a child there.  But the cattle, the pigs, the chickens and things like that, we were familiar with.  And we played with the chicken.  And we learned to realize that this was our food and that we were to protect them, even though sometimes we might have been cruel to the, to the chicken or the little animal.  But I loved the South.  I thought it was beautiful.  But I--there are things that I did not understand.  When I was little, my mother [Maggie Mae Cameron] and father [Ambrose Cameron, Sr.], they would get our groceries from the Italian store on the corner.  And I would go down as a child and order things on the account and the storeowner would give them to me.  So when we would play house in Brookhaven, we would go under the house and set up our little tables.  And, of course, they always selected me as the mama when we played house because I would get real food.  I did not like to eat mud cakes.  And the other kids, if you selected them as mama, you'd get mud cakes.  But I would go up to the store and tell the storeowner that my mother wanted butter rolls. She wanted pig feet and she wanted sardines and crackers.  And she would give them to me.  And I'd bring them back.  We'd go under the house and have real house.  And we would eat real food.  So I was always a winner there because I could provide what they really enjoyed in life.  But on the weekend when my mother and my dad would have to go to pay the bill and get an account of what was happening, I would be in the bed when I'd hear them hit the front porch.  And they would pause to get the switch off the tree.  Now, I knew what was coming when they came in the house.  They'd pull the cover back, boy, I'd get it.  But guess what?  I'd go right back up there again when we needed to have--play house and to have food.  I'd go back again.  I later learned that the economics of the whole situation was that I'd run the grocery bill up, and they'd have to go pay it.  You see that never really sunk in.  But those were even delightful and sometimes unhappy situations that took place when we were children.  I loved when it rained outside because when it rained outside, we'd always have to come in.  And the older people would tell us that God was working and we needed to be still when you'd hear the thunder and see the lightening, and those were moments when we'd pause, you know, in order to reflect on our spiritual life.  And they would pray with us, talk with us and softly sing songs.  You couldn't talk loud or sing loudly.  But we enjoyed that.  And we felt the comfort of our adults with us at that time because lightening was frightening.  But we felt we were secure when they were there with us.  Those were pleasant moments.  I enjoyed the church.  My first speech at three years old was at our church.  And when I spoke, the people stood and applauded.  And I thought they stood and applauded because they didn't like the speech.  And when I came home to tell my mother and talk to my mother about how I felt, she impressed upon me that they enjoyed it, and that they really loved it.  That's why they stood and they applauded.  But our church life was good.  We enjoyed that.  I can remember funerals, you know, when we'd have to go to the church in the wagons, drawn by the horses.  And the caskets would be in the trucks--I mean in the wagons.  I found that very, very interesting, especially compared to what happens now a days, you know.  Those are things that children don't experience and they don't see; how you see the wagons lined up with people sitting in the wagons, following behind the lead horse and wagon with the casket in it.
Speaker 1: What are some of the, you know, did you--when you were in the cabin or where--a church, but I was sort of particularly struck by the, story, you know, of singing songs lightly during the thunder.  And I was wondering, do you have any songs that sort of remind you of that time period, that, you know, the adults would sing?
Speaker 2: Yes, there are times when sing songs like, "Yes, Jesus Loves Me, Yes, Jesus Loves Me, for the Bible tells me so."  We felt loved by Jesus and we felt loved by our parents.  And those were the songs.  Then we would sing--there are several that I don't quite remember now, that--but my grandmother and my mother would strike those little songs up.  We didn't have instruments in our house at that time, but they would strike the songs up.  And we would join in singing together.
Story_ID: 15931
Speaker 1: Tell me what the community was like that you grew up in?  What was the community?  Were you--was it--I know it was a rural community, but did people--well, tell, just tell me?  Was it mainly around your family or (unclear)--,
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) No, it wasn't really rural, you know, it was a little town.
Speaker 1: It was a little town, okay.
Speaker 2: It was a little town with houses on both sides of the streets and lined all down the streets, you know.  And, of course, as you know, we didn't have paved streets.  But it was a little town with trees and flowers, fruit trees, nut trees.  And all of this is around--and you could walk down the streets and find something to eat.  You could pull plums off the trees, peaches or apples.  And on the little hill by where we lived was a pecan grove.  And, of course, I often described that as a high hill, but I later found out when I went back forty-eight years later that it wasn't so high after all.  (Laughs) I guess I thought it was high because I was so little myself.  But we would go up on the pecan grove and we'd get nuts.  And we could eat nuts.  We could climb the tree and get figs because we had two big fig trees right in our backyard.  We had wonderful plums and apples, peaches, berries.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the names of people who lived on the street, some of the neighbors?
Speaker 2: Yes, I do.  You know, I, had talked with the AFL-CIO [American Federation of Labor-Congress of Industrial Organizations] leadership in Baton Rouge, Louisiana about my desire to go back to Brookhaven [Mississippi].  I always wanted to go back from the time that I was a child.  And we had no connections since my parents [Ambrose Cameron, Sr. and Maggie Mae Cameron] died, you know, young.  And we didn't have relatives back there.  But I wanted to go back.  And when I spoke at the AFL-CIO convention one year, the president surprised me by having his secretary to drive me back to Brookhaven.  I, couldn't believe that it was really happening.  I had wanted to go back ever since we left.  Now, it's forty-eight years later, and I'm going to Brookhaven.  We drove down the highway, and when I looked up and saw the sign saying 'Brookhaven,' the tears came.  I really saw Brookhaven.  And when we got there, Cybil, who was the young lady with me, she said, "Do you know where to go?  Do you know anyone there?"  I said, "I really don't know where to go, but I remember when we left, the train station, which was about a block from where we lived, if we can find the train station, and make a right turn, and go down the big hill, and go down to the next corner, my house should be down there."  We drove down this main highway, and when I looked and saw that train station, I was so excited because I remembered that was the station that we left from.  And I said, "Go another block."  And we went another block, and that was Second Street.  And I said, "Make a right turn."  Well, the hill wasn't quite as high as I thought it was, but we went down this hill.  And then when we got down there, I looked to the right.  And I said, "There is our church."  That's where I made the first speech at the church.  And then when I looked to the left for the Italian store, which is another favorite spot of mine, it was not there.  That was a vacant lot.  And I had her to go down to the next corner.
Story_ID: 15932
Speaker 1: When I passed by the train station [in Brookhaven, Mississippi], I looked over.  I was so excited because there's the train station that we left from.  And I yelled to Cybil to go to the next corner which should be Second Street.  And it was.  And then I suggested we go down this hill, and of course, the hill was not as high as I thought it was.  And when we got to the bottom of that hill, we looked to the right, and there was our church.  That was the church where I made my first speech at three years old. And then I looked to the left for the Italian Store, where I did my great business at.  And it was not there.  There was a vacant lot.  We went on down to the next corner.  And Cybil said to me, "I wished I had taken the picture of the expression on your face when you looked and said, 'There's my house!  There's my house!'"  It was still there.  And, of course, when we got down to the corner where the pecan grove was, the hill was not as high as I thought it was, but the pecan trees are still there.  I then went up to our minister's house.  It was still there, but it's a brand new, big lovely house.  And I knocked on the door.  And the minister's wife who was his later wife, she came to the door.  And I began to inquire.  And I told her about our family.  The minister was ninety-seven years old and he had died four months before we got there.  And this was his new wife, who did not know us, but we began to talk about some things that happened in the community and about the people.  And I would tell her about the people that I knew, where they lived and who they were.  And, of course, we went across the street, and there a young lady met us at the door.  And she didn't know us, but she said, "My husband will be here soon and he will probably know you."  And sure enough, when he came there, he said, "You're the little cute girl that wore bangs and the little short hair."  I knew he knew me then.  And he began to tell me about my father [Ambrose Cameron, Sr.], the truck that my father drove in the community there.  And I asked about some of the other neighbors that I knew and he knew.  They were no longer there.  And then I asked about the house that we lived in.  And he said, "You probably cannot get in there because the woman that lives there is ill, and she has a house full of dogs."  Well, I did want to go in that backyard to see if the fig trees were still there.  We saw the fig trees.  I was so excited.  And I saw this long water pipe sticking up out of the ground that I thought the worms were ministering to.  But it was such a thrilling experience.  I just can't really tell you what it did for me to get back there and see that place and to remember things that happened.  I knew the neighbors.  I could call their names.  They were not there.  Some had died and some had moved away.  But there was a friend that lived around curve that died when we were children.  And that day, we went down to their family's home.  And then they would have the bodies brought to the home, and they would wake them in the home.  And when I got there, Ms. Knight was not home, but she still lived there.  And I had one of the magazines from my [American Federation of Labor-Congress of Industrial Organizations] Union with my picture on it.  And I left it on door--on her porch, and just left a card, told her whose daughter I was and what not, and that I would like to hear from her.  This I did.  She wrote to me, and we established a relationship.  And she told me so much about myself as a little girl and how the older people would prophesied that I was going to work for the Lord and that I was going to speak and I was going to preach.  She was so proud that I had come by to see her.  I remembered my grandmother lived up on that hill.  And when we went to where my grandmother lived, the yard was full of tall weeds and stalks.  And I was afraid to go in there.  But Cybil, who was with me, she said, "I'll go in."  I said, "If you go in there, there should be a, an oval window."  And my uncle, who was ill, used to peep out that window so that we could wave and talk to him.  So Cybil went through that yard, broke these bushes down.  And she said, "There is the oval window."  I was so excited that that window was there, and that was such wonderful memories about my grandmother and my uncle before he died.  This was one of the great experiences for me to go back to Brookhaven [Mississippi].  Now, we have two members in our church who are from the Brookhaven, and they are longing all the time to get me to go back to Brookhaven, with a paid trip back to Brookhaven.  And they have shown the people in Brookhaven the 'Time' magazine and 'Ladies Home Journal.'  And they wanted me to come back too, but I've never had that same desire to go back as I had before I made this trip.
Speaker 2: So in many ways it sort of represented a circle, a completion then.  And did it remind you of really happy times too?
Speaker 1: Oh yes.  Oh yes.  Oh yes.
Story_ID: 15933
Speaker 1: Tell me some of the other memories of growing up there, you know, things that have--I'd like to go back though to that day that you spoke.  Was that--were you--how did that even come about that you spoke before the church at three?
Speaker 2: Well, there was an Easter program, and, you know, children going to Sunday school had little speeches.  And you would learn those little speeches.  And one of the great benefits of children in the black church especially, is that you learned to speak before great audiences.  And you have to perform and the people will determine whether or not you're doing well, and they would let you know that, you know.  But, so this was an Easter speech that I made, very short, but you had to practice emphasizing, you know, when you talked.  And the people would respond.  And, of course, I had to learn to that that was a good response (laughs) and not an  anti-response.
Speaker 1: Now, share some other stories about your family life and growing up, you know, just other memories you have.
Speaker 2: My grandmother was a midwife.  She delivered me and several of my other siblings.  And she would also wait on the white women and deliver their babies.  Down the street and up the hill from us was one of her patients.  And she would take me with her when she went places.  I recall, and this seems to be so clear in my mind's eye, as the older folks say, when we went to one of her clients up the hill and I started to go in the front door.  And she snatched me back, you know.  "No, no, no."  And we had to go through the back door.  And when we went through the back door, we would go in and she would greet her client.  And she would go and get the baby out of the bed and take the baby into the kitchen where she was prepared to feed the baby.  Then, you know, the older people used to chew the baby's food, and then put the food in the baby's mouth.  And she would chew the baby's food and put the food in the baby's mouth.  And I would stand there and watch that.  Well, it was later on in my life when I connected up.  Anyone who was not good enough to come to our living room in house could not really feed our babies, you know.  And I remembered this and how she loved those babies and how she treated their mothers and their fathers, you know.  And they loved my grandmother.  She was a very, very popular person in the town.  And she could go almost anywhere, but she could not go in the front door.  I had to deal with that for many years until I was able to sort it out and to rebel in my later life against that system.
Speaker 1: Now, any other stories that you have, any other thoughts about things?  About family life, the church life or--.
Speaker 2: Yes, you know, we used to--every, especially on the weekend; a weekend was very, very important to us.  We would have family sharing on our front porches.  My dad [Ambrose Cameron, Sr.] and a few of his friends would play guitars.  And we would dance in the yard.  We would sing and we would have good things to eat.  It was sort of like a weekend celebration.  We enjoyed that.  We always looked forward to it.  It was sort of like a love feast, you got a chance to hug each other and to talk with each other and to share.  Those were some of the wonderful things that we enjoyed as families.  And it brought together families up and down the block, you know, the next-door neighbor and next-door neighbor and those who were across the streets from you.  And, of course, it was beautiful how people in the South would always greet each other, you know, with the tip of a hat, a wave of a hand, so warmly, you know, "Good morning; how are you?"  And they would yell out from their porches, you know, "How you doing?"  And we would respond to them.  Those were blessed experiences because it did something for the "who you are", you know, and the "who you related to".  It was a blessing to have neighbors who cared about you and who were delighted to greet you.  When we had stormy days, that was in-house day.  But when we had sunshine, we'd all be in the streets and the children would be playing and enjoying, while the older folk would be greeting and talking to each other.  And we called it gossiping.
Story_ID: 15934
Speaker 1: Do you remember any of the stories that the old folks would tell or, you know, or the things that they would discuss?
Speaker 2: Well, yes.  Sometimes we had very difficult situations when you had lynchings, you know.  You'd hear the older people--now, they wouldn't talk to us about these things.  But you'd hear them praying and if you were a sensitive child like I was, you'd be listening to what they'd say to try to determine what was going on.  And sometimes they were grieving about the neighbor's children.  I can remember one occasion, and I don't know the name or the incident.  One of the neighbor's son was lynched.  And they had found him and the church bell toll.  When the church bell tolled, you knew someone had deceased.  And, of course, they, just about knew who it was because of the conversations they had had with each other, you know.  And it was frightening to us because you always had a feeling that they were going to lynch you too, you know, um-hum.
Speaker 1: So this black community was how large, do you think?
Speaker 2: The what?
Speaker 1: How large was the black community there?  How large was--
Speaker 2: I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: You talked about some unpleasant, you know, or incidences.  What were some of those other things that happened, you know, to--maybe to you personally or, you know, were you talking about some white and black relationships or were you--
Speaker 2: Right, um-hum.  It was very difficult for some blacks to accept the treatment of, you know, segregation, racism.  And you'd hear them protesting.  They wouldn't protest to the whites, but they would talk about it, you know, among themselves.  And you knew that it was humiliating.  And as a child, I sensed that it was something wrong with the way the white people treated black people. And I developed an anger.  I didn't like that.  And from a child, when there were things that I did not like, I would protest against it.  And to see your mother [Maggie Mae Cameron] and your, grandmother and your father [Ambrose Cameron, Sr.] hurt and embarrassed, even as a child, that's why I'm so sensitive to what children see and what they think now, because before I could express how I felt, I felt it, you know, the anger.  And I wanted to do something about it.  My mother later on said to me when I asked her why we had to live the way that we lived.  "Why were we poor?"  That was after we had moved to Chicago [Illinois] where we were supposed to have freedom, joy and peace and all of these wonderful things.  And I wanted to know if things couldn't be different.  I remember she said to me, "Yes, things can be different.  But you'll have to help make it."  I didn't understand it then, but whatever I could do, I wanted to make a difference.  I didn't like being humiliated.  You know, I didn't like to see them hurt.  I didn't like to hear them praying for the Lord to give them strength and to help them through a crisis.  I didn't like to hear them talk about the problems that the neighbors were having and that their children were going through.  But there was always the hope that some day things were going to be better.  Things were going to be better.  Then my mother said, "You can help make it better."  I never forgot that, not even to this day, even at my feeblest moment, you know, I remembered that we've got to do what we can to help make life better.
Speaker 1: So you--so in many ways, you were, you had some of the frustration of your father, right, in questioning of the system.
Story_ID: 15935
Speaker 1: Did you as a child--what kind of child would you say you were?  Were you--did you live in your head some or were you--it seems you were outspoken, you know, but what type of child would you consider yourself?
Speaker 2: The older people used to say, "An old child."  In other words, they would talk about an old child who was concerned about old people's business and what they were doing and what they were saying.  And that's true, you know.  And then I enjoyed being around the older people.  We had a Victrola [brand of phonograph].  And my grandmother used to have prayer meeting over to the house sometimes.  And she would call me to turn the Victrola, you know, when you put the records on there, you have to keep turning it.  Other than that, it would wind down, you know.  And I'd want to go out to play sometimes.  And I'm in there standing on the little stool, turning the Victrola.  And that song, 'What Are They Doing in Heaven Today,' I got to the point where I would say, "I don't care what they're doing in heaven today.  I want to go out and play." (laughs)  And she would know when I, I had turned the Victrola loose.  It would wind down (with emphasis).  She said, "Young lady, turn that Victrola."  And gosh, I was just so upset because I'd have to be bothered with 'What They're Doing in Heaven Today.'
Story_ID: 15936
Speaker 1: Where did you go to elementary school?
Speaker 2: I went to--I thought I really started there but I found out it was--one of the young ladies who would come to get me to take me to class with her.  And I'd sit in the class, doing the class.  I would read, and I would learn to write, but I started elementary school here in Chicago [Illinois] because I was six when I came here.
Speaker 1: So let's talk about--so I know why your family came.  It was for opportunity.  Right?
Speaker 2: Well, not only that.  It was to escape--.
Speaker 1: Your father [Ambrose Cameron, Sr.], your father, that's right.
Speaker 2: The trouble that he--.
Speaker 1: Do you know what actually, did you ever hear that story later about what happened?  You know, what the incident was involving?
Speaker 2: I think he, hit one of his boss who was a white man.  And, you know, that's a no-no, um-hum.
Speaker 1: So he had to get out of town.
Speaker 2: He had to get out of town.
Speaker 1: So now, your family loads up and comes to Chicago.  And you say that it seems like this--well, it's a very different place, right?  Do you know where your--do you remember where your family lived at the beginning?
Speaker 2: Yes, we lived--my Aunt had a home at 4409 South Calumet [Avenue].  And we came to live with her because that's where my father was living.  His older sister was there.  And they brought all of us, the five of us.  And one of the greatest disappointments was when I got up that next morning and looked out in the backyard.  There were no trees, no fruit, no chicken, no pigs, no nothing out in the backyard.  And I asked the question, "What are we going to eat?" not realizing how difficult it was for any aunt or anybody to feed five additional children and your brother and your sister and all.  But somehow God made a way.  We didn't eat as much as we ate when we were in Brookhaven [Mississippi].  And every meal was so important, you know.  And we, did the best that we could.  There was a grocery store across the streets from us.  And this couple befriended my mother [Maggie Mae Cameron] and the wife--she just loved my mother and they prayed together.  And she would give us things out of the store.  And when we would go over to play with her children, her children would ask, "Do you want something?"  And we'd say "Ice cream," because ice cream was so precious then.  And she would go and get an ice cream cone and bring it.  And we'd have an ice cream cone at the Cotton's Grocery Store [Chicago, Illinois], right across the streets from us.  But--and she and I, just three weeks ago, we were talking about the Cotton's store and what it meant to us as children.  And I said to her, I said, "I realize that, now that we very rich.  We just didn't have any money."  But food was so precious, and I always said if I ever got grown, I was going to buy ice cream and eat it like it was going out of style (laughs), not realizing that even though you're able to buy the ice cream, you can't eat it like it's going out of style.  It does something else to you.
Story_ID: 15937
Speaker 1: Tell me the schools you went to in Chicago [Illinois] again.
Speaker 2: Here we started to Forrestville, Forrestville Elementary School.  That was the first school that we went to here.  And it was a very interesting experience in that because of our economic condition, it almost looked like every month we were moving again because when you can't pay the rent, you got to move.  And I--I remember coming out of the school one afternoon asking the Lord to help me to determine which house we lived in because I couldn't figure out which one to go back to.  And I was just praying, "I said, Lord, please help me to go back to the right house."  And I did.  But it was an agonizing experience as a child, you know.
Speaker 1: Now, what school after Forrestville?
Speaker 2: After Forrestville, we moved to 42nd and Calumet, and I went to Felsenthal, went to Felsenthal.  And then from Felsenthal, I went to Wendell Phillips Elementary.  And then from Wendell Phillips, at the age of twelve, I went to DuSable.  I had gotten several doubles and I went to DuSable High School.
Story_ID: 15938
Speaker 1: Were there any things--what was--cause you, you know, before you, I mean in your earliest years, that was, you were a small-town girl.  And now, you know, you moved into a city [Chicago, Illinois].  How do you think that really sort of, you know, changed--because your family is also trying to adapt in many ways.  Right, and your father [Ambrose Cameron, Sr.] is looking for work.  Your mother [Maggie Mae Cameron] was, you know, working.  So how was that--how were you--do you think the family was under a lot of pressure--if  they were under pressure, your parents, right?
Speaker 2: Well yes, because you see my mother continued to have children.  There were three more children born after we got here.  And, of course, that was pressure, you know.  And we used to raise the question, you know, "Why do we keep buying babies when we're so poor?" you know (laughs).  But they made it somehow.  They, when the WPA [Works Progress Administration], you know, was created, my father then could find stable work for the WPA.  He became a foreman on the lakeshores out there, putting the stones around the lake.  And things were better for him.  And it was better, you know, for the family.  And, of course, now we were on what they called charity at that time, now relief, but they called it charity.  And no child wanted to be on charity or wanted it known.  And, of course, once a month the secret was out because these big trucks would come and stopped in the middle of the block.  And they had your, food boxes.  And the man would call the names so loud that everybody would know that Brown and Cameron and Williams and Jones was on charity.  And that was so (with emphasis) embarrassing to children, you know.  You're having boxes dropped.  And you'd have run out there and get your box and bring it in the house.  Well, we didn't have sense enough to really see that most of the people in the block was running out to get the boxes to take them back into their house.  But it was embarrassing to us.  The other thing is that when the relief worker would come, and whatever your mother said you needed, she had to have proof of what you needed.  And we would dress our little selves up.  You had to keep your clothes clean and starched and, you know, and we're downstairs playing, and you've got your little shoes shined up, even though the cardboard was out of the bottom.  And I can recall, I've told this story over and over again, my mother called on me to come up.  And when I came up, she wanted me to sit on the pile of clothes to show the worker my bare feet.  And I didn't want to show her my bare feet because I didn't want anybody to know.  My shoes were shined, and I've got my nice little dress on.  And she wants me to raise my feet to show her my soles of the shoes.
Story_ID: 15939
Speaker 1: The [social] worker kept asking me to pick my feet up.  And something said to me, "Slap her in the face with your feet," you know.  I wanted to (imitates slap)--and then I just held myself there.  And I began to cry.  It was so humiliating for me to have to pick my foot up to prove to her that the request of my mother was a legitimate one.  I later used that to speak to welfare workers at conferences and conventions, you know.  Some of them feel that poor people are so ungrateful.  And I tell that but there are some other things that's happening to them, when you're dealing with their problems, especially if you don't understand it.  And I tell them about this incident, how I've got to come up from outside playing to show the worker the bottom of my feet.  And nobody knew that I had cardboard in my shoes.  Those were very, very terrible things, but it, did something for me that was good for others.  It instilled within me a fight against a system that would badger the poor, those who are underprivileged to the point that they just didn't want to respond to life.  But there was something on the inside of us, and I thank God for my Christian rearing, that gave courage and gave determination so that I could rebound and I could respond, but it breaks so many people down.  And I've spent my life trying to help those people to stand up, not because of, but in spite of what you have to face and what you have to go through.
Story_ID: 15940
Speaker 1: Are there other things influencing you, you know, in this period in Chicago [Illinois]--people that either you're either observing or are teachers or any--are there other things that are sort of, you know, happening to you, whatever.  You know, you, obviously, are a very strong-willed person, you know.  But I was just wondering what other things were sort of forming you as a young person. The church definitely.
Speaker 2: And the union.
Speaker 1: But the union, when are you--when do you get involved?  I mean the union, you came here in 19--let's see, you said, 19--
Speaker 2: 1930.
Speaker 1: --30, right?  And--but your involvement with the union really became--that's what--see, your involvement in the union came around the time of your parents' [Ambrose Cameron, Sr. and Maggie Mae Cameron] death, didn't it?
Speaker 2: My involvement in the union came in 1942.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 1942.  I joined the union in '42 [1942].
Speaker 1: Well, then what, you had immediate rise in that union then--.
Speaker 2: I did what?
Speaker 1: Okay, right, but that was with the United Packinghouse Workers [of America] union, right?
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: But, okay, but 1942--well, okay.  But your parents died at--what year did your mother--?
Speaker 2: My mother--1944.
Speaker 1: Okay, that' right.
Speaker 2: In 1944.
Speaker 1: So you had already start getting--you had already gotten involved in the union.  So you were eighteen years old then.
Speaker 2: Seventeen.
Speaker 1: Seventeen.  So can you talk about how that happened.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, from the time that I was eight, nine and ten years old, I would do things to try to help make money.  Money was not in circulation.  You know, if you had a dollar that week, you were doing pretty good.  And I would do hair and you make fifty and twenty-five cents for doing hair.  That gave a little something.  But I also played for the, for the church.  And the church would give me one dollar and twenty-five cents a week.  And I didn't realize then how valuable that was.  I would give my mother the dollar and I would take the twenty-five cents.  And I'd have that little spending, you know.  But also when Mother's Day came, I always wanted to do great things for my mother because I thought she deserved it.  And she worked so hard and received so little.  I learned to make flowers.  I'd make roses and then I'd make the, chrysanthemums.  And I would box them up and get the children organized and tell them how we were going to make mother really happy for Mother's Day.  And I would send them up to the dime store.  And they would sell their Mother's Day flowers.  And you know when we would work during that period together to encourage our mother, on Mother's Day, we would give our mother twenty-five dollars.  And I never realized until much later what twenty-five dollars were.  But I would cut and sew and cut and make flowers for about three weeks.  And as fast the kids--they were beautiful.  As fast as the children would go up to the dime store, they'd sell them out and have to come to get more.  I also learned to make some very good fudge, stupid of me I didn't keep making it.  I made some very good fudge.  And I'd have coconut fudge, and I would have chocolate fudge and wrap them up in paper, you know, wax paper.  And we would sell them two cents a square.  And I would tell them I did very well.  All of them I didn't eat, I'd sell it.  And we were able to bring and give to our mother from the sale of our candy.  And when I was playing for the choir, I got a chance to play because the older young ladies who were musicians, they were busy courting.  And they would not get back to church on time.  And they would always solicit my help, and I would play for the church.  And the church hired me, and that dollar and twenty-five cents a week was marvelous.  So those are little things that you would do to try to help make a difference.  But then I began to look at the broader picture, you know.  Money was a necessity.  We needed it in order to survive the many things that we needed.  I wanted to help make a difference in the lives of working people and especially women and non-whites who were really going through--we were taught to feel inferior about ourselves.  I wanted to help us to feel better about ourselves and to really reject, the treatment that we received.  And I had to learn ways and means of doing this.  God has always blessed me to inspire others because he has inspired me and I've been inspired by my mother and my grandmother.  And, so I wanted the opportunity to inspire women, not to accept less than what we were worth.
Story_ID: 15941
Speaker 1: When I went to Armour and Company [meatpacking company] at the age of seventeen to work, I went there to work as a typist because that was the only marketable skill that I had.  I could type sixty or seventy words a minute.  And I first went there and they were hiring butchers, and I thought I could get on as a butcher.  But the man discovered right away that I couldn't handle that steel.  And then he said, told me, "Get out of this line, you're no butcher."  And that was humiliating to me.  But I looked over to the other side of the room, and there were six young white women sitting there.  And I said, "Something must be coming up," so I'd wait with them.  And when Ms. McCann came into the room, this attractive woman, she said, "Are there any typists here?"  Oh, this is it!  And we went in and so, she said, "How old are you?"  I've got a ring on my finger.  She said, "Are you married?"  I said, "Yes."  She said, "I guess you're old enough to work."  And then we qualified as typists.  And she hired all seven of us and told us to report on Monday morning.  When I told people that I got hired at Armour and Company as a typist, they sniggled and some of them would say, "Oh, you did?"  I didn't understand what that meant because I did not know that Armour and Company did not hire black typists. And when I went to work that Monday morning, they gave me a white nurse's uniform, a white nurse's cap, and told me where to go, the department that I was to go in.  And I wondered who in the world are going to wear these things to type.  They sent me straight to the stew line in the packing department.  And there was a line where stew came down in cans and you would have to weigh it for accurate weight.  And it was a moving situation.  You were just going (gestures fast movement), this, you know, all day long.  I told the people on the line that I was just there temporarily, that I was a typist.  And they laughed too.  And they looked at each other and the body language.  So I began to ask them how much they made on the line.  And they told me they made--the women made something like sixty-two cents an hour, which would have came out to about twenty-four dollars a week.  Well, if you got hired as a typist and you were white, you might have earned something like nineteen dollars a week.  If you were a black and fair complexioned, you might have earned something like twelve dollars a week.  And if you were black like me, and got hired at all, you might have earned something like eight dollars a week.  Well, when they told me we earned twenty-four dollars a week on the line packing stew in the can, I didn't worry about the office because I realized I went to work because I needed the money.  And I stayed on that line.  During that time I also found out that the men made fourteen cents an hour more than the women and their work was not as tedious as the work the women were doing.  And so I began to formulate certain needs, a need to struggle, a need to fight, a need to inspire and encourage these women and to need to build organization.  And I later found out when I asked them why they made twenty-four dollars a week and the office didn't make that, they told me they were in a thing called the union.  And I didn't know what that was and could care less because if that made the difference, I wanted to know more about it.  But there was, a time I wouldn't have gone next door to the best union meeting in the world, but is this the opportunity where I can get this improvement and make life better?  And I was still searching for that, you know.  So I, joined the union.  And right after I joined the union, I discovered I was pregnant with my last child.  And now, I've got to give up this job.  Well, when you gave up the job because you were pregnant, you were fortunate if you could get it back again.  And this was a good-paying job, with benefits.  And in 1942, I even had a--I was able to get a release for my child, to get off to have my child rather, pregnancy leave.  And I wasn't that they were going to take me back.  But they said that I could be off for a year and I'd have to wait until my baby was three months old before I could come back to work.  If my job was still there, they said I could have it back.  And I could hardly wait until my baby was three months old.  I went back because I needed the income.  And they gave me my job back.  I then had a great, greater amount of appreciation for the union.  And I wanted to do something to help build it.  But I didn't want to be a leader in the union.  I just wanted to help build it.  And I began to inquire, what I can do to make a difference.  And I talked union talk with the others.  Well, many of them didn't think so much of the union, even though they were receiving great benefits from the union.  So that meant you've got to teach and inspire and help them to realize if this is for us, we have to make it work.  And that's what really made me interested in it.  But it was not until I went to my first conference as a delegate from my union that I saw what I thought--the picture that could make the difference.  And in this room, it was packed with white workers, black workers, brown workers, women, men, young and old.  And I said, "Lord, this is the winning combination that can make a change in this world."  And then I was inspired because they were advocating leadership, black leadership, women leadership.  And not every black and not every woman wanted to take a leadership role.  I didn't either, not in the union, but I came back and inspired my local and thanks them for sending me, and told them that we should have a woman vice president in our union, serving with the white male president.  And I convinced them of that, but we couldn't find a woman to run for vice president.  And at the last minute, they kept begging me to, and I said, "No, I can't do it."  But then when we had more of an option, I said, "Okay," because I didn't think I'd win anyway.  And so I didn't go home--didn't go to vote on that day.  I went home.  And when I came back the next day, they were all congratulating me.  "For what?"  "You're the vice president of our local union."  I said, "Oh, no, I can't be it."  "But you are."
Story_ID: 15942
Speaker 1: And you know it took me three months to really break that thing down to my husband [Rev. Claude S. Wyatt, Jr.], to tell him that I was now vice president (laughs) of a union and I'd have to go to union meetings.
Speaker 2: So what did he think of that?
Speaker 1: He said, "You're vice president of what?  We've got a house full of kids here.  We've got work to do here."  I said, "But honey, if life is going to be better, we have to do our part to make it so.  And if I can help, and if you help me, I can help the union.  And we can work together."  And he just said to me, "Well, all right."  He said, "If you do that, you got to be sure that things are kept up here at home."  I said, "Don't worry about that.  We, together, will handle that."  That's the way we got started.  And I became the Vice President, but in a short time, the President, who was a lovely, wonderful white brother, he had to resign.  And that left me to be elected the first president of a local union in the United Packinghouse Workers [of America].  And the question was whether or not I could handle that role.  And I used the scripture, I can do all things through Christ Jesus which strengthen me.  And I would seek the advice and the help of my Lord and my friends and my loved ones.  And if anybody can do it, I can do it, and I will.
Story_ID: 15943
Speaker 1: I want to understand the--if you would--I mean this was a different Chicago [Illinois].  This was a Chicago where, you know, it had a--there were a lot of, you know, packing houses and, you know, places like that and a lot of people were coming here for jobs.  And I think, you know, now a days, the reason I'd like you to talk about this and put it in context is that things have changed in many, you know, lots of ways.  But these were people flooding the cities, of all, you know, different ethnic groups, right?  And they were, you know, cheap labor.  But I want you to sort of, I mean, how was a person like yourself, you know, in this way.  I mean even though you were outspoken, you were all of seventeen, you know, this--that's, that's sort of amazing.  You were all of seventeen.  So I wonder, who did the other people that were part of this, you know, United Packinghouse Workers [of America], what were they like and what, you know, what was the group, that allowed you even to ascend into the leadership?
Speaker 2: Well, this union, the United Packinghouse Workers union, had a philosophy that was much different from that of most unions.  It was one of giving every worker who wanted to an opportunity to learn, but also, an opportunity to perform.  And they encouraged women, blacks and Hispanics to take leadership roles and provided training for those who would accept this role.  And it was a marvelous opportunity because they'd not only train you for union leadership, but for community leadership, for political and for spiritual leadership. Our union inspired women when no other group was inspiring or wanting women.  And, you see, and because so many of us felt inferior or unwilling to take this role, those of us accepted it had a responsibility to reach out to the, all of the other sisters and to brothers, and to unite them so that they could become this powerful force that is very necessary for the change of our total society, not just our jobs, politically, spiritually, and otherwise.  And so there I am, you know, to study and to learn and have spent over fifty years in the school of learning, which has been second to none.
Story_ID: 15944
Speaker 1: Can you just touch upon--what were some of the things you learned during that early period that have stood you well in your career because you're known as, you were known as a master negotiator in many way.  And so I'm just wondering what did you learn during that time period?
Speaker 2: Well, you learned how to negotiate.  You learned that people had needs and they had a right to have those needs fulfilled.  During one of the first negotiations that I went into, I had met with the committee to plan our benefits and things that we wanted, what we wanted to ask the company for.  We planned our agenda, lined it up and when we went in to meet with the company and the executives, you have the union committee and the union leadership, that's myself.  The company has the officers of the company and the attorneys. Now, the first thing I learned when I went in, and I've got to confront an attorney with the company, is that he or she may know law, but they don't know about those cans and those bottles and those frankfurters and bacon and other stuff that's coming down.  That's what we know, and we must talk about what we know.  We must ask for what we need.  They don't understand and won't even agree because they've never been where we are.  I can remember when I went in to ask for the benefits, we had to have our set, sick leave for our people.  But then workers, not many workers got sick leave.  We've got to have sick leave for our workers.  And I can recall the company saying, "Sick leave?  What is sick leave for them?"  I said, "Well, when they're off sick, we have to have partial pay for them."  And he said to me, "Are you kidding?  Who do you think will pay these people to be off sick?  If we pay them to be off sick, they'll never be well, you know."  And then you argue the point, and what I said to them, "We've got to have vacation for these workers."  "To do nothing?  Oh no, we're not going to buy that.  You'll have to come up with something else."  Every item that you raised on the agenda--and I discovered that the company didn't think that these workers were worth the benefits that they were due.  I then argued the point, in my first argument when we raised about sick leave, I said to the company, "You know, you see those machines over there?  Whenever they get sick, you'll just pick up the phone and the mechanic or electrician comes running upstairs to take care of those machines.  And in a little bit, they're working again."  I said, "You know, you have six hundred machines, happen to be human machines, that occasionally get sick.  And we want the same kind of treatment for them.  When they get sick, they've got to be able to go to the doctor, go to the hospital for recovery so that they can come back and function again."  Those are the kinds of arguments that--and I just said, the Lord gave me, that you'd be able to argue the point.  We had to argue and fight and threaten every step of the way.  But finally, when you look back, you think to yourself the millions of dollars in benefits.  We were getting five cents increase after a lot of sweat and work and argument.  And you'd talk about pensions.  Nobody ever dreamed of talking about pension for the workers.  And they would give you a dollar for a pension.  But then when I'd go to meet with the workers to sell the idea, that we got five cents raise increase and we got a dollar for pensions, they'd want to throw me out of the union hall.
Story_ID: 15945
Speaker 1: What were your parents and your husband [Rev. Claude S. Wyatt, Jr.] saying about this at the beginning?  Were they aware or were they supportive or were they--because you had young kids, right?
Speaker 2: Okay, yes.  They were supportive.  My in-laws, my mother-in-law was so wonderful to help with the children, my mother [Maggie Mae Cameron] and my sisters and brothers, my family.  And they were proud of the struggle, you know, that we were involved in.  My husband was a jewel.  He could never really cook.  And he even tried to the extent of baking cornbread by putting the cornbread in the top of the oven before putting it in the bottom to, cook (laughs).  But he was wonderful and happy with the children.  And we taught them also to help each other. And in doing so, all together we were working to make this a better world for all of us.  And everybody had a role to play.  We convinced them of this.
Story_ID: 15946
Speaker 1: But as I was saying earlier when I went in on one occasion to negotiate [on behalf of the United Packinghouse Workers of America union], the company [Armour and Company meatpacking business] had a habit of sitting the committee down on the sofa.  And they would sit at the table and you were looking up at them while they looked down at you.  And one of the things I would say, "Something you've got to get straight.  We need to be able to look at each other, and not look up.  You've got to change this arrangement.  We want chairs all around the table and not a sofa where we're sitting down."  Well, they didn't quite know what to do with that except to change and put chairs all around the table.  The other thing is that I had a bad habit, I guess you would say, of pausing for station identification, when something was said, denigrating someone else or something else.  And to hear the employer say, "Send my gal in the room."  I would wait until the secretary comes in the room.  Then I'd say, "Is that (points her finger) what you were sending for?  Well, that doesn't look like a gal to me and I'm not sure what a gal is."  We had gotten them to the point where they would respect women by calling the women, not "Gals" or "My girl."  And we accepted that, so we had to train our women to reject it and to challenge them when they'd call them gals or girls.  And I said to the company on many occasion, "You don't have girls working here, do you?  And we want you to be clear about it, that you have women because when we talk about wages, we want wages for women and not for girls."  So these are the things that you'd have and the attitude you'd have to take to back them off, but at the same time, to help them to respect the struggle that you're involved in.  It was a teaching experience, not only for the companies, but also for the workers.  How many times have you heard women refer to each other as girls or gals, you know?  And you'd have to tell them, "Don't disrespect yourself.  If you do, then you can't demand that they respect you.  And the respect that you demand makes a difference in the benefits that you receive and the life that you're going to enjoy and live."  We used to have conferences on the attitudes and the relationships with workers and employers, one to the other.  So that we could go through these little-bitty things that make a difference in the way act toward each other and treat each other.
Story_ID: 15947
Speaker 1: Were you getting pressure on the job [at Armour and Company meatpacking business], you know, at the same time to perform or where your supervisors, you know--were they engaging in any union-busting techniques, you know, that you hear about?  Were they doing any of that to, you know, to sort of take away power and control or to, you know, dissipate any--?
Speaker 2: You've always been confronted, you know, with that because, number one, you've got to build your team.  That's your union team and build their respect.  But you have to also build the respect with the management, you know.  And we're not there for foolishness.  It's serious business.  It makes a difference in the life, kind of life, that the workers are going to be able to live.  And we have joint responsibility, union and company, in making that the best work life with the best benefits that we can possibly get. And this has to be done in a united way, with management and the union.  And then my responsibility is to build the [United Packinghouse Workers of America] union, members that you're in charge of, so that they know to best accomplish this goal.
Speaker 1: So can you talk about your first victory as a, you know, a union organizer with one of your--.
Speaker 2: Well, when I first became--I was the vice president.  I was working in the plant at that time.  And I got a call to come into management's office because we had one of our workers fired for stealing.  And so I, went into this meeting.  Now, one of the things that some of the leadership, the [shop] stewards and officers were critical of me.  They said I could not be a good leader because I didn't curse and that all I would be doing would be praying.  Well, we went into this first meeting.  This is my first grievance.  And the company was sitting across the table from us and the union committee was on one side.  I did not know when I went in that I was in charge because the president had resigned, and that now the vice president had to take charge.  I found that out briefly as I prayed and grasped my breath.  But the company said they had caught Grover on the elevator with a whole lot of meat around his waist.  And they fired him.  And the committee went to banging the table and yelling back at the company and calling them all sorts of everything.  Well, I really didn't know anything to do but to pray then to get myself together because now I'm in charge.  And I've got to deliver.  But here was a man that stole meat, and the superintendent has stepped on the elevator and only two of them are on the elevator.  And when he opens his coat, he saw all this meat around his waist.  And he said, "He's fired, and that's it.  Whatever else is on your agenda, let's hear it."  So I said to him, "You have said that Grover was a good worker.  You were shocked and surprised that he would do a thing like this, and I--" and he went on.  I said, "I imagine he was more shocked and surprised than you were when you stepped on that elevator.  And you say, you caught him with the meat.  I don't know whether you did or not because I was in the bacon room.  But one thing I do know is that we respect Grover.  We're shocked and surprised if this happened.  But I'd be willing to tell you now that now Grover and his family and his children are in one of the saddest conditions that you could ever imagine because he's lost a job that he's had for years."  And I just raised an argument back and forth like this, and, I said, "And I would really recommend if you can find it within your heart to forgive him, that this would never ever happen again.  And if you would call him back to work, you would have one of the best employees who you have already invested so much in, you'll be forever grateful that you did."  When I said that, I, had to try to hold my breath and the owner said to the superintendent, "When should we call him back?"  And the Superintendent looked at him and I thought quickly to give him face-saving grace.  I said, "Don't call him back this week.  Let him finish it out.  But call him back for Monday.  And since most of us live on pre-spent income, I'm sure he cannot afford another day off from work."  And the employer said, "If we call him back to this job, you had better be in here when he comes back and hear us tell him if he ever, if he ever lets this happen again, he is gone and there is no grievance."  I said, "We have a deal."  Now the committee looked at me.  I give them a blank, you know because I didn't want to argue the point.  This man said bring him back.  That's a victory.  And when we went back into the department and said that Grover would be back Monday, nobody could believe it.  But he came back, and he worked there until that plant closed and he was pensioned off like the other employees.  That was my first victory.  But it did so much for me as a person.  It gave me faith and confidence in the fact that you can stand for what's right and what's just and what's fair, and you can win.  There are times when you'd lose, but not all the time.
Speaker 1: So, this was really pretty amazing.  I mean your, your stock went up very high--.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Because that would sort of be unheard of.
Speaker 2: Yes, that's right.
Story_ID: 15948
Speaker 1: Did that catapult you sort of into the national scene, that victory or you were still, you know, working within the local context?
Speaker 2: I was still working within the local context, but it was at a--an international convention [of the Amalgamated Meat Cutters and Butcher Workmen of North America, AFL-CIO] that I attended and I was appointed to be the Secretary of the Civil Rights Committee.  And the [United Packinghouse Workers of America] union had a very difficult situation in that some of our members from the South had walked out of the union because they were forced to respond in a just way to the black field representative.  And we had to give our report to the entire convention.  And if the convention insisted that they had to respect this representative, they were going to pull out of the union.  The report that I gave, I, never knew at that time how valuable it was and how hot it was.  But I gave it, and read it for three days in such a way that when I moved for the adoption of the report, the unanimous group voted.  And therefore, this group got up and walked out of the convention.  And it was the way that we read it, the emphasis given in certain places and the information that was there, that was moving to many of our leaders and our members.  And so I was appointed, after I got back from that convention, to serve as an international representative for the union.  And that meant that I not only had my plant to negotiate for, but I had up to as many as thirty other plants to negotiate for.  And then I was put on as a program coordinator.  And that was to draft the programs and direct the programs, the political, foreign labor, civil rights, women's, and whatever, that the union had to do in my area, my district.  I had to plan the programs and direct them, and the education of all of the [shop] stewards and officers who were part of our district.
Speaker 1: Now, that was what year, Reverend Wyatt?
Speaker 2: United Packinghouse Workers union.
Speaker 1: No, I meant that 1944 was when you began, but (unclear)--,
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah, but that, that was in 1954--,
Speaker 1: '54 [1954], okay.
Speaker 2: --when I became an international representative, '54 [1954].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And that was really sort of the height of--I mean that was the, a lot of things were happening in the Civil Rights Movements.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: They had started before, but they were happening.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but see the union was the first civil rights organization when I became part of it because we did the civil rights work.  We did the women's rights work.
Story_ID: 15949
Speaker 1: You know, like you said, I was--they said I was an old person--what did you say?  I was born old, you know, the, you know.  So I don't hear--I hear like fire brand.  I, I mean were you just like all energy, you know, and going--you know, how sometimes youth is unbridled.  Were you that or was it--but it seemed control in many ways.
Speaker 2: Well, that was a Christian depth within me which gave me faith and hope in my struggle.  I'm a person of great prayer and asking God's direction for whatever I do, whether it's in the home, in the community, on the job or what.  And God does lead us.  There is a scripture in Philippians [Phil. 4:13] that says, "I can do all things through Christ Jesus which strengthen me."  And I've always believed that, and not just believe it, I know that, that that is true.  So you can face even the toughest enemies and then do what is right to accomplish your just goals.
Speaker 1: Now, when you--and this--but you never had threats against you or anything like that?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  Meanness, you know.
Speaker 1: Can you talk just about a little bit of that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I've seen times when you've faced racism, which was so thick you could cut it with a knife so to speak.  And sometimes you'd face very hostile and mean sources.  Some of them are white, most of them are.  And then some of them are black, you know, jealousy, meanness, people who would undercut you, sell you down the river if they could, take your group and try to throw them off.  When I first became President and I came into the [United Packinghouse Workers of America] union, my first union meeting, we had a pledge allegiance to the flag and when I asked them to bow their heads, and at that time, Reverend [Willie T.] Barrow was a member of our union also.  And I would call upon her to offer prayer.  Well, some of them resented that, you know, said, "This is a union meeting.  This is no church."  And I had to remind them that many of us who were in that union meeting would also be in church on the weekend.  And we know that if there are things that we want to accomplish, that God has this whole world in his hands.  So we'd better talk to him about it.  And some would resist, but others would melt under that power that God gives because they knew it was something real about it.  It convinced them, you know, and inspired them.  Well, we had one president--one young man rather, who was--to get rid of me, he would do everything he could to throw the course.  And, but I would to be as nice as I could to him.  If I had to take a contract and to present it to the members and get their support, he would have his argument drafted all down against me.  And when he would come in, sometimes some of our members who were sort of protective, would yell, "Shut up."  No, but I would let him talk because I knew that we had him in our hands.  And he would talk and talk and talk and talk himself completely out of sort.  And then when I called for a vote, we never lost a vote.  We won every one.  He finally had to come to the end to say to me, "I don't know why I don't like you, but you're the best president we've ever had."
Story_ID: 15950
Speaker 1: You are twenty with, you know, when your mother [Maggie Mae Cameron] passed away.  This was 1954.  And you inherit-you have how many children of your own at that point?
Speaker 2: Two sons [Renaldo Wyatt and Claude S. Wyatt, III] of my own.
Speaker 1: Two sons.
Speaker 2: And she gave us her five.
Speaker 1: Five, so you have--
Speaker 2: Seven.
Speaker 1: So seven.  And this is, I mean this is--and so you're active, but you also have, you know, you've had your mother that you loved, that you've lost, you have that loss there.  And then you have this, you know, really huge obligation that you take in, and yet, you're still active with, you know, with what's going on in the workplace.  And I'm wondering how you handled all of that or was it a temporary break of a few years, you know, just so you could sort of mold the family together?
Speaker 2: No, un-un.  To add to that, when I lost my mother in 1944, but in that same year that she had given us her five children, we were in World War II.  And my husband [Claude S. Wyatt, Jr.] was drafted into the [U.S.] Navy.  So I was there alone to try to manage whatever we could for the survival of those children who were terribly frustrated because we've lost the center of our home.  And now, I've got to recapture and recover and to revive them to keep them surviving and to keep them going.  And at the same time, to stay alive myself, not knowing what the war will offer to us.  But again, I can do all things through Christ who've come to strengthen me and to lift me up.  And I would pray, and I'd hear the voice of God saying, "Follow me."  And that would inspire me.  People would tell you what to do.  Some would say, put my sisters and brothers in the, in the foster home.  But that wasn't what my mother had asked.  My mother asked me on her dying bed to take them and to keep them together, said, "It won't be easy, but God will help you.  And that's true.  He did that.
Speaker 1: Now, how long was your husband in the, you know--
Speaker 2: He was in a year.
Speaker 1: A year, okay.
Speaker 2: It was a year.
Speaker 1: So this, okay.  And what are the ages?  They were from what age to age?
Speaker 2: Seven, fourteen, seven to ten.
Speaker 1: Seven to ten.  And your own children then were what--
Speaker 2: They were three years younger than, than my younger sisters.
Speaker 1: And you're all of--in your mid-twenties?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean you hear some of these stories, but they don't happen that often, you know, (unclear) or maybe more back then though.  Now--to keep the family unit together and them functional.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 15951
Speaker 1: What else do you think significant about the period from like 1944 to '54 [1954]?  Was there other things significant and where did you also meet Reverend [Willie T.] Barrow?  What year was that?
Speaker 2: No, I, met her in the--in the '40s [1940s].  I met her in the '40s [1940s], and she started to work at the Illinois Meat Company, where I was working at that time.  And we began to work together under much criticism from our church group.  We began to work together in the Civil Rights Movement and in the labor movement, which was the Civil Rights Movement.  And we would inspire and encourage each other.  And I was able to convince her to become a part of the organized labor movement, become a part of the women's movement and we would help each other.
Speaker 1: Now, can we--that's an interesting thing you point to, and that is--that just like, well, people think about the Civil Rights Movement.  A lot of times they think of civil rights and church in one sort of breath, but the Movement was a new movement and as new things, sometimes people are fearful of that.  And I'm wondering, you know, what church were you affiliated and what pressure, you know, what were they saying not to do?
Speaker 2: Well, we were members of the Church of God.  And, of course, they felt that a nice young lady like me had no business in the labor movement, you know.  They saw that as a gangster, male, you know, type organization, sorority.  And they--there were few who were very encouraging and who were inspired by the things that we were doing.  And they would tell you, "I'm praying for you.  Stay with it."  And whereas today, so many others saying, "I'm glad you did."  They still say, "I'm praying for you, stay with it."
Story_ID: 15952
Speaker 1: What were some of the other names that were important, you know, with people you were working with during that time period, you know, that were also very active in the, you know, in either the women's movement or the, you know, or the [United Packinghouse Workers of America] union, the labor movement, that you got to know?
Speaker 2: There were, some women who were responsible for me really moving on in the direction that I was in and several of them that I must always mention, Hattie Gardener and Bessie McCauley and several of my white sisters.  But they would say to me, "You're young.  We're older and we've fought a long time for women to get involved.  We've got to have somebody involved that can still fight.  And since we're older, we can't.  You're younger, you can.  And we will be here for you.  We will support you."  And they always did.  They encouraged me and many times when I would be in charge of a convention or conference, I'd have to set it up.  Whatever they could do, they would do it.  When I'd call the convention or the conference to order, they were there to do what they could.  Sometimes they would be dressed all up, fixing food to serve, to make things nice and to make them pleasant.  So those were marvelous persons who were there for me, to keep me inspired, to keep me encouraged.  There are others whose names I, you know, don't recall at this time, but there were many black, white and Hispanic sisters who would stand up with me, and not only the sisters, but there were a number of the brothers who would come and stand by my side to help me to get our programs, get them over.  Emma Beck was the name I was trying to remember who was a very, very dear, wonderful person to give help and support and encouragement.  And that means an awful lot.  When you're underneath the gun and when you're in the struggle, to have someone to say, "I'm with you" or somebody to stand with you and to pray with you and talk with you means an awful lot.
Story_ID: 15953
Speaker 1: In 1954, when you go to the international--
Speaker 2: Convention [of the Amalgamated Meat Cutters and Butcher Workmen of North America, AFL-CIO].
Speaker 1: --convention.  And that sort of catapults you forward, how do things change at that point?
Speaker 2: How do things change for--?
Speaker 1: For you and, you know, sort of being on the national stage?
Speaker 2: Well, it just opens up more doors and means more responsibility, you know, for you.  And of course, now, my kids are up, you know.  We've come through that.  And traveling becomes a part of your, of your challenge.  And I'm able to do it more.  And then with the support of my husband [Rev. Claude S. Wyatt, Jr.], you know, then I'm able to do what I have to do.  And I've learned so much and I'm still learning because the organized labor movement is a university of its own.  You learn about some of everything and that was valuable to me, not only in the labor movement but also in the church.  You're able to help develop your members to think politically correct, you know, to think spiritually correct and how to combine these things together and be of greater service to the total community.
Story_ID: 15954
Speaker 1: The Vernon Park Church of, church was platformed in what year though?
Speaker 2: 1955.
Speaker 1: '55 [1955].  So tell me how that came, came about, you know, that you, you and your husband [Rev. Claude S. Wyatt, Jr.] decide to do this.
Speaker 2: Well, my husband and I were both in the ministry.  And we were invited to a one or two-week revival for a little Baptist church.  And this we reluctantly did, and we went and ran the meeting.  And we ran the meeting they then wanted us to come to pastor them because they were without a pastor at that time.  This we were not willing to do because we were members of the Church of God.  And they were a Baptist church.  But then they challenged us by saying, "We will become members of the Church of God too if you all will pastor us."  And, you know, we were not really wanting to pastor anybody, but our church body, they inspired and encouraged us to--some of our leaders, to take on that challenge.  And we took the challenge on and they changed the name of the church and were welcomed into the Church of God.  And we started with twelve members and several of them were here just this week from--had come from Mississippi, Jackson, Mississippi and they were sitting in there laughing about when summer would come--we were meeting in a garage.  And when summer came, their parents would take them south to Bay Ridge Christian College [formerly located in Union, Mississippi] to share down there.  And they were gone all summer.  And so here we would come with our children to run the meetings and keep the meetings going.  And there were times when we'd want to go south too.  But there we were with the family and ourselves and some of our friends, Reverend [Willie T.] Barrow and others would come out to inspire us to keep us going along.  And the church began to grow.  People would come to share with us and to take a part, and God always sent someone to be there for us.  And then we, lost the meeting place which is in the, in this garage.  And we had no place to meet.  We then started meeting in homes.  And finally we, got a place.  We were out in Morgan Park [Illinois].  One of our ministers, they had a building and they had a--but they didn't have a piano or a pianist.  And I would supply that for them.  And we joined together and worked together, three congregations, which were small.  And then finally, it was thought that we should separate for the growth of Vernon Park [Church of God, Chicago, Illinois].  And we were able to find a place on 74th [Street] and Cottage Grove [Avenue], way upstairs in a little auditorium. We used to have great church there.  Many people were blessed and they would come forth and to receive the help that we'd give them and we decided that we would up a temple for the Lord, we'd build a church building.  And we did this over on 76th [Street] and Maryland [Avenue].  It was our first little building there.  And we stayed there for a number of years and we outgrew this little place.  And we felt that growth was necessary, and it was taking place.  So then we vowed to find property out where we are now.  And we went out there and we had a contractor who broke ground, but then challenged that he would not continue the building.  So we were stuck there with a hole for seven years.  One of the reasons we were involved at that time with Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] in a leadership with him.  And as a punishment to us, we could not get the kinds of cooperation to finish that building.  But we held on and did the very best that we could and continued to develop our people and to raise the necessary funds.  And finally we got a builder who came out, and he said, "This should not happen to you all, with the kind of work that you're doing in the community."  He said, "I'll put your building up."  And that was a blessing, another blessing from God.  And so he and the architect that he was working with, they pulled a program together.  And then in 1985, on the coldest day in the history of Chicago [Illinois], we went into our new building at 90th [Street] and Stony Island [Avenue].
Speaker 1: Now, I, you know, you say that you were reluctant, you know, to start, that you were--you know, some people say they were called, but you were, you know, requested to go into the, you know, to have, you know, to go into the ministry.  But I'm wondering what, you know, you had been very active, you know, in the workplace and in the community at that point.  There's a difference in forming an institution, you know, church and running a church.  And I'm wondering over what, you know, what were some of the things that you, you know, had to learn to really do that successfully because it's a different thing, you know, doing that sort of--though, there's, you know, there's coalition building, but this is a different thing, you know, when you're doing the business of the Lord.  That's why I was just wondering, you know, even being able to balance those things, though you're humanity, there're, you know, two different things really.
Speaker 2: But, you know, you don't really separate them.  It's all a part of God's building to make life better for his people.  And that's one of the great challenges that you have is to keep the church from seeing, union people, community people and people people.  You know, we are all one people.  We have different needs.  And we have to be supportive of those different segments that supply those needs.  And we never permitted our self to be divided, you know, one people.  And the people have certain needs, economic, political, social, spiritual, you know?  And you've got to see to it that all of those needs are met.  And there are those of us who place emphasis in maybe one or two or more.  But wherever they are, we need to bind together, unite our hearts and our minds together so that people's lives are fulfilled.
Story_ID: 15955
Speaker 1: The Civil Rights Movement, in many ways that, you know, that we know as the Movement that lots of people of played, the Dr. Kings, you know, associated with it, leading really was in many ways a labor movement, right, at the beginning?  And I want you just to, sort of a comment about that, but also talk about how you came to know Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] and get involved with that.
Speaker 2: Well, as I said, when I first started, in the labor movement, it was doing the work of a civil rights organization also because these were the total needs of its people.  The only thing that was missing there, they were not really doing the spiritual work of the, you know, organization.  But there were members of various spiritual churches, what have you, who were part of the organized labor movement.  They just never saw bringing it together, combining it.  They kept it separated.  And you do a little piece, and I'll do a little piece and, you know.  But when we, really worked with the organized labor movement and we noticed the work that they were doing in the civil rights and the women's rights--these were two partners, the civil rights and the women's rights.  We then became acquainted with Dr. King when the Montgomery Improvement Association was created and we had the Montgomery [Alabama] struggle.  Then Mr. [Charles] Hayes, at that time, he was our director, Director Hayes, and Vice President, Russell Lasley of our union, they went to Montgomery to meet with Dr. King, as they would with any other group that was doing something in the social area, political area or what have you.  And when they met with him, they made a commitment that they would raise funds for the Montgomery Improvement Association.  And, naturally, like most leaders, when Mr. Hayes came back, he explained the program and their commitment.  I was the director of the, coordinator.  And my job then was to develop the program, sell it to the local unions and get them to cooperate and give the support that we needed.  And this we did.  As a matter of fact, when he came back and he said that we had to raise at least eight thousand dollars from our district, which was a nice sum of money during that time.  But guess what?  The majority of our members were white members.  And we're still in this racist area.  You've got to go out and sell them on the idea of helping Dr. King who was fighting against racism and whatnot and show them why it is important for them and for their families.  And this is what we did.  And we went to various groups.  I recall on one occasion going into one of our groups down in the lower part of Southern Illinois.  And when I went in, you could cut racism with a knife.  And the body language was enough to cut your legs out from under you.  But as I prayed and stood and was introduced to speak to the membership, I stood up, and I said to them, "I'm glad to be here.  Relax yourselves.  I came to help you.  I'm five feet two, one hundred and twenty-five pounds," at that time.  And I said, "And this is colorfast, it won't rub off."  I got a laugh from them when I said this.  It was sort of like a icebreaker.  And they laughed.  And then I went on to talk about why I was there to help negotiate contract for them, but also to tell them that our union is committed to raise eight thousand dollars for the Montgomery Improvement Association.  So now I've got to explain to them what this thing is, the Montgomery Improvement Association and about Dr. King.  Well, for some, they don't want to even hear this thing because the world, the nation is still anti-Dr. King.  But there are some of us who have embraced it and taken it on and have made a commitment to go out and convince others.  Well, God blessed us.  As a matter of fact, before he died, we were reviewing that process and [U.S.] Congressman [Charles] Hayes, he was a Congressman, you know, at this time, he said that we raised more than any other district in our union.  Rather than eight thousand, we raised twelve thousand dollars for the Montgomery Improvement Association.  But not only were we able to raise over our quota, but we were able to go back again and again to get our members to unite, to organize themselves to give visible support for the struggle there in the South.
Speaker 1: Now, explain the Montgomery Improvement Association, and what they were really trying to do there.  What were the issues that they were dealing with?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, it started in the main when, our sister refused to sit in the back of the bus.  That's when we began to get on.  Of course, they had been organized even before that time because workers in the South and leaders in the South, even though many of them are not read about or talked about, they were always struggling to break down racism and segregation in the South.  And as a union, I just told you, we had so many of our members who walked out of the [Amalgamated Meat Cutters and Butcher Workmen of North America, AFL-CIO] union's '54 [1954] convention because we were insisting that blacks and whites had to work and share together.  And you had to respect black leadership.  Well, we had to explain to them that, what the Montgomery Improvement Association was doing, and you know, they took on the responsibility of organizing all over the country to give support to the struggle of the bus boycott.  Remember the people marched--walked rather, for over a year.  They walked and they shared rides for over a year in order to break that pattern down.  And they succeeded in doing that.
Speaker 1: Now, that was--Montgomery was, you know, it was successful.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: The bus boycott worked there.  And then there was a whole series of places around the South that thing, you know, barriers were being broken.  But, let me ask you--
Speaker 2: Places to eat, hotels to sleep in. When we were going, before this happened, when we were going back and forth to Muncie, Indiana and back and forth to DuQuoin, Illinois, we'd go down there to negotiate for the workers, we could not have a decent place to sleep because we couldn't sleep in the motels, even though they were very nice.  We had to sleep in the laundry owned by two black people.  And we, you know, we had to talk to our members about breaking down the discrimination in the motel.  We could not eat the--in the restaurants, no matter how good the chicken smelled.  We'd have to go to the supermarket and get crackers and lunchmeat and cookies and eat it in your car.  Well, we had to talk to our members about breaking that down.  And this they did.  They broke down the discrimination in the motels.  They broke down the discrimination in the restaurants so that we could go in the restaurant and eat just like they could go in the restaurant and eat.
Story_ID: 15956
Speaker 1: Now when did you get involved with Operation--was it Operation Bread Basket when you first got involved?  You were at the beginning of that?
Speaker 2: Beginning, yes.
Speaker 1: Were you at the beginning when, when it was--I was told that it was formed actually under Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.], you know, as part--were you there?  Or was it after it really sort of established its roots.  I know it established its roots here, but I'm wondering about that history, the start of Operation PUSH [People United to Save Humanity]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, Operation Bread Basket started.  And we, it started with the various coalitions that we had in order to, fight against racism, segregation, discrimination, here.  And we had different issues and you couldn't get all of the unions to become involved. But you could get the community that brought together, the various segments of that community to be a voice and to be a force. We organized the ministers here in the city of Chicago [Illinois].  It's a powerful force.  And you had to work with them to get them to understand that this was a part of our responsibility, like preaching and teaching people about living right so you can go to heaven when you die.  You had to also preach and teach to people about doing the right thing in order to live here, while you're on earth.  And some didn't want to accept that, but we were able to get it over.  And when Dr. King became active, he would come to speak for us, you know.  I can recall when he--we were the first union to invite him to Chicago.  This is because of, Mr. [Charles A.] Hayes and [Russell] Lasley.  And when he came, our union had a, conference, a civil rights conference.  And at that conference, they were to present to him these checks that we had raised, the money.  And when that day came, Dr. King was due in, well, they didn't want to send anybody that was important down to the hotel door to meet with Dr. King.  So they asked me to go because I wasn't that important and neither was Dr. King that important to them at that time.  And they others wanted to be up there where the action was.  And so my husband [Claude S. Wyatt, Jr.] was there with me and I got him to go downstairs.  And we went downstairs and sat in the lobby until this little man came strolling in the door.  And when he came in, we greeted him and told him that we were his reception committee, and we were to bring him up to the conference room.  And we did.  And we brought him up and presented him.  And they introduced him.  And everyone was curious.  But believe me when I tell you, when that man spoke that morning, it was the most amazing thing that had happened in that room.  There were people in tears, some who did not want to give support to him, they didn't know what to do.  He was so powerful in his liberation and his quest for unity among the union people and the support.  It was a real blessing.  Well, we never had to worry about anybody going down to meet him again because everybody wanted to be there.  As a matter of fact, when the cameras rolled, you couldn't even get up there.  I tell most people, as long as I worked with Dr. King, and as often as we even prayed and shared together, I never had a picture taken with him.  My husband did, never had a picture taken with him.  But there were times when I'd have to set up meetings with the various leaders.  And when Dr. King would come, I don't have to tell you, you know, you couldn't even get on the stage.  They would knock off the stage to get up there with him.  But that was all right because we wanted their support more than anything else.
Story_ID: 15957
Speaker 1: Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] had a difficult time ultimately here in Chicago [Illinois].  And you indicated that had some issue, you know, there were some repercussions with even the building of the church, you know, because of affiliation.  But he, said Chicago was one of the worse places that he had experienced.  Will you talk a little bit about that?
Speaker 2: Yes, you know, when he had the two marches over on the West Side and then here in Marquette Park and Gage Park.  And when we marched over there we were faced with some most hostile people that you've ever dreamed of.  And I can, right now, see the faces of children looking up at their mothers and their fathers as they used the most vulgar language, vulgar language in the presence of them talking about the nuns and the preachers and all of us who were marching.  We marched through Marquette Park and around, and when we came back, we were so glad to get back because we left our cars there parked.  And we could get back to our cars, but when we got back, our cars were burning because they had pushed them over into the lagoon, the pond and set them on fire.  And then they warned us, that when we got out on 71st Street, that we had to be very careful because the people in the community had lined up, down 71st Street.  And they had bottles and bricks.  They had firecrackers that they threw on us out of the trees.  And when we start out--started out of Marquette Park, they threw bricks at our heads, at our legs.  I got a busted leg, couldn't walk for two weeks.  But we kept on marching, and they taught the whites how to march with the blacks in that if blacks were attacked, the whites had the responsibility of falling down upon them to protect them because they wouldn't beat the whites as much as they would beat the blacks.  But that was one of the most difficult things.  And Dr. King saw it as an anti-human attitude that he had never seen before.  And he said that many times, how vicious and how mean the people were.  They broke out all of their windows, throwing the bricks at us across the streets.  It was horrible.  The police were lined up the streets, and all they would do is to just stand in front, but the thing that helped us were the gangs, the [Black P.] Stones, Blackstone Rangers, the [Black] Disciples.  They came over and they put on badges.  And they would yell, "Heads up, heads up, heads up" to us whenever they saw a brick coming towards your head.  And they walked the streets to try to help protect those of us who were marching.
Speaker 1: In many ways, you had had an experience in Chicago where you were working, you were working on behalf of people who were oppressed, but you were working alongside whites and other people.  And I know whites were also involved in the Civil Rights Movement, but were you surprised at the hostility that you saw coming out, or did you expect it?  Were you surprised at all?
Speaker 2: I was surprised at some.  As a matter of fact, it was really heartbreaking.  When you would march down the street and look out and see members of your union in the streets with the adversary, throwing bricks and vulgar words at you, you know, you'd hear some of the other members saying, "My God, there's so and so.  And I work with him or her everyday."  It was really a revealing situation that was heartbreaking to some of us, but it also sent an alarm to us that we had to work fast and do something because this was something that was breathing within our community.  And it--no matter what you do, unless you can put an end to this, this thing will explode to the detriment of the total community.  And so we knew we had to march.  We had to talk.  We had to pray. And do whatever we could do. We had to politically call upon the government to do its part.
Story_ID: 15958
Speaker 1: In the '60s [1960s], you really became very active, you know, besides the Civil Rights Movement, with the modern-day, I mean you had already started your activity with the women's movement.  See, people a lot of times, and I think you alluded to that, but I'd like you to put it in historical perspective.  Most people think that the women's movement, most, you know, in today's world, think the women's movement began after the Civil Rights Movement, but that what you have said, over and over again, is a lot of that work began even before that.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And I'd like--could you talk just about that and sort of--I mean, you know, things like the Equal Rights movement and equal pay for the work, which you were a part of which I'd like you to, you know, talk about that.  But the seeds were planted years ago, but it took till the '60s and the '70s [1970s] for those things to, you know, come into being.  But can you talk about when you perceived a lot of those things started?
Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, before the Equal Pay Act was enacted in 1963 or the Civil Rights Act, 1964, we had equal pay for equal work in our union contracts.  And we were those--some of those had used our background and our support in order to get the [U.S.] Congress to pass the law that it passed.  We were advocates of it.  We had conferences on it.  We had resumes and things drafted up, giving support to the struggle for equal pay for equal work.  We were ahead of the comparable pay for comparable work, but also the civil rights struggle, we were--we already had in our constitutions, mandates for equality of rights for blacks, brown or white and for women.  So that we were feeding this to our various civil rights groups and to our political groups, encouraging them to enact laws to make this a permanent situation in our nation.
Speaker 1: But what were some of the things that you had to counteract?  There were a lot of fear related to that.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, can you talk about what people's feeling about how that--it would, you know, to would tip the, scale in too many directions at once, you know, be an issue.
Speaker 2: Well, even some women were not clear about they would benefit.  If you talked about equal pay for equal work, they thought they were going to have to do men's work.  And if that they would not be able to do it, and yet and still, we were able to convince some of our members and help them to realize that their work had greater value than some of the work that men did.  And that there were jobs that men did that the women ought to be able to do because it's greater pay there, because it has the, the gender rate.  For instance, we were able to get a young lady in Michigan to take on a job as the first hog header, cutting off the heads of hogs.  And even though she was reluctant to do it, we convinced her that here's where the money is.  And since you work, you want to put in eight hours, you want to get as much for the eight hours as you possible can.  She later on, a young, beautiful, tiny young woman, sent me a picture of her heading the hog and thanking us for encouraging her.  She said, "This job is better than the job I've ever had."  And she earned more money.  Well, this was true for many of the jobs because in the plant where I was, women's jobs were being eliminated by automation and technological changes at a more rapid pace than men's jobs.  And so we had to fight for women to have an opportunity to bid for so-called 'male jobs.'  And this they did.  We changed the seniority systems in order to accomplish this goal. And when, once women understood what it was that they had involved here, it made all the difference in the world.  And some of them were able to last (pause)--.
Speaker 1: You said, it made all the difference.
Speaker 2: All the difference in the world.  And some of them were able to last on their jobs, even though they were being laid off at a more rapid pace than men were because there were no more so-called quote 'women's jobs.'
Story_ID: 15959
Speaker 1: So I was asking about, you know, women who--I mean people who felt this was really wrong.  It was against really, even the church, the structure of the church, and, you know, men being--
Speaker 2: Usurping the authority of the men.  And we had to deal with this whole struggle of what equal rights meant and how devastating it was to both men and female.  I used to do a class at Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois] for labor groups.  And when I'd come in the evening, I'd have them to look at the statistics of women and what women were doing.  And I'd ask them questions about their women.  And even though they were leaders in the labor movement and they had women in their, unions, they knew very little about what was really happening to women.  And surprisingly so, many of the women did not know what was really happening to them.  So the first thing is to begin educating ourselves about who we are, where we are, why we are and what we are.  This took a period of time before you could get people to become involved in the, struggle.  And when we had women who would--they would get equal pay for equal work, they didn't want it.  And the companies would say to them, "They can't do the work that the men do."  And we convinced them that they did sometimes greater work.  Women can't push heavy loads, and we convinced them that heavy loads does not determine the worth of the job.  We had noticed that many times when men have heavy loads to push, they had another brother to come along and push with them because they couldn't push it either.  And we were at the point where we didn't want women or men to have to strain to push loads.  And when women began to see it and men began--we can relieve the heavy load pushing off of both men and women.  And then when men and women get equal pay for equal work, you cannot pit one against the other.  They will fight together for each other to have a just and a fair and an adequate wage.  When you get them to see it on this basis.  I said in the, my class at Roosevelt, to one young man who was arguing against it.  He said, "I cannot stand a woman that makes more money than a man."  Then we do a little blackboard work, and we said, "Well, let's look at that.  If your wife was working, and she earned three hundred dollars a week and you earned one hundred dollars a week, it seems to me, that's about four hundred dollars that comes into your family budget income.  Right, we can understand that.  Well, what you're saying is you'd prefer to have the woman to earn less than you.  That means you earn one hundred [dollars] and she now has to earn seventy-five [dollars] or fifty [dollars].  And when you figure that up as a good mathematician, you would see that is very, very poor thinking on your part.  It may inflate your ego, but it's certainly deflating your home budget."  And sometimes you'd have to get them to look at this way.  What difference does it make if you learn how to share together, how to pool your resources together and set your goals on things that you want, and accomplish them because you're working together and not apart.  It helps them to understand because we have been indoctrinated so long about the worth of blacks, the worth of whites, the worth a male, the worth of female.  And we are all worth everything that we can earn when we give our labor and of ourselves.  And we have to fight for each other to accomplish that.  An injury to one of us, is an injury to all of us.  And if we don't fight for each other then none of us will be able to have our full rights respected.
Story_ID: 15960
Speaker 1: The other thing I want to ask you about, during the '60s [1960s] and the Civil Rights Movement, there's a lot of discussion--well, even in the Black Power Movement, which, you know, you weren't a part of, I don't think necessarily, there was lot of discussion--.
Speaker 2: Yeah I was a part of the Black Power Movement, uh-huh.  See, I thought blacks ought to have power too. (laughs)
Speaker 1: I know, but you know what I'm saying, but there was a lot of talk (laughs) about how women actually, you know, that they were still, you know, given the short end of the stick, you know, by the brothers.  So my question, were you ever outspoken about that, you know, women should--you know, because there's more discussion now about women's treatment during that time.  Were you ever outspoken or was there a conflict because you were involved in the start of the National Organization [for Women]--NOW.  And that group, you know, a lot of times in terms of black women--you know, it was more of a feminist activist group.  So I was just wondering, I was wondering, one, do you have a comment about the, you know, black female role in the Civil Rights or Black Power Movement?
Speaker 2: Well, one of the comments that I've often made is that, as we fight to take these chains off of our legs, we have to remember that the white male has one chain, an economic chain, you know?  The black male has an economic and he has a racial chain on his leg.  The white woman, she has an economic and she has a female chain on her leg.  And when you think of the black woman, all the chains that they are available, she has on her legs, economic, political, social, you name it, as a black woman.  And until we release all of these chains off of her legs, we will not have the freedom for any of us that we think we're entitled to.
Speaker 1: Now, why do you think the National Organization for Women was important in that movement?  Why was that a natural extension of things for you and did you, and--that's one thing which you probably say you've already said.  But the other part of it, was there a part of that Movement that you questioned?  I mean you're --the very active feminists, did you ever come to loggerheads with them?
Speaker 2: Yes, we came to loggerheads within the labor movement, within the church, within our homes or wherever we are.  You've got to argue for justice and for that which is right.  And you have educate and train and share and be educated as you share with each other.  Our goals ought to be the same: freedom, justice, peace and equality for all of us.  And then when you think in terms of, our feminists groups, so-called feminists groups, we organized the National Organization for Women [1966] at a time that we were coming out of the completion of [U.S.] President [John F.] Kennedy's Status of Women [President's Commission of the Status of Women, 1961-1963].  We had done this report on the status of women. And it was amazing what was discovered after we had had conferences all over this country, and one national conference of twenty thousand women in Texas.  And we, discovered that there were a lot that women were lacking because they never fought for it and some of them never dreamed that they owned it or had it.  And so we had to reveal it and make it known to them.  Now the National Women for--National Coalition [sic, Organization] for Women, it came about because most of us were not sure that anything was going to be done about that magnificent report that we presented to President Kennedy on [former First Lady] Eleanor Roosevelt's birthday [October 11, 1963], just before his assassination.  Marvelous things there, but we thought nothing would come.  And the National Coalition of--for Women, they then began to formulate a group that they thought could be sure to see to it that we did not shelve that report.  That was one of the reasons.  And, of course, we went into all different directions because there were a lot of women that had their own private agendas.  And whenever you organize, there are those who are there with their own private agenda and their job is to try to see if they can get the support, for that agenda.  Now, that was one of the reasons that we organized the National Women's--for, Committee for Women.  And we probably have let them go off on a course that was not designed for them in the beginning.  But there were those were those of us who were members of it because we felt where women are, we ought to be.  Whether they're off course or on course, we ought to be there to try to help them.  And sometimes the agenda that they want to pursue is not the agenda in our best interest.  Had we not had confusion like that, we probably would have gotten the Equal Rights Amendment because we were just three or four states from it.  We could have gotten it, but you understand what happened.
Story_ID: 15961
Speaker 1: Reverend Wyatt, when you look back on things in your long career, what are you most proud of, do you think, I mean, one--or what things are you most proud of that you participated in or worked in?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I think I'm proud of everything that we were able to do, even the suffering, you know, that we had to go through.  We're proud of that because God brought us through, and there were those of you who were there to give us encouragement and support.  So there are a lot of things.  I'm, proud that at least we have an organization that speaks for working-class people.  I'm proud of the fact that we can make demands and stand up to those demands until something really takes place.  I'm proud of the fact that life will never ever be the same for women or for blacks in this country or any other country because of what we've been willing to do.  I look at the AFL-CIO [American Federation of Labor-Congress of Industrial Organizations], the national organization, just before my retirement, I took a stand; it was sort like a death stand, that we've got to have women on the national AFL-CIO.  We can no longer have it an all-male board.  And in taking that stance, there were those who disagreed with you and felt that the time was not right.  And I said, "I'm getting ready to retire and it's passed time."  Well, I'm proud of the fact and some of them know that, that on the AF of L-CIO, not only do they have one woman, but we have six or seven women on that national board because some of us dared to stand up and say, "We must have it.  And women, you cannot let it go undone."
Story_ID: 15962
Speaker 1: Let me ask you, from your vantage point, and let's take the, you know, the state of unions today.  What are--are you disappointed in terms of anything that you see, you know, in terms of advancements and where the state of labor movement in this country, and the fact that also a lot of movement has been backed--we live in a global society now.  So a lot of things have been, sort of people were breaking up unions by taking and dispersing jobs around to other places.  What, in terms of the labor movement in this country--what like concerns do you have or what hopes do you have in terms of its future?  Or what do you see as its role in the 21st Century?
Speaker 2: I see as its role the struggle to make life better for all people must continue, because the moment we stop the struggle and you're not fighting, we'll find ourselves right back where we were in the beginning.  I think it was A. Phillip Randolph that said that the struggle is never won.  It's continuous.  And when you take a look at it, with a stroke of a pen, we could lose everything that we have accomplished.  And some of those things we are losing.  I think that we've got to emphasize the fact that people must respect their right to struggle.  They have a right to struggle.  They must respect their right to set their own agendas, and we have agendas.  And we must understand that those agendas must include peace, justice, freedom and equality for all of us.  When we think about that great document [U.S. Declaration of Independence] that was written, "We hold these truths to be self-evident that all men are created equal and that they're endowed by their creator with certain inalienable rights, and that among these are life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness."  That's the challenge that we all must work for, a better life for all people and spiritual value.  Without spiritual value, without spiritual goodness on our part, none of this, none of this will mean anything to us.  That's why now some people are saying, "All that you all fought for, you've lost it."  I said, "No.  One thing we fought for was hope.  And we still have hope, but because of what you are doing and what others are doing, the young people will wake up and they'll grab the mantle and carry the torch."  We have a lot yet to gain when we talk about we want a better life.  I still want a better life.  There are still children who have their soles off their shoes, don't have shoes.  We've got to see to it that all children have shoes and that they don't have to be humiliated by showing it.  They don't have to speak alone for what they need in their lives because all of us would do that.  We can't sit by watching 'John's other wife, while the world turns at the edge of night' [referring to popular television soap operas].  We've got to see what's happening to not only us, but to our world.  Our world is in trouble, whether we know it or not.  It is in trouble.  What are we going to do?  You can't just keep writing the documents.  You can't just send salutations.  We have to unite ourselves together and continue to fight for a better world and for better leaders to lead that world.
Story_ID: 15963
Speaker 1: The other thing, with the black community.  Do you have any--when you look back at the, you know, the struggles that were done and where, the state of the black community, do you think there's anything that we did wrong in the process?
Speaker 2: One of the things I think that we did wrong, even though it was our young people who really waged the battle, we have not continued with our generations yet to come to share the struggle that we're in.  That's why I'm pausing now in my very, very tired schedule of life to share with you and others who will make history known.  Life hasn't been an easy road, and our children must know it.  Some of us suffered and we died and some of us pained and hurt and some of us still hurt.  Some of us still share pain because of what we see.  When we see our kids on drugs and we claim nothing can be done about it, we hurt.  We fought to have a better life for those children.  When you go to the jails as we have gone, and you see young people in jail, large numbers of blacks, large numbers of women in jail, something has to be done to provide a system and a way of life for them that will help us to truly say, "We have overcome." rather than, "We shall overcome".
Story_ID: 15964
Speaker 1: With the Black Church--what role--you know, the Black Church has been a huge part of black life and has provided the, the foundation for black people to--.
Speaker 2: It's really the soul of the community.
Speaker 1: It's the soul of the community.  What role do you see playing and, you know, the church playing in this, you know, that maybe it'd be a little different than how, you know, it operated previously?  And do you think it needs to sort of examine itself as it moves forward and deals with this community that seems to be a, you know, different in terms of its need, you know, and more needy in some respects in it's need.
Speaker 2: Well, I'll tell you.  I don't think that the, church, the black, the white and the brown, the red, in the church, can become the theater of our society.  I think that we've got to be that spiritual body that embraces people and bring them in and prepare them to be union members and feminist members and members of our other segments of our organization.  We've got to bring them in and help them to understand that our purpose for being here is to make this a better world.  That's our purpose, our job.  How can we do that?  We still got to teach and to train, to recommend and to help our children to learn the respect that we were taught to have.  Number one, for themselves, and then for their parents, for their older people and for their community.  I can see that there will come a time when children, again, can play in the streets and the old people can sit on the porch.  But it won't happen unless we make it happen.  We've got to recommit ourselves to that better world where peace and joy and fulfillment is a reality.
Story_ID: 15965
Speaker 1: When, when God permits us to go through what we're going through now, we'd better wake up, you know.  Our children are calling for help.  And we don't know what to do because we are their main problem.  We are their main problem.  Without us, they won't know the way, and without God, we won't know the way.  And so we have dismissed him and counted him less important than he is.  And then without God, we can't, and without us, our children won't.  That's my great concern.  I know that it can be better.  (Unclear) but you have to make it so.
Speaker 2: Now, Reverend Wyatt, I'm sitting here talking to you these last few hours, you know.  It's hard to think--I mean you're a very articulate person.  And I want to, take you back to your childhood a little bit because that was such a rich sort of nurturing.  It was almost as if, and not a perfect place, but with the community you came out of and your family that you came out of, and not, you know, perfect, held you up.  And you talk a lot about, you know, even I think what you're moving to now is us, you know, as a society, holding up our, you know, our children.  And you said, you know, when three, with Easter Sunday in the church, you know, that was even the time when some children would be chosen or they would be held up because they had a gift.  But I'm wondering when you look back at your life and in your quiet moments, do you feel that you've had a guardian angel looking over you in many ways or, you know, why you were, I mean so young, driven, you know, to do this.  And you've had such a supportive husband all, along the way.  And you've done things, you know, and the family structure didn't fall apart.  I know you say it's your great belief system, you know, but do you feel that someone was looking out for you?
Speaker 1: By all means.  I know that God was looking out for me, that he has provided me with that help and the strength that I need.  I can't even begin to tell it, and I have done many interviews, what really has transpired in my seventy-eight years.  I sit down and sometimes I take parts of it and I try to deal with it.  Some of it brings pain and hurt to my heart, and then some of it brings great joy, great joy.  But I'm forever grateful to God for what he has permitted me to experience.  And like the song used to say, "He brought me all the way and carried my burden everyday."  So this is my reason for being here.  I'm convinced that I have a reason, and God keeps me reminded of that reason, of the purpose of my being.  And he has promised all of my life to supply all of my needs, and he's never failed.  He's never failed.  Times that I've had to wait, I understand how wonderful waiting can be.  When he holds me up on some things, I know that he's working something else out that I don't see.  So I'm very, grateful, you know.  I thank him because he has blessed me with family, but also with the families of others.  I think about eleven years in Altgeld Gardens [public housing project] with the hundreds of young people that would come to our home and sit in our living room and up the stairs, while we try to rescue them from the den of dope addicts, from the alcoholic dens.  And to turn around and see some of them now, great in the ministry, Ph.D.s and ministering to families, we know that we haven't wasted our time.  It's been worth it, you know.  When we look around the city of Chicago [Illinois], no matter where you go, you'll meet young people who say, "Remember me?  Remember me?"  Oh God, that makes it worth it, you know, it makes it worth it.  So there is so much, you know, that we go over and we reminisce on.  And then there're some things I just turn a loose and say, "Lord, we did our best."
Story_ID: 15966
Speaker 1: What about, do you ever think about your mother [Maggie Mae Cameron] and father [Ambrose Cameron, Sr.], and, you know, I think about your father, you know, you said he was an angry man, frustrated.  And I think also I wonder if you ever think about what he would have thought to see your success because that--in the world that he lived in was not possible.  And I wonder if you, you know, if that ever comes to mind?
Speaker 2: I think he would be pleased.  He always thought that we'd be all right, you know.  He always thought that.  And of course, my mother never doubted, never doubted.  She said to me as she prepared to leave us, "This is a heavy responsibility that I'm asking you all to take, but take it.  God will help you and see you through."  And I know she believed that because all of her life, you'd hear her praying, "Thank you, Lord, for my little children," eight of us, sometimes not enough to eat, and she's thanking God.  She said, "This is the greatest gift that you've given me, my little children.  And I just want to thank you."  And she'd say, "Put it on me, and spare my girls."  She would pray like that for us.  And then she would look up to God and give thanks, not complaining.  And even as a young person, I could see many things that she had a right to complain about.  But she was thanking God and grateful to him.  You know, that's been a part of my life, to just be grateful and to thank God for what he has blessed us with, and to ask him to help us to share this life to the best that we can.
Speaker 1: Reverend Wyatt, what do you want to be remembered for?
Speaker 2: I want to be remembered for inspiring others, as I have been inspired.
Speaker 1: And what do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: You know, I've thought about that a number of times.  And I have not come to the conclusion, but I do want it to be one of love, faith, confidence in people, not because of, but in spite of where they are.
Story_ID: 15967
Speaker 1: What is your favorite scripture, Reverend Wyatt?
Speaker 2: My favorite is "Trust in the Lord--that's Proverb--with all of your heart and lean not to your own understanding".  If you acknowledge God in all of your ways, He will direct your path.
Speaker 1: Thank you, Reverend Wyatt.  Thank you.  You're probably saying, "They've held me hostage."  (Laughs) Can you talk about what, you know, how it came about and--
Speaker 2: We have a saying in our church, that we are reaching beyond the walls.  And we had a television program, we still do as you know, 'Reaching Beyond the Walls,' meaning that we cannot let this greatness of God remain inside of the walls of the Tabernacle, but we have to take it out there into the community and help it to make a difference in their lives.  We thought in terms of trying to find a place that we could build a center to house the people of the community, young and old, male and female.  And the Globe Glass Center became available several years ago.  And as we shared and talked together, we decided we out to try to buy it and rehab it.  It could make a difference in the community.  If we've been in this community all this time, we should not let a broken down building sit over there on that corner.  And so we took that broken down Globe Glass building, and rehabbed it.  It is a beautiful community center, community and family life center.  Older people can come.  And it is so amazing, Julieanna, when we see them testifying what their life has been like when they've learned to handle the computer.  We've graduated about seven hundred, through the computer class, in the last couple of years.  We have children going through there, taking computers.  We have children taking reading and, learning how to address themselves and their concerns.  We have exercise programs.  We have job training and job inspiring programs.  And we have folk who come to use that center, and they have a decent place where they can sit and they can eat and they can share with each other.  It is an inter-generational place where older don't have to be lonely at home.  They can come and find other older people, but also they can find children.  And the children can find them, that they can relate to.  It is very beautiful sometimes to just sit there at the door and watch the little children, after school come with little packs on their backs into a center where somebody will pat them on the arm or give them a hug and they're in a safe place where their parents can come to get them.  We have created that center there for the service of the community, even though we're struggling now to raise the funds that we need to keep it alive and open and to get the kinds of help that we need that can make a difference in the lives of our people.  So it's a great work, and I serve as the CEO [chief executive officer] and as the president.  And we have a board made up of community people, that you ought to be on.  But we have board there made of people who are willing to share and to work with us.  I, just can't say too much about it.  I'm glad that we have it, and that we were able to get it going before we retired year before last.
Speaker 1: And Reverend Wyatt, that is an extension of always what your ministry has been.  I remember us talking before, you know, many --well, several years ago, but you were talking about how important it was to have the ministry extend out.
Speaker 2: That's right.  That's right.
Speaker 1: That's always been a central part, to reach people.
Speaker 2: That's right.  That's right.
Story_ID: 15968
Speaker 1: That's Mrs. Rosalyn Carter [wife of U.S. President Jimmy Carter] and myself at the White House [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: Do you know what year?  But it was during their--.
Speaker 1: During their administration, um-hum.  And we had concluded a conference that she chaired.  And she had invited us all to the White House as guests for the afternoon.
Speaker 2: Do you know what the conference was?
Speaker 1: It's on employment.
Speaker 2: [Addie Wyatt meets First Lady Rosalyn Carter at the White House, Washington, D.C., ca. 1977-1981  From the collection of Addie Wyatt.]
Story_ID: 15969
Speaker 1: That's my mother, Maggie Mae Cameron.
Speaker 2: And how did she spell her name?  Maggie--.
Speaker 1: M-A-G-G-I-E, M-A-E, C-A-M-E-R-O-N.
Speaker 2: And I think earlier, didn't you tell us how old she was when this photo was taken?
Speaker 1: She was thirty-nine, and that was taken just before she died.
Speaker 2: [Addie Wyatt's mother, Maggie Mae Cameron, ca. 1944.  From the collection of Addie Wyatt.]
Story_ID: 15970
Speaker 1: That's a meeting at the White House [Washington, D.C.] that we were having with President Carter, during his administration.  Several of us, I was one of them, were there to advise the President on women's issues and sometimes on labor issues.
Speaker 2: And if you would look to your right, there's actually a little TV set here that you can see the photo.  Is that you in the center there?
Speaker 1: That is Addie Wyatt, sitting just a little bit down from Dr. Dorothy Height.
Speaker 2: [Addie Wyatt (seventh from left) attends a meeting on labor issues at the White House, Washington, D.C., ca. 1977-1981.  From the collection of Addie Wyatt.]
Story_ID: 15971
Speaker 1: That happens to be a group of ministers meeting together, and it was at the end of one of our conferences.  I'm not sure.  And we posed together for pictures.
Speaker 2: Okay, and again, for the people who might not be sure, can you identify where you are and point out any of the other people that you'd like to tell us the name of?
Speaker 1: I'm on the left front row.  And that's Reverend Willie Barrow on the right front row.
Speaker 2: So Reverend Barrow is in the orange dress?
Speaker 1: That is correct.
Speaker 2: And you're in the red dress?
Speaker 1: No, I'm in the blue, right here.
Speaker 2: [Addie Wyatt (front row, second from left) meets with other ministers following a church conference, not dated, from the collection of Addie Wyatt.]
Story_ID: 15972
Speaker 1: Now that's Reverend Addie Wyatt on the left there, and that's Dr. Thomas Skinner, sitting next--,
Speaker 2: Where was (unclear)--,
Speaker 1: This was taken at the PUSH [People United to Save Humanity] headquarters [Chicago, Illinois].  And I don't know.  This was several years ago.  He was serving as a speaker for Vernon Park Church of God [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: [Addie Wyatt attends an event at the Rainbow/PUSH Coalition headquarters with Dr. Thomas Skinner, Chicago, Illinois, not dated, from the collection of Addie Wyatt.]
Story_ID: 15973
Speaker 1: That's Addie Wyatt on the end.  This is one of our guests from Africa and the young man over here is my husband of sixty-two years, Reverend Claude Wyatt.
Speaker 2: And was this, you said a guest at--this was at the Vernon Park Church [of God, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: [Addie Wyatt and husband Rev. Claude S. Wyatt, Jr. pose with an African guest at Vernon Park Church of God, Chicago, Illinois, not dated, from the collection of Addie Wyatt.]
Story_ID: 15974
Speaker 1: That's Reverend [Claude S.] Wyatt [Jr.] here.  I can't remember the name.  This is a great, newsman.  You know him?
Speaker 2: I don't know him.  Do you know him?
Speaker 1: It came up, came up and then he went back down again.  Oh--he was, his son was pastoring in Evanston, I mean in Anderson, Indiana for a while.
Speaker 2: [Addie Wyatt's husband Rev. Claude S. Wyatt Jr. (right) poses with a popular newsman, not dated, from the collection of Addie Wyatt.]
Story_ID: 15975
Speaker 1: And that's Congressman Charles Hayes.  He was a Director and a Vice President in our union [United Packinghouse Workers of America], and then finally, before his demise he was [U.S.] Congressman of the First Congressional District [of Illinois].
Speaker 2: [Addie Wyatt shows a picture of former union leader and U.S. Congressman Charles A. Hayes from Illinois, not dated, from the collection of Addie Wyatt.]
Story_ID: 15976
Speaker 1: That's Reverend Addie Wyatt sitting at my desk at the Amalgamated Meat Cutters and Butcher Workmen's office.
Speaker 2: Okay, let's see if we can find a year on that.
Speaker 1: It's right up in the corner.
Speaker 2: May, 1975.
Speaker 1: 1975, May.
Speaker 2: And the Butcher Workmen is part of the--is that the publication of the union?
Speaker 1: That is.
Speaker 2: [Addie Wyatt sits at her desk at the Amalgamated Meat Cutters and Butcher Workmen of America's union office, May, 1975. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of magazine reproduction of color photo ('The Butcher Workman,' May 1975).  From the collection of Addie Wyatt.]
Story_ID: 15977
Speaker 1: You were on the cover.
Speaker 2: And when I thought about that, I thought about you, how hard, what a hard time she had to get me to come for an interview.
Speaker 1: See, I don't like to talk about myself.
Speaker 2: I know (laughter).
Speaker 1: And she had a hard time getting me to come.  And when--I was on vacation, she kept calling and begged me to come.  And when I went in her office, I said, "Now I want you to know, the only reason I'm here is because you told me you were a woman with an assignment that you had to fulfill.  And I was on vacation.  I'm entitled to a vacation."  And she said, "Well, thank you for coming."  And she sat down to interview me, and I was talking about everybody in the union [Amalgamated Meat Cutters and Butcher Workmen of America] but myself.  I said, "I don't like to talk about myself."  And so when this came out, we had a convention of five thousand people for the church youth at the Hilton [hotel]. And I had gone down there to spend the weekend in the Hilton, resting myself.  The phone is jumping off, my office is calling, people calling from everywhere.  We've got photographers here.  Big deal, I mean what, what's the big deal? [tape skips]
Speaker 2: This is like the "Women of the Year," which is still big.
Speaker 1: Well, that's--when was--
Speaker 2: '76 [1976], January 5, 1976, it came out.
Speaker 1: That's actually--.
Speaker 2: This is the first, this is the pre-, this is always the important issue.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and generally, it's the "Person of the Year" or the "Man of the Year" (unclear)--,
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Um-hum, um-hum.
Speaker 1: --and they decided to recognize women.  They don't do that every year, unfortunately.
Speaker 2: That was one of the questions that they--the photographers asked, what do you think about all of you rather than just one.  I said, "When you think in fact that all of them have never been and will probably never be again, it is good to get them on there."
Speaker 1: That's true.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: [Addie Wyatt is one of 'Time' magazine's "Women of the Year," January 5, 1976. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of magazine reproduction of color photo ('Time,' January 1976).  From the collection of Addie Wyatt.]
Story_ID: 15978
Speaker 1: My husband, Rev. Claude Wyatt, Rev. Willie Barrow and Keith--I mean Clyde Barrow, Rev. Barrow's husband, and yours truly, Rev. Addie Wyatt.
Speaker 2: Okay, we got it.  What year, do you remember a year for this or an approximate time?
Speaker 1: At the PUSH's [People United to Save Humanity] convention.  I'm trying to see if I can see the year on there.  Un-un.
Speaker 2: There's no year.
Speaker 1: [Rev. Claude S. Wyatt Jr. (left), Rev. Willie Barrow, Clyde Barrow and Addie Wyatt (right) at a Rainbow/PUSH Coalition event, Chicago, Illinois, not dated, from the collection of Addie Wyatt.]
Story_ID: 15979
Speaker 1: That's a memorable shot there.  I don't know the people's names, but I went down to visit one of our strikes.  And we walked the picket line with them.  And I remember it because when a truck came around, I almost was hit, and I had to jump in the ditch.
Speaker 2: [Addie Wyatt visits a strike, not dated, from the collection of Addie Wyatt.]
Story_ID: 15980
Speaker 1: From left to right, from your, from viewer's to viewer's right.
Speaker 2: That Roland Burris and [Alvin] Al Boutte--,
Speaker 1: B-O-U-T-T-E.
Speaker 2: Rev. Jesse Jackson, Andrew Young, Cirillo McSween.
Speaker 1: C-I-R-I-L-L-O, M-C-S-W-E-E-N.
Speaker 2: And Rev. Addie Wyatt.
Speaker 1: Do you know what the occasion was?
Speaker 2: We were at a meeting at PUSH [People United to Save Humanity].
Speaker 1: [(L to R) Roland Burris, Alvin Boutte, Jesse Jackson, Andrew Young, Cirillo McSween and Addie Wyatt at a Rainbow/PUSH Coalition event, Chicago, Illinois, not dated, from the collection of Addie Wyatt.]
Story_ID: 15981
Speaker 1: Right on the corner, our member. Oh, [Ronald] Ron Robinson.
Speaker 2: Ron Robinson.
Speaker 1: Ron Robinson?
Speaker 2: He was Alderman and Sergeant at Arms at the City Hall.
Speaker 1: Oh, I know him, okay.  And do you know who that is?
Speaker 2: That's a minister.  Don't you remember.  He was in the Movement with us.  He's dead.  Oh, boy.  Rev. Addie Wyatt, [Chicago] Mayor Eugene Sawyer, my husband, Rev. Claude Wyatt, and that was an occasion that we had.  I think this was birthday celebration for Rev. Wyatt at the Vernon Park Church of God [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: [Ron Robinson (left), Addie Wyatt (center), Mayor Eugene Sawyer (center right) and others celebrate Rev. Claude S. Wyatt, Jr.'s (right) birthday at Vernon Park Church of God, Chicago, Illinois, not dated, from the collection of Addie Wyatt.]
Story_ID: 15982
Speaker 1: Reverend Addie Wyatt, Honorable C. Delores Tucker [former Pennsylvania Secretary of State].
Speaker 2: [Addie Wyatt talks with former Pennsylvania Secretary of State, C. Delores Tucker, not dated, from the collection of Addie Wyatt.]
Story_ID: 15983
Speaker 1: That's the Honorable [U.S. Senator] Carol Moseley Braun, Rev. Claude Wyatt and Rev. Willie Barrow and Alderman, Minister (unclear) [Leonard] Deville.
Speaker 2: [U.S. Senator Carol Moseley Braun, Rev. Claude S. Wyatt, Jr., Rev. Willie Barrow and Alderman Rev. Leonard Deville, Chicago, Illinois, not dated, from the collection of Addie Wyatt.]
Story_ID: 15984
Speaker 1: That's [U.S. Congresswoman] Geraldine Ferraro.  I served as her Senior Policy Advisor for Geraldine and [U.S. Vice President Walter] Mondale's [presidential] campaign.  That's myself, next to there, and I don't know who this is.
Speaker 2: [Addie Wyatt hugs Geraldine Ferraro during her vice presidential campaign, 1984.  From the collection of Addie Wyatt.]
Story_ID: 15985
Speaker 1: John Hope Franklin and Addie Wyatt.  I'm not sure who that is.
Speaker 2: Okay, and can you tell us anything about the place or the date or the event or the occasion?
Speaker 1: I think we were at a PUSH [People United to Save Humanity]--,
Speaker 2: It's a PUSH.  It says PUSH--.
Speaker 1: A convention.
Speaker 2: [John Hope Franklin, Addie Wyatt and an unidentified woman at a Rainbow/PUSH Coalition convention, Chicago, Illinois, not dated.  From the collection of Addie Wyatt.]
Story_ID: 15986
Speaker 1: I'm there at a women's conference [of the union of Amalgamated Meat Cutters and Butcher Workmen of North America] at the Pick-Congress [Hotel, Chicago, Illinois] and that's sister Ann--I can't think of her name.  And the one over on the other side of me, Emma Beck.  She was a leader in our women's committee at the--.
Speaker 2: Ms. Beck on the right?
Speaker 1: On the right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm in the middle.
Speaker 2: [Addie Wyatt (center), Emma Beck (right) and an unidentified woman at a women's conference of the union of Amalgamated Meat Cutters and Butcher Workmen of North America, held at the Pick-Congress Hotel, Chicago, Illinois, not dated, from the collection of Addie Wyatt.]
Story_ID: 15987
Speaker 1: Addie Wyatt and--.
Speaker 2: Is that Marla (unclear)?
Speaker 1: No, you know, she's very active.
Speaker 2: The face looks familiar, but--.
Speaker 1: Oh God, Juanita Passmore.
Speaker 2: Oh, that's Juanita Passmore. Okay.
Speaker 1: We should probably spell Passmore.
Speaker 2: P-A-S-S-- Oh, sorry.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) P-A-S-S-M-O-R-E.
Speaker 2: [Addie Wyatt with Juanita Passmore at a Rainbow/PUSH Coalition convention, Chicago, Illinois, not dated, from the collection of Addie Wyatt.]
Story_ID: 15988
Speaker 1: The late Alderman Dixon and Addie Wyatt.  She was the Alderman of the Eighth Ward and also City Council Pro Tem [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Mayor Pro Tem (unclear)--.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, one more time.  So it's Mayor Sawyer.
Speaker 2: Mayor Eugene Sawyer [of Chicago, Illinois] .
Speaker 1: And the Alderman Lorraine--
Speaker 2: Lorraine Dixon.
Speaker 1: Is that a C-K-S-O-N or X-I-O-N?
Speaker 2: X-O-N.  D-I-X-O-N, and she was Alderman of the Eighth Ward and Mayor Pro Tem of the City Council.
Speaker 1: [Photo - Addie Wyatt with Chicago Mayor Eugene Sawyer and Alderman Lorraine Dixon, not dated. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photo; from the collection of Addie Wyatt]
Story_ID: 15989
Speaker 1: That's Reverend Addie Wyatt and Dr.--what's the doctor's name?
Speaker 2: (Response unclear).
Speaker 1: No, but this is doctor.  You know, she was giving leadership at the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] tea this year even.
Speaker 2: [Photo -  Addie Wyatt poses with an unidentified woman at a Rainbow/PUSH Coalition convention, Chicago, Illinois, not dated. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of black and white photo; from the collection of Addie Wyatt]
Story_ID: 15990
Speaker 1: Dr. Dorothy Height, with her beautiful knees showing, Reverend Addie Wyatt, trying to hold hers down and Dr., oh, what's her name?  You know she died last--couple of years ago.  Dr. West--no.
Speaker 2: Joyner?
Speaker 1: No, not Joyner, that's not--doctor--
Speaker 2: Do you have anything more rigid? That's curling and giving me a little bit of reflection.
Speaker 1: Dr.--Essie, Dr. Essie.
Speaker 2: Oh that's got it; that's okay now.
Speaker 1: Dr. Essie...
Speaker 2: She worked with children?
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.
Speaker 2: Dr. Effie Ellis!
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Dr. Effie Ellis.  I knew it was is in my computer coming up.
Speaker 2: That's good!
Speaker 1: Dr. Effie Ellis.
Speaker 2: E-F-F-I-E, Ellis, E-L-L-I-S.
Speaker 1: Shout it out Julie, 'cause you're off mic.
Speaker 2: E-F-F-I-E, E-L-L-I-S.
Speaker 1: [Photo - Addie Wyatt with Dr. Dorothy Height and others at a Rainbow/PUSH Coalition convention, Chicago, Illinois, not dated. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of black and white photo; from the collection of Addie Wyatt]
Story_ID: 15991
Speaker 1: Reverend Addie Wyatt, looking confused.
Speaker 2: You're not looking (laughs), you are not looking confused.  But it says thirty thou-, thirty million.  What's the packing--and this is the 'Packinghouse Worker'.  Do you know what the circumstances are?
Speaker 1: It was a fundraiser I know.  I don't know whether that was for the [Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] Drive or what.
Speaker 2: [Photo - Addie Wyatt prepares for a union fundraiser, not dated. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of black and white photo; from the collection of Addie Wyatt]
Story_ID: 15992
Speaker 1: That's Rev. [Henry M.] Williamson of the Carter Temple A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] Church, pastor and right next to there is Dr.--I mean Bishop [Louis Henry] Ford, the [Bishop] Ford Highway is named after him.  And then Rev. Addie Wyatt and Rev. Willie Barrow.
Speaker 2: That's King, Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.]'s son.
Speaker 1: Who is it?
Speaker 2: Is that the Kings' son or not?
Speaker 1: Behind that, um-hum. Behind that would be.
Speaker 2: He's not--
Speaker 1: Marty.
Speaker 2: Is he Marty? That's Marty? Okay.
Speaker 1: You have to tell who is next (unclear).
Speaker 2: He's Martin and reverend, I mean Father [Michael] Pfleger [of St. Sabina's Catholic Church, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Pfleger is right here, right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, so Pfleger is on the left-hand side of Martin Luther King, Jr.  And Pfleger is spelled, P-F-L-E-G-E-R.
Speaker 2: And right next there is Rev. Tyrone Crider.
Speaker 1: Okay, C-R-I-D-E-R.
Speaker 2: And then, who is this?
Speaker 1: I don't know.  That's what I was going to ask.  I don't know who that is.
Speaker 2: Dr. Clay Evans and [Chicago] Mayor [Eugene] Sawyer.
Speaker 1: [Photo - Rev. Addie Wyatt (front row left) with prominent clergy and political figures, Chicago, Illinois, not dated. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photo; from the collection of Addie Wyatt]
Story_ID: 15993
Speaker 1: Reverend Addie Wyatt and the past president of the United Food and Commercial Workers [of America] union.  And that was at our first UFCWA merger convention, after we merged with the meat cutters and those groups.
Speaker 2: What year?
Speaker 1: 1979.
Speaker 2: [Photo - Addie Wyatt shakes hands with the former president of the United Food and Commercial Workers of America union, 1979. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photo; from the collection of Addie Wyatt]
Story_ID: 15994
Speaker 1: Reverend [Addie] Wyatt and Dr. Dorothy Height.  Let's see, I think that's, what's her name, behind that--
Speaker 2: Is she an artist? (unclear)
Speaker 1: I don't know who.  And I know that this is Clarice over here.  I can't think of Clarice's last name.
Speaker 2: Which one is Clarice? Behind Doctor Height or in the middle?
Speaker 1: Behind Dr. Height on the end.
Speaker 2: Okay, it's Clarice.
Speaker 1: So we have to go searching.
Speaker 2: There's a little bit of reflection in the upper left corner.
Speaker 1: Is that working? What about that?
Speaker 2: And I think she's [Rosemary] Rosie Bean.
Speaker 1: Beam, B-E-
Speaker 2: Right here, B-E-A-N.
Speaker 1: In the midde, B-E-A--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.  No, on the--,
Speaker 1: On the left?
Speaker 2: Yes, back row left.
Speaker 1: [Photo - Addie Wyatt (front row left) with Dr. Dorothy Height and others at a Rainbow/PUSH Coalition convention, Chicago, Illinois, not dated. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of black and white photo; from the collection of Addie Wyatt]
Story_ID: 15995
Speaker 1: Reverend Addie Wyatt and President Jimmy Carter.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: At the White House.
Speaker 2: Was that by any chance at the same conference where the--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: --different occasions.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yes.
Speaker 2: [Photo - President Jimmy Carter greets Addie Wyatt at the White House, Washington, D.C., 1970s. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photo; from the collection of Addie Wyatt]
Story_ID: 15996
Speaker 1: Right over here on this end, the right end, that's Reverend Addie Wyatt, and next to her is her father, Ambrose Cameron, [Sr.].  And we're having that--that's in our living room at Altgeld Gardens [public housing project, Chicago, Illinois].  My brother, who's standing in the middle, he was getting married, well he had married, Emma Savage, who is [U.S. Congressman] Gus Savage's sister.  And these two over on this end--,
Speaker 2: From the left?
Speaker 1: --on the left, that's Gus Savage's mother and Gus Savage's father.
Speaker 2: That's a historic picture.
Speaker 1: [Photo - Addie Wyatt and family at her brother's wedding, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1950s. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of black and white photo; from the collection of Addie Wyatt]
Story_ID: 15997
Speaker 1: We're marching down Michigan Avenue [in Chicago, Illinois] for the Equal Rights Amendment.  And that's Betty Friedan, Addie Wyatt, C. Delores Tucker, Jean Stapleton [actress], C. Delores, and this his [Phil Donahue's] wife, Marlo [Thomas]--and what is his name, (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Which one you looking at?
Speaker 1: Now, this was the Chair of the National--what am I calling it, the National--
Speaker 2: Organization for Women?
Speaker 1: --Organization, I called it committee didn't I?  National--.
Speaker 2: Is that Clara?
Speaker 1: No, that's a movie star here.  This is, no--,
Speaker 2: It's not [William] Bill Lucy is it?
Speaker 1: No, that's a legislator, state legislator.  And that's--you know who she is, the--that's Betty Friedan.
Speaker 2: Okay, do you remember the year this took place?
Speaker 1: When did we lose the Equal Rights Amendment?  When did it (unclear).  19--
Speaker 2: Early '70s [1970s], is that when---.
Speaker 1: [Photo - Addie Wyatt takes part in a march for the Equal Rights Amendment, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1970s. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of black and white photo; from the collection of Addie Wyatt]
Story_ID: 15998
Speaker 1: Dr. Rosa Parks and Dr. David Abernathy, Dr. Abernathy's wife, Mrs. Abernathy.  And I'm trying to think who this is.  I can't get him.
Speaker 2: Who's that?
Speaker 1: Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] and Dr. Coretta [Scott] King, right here.
Speaker 2: In the middle, with the glasses on?  I don't know.
Speaker 1: I'm trying to think who it is.  I'm trying to see the date down here.  What is this right here?  Is this '56 [1956]?
Speaker 2: It looks like '65 [1965].
Speaker 1: It's '65 [1965],
Speaker 2: Is it '65 [1965]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, May '65 [1965].
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: [Photo - Addie Wyatt exhibits an autographed 'Ebony' magazine cover commemorating the March on Montgomery, Alabama, May, 1965. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of magazine reproduction of color photo ('Ebony' magazine, May 1965); from the collection of Addie Wyatt]
Story_ID: 15999
Speaker 1: Reverend Claude Wyatt and Reverend Addie Wyatt.
Speaker 2: When was this taken, if you can recall?
Speaker 1: About 1985 or 6 [1986].
Speaker 2: Maryland Street [sic, Avenue] Church [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: [Photo - Rev. Addie Wyatt with her husband, Rev. Claude S. Wyatt, Jr., Chicago, Illinois, 1985-1986. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of black and white photo; from the collection of Addie Wyatt]
Story_ID: 16000
Speaker 1: James Compton on the left, Coretta Scott King and next to Coretta is--who is that?  And then Reverend Addie Wyatt and Lerone Bennett.
Speaker 2: [Photo - Rev. Addie Wyatt (center right) poses with James Compton, Coretta Scott King, Lerone Bennett, Jr. and others, not dated. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of black and white photo; from the collection of Addie Wyatt]
Story_ID: 16001
Speaker 1: Eugene Sawyer [former Mayor of Chicago, Illinois], Rev. Addie Wyatt--
Speaker 2: Do you have anything to--
Speaker 1: Roland Burris, who is this? All right, that's good.  I can't think of her name.  This is Rev. [Henry M.] Williamson, isn't it?  And this is [U.S. Senator] Carol Moseley Braun.
Speaker 2: You know she's moved back now.
Speaker 1: And so what was this occasion or year or anything else you can tell us about this one?
Speaker 2: I don't know, let's see.
Speaker 1: It was in honor of [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.].
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, I think it was.
Speaker 1: At the Center, SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference], 1993.  So it must have been a SCLC Conference.  It was an SCLC Conference, probably 1993.
Speaker 2: Okay, next please.
Speaker 1: It was honoring him here.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) It was like when they were honoring the First Martin Luther King Holiday,
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: It's like in the bottom.  First Martin Luther King holiday.
Speaker 2: [Photo - Addie Wyatt with others at the Southern Christian Leadership Conference's celebration, in honor of the first Martin Luther King Jr. holiday, Atlanta, Georgia, 1993. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photo; from the collection of Addie Wyatt]
Story_ID: 16002
Speaker 1: Reverend Jackson and Reverend Addie Wyatt.
Speaker 2: [Photo - Addie Wyatt poses with Reverend Jesse Jackson, not dated. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of black and white photo; from the collection of Addie Wyatt]
Story_ID: 16003
Speaker 1: In Reverend Claude Wyatt's head.
Speaker 2: [Photo - Addie Wyatt superimposed on husband, Reverend Claude Wyatt's silhouette, not dated. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photo; from the collection of Addie Wyatt]
Story_ID: 16004
Speaker 1: Mayor of Chicago [Illinois], Mayor Richard [M.] Daley, M. Daley, and Reverend Addie Wyatt at a breakfast.  I think that must have been a [Operation] P.U.S.H. breakfast honoring Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.].
Speaker 2: [Photo - Rev. Addie Wyatt with Mayor Richard M. Daley at a Rainbow/PUSH Coalition event honoring Dr. Martin Luther King, Chicago, Illinois, not dated. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of black and white photo; from the collection of Addie Wyatt]
Story_ID: 16005
Speaker 1: That's Reverend Claude Wyatt and Reverend Addie Wyatt.
Speaker 2: [Photo - Addie Wyatt poses with husband, Reverend Claude Wyatt, not dated. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of black and white photo; from the collection of Addie Wyatt]
Story_ID: 16006
Speaker 1: President [Michael] Alexandroff.  That's at Columbia College's [Chicago, Illinois] graduation.  They gave me an honorary doctorate.
Speaker 2: [Photo - Addie Wyatt receives an honorary degree from Columbia College, Chicago, Illinois, 1978. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photo; from the collection of Addie Wyatt]
Story_ID: 16007
Speaker 1: Those are the officers of the Amalgamated Meat Cutters [and Butcher Workmen of North America union].
Speaker 2: When was this taken?  And where?
Speaker 1: It's at--that's where our office was at 2800 North Sheridan Road [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That was Amalgamated's building.  We sold it to St. Joseph's [Hospital].  A gorgeous building.
Speaker 2: Okay, August of 1976.  Look at--this is an amazing picture.
Speaker 1: Yes it is, honey, and it makes me sad when I look and I said, "There are only about two of us left."
Speaker 2: Really?  Living?
Speaker 1: [Photo - Addie Wyatt poses with the officers of the Amalgamated Meat Cutters and Butcher Workmen of North America union, Chicago, Illinois, August, 1976. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photo; from the collection of Addie Wyatt]
Story_ID: 16008
Speaker 1: Reverend Addie and this is Jean Barnett, the retired Vice President of Revlon [Inc.].
Speaker 2: [Photo - Addie Wyatt poses with Jean Barnett, former vice president of Revlon, Inc., not dated. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photo; from the collection of Addie Wyatt]
Story_ID: 16009
Speaker 1: Reverend Addie and my great-granddaughter, Joy Alexandria Hall.  A-L-E-X-A-N-D-R-I-A, Hall, H-A-L-L.
Speaker 2: [Photo - Addie Wyatt poses with great-granddaughter, Joy Alexandria Hall, not dated. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photo; from the collection of Addie Wyatt]
Story_ID: 16010
Speaker 1: Rev. [Claude S.] Wyatt [Jr.], my husband, and then my brother, [William] Willie Cameron, myself and then Dr. Alvin Lewis.
Speaker 2: [Photo - Addie Wyatt with Rev. Claude Wyatt, her brother Willie Cameron, and Dr. Alvin Lewis, not dated. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photo; from the collection of Addie Wyatt]
Story_ID: 16011
Speaker 1: Claude Wyatt the third [Claude S. Wyatt, III], my son.
Speaker 2: And you say 'Dee-Dee' is that his nickname?
Speaker 1: Claude 'Dee-Dee' Wyatt.
Speaker 2: [Photo - Addie Wyatt's son, Claude S. Wyatt, III, not dated. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photo; from the collection of Addie Wyatt]
Story_ID: 16012
Speaker 1: My sister, my brother, deceased--.
Speaker 2: Now, you have to give your sister's name.
Speaker 1: My sister, Audrey Dandridge, D-A-N-D-R-I-D-G-E, and my deceased brother, Emmett Cameron, C-A-M-E-R-O-N, my brother, [William] Willie Cameron, C-A-M-E-R-O-N, and my son, Renaldo Wyatt, R-E-N-A-L-D-O.
Speaker 2: [Photo - Addie Wyatt's sister Audrey Dandridge, brothers Emmett and Willie Cameron, and son Renaldo Wyatt, not dated. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photo; from the collection of Addie Wyatt]
