Story_ID: 15203
Speaker 1: My name is Racine Tucker-Hamilton, and I'm the interviewer.  Edgar Carey Lane is the videographer.  And today's date is Tuesday--I'm sorry, Wednesday, June 2nd, 2004.  And this interview is taking place at 2331 Montebello Terrace--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Terrace.
Speaker 1: --in Baltimore, Maryland.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And now, if you would, Dr. Whitten, please, for the record, just tell us your name, your full name, and spell it, please?
Speaker 2: Benjamin Carr Whitten, B-E-N, B-E-N-D-I-G, no, B-E-N-J-I-M-I-N,
Speaker 1: J-A-M-I-N.
Speaker 2: Carr, C-A-R-R, W-H-I-T-T-E-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, great.  And, Dr. Whitten, could you please tell us the date and the location of your birth?
Speaker 2: Yes, July 25th, 1930--'23 [1923].
Speaker 1: Okay, and where were you born?
Speaker 2: In Wilmington, Delaware.
Story_ID: 15204
Speaker 1: Could you please share with us your favorite food?
Speaker 2: (Laughs) I like chicken.  I like pork chops.  I like hamburger, and I like oatmeal, oatmeal, yes, all kinds of fruit, yeah.
Speaker 1: And what about your favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall, it's football season (laughs).
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Purple.
Speaker 1: And your favorite vacation spot?
Speaker 2: In Atlantic City [New Jersey].
Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying, do you have one?  A favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes, "if not when, what now?"
Story_ID: 15205
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about your mother, starting with her name and where she grew up and that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: Well, her name is Emma, wait minute, Carr.  She was a daughter of a, a slave, and her, her, yeah, her mother, her father [Hugh Carr] was a slave.  She, she grew up in Charlottesville, Virginia on a farm.  There were, there were five children and one son and other, they were daughters.  Her mother died when they were young, and the older sister raised her.  And the son--the father was a very stern person.  He didn't take any stuff (laughs).  But all had to do something.  And the father said you had to go to school.  And all the children went to universities, to Virginia State [University, Petersburg, Virginia].  That's not the school right now, name, but that's, that it is, yeah.  And they, they went.  And they did very well.  My mother didn't like the farm, so she left to go to Wilmington [Delaware].  And she married my son--my dad in, in Delaware.  But they were late to get married.  A lot of the black women from, from the South, they had jobs in the North, to take care of other children and that, that kind of stuff; they did not have good jobs.  In fact, a lot of the persons that finished going to one of the schools, they cannot teach.  And at some times, the persons could not marry as a, as a teacher.  So my mother had a couple--lot of jobs and they married, married my, my dad.
Speaker 1: So tell me a little bit about your father.  What was your father's name?
Speaker 2: T--Tobias Emanuel Whitten.
Speaker 1: And tell me about him.
Speaker 2: He was, he was a big man.  And he, I think was a playboy for a while (laughs).  But they, they married, and he went to school and became a teacher, a history teacher.  And he didn't, didn't survive too long.  He died when he was forty-five.  And the children were very young.  My dad was, my--my mother had the four children and the oldest was Charles [F. Whitten].  And he was nine--no, eight, and I was six.  And my--my sister was five, oh, three--no--she was--.
Speaker 1: Two or three, three or four?
Speaker 2: Four.  And my other brother was two, two months--twenty minutes--two--twenty months.
Speaker 1: Twenty months old?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Tell me a little bit about, from what you remember, about your father.  How would you describe him?
Speaker 1: He was a very playful person.  And he never gave me a whipping (laughs).  But he took me places, but I don't remember much about him.  I really don't.  But I remember that he never, he was a very, very playful person, and we had a good time, what I remember.
Story_ID: 15206
Speaker 1: What can you tell me about your grandparents on your mother's side, your maternal grandparents?
Speaker 2: They were--did, I didn't, didn't remember--I didn't know them at all.
Speaker 1: What about your paternal grandparents?
Speaker 2: Same thing, I didn't.
Speaker 1: And how far back can you trace your, your ancestry?  Do you know, did you all come, were your people free?  Were they slaves?  How far back can you trace your ancestry?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother [Emma Carr Whitten]'s family, the dad was a slave.  And my other family, I don't--they don't talk about it.  It's a shame they didn't.  And a lot of them were, they had a lot of women.  And when they marry, then there's that, another name, different name.  So I don't go, I can't recall any of them.
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about your mother's family though, a pretty--a very rich history there with the Carrs in Charlottesville, Virginia?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about that, and the farm there?
Speaker 2: They had a farm, and they, the older one went to--married.  And the man, my uncle, he was a person who'd take care of the, learned how to farm.  He went to, went to school with my aunt, same school at--but they only had one child, and that was a woman, my cousin.  But the children went to school and did very well and became teachers.  Those were in, when they were in Virginia.  If you went some place in the South--in the North, they would not honor the school, from, from the--from the college, had a word problem.
Speaker 1: What can you tell me about Riverview Farm and Hugh Carr?
Speaker 2: Well, I just remember that my mother had a picture of my, her--his--her dad always.  And when I was very young, they took us to, to the farm, particularly in the summer.  I have pictures of my dad [Tobias Emanuel Whitten, Sr.] and my mother and my aunts in the summer particularly.  It was very strange because you had to use the bus, I mean the train, and all the blacks were in the back--in the front where all the--full of smoke and that sort of thing.  I remember that, yeah.  We had a good time in, in, as young people.  And as I, as a boy I enjoyed going to the farm.  My mother, after, when they married, they, they sold her, her share, and they--my, my mother and my dad had a, a house in Wilmington [Delaware].  And it costs three--three thousand dollars, yeah, on Poplar Street in, in Wilmington.
Story_ID: 15207
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about what life was like growing up for you [in Wilmington, Delaware]?  What was a typical day like for you growing up?
Speaker 2: It was just a lot of play (laughs), had to go to school.  And I was very close by--I lived very close to the schools that I attended.  And I was very playful, and I'd have to--a lot whipping (laughs), 'cause I had do things, that--I shouldn't do that (laughs).  And it was real funny because my, my mother [Emma Carr Whitten] was a very special person.  And we had a lot of fun with my mother, but you didn't cross her (laughs).  When she, do it, you had to do it, yes, indeed.  I remember some of the little whippings I had (laughs).  She would wait until the next day--night.  And she'll kind of, "Benjamin," oh, oh, that's a problem (laughs).  "Come on to the bathroom, and, and bring your belt (laughs).  You're gonna have a"--she did that.  So, we, we laughed about it for a long time, yeah.  But I was real playful and devilish, always.
Speaker 1: What's your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: I liked sports, but I was very small.  So, the guys just--I couldn't, couldn't do some things.  But I learned how to play tennis.  I liked to skate and also I, finally, I found a, I had a bike, a bike, and used to go every, every day just to do that.
Speaker 1: And then could you tell me your brothers and sisters' and their birth order, including yourself?
Speaker 2: My older brother is, is Charles [F. Whitten], and I'm Benjamin, and my--Ann, Ann [Alice Ann Whitten] is my sister and Toby [Tobais Emanuel Whitten, Jr.] is my, my younger brother.
Story_ID: 15208
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about what it was like for you to have lost your father [Tobias Emanuel Whitten, Sr.] as a young boy?  What was that like not having your father in the house while you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, didn't have one, but my mother [Emma Carr Whitten] did, had, at one time there was a doctor in the house.  And he, he's--like a, like a father for a while.  And then I also had a, an aunt, on my, my father's side, Aunt Alice [Whitten].  And she was also like a, like a brother--a mother or a father.  And we couldn't have made it, (unclear) for her.  She helped show--she, a teacher in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  But she walked to the train station [in Wilmington, Delaware] every day and come back.  And then she would all go to--and we all ate together in, in our house, in our house.  Aunt Alice, she, she was something.  We needed her.  I couldn't have gone to college except that she was able to help us.
Speaker 1: And your mother rented out space in the house for the doctor?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us a little bit about that?
Speaker 2: It wasn't too much room.  The room--living room was the waiting room, had to go upstairs for the doctor to take care of things.  And the one, one room, and then the children, we were in the other room, bathroom--bedroom.  And that, that was it.  But he was a, he was--he finally purchased a, a house across the street from where we lived.  And that was great.  So I know him, Dr., Dr. Brown.  He was very good, yeah.
Speaker 1: And growing up, your mother worked as his receptionist during the day and taught school at night?
Speaker 2: She did more than that.  She, she was a workahol[ic].  She learned how to, she could slow--to sew women's--or taking care of the hair, the hair.  She did everything.  She did everything.  I don't know how she made it.  I really don't because then you had to, you had to wash and iron everything.  And you have to take care of the water and back.  It's, it's a mess--it was a mess, it was a mess.  But she survived.  And she didn't have a lot of money.  My--we would have been warehouse, what do they call it?
Speaker 1: Welfare.
Speaker 2: Yeah, didn't have it then.  They had what was called a Mother's Aid and a little money for that.  And there were some kind of foods.  They gave you flour, but not the white flour.  It would be, it would be the black, dark flour.  And my mother would make rolls and that sort of thing.  I like the, the brown bread right now forever.  That was good.  She was good.  She was a good cook.  One of things I remember on the, on--on Saturdays for football season, she would always make vegetable soup and rolls.  And I would stretch out on the floor and listen to the football games all, all--from, from, from quarter, from quarter, fifteen of twelve until twelve, until twelve--until six because the, the others on the three, three years--three hours on the coast, on the coast.  But I enjoyed that.  And they we always took a side with Army [U.S. Military Academy, West Point, New York] and Navy [U.S. Naval Academy, Annapolis, Maryland].  And my brother [Charles F. Whitten] liked to be the Navy, from the Navy, I was the Army.  And we had a good time with that.  And we didn't know that blacks couldn't go to those schools then, it was ridiculous, but that's the--we didn't know.
Story_ID: 15209
Speaker 1: Do you remember the name of the street that you lived on growing up--?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and what your community was like?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, Poplar Street [Wilmington, Delaware], yes.
Speaker 1: And what was your community like?
Speaker 2: It was just all, all black people, young and old, all kinds, all kinds; across the street, and they're--you knew everybody.  So if you did something wrong, then your mother or your father would know it.  Some of the small houses had a lot of children.  I don't know if you knew the name of Brown, what's?
Speaker 1: Cliff Brown.
Speaker 2: What's his name?
Speaker 1: Cliff Brown.
Speaker 2: Cliff, yeah, Clifford Brown [jazz musician].  He, he became very famous.  He, next door to us, and it was a mess because my mother [Emma Carr Whitten], "Oh my, is he gonna play again?" (laughs) "Always, yes."  And then two, two, there were two clean--and they had six, there were eight children in that little house.  It, I remember that, yeah.
Speaker 1: Can you tell me what sights, sounds and smells remind you of growing up?
Speaker 2: Wools--rolls, number one and for, for turkey, for the Christmas or, or Thanksgiving, oh, yeah, all of that.
Speaker 1: What sights remind you of growing up?
Speaker 2: I was a good, I used to use the bike and the, had a, had a wagon or--and, of course, I--they had horses then.  And I used to go to the stables around, about three, three or four blocks from where I lived and looking at the--yes, I enjoyed that.  And I remember the smell of that (laughs).
Speaker 1: What about, what sounds remind you of growing  up?
Speaker 2: One thing my Aunt Alice [Whitten], she was just four blocks from where we lived, and on the way to the station, she would knock--make sure everybody up, Aunt Alice (laughs), yes, I remember that.
Story_ID: 15210
Speaker 1: Do you remember which elementary school you attended?
Speaker 2: [Public School] No. 5 [Wilmington, Delaware], and one nine--and, and [Public School No.] 19 [later St. Hedwig's High School, Wilmington, Delaware], two of them.  They were only about four blocks where we lived [Poplar Street, Wilmington, Delaware].  And the other thing was we liked, I liked the sports.  And I'd look at the teams, the games, close to where I lived.  And some of the guys were really good.  And I couldn't do much, but I, I enjoyed.  And then I learned how to play tennis.  And I did pretty good, I thought.  I, I liked tennis.  And, and then when you had a little, little problems, but to the boys, somebody would have some boxing gloves.  And you would have to fight like that rather than something else.  And that was pretty good (laughs), for as a small person, and I was very, very fast and very quick.  So used to, used to box that way.
Speaker 1: Do you remember some of your teachers in elementary school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, three or four of them, yes.
Speaker 1: Did they have a big influence on you?
Speaker 2: Not really, all of, you know, we were a family of teachers so that you had to do things that you had to do.  And I, I skipped a couple grades too so that I moved around.  And I was pretty good, I think, with the books, and I also liked to read.  I, I was close to the library.  And I used to get three books every, every two or three days.  And I would book and book and book.
Speaker 1: And what type of student were you during the elementary school years?
Speaker 2: I was good (laughs).  I really was, and that's the reason they, they double--they promoted me, you know.  So that when I was ready, when I finished college--high, high school [Howard High School, later Howard High School of Technology, Wilmington, Delaware], I was only fifteen years old.  So I had--I was a good, good student, very playful, but I was a good--I was good (laughs).
Story_ID: 15211
Speaker 1: What kind of child were you during this time?
Speaker 2: Devilish, devilish, very devilish, talked, taking care of, doing something every day, and walk by and hit somebody, yeah, crazy.
Speaker 1: Did you and your family attend church?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What was that like?  What were those experiences like?
Speaker 2: Yes, we would go to, to Sunday school, and sometimes we'd go to the church, but mostly every, every Sunday, we'd go to, to Sunday school after church.  And then in the evening, we'd go to young people at the church.  So we enjoyed that.
Story_ID: 15212
Speaker 1: Now, what about junior high school?  Where did you go to junior high school?
Speaker 2: Same place.  The school was a junior and senior high school together.  And we only lived four, four blocks from it.  Two?
Speaker 1: It was Howard High [School, later Howard High School of Technology, Wilmington, Delaware].
Speaker 2: Yeah, Howard School, yeah.
Speaker 1: So during junior high school, who were some of your friends?
Speaker 2: I remember a lot of them.  In fact, they were friends for--through the high school together because they had two sections of every class (unclear).  And we were all the same, together.  We were together all the time.
Speaker 1: And--.
Speaker 2: And my, in my graduating college--high school were a hundred people.  So it was a small school really.  I thought it was a big school, but with the junior and senior together, then it was pretty good.
Speaker 1: And during the junior high school years, the early teenage years, did you have dreams and aspirations?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, I could, yes, I did.  At one time, I was gonna be a dentist.  And then I was gonna be a teacher.  I was gonna do--and it's funny, my brother [Charles F. Whitten] wanted to be a teacher--a, a doctor.  And I said, I'll be a dentist.  And my, my sister [Alice Ann Whitten] would be a nurse, and maybe, Toby [Tobais Emanuel Whitten, Jr.], you can be a (laughs), take care of dead people (laughs).
Speaker 1: Do you think you all were influenced by the doctor who lived in your home, who ran his practice out of your home?
Speaker 2: I, I think so.  But not a lot, but yeah, because we, we had model, had role models right in the family.  So my uncle and my dad [Tobias Emanuel Whitten, Sr.] and my mother [Emma Carr Whitten], they were, they were teachers.  And her, her teachers--sisters were teachers.
Speaker 1: What kind of high school student were you?
Speaker 2: I was good, yeah.  I wasn't (laughs), I wasn't the, the first, number one.  I was about third in the, in the class.  And my mad--my mother was so mad because I could do better.  I could have done better.  I, I was not a, a--that teacher like--a, a student like that.  In fact, when I got a C one time, she would have to--well, you have to wait until it's better and you go to, you go to school and then go home until the next day.  That was the, that was the punishment, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And during your high school years, how did you spend your time?  What were some of the things you were really interested in doing and that you enjoyed doing?
Speaker 2: I liked the, I liked to play (laughs).  I liked to play tennis, to skate, skate, using the bike, listening to the radio a little bit.  And then I liked to read, always read.
Speaker 1: Do you remember some of your teachers from high school?
Speaker 2: I know all of them, remember all of them (laughs), I really do.
Speaker 1: Were there any that influenced you particularly?
Speaker 2: The shop teachers--my uncle, my uncle. Yeah. So he was number one.
Story_ID: 15213
Speaker 1: During your high school years [at Howard High School, later Howard High School of Technology, Wilmington, Delaware], what were your thoughts about college?
Speaker 2: Well, we knew we were going to college.  We knew that.  We'd have to because all of the people in my family went to college, and you have to go.  What are you gonna study?  That's fine.  Whatever it is, you have to do it that way.  And then, you need any money to do it, well, we will help.  And we had a, together we would say, "Okay, we will help you and you have to help my, my sister [Alice Ann Whitten].  And the second brother had to go take care of the younger guy [brother, Tobias Emanuel Whitten, Jr.]."  And that's what we did.  We did, yes, indeed. And at this time, were you thinking that you would become a dentist?
Speaker 1: Oh, no, we'd stopped doing that.  I went to the [U.S.] Army, I was in the Army, in the war [World War II], so that, I didn't like that at all.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) What year did you go to the Army?  Do you remember what year?
Speaker 1: When I finished college [at Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: So around 1944?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) I was nineteen years old, nineteen years old, went right to, in the Army.
Speaker 2: Okay, so around 1943, you went into the Army?
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: And what was your, what were your experiences in the Army like?
Speaker 1: It was ugly (laughs).
Speaker 2: How so?
Speaker 1: Number one, black, black people didn't have a chance.  And it didn't make any difference if you were smart or you had a degree, did not--if you were black, do something else, yes, indeed.  And you had a job in the, in the Army, it didn't make any difference, whether you could do better, whether have a officer--all white in my battalion, all white, and I didn't like it at all.  And they knew that, that my degree, I was good.  And they had the test, "Oh, yes, he was better than, than most of the officers"--didn't make any difference.  And when time to go to OSC [Operations Support Command], that you're going, going to, overseas, then you can't, you can't go now.  You have to go overseas.  So that's what happens.  And just hundreds of thousands of men who were smart and had degrees, didn't make any difference, particularly as black.
Speaker 2: How many years did you spend in the Army?
Speaker 1: Almost three.
Speaker 2: Were you drafted into the Army?
Speaker 1: Yes, oh, yes (laughs).
Speaker 2: So from about 1943 'til about 1946, you were in the Army?
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: And tell me what you did after the Army?  You decided to go back to school?
Speaker 1: No, I, I worked as a special, a training--.
Speaker 2: Training.
Speaker 1: Specialty for the, for the--for CVA--VA [Veterans Administration, now U.S. Department of Veteran Affairs], yeah.  And I had my degree so I did that, just for a year and a half.  And then they agreed that I'd go back to college, back to college and get, get a Masters.
Speaker 2: Why did you decide to go back to college?
Speaker 1: Well, I really wanted to--I was very, I was restless, and I really wanted to take care with black people.  And I know that in my corner, where I lived, the Jews had a, a whiskey store.  In the whole of the city [Wilmington, Delaware], no black has a, a whiskey store.  I was gonna do that.  And, oh, my mother [Emma Carr Whitten] and aunt [Alice Whitten], "Oh, no, a Whitten in a whiskey store.  No, indeed."  Oh, I'd better leave--and I decided I would go back to college and go someplace else.  And I would not go back to Wilmington [Delaware] where everybody knew me as a little, little boy.  And I wanted to be, I was grown, I was grown, and so I left to go somewhere else, go someplace.
Speaker 2: So going back to college in the college years, in the early '40s [1940s], what were your experiences like in college?
Speaker 1: In the, really, it was--before going to the Army, I had finished college.  And that was, that was different.  And at the, in the, after the Army, I just had one, one year there.
Story_ID: 15214
Speaker 1: While you were getting your undergraduate degree, what were your experiences like in college?
Speaker 2: It was, it was--I was still a young boy.  And it didn't make any difference, but at Penn [Pennsylvania] State [University, University Park, Pennsylvania], there were only two places you could, you could live.  And there were no black women there, but it didn't make any difference because the white women either--because they didn't go to, didn't go to Penn State at that time.  So it didn't make any difference.  But the only three places you could live as a black man in, in, at Penn--in State College [of Education, Penn State University], State College, it was, it was--but it didn't make any difference because a lot of the people, guys that I knew, the same thing, had to walk someplace, and that sort of thing.  And they had a lot of fraternity houses, but they were people who had good money, you know.  And they, it was different.  But those who were gonna be teachers were, we did fine.  I didn't have a problem except two times where a restaurant didn't want black people to go there.  And another place, thing, they had a person, one guy gave me a, a nigger one time.  And we're in the, in the pool, and I tried to kill him (laughs).  I was a good swimmer.  And I didn't talk to him again the whole time.  But the other guys, we did fine.  There was a fraternity for teachers, shop teachers.  They couldn't, I couldn't go there.  So the guys with me said, "Well, I guess if Ben can't go, then I don't either."  So they had a, had a industrial arts club for us.  And later, later I was in, wanted to go to the, they told me to go, wanted me to go to the new frat, and I did.  And I was honored for that, honored for that too.  But that's what happened.
Speaker 1: Were you the first African American to join that fraternity?
Speaker 2: At, at Penn State, yeah, yes.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the name of the fraternity?
Speaker 2: Iota Lambda [Sigma].  I, I can tell you a little bit later (unclear)--.
Speaker 1: That's okay, Dr. Whitten.  Let me ask you this?  Do you think, was college a little bit more difficult for you because you were so young.  You were fifteen, sixteen years old at the time, and many of your classmates were eighteen and nineteen years old.  Was it a little difficult in that sense?  Were you as mature as some of your classmates?
Speaker 2: No, not really.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Did that make it harder?
Speaker 2: But I was still, I was still a, a student.  I was able to, to take care of the classwork, didn't have a problem.  I was always with people who were, were older than I was, so it didn't make any difference.
Story_ID: 15215
Speaker 1: After you got your master's degree, what did you do next?
Speaker 2: I went back to--I went to Baltimore [Maryland], and was a teacher.
Speaker 1: And that was in the early '50s [1950s]?
Speaker 2: No, it's in--.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: In the early '50s [1950s]--.
Speaker 2: '49 [1949].
Speaker 1: So the late '40s [1940s] or early '50s [1950s]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What was teaching in Baltimore like?  I'm sure you were teaching in segregated schools?  What was that like?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Oh, yes, oh, yes.
Speaker 1: What was it like?
Speaker 2: Some of this, the facilities were very bad, but the teachers were good.  The black people, teachers, they were excellent. And that was, and a lot of men who, who were teachers.  And we had a good time with that.  And there were--a lot of the black teachers would go, had their master's.  And in Maryland, they could get money to go to school after, after college or as a teacher you can get a master's or Ph.D. and the state would take care of it because the university didn't want black people to go to the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland].  And people went to a lot of places.  One fellow went to, to California, a lot of colleges really.  It's ridiculous, but it's what happened.  That's what happened.
Speaker 1: And do you--?
Speaker 2: And the same thing happened with the University of Delaware [Newark, Delaware], the same thing.  And when I was at--for my masters, I decided that it's bad that--well, somebody told me that, look, you can't, you can't become a engineer.  And one of the securities at the, at the office, at Penn [Pennsylvania] State [University, University Park, Pennsylvania] said, "Well, you're smarter than most of the guys, you--why don't you be an engineer."  And, of course, I went to other places.  So the counselor said, "Yeah, you can go there, but you can't get a job; black people can't get a job."  So I went, went back to teacher--teaching.  So I did that.  There was something else I was gonna say.
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this, as an educator for so many years, do you think that we've lost something as African Americans as a result of integration?
Speaker 2: Yes, more than that, though.  There were a lot of things that people can do then, that you could before, so that they--and then we did some stupid things too.  We would send all the good kids into a black situation--a white, and I, I talked about that.  And I, that's just awful.  Give them some good and some bad and in between.  And all of the kids, they would send them to white schools.
Speaker 1: So all of the bright kids would go to the white schools?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yes, and that was, that's bad.  It was bad.
Speaker 1: How so?  Why, and what made it bad?
Speaker 2: Because it's saying that the black schools were not as good enough for kids, and that's wrong because we had the better teachers, and we could--it was, it was great because we took care of the children and their families and that sort of thing.  So they'll do better rather than with the schools, black schools--white schools, didn't happen.  There was something else though.  At the, when I was, after using, working at the VA [Veteran's Administration, now U.S. Department of Veteran Affairs], I was up to Penn State, and I decided it's awful that the University of Delaware take care of black people.  So I, I went, and I applied.  I had my degree from Penn State, and I, I applied as a first, freshman.  And they told me "No, you can't go, you're black."  And I said, "I'm gonna sue you."  Then they decided that, "No, you could go, you can go."  And black people could go there if they're in--from Delaware.  But if from other state, no, can't do that.  But the blacks in Delaware would not go to the University of Delaware, except the teacher of my--a science teacher.  And he got his, got his doctorate there, University of Delaware.  And for years a lot of the kids would not go to the University of Delaware.  And the Delaware State [University, Dover, Delaware] was not a well-positioned school.
Speaker 1: What do you think life would have been like had you gone to University of Delaware?
Speaker 2: It wouldn't have been any problem for me.  I was young.  It wouldn't be any difference.  I did what you had to do.  And my--we would, we were taught to do that, to do that.  And you'd have to study, and you had good grades, and it didn't make any difference.
Speaker 1: Where you went?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Story_ID: 15216
Speaker 1: While teaching [in Baltimore, Maryland] in the '60s [1960s] and the late '50s [1950s] and early '60s [1960s], you were also working on your Ph.D.?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So tell me a little bit about what that was like while, you know, teaching, raising a family, et cetera?
Speaker 2: Oh, it wasn't too bad.  We saved, we saved money so that we could go to school in the summer.  And it wasn't, it wasn't a big problem.  We didn't have as much money for vacation and that sort of thing, but you do what you have to do.  And a lot of the other teachers, teachers went to summer school and they--as long as they had money from, from the state [of Maryland], they was great.  I mean, I mean hundreds of, of kids--of teachers went to (unclear) at NYA--U [New York University, New York, New York] and all of them.  I tell you, they had degrees.  They're better than, than the, than the white schools' teachers.
Story_ID: 15217
Speaker 1: During your teaching career in Baltimore [Maryland] City [Public School System], what were some of the biggest changes that you saw taking place in the school system during the time that you taught?
Speaker 2: Well, you got the degration [sic, desegregation] now.  That was, that was one thing right there.  And number two, then we made inroads saying,"Well, white--black people take care of white schools too.  You can be a principal at other places, yeah."  And that's a tough, tough battle with that too.  And a lot of people had, didn't care about that.  I didn't like it, and I did some things and I played for--paid for it too because they were not--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) How so?
Speaker 2: They would not honor my, my skill and my, my degree and the fact that I'm better than some of the others.  And so it was tough, until they had, had a, if you wanted to be a--if you wanted to move up, then you have a, a test.  And I had highest mark in, in the damn state--that's the truth.  And they go to my school, my shop teacher and looked around, "Who is this man here?  Who's this?  You know, who is this person?"  And after that, I became (laughs), as a vice principal, but it was tough to make it there.  And a lot of the people didn't care because that's the way they had lived that way, always.  It didn't make any difference, but I didn't like it.  And I was in the [U.S.] Army, the same thing.  I said, "Oh, no, we're gonna have to do something."  But we couldn't, we couldn't, people wouldn't, wouldn't get together in saying, "Let's, let's do something."  We had a meeting in my house.  People who were educated and that sort of thing, well, we're gonna do something.  The next meeting, they didn't come.  I was by myself.
Speaker 1: Why do you think that was?  Why do you think people weren't as active as they could have been?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Because they were comfortable, they were comfortable, and they, they had--it was a big city, and they had, they lived that way before.  And it didn't make any difference, I don't believe.  But I was a rabble rouser, that's right.  And I, I didn't like this stuff.  And somebody told me, says, "Well, if you don't like it, Ben, why don't you go back where you came from?"  It's the truth (laughs).
Story_ID: 15218
Speaker 1: In 1976, you were a candidate for superintendent of Baltimore [Maryland] city schools.  Tell me a little bit about what that was like, to be considered for that position?
Speaker 2: It was, you know, we had a person who has left, and they're gonna fire--fill that person.  I said, I hope you don't get another person like--that's left.  I didn't like him and what, what he was doing.  I said, rather than--I'm gonna, I'm gonna apply just in case, rather than take some, somebody else from--at least they know me.  But they, they knew who was gonna be the person, and the mayor [William Donald Schaefer] liked that person and that sort of thing.  It didn't make any difference.  It wasn't real service.  I didn't, I didn't want to do that.  I didn't want that.
Speaker 1: But had you been selected for the position, what kinds of changes do you think you would have made or implemented within the city school system?
Speaker 2: I, I was a, I was a pretty tough person, and there were people who would have been--I would send--have to go someplace else rather than to continue the same way.  I moved around, like I say, as a, as a principal, I walked every day, all day--what's happening in, in the, in the school.  And some people went to the office to do things.  And some people say, well, let somebody to help as a vice principal rather than the principal to be doing that.  And I did that.  And if I were a principal--a superintendent, there would be more of that.  I really would.  And then the other person--thing about it was that when some of the schools were doing well, and doing poorly, we would change.  I'll give them, give another year to learn how to take care of things and get another job, another school, get that straightened out.  I would, I would do that.  I really would, and we ought to have some money for people--very good.  So I was a very, very [outspoken] about that thing.
Story_ID: 15219
Speaker 1: During your nearly twenty years of teaching, what were some of the biggest changes that you saw taking place in [Baltimore, Maryland] city schools in, you know, the late '60s [1960s] and throughout the '70s [1970s]?
Speaker 2: It's, it's more than just the school.  It was the, the city and the job situation.  So that some of the kids want to do some things and good doing that, they didn't have an outlet for that.  So that was the city situation.  A lot of the good kids from the vocational schools, they can't find a job.  And that was, that's ridiculous, but that's what happened.  I think it's happening right now, still.  It happened with me.  A lot of people who, who were good didn't get promoted.  And that, and now, a lot of the black people don't take--don't go too, as, as a teacher, they want to be--got a lot of money from other kinds of situations.  That's what happened to us.
Speaker 1: You think we need to have more black teachers in schools today?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh, no question about that.  We need good people too, not just, they're--only black but because they are good.  They're smart rather than the, all the, the smart people go to MBAs [Master of Business Administration], and that's--we need, we need good teachers taking the kids.
Speaker 1: What do you think we need to do to encourage more good people and African Americans to become teachers?
Speaker 2: I wish I knew.  It's not just money.  It's more than that.  But a lot of it is making sure that the people who have other careers decide, let's--two years or four years taking care of a, of a teacher, as a teacher, rather than, okay, and you go back to your other job again.  I, I think you have to do that.
Story_ID: 15220
Speaker 1: When you retired from the school system, you went on to become the administrator of the minority contractors technical assistance program for the Baltimore [Maryland] Council for Equal Business Opportunity.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What was that job like and how did you transition from teaching into this new position?
Speaker 2: It was easy to do that.  We had people--I knew the people who were doing that.  And it was easy.  I wanted to do something different, rather than the school system.  So that was, it was, at the, at the school system, I was, I was the boss for my section.  But now I had another boss, boss.  And we had to, we did fine together.
Speaker 1: And did your background in industrial arts really help you in this position?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, oh, yes.  We had some good situations so that helping some of the contractors to make sure that they are taking care of the money--the main thing is they don't have enough money or they would, they would underbid their job.  And that's a problem.  Or they might find, a lot of people would, they--lay off.  And ready to go back, then they can't find the people again.  So there are problems, real problems for that. And all the money and for taking care of the, the bills and the, the taxes and all of that, they have problems with that.
Speaker 1: And during that time, you also are inducted into the Baltimore Business Hall of Fame.  And was that a great accomplishment?
Speaker 2: Not really, really, it was not.
Speaker 1: Why not?
Speaker 2: I was not, it was not a--I was made for something else.  It was not, some made, somebody else had that.  I, I was, I was, I wasn't inducted for that.  The, I was a good candidate for something else, but not, not that.
Speaker 1: What were some of your accomplishments with the minority contractors technical assistance program?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we, we had a couple, couple of situations where kids--businesses learned how to take care of their money and for the, how to, the taxes and that sort of thing.  One of the problems we had was that people don't prepare as a person has, as a business person.  We have a good, we had a good--what, it, it was, where we had, we had a lot of parties and things for, for--a hall, a hall.  And one guy had a big, big place.  And we said, "You have to get somebody as a board so that people would use that place."  "No, man, this is all mine."  And we couldn't, we couldn't really change him, and, of course, he failed, his business failed.  We couldn't and, "This is all mine."  I said, "Well, you have to have a board."  And that, on the board, say, have a, have a party or another, other things, a restaurant or something; wouldn't do it, wouldn't do it.  It was just a--I was very disturbed about that.  I couldn't, couldn't make a difference.
Speaker 1: What do you think would have helped, to help change the mindset?  What could have been done to change the mindset?
Speaker 2: Well, there were more people to do that.  And, but they're, people had--one of the other things, he had, he had money because he has, from, from rackets.  I said, "So what?  Let's get together," and said, "Don't, you--affront."  Somebody affronted that, rather than take care of yourself and let, have a board and people from, from different walks of life to do that.  But he wouldn't do that.  And that's, that's one of the problems.  They want to take care of themselves, and they have to get the money right away.  You have to wait and make sure that things are moving around.
Story_ID: 15221
Speaker 1: Around the early '80s [1980s] you became the President of the [Greater Baltimore] Urban League [Baltimore, Maryland],  but before that, while you were still in the school system, you were somewhat of an activist.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about your activism within the school system?
Speaker 2: (Laughs) We--it's almost--not heard--to, to cut some people from the school system, but I tried the people.  They're not good.  That's the good with it  But they, they transferred somebody else, another school.  But it's very tough to take a teacher out doing, doing well--not doing well.
Speaker 1: And you were trying to relieve some of the teachers who weren't performing well?
Speaker 2: That's right, yes.  Well, the other things.  Some of the, the other people too.  In my, my building, people would come and take care of the, the heat or the light or something and then they would sit.  I said, "Have you finished?"  I said, "And you have to leave."  A lot of people wouldn't, they wouldn't do that.  And that's the kind of thing that I would do.  And I would know that all of the teachers said, "Look, you got to sleep--you have to, you have to teach your kids right away, all day, all the period."  So I moved around and see the, what, what are you doing?  And the teachers, the kids looked better too.  Here comes, here comes the principal, watch yourself, rather than sitting in the office.  And the office, take care of it at night.  So that's, that's the kind of person I was.
Story_ID: 15222
Speaker 1: Why did you decide to take the helm of the [Greater Baltimore] Urban League [Baltimore, Maryland]?
Speaker 2: It wasn't doing as well, what they could have done.  And this time, I could make a change too.  And I thought I could help.  So--.
Speaker 1: What qualified you for that job, president of the Urban League?
Speaker 2: Well, I was a person who, who knows with people and with jobs and with taking care of schools.  We have people who are getting ready to get jobs, and that was the problem of the, for the League, make sure people are prepared and find jobs and continue that, at times, that, that people would move, move on.  But my experience at the school system qualified to do that.  A lot of jobs were for, from the, from the school system, learn how from the, from the vocational division, and from, from people going to college, same thing, too.  They're looking for jobs.  And you have to make sure that you have opportunities for people to, to, to work.
Speaker 1: What was your biggest challenge when you--so Dr. Whitten, what was your biggest challenge facing you when you became the President of the Urban League in the early '80s [1980s], in 1983?
Speaker 2: Making sure that the staff is best, better.  That's a change.  It really is.  People would, in the morning, get a cup of coffee and get the paper and look at the paper.  And I said, "Well, no, you can't do that.  You have to go to work, get coffee and at home, and get your coffee--get the paper going to, afterward or earlier."  And that, that was tough.  People were just, "Oh, I'll be there when I get there."  And I--I did a good job talking about the staff.  One of the best guys in the, in the office.  And I talked to him, he had to be at 9:00 [a.m.], whatever or 8:00 [a.m.], whatever time, and, you know, the next day he was late.  And I said, you can't, you can't, you can't work today.  And any day that you can't back, come back, you will, you cannot work.  And people were crazy--and saying, "Oh, that man must be crazy."  But you have to, have to--the different, it's a different mindset for a job like that.  And you can't be, be very--[lackadasical].  You know, you have to be persona--have to be professional.  And you can't just go to a job, a job.  People want work, you have to work.  You have to do things.  So one, one thing, and at the time, I had to say, "Look, you can't sign, send out, from anything until I can, I can see it."  And some of the letters and things were just awful.  I had staff members, and once I had, I had a spelling a spelling [test] because they didn't spell well.  Somebody told me, said, well, well, you want--Ben, Ben, you want to do that, can, can your staff do that?  I said, "Well, they will be, 'cause I'm gonna be better--they're gonna be better."  And you don't have to fire everybody either.  You can make sure--here's what we have to do this.  I'm gonna check it.  You're doing better today, next week you have to continue to do that.  You can't just--new people.  You have to, those people get better.
Speaker 1: And do you think that type of attitude from you came from all of your experience and your years in working with young people and working with students?
Speaker 2: I'm sure, I'm sure.  And then teachers too.  Teachers had that same thing, you had to do the same thing.  And--.
Speaker 1: What were some of the challenges facing the city that the Urban League had to deal with during the early '80s [1980s]?
Speaker 2: It was teenage pregnancy--babies, babies.  And also people who, jobs--drugs, and also from people who will not finish school.  This is the same thing.
Speaker 1: So what were some of the things that you all did, some of the initiatives and programs that you did to help eradicate some of those problems?
Speaker 2: Well, we had, we had very, very good people who, who had programs, particularly, for, for men.  We had a good guy who was, who was very great.  And he's the one that I told him, he had, had to go, and leave now until he could get to work in time.  But he was, he was good and still is good.  But you have to have very high performing, what do you call it, jobs, you have to do that.  And that, that helps.  And then you have to move around the city so that people know that you're doing a good job.  And if a person's not good, fine.  Let me send somebody else.  And then you have to make sure that person's gonna be better.
Speaker 1: What was your biggest accomplishment as president of the Urban League, during those five years?
Speaker 2: It was to make a difference and change of the attitude of the staff and the people who, who take care of the whole place.
Speaker 1: And when you look at the Urban League, particularly the Urban League of Baltimore today, do you still see some of those changes that you implemented?
Speaker 2: No, no.  They--I don't, I don't use with this, with the (unclear) anymore.  I've learned that when you leave, you have to let others take care of it is.  If the person calls you and said, "Can you do such and such," fine.  But you can't really go back.  You have to, have to leave.
Speaker 1: And why did you step down after five years?
Speaker 2: I was tired (laughs).  I was old.  I was an old man.  I was (unclear) seventy, eighty, eighty, seventy-eight, seventy-seventy-, no.  Sixty-five, sixty-four, sixty-four is fine.  It's time to go, time to go.  And I was just burning myself out.  And I liked to work, and I was working too hard and too long, and it was, it was stressful.  And I think I what I could do.  All my jobs, it's the same thing.  I did too much, and I did too much (laughter), I really did.
Speaker 1: And after you left the Urban League in 1988, in 1989, there was a wing of a new facility, the Westside Skill Center that was named after you [The Benjamin C. Whitten Wing for Construction Trades, Baltimore, Maryland].  What were your thoughts about that?
Speaker 2: Well, they were late to do that.  They should have done that a couple of years before that.  And they decided, well, we have to do it anyway.  And it was great.  It was very--you know what happens, you can't name a building for schools in Baltimore unless you're dead.  And all they could do is to make a wing or the, the field or something as a--so that's what happened because they could have maybe made--name of the building, the whole building.  But they can't do that until you're dead (laughs) and, and gone.  But if you're in the state, it's different, but for Baltimore City, that's what happens.  You have to be dead before they can name a building like that--a school building like that.
Story_ID: 15223
Speaker 1: How do you feel about the way that you've lived your life?  And what's been most important to you?
Speaker 2: Well, I liked, for quality--quality for everything.  Every job I tried to make people better.  Every situation, better, and if it's not, they have to fix.  We have to fix it.  And you have to make sure that the same people can take care of it, you have to help that person get better rather than to find another people, same people, and that--new people.  You have to make those people better.  And if you can't do that, then you have to find--and leave, you have to go, you have to go.  You have to try to make sure you can be better.
Story_ID: 15224
Speaker 1: One thing we didn't talk about was in the early '90s [1990s], you suffered a stroke.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: In the '90s [1990s], can you tell me a little bit about that?
Speaker 2: It's not much to say.  I was, I was painting my house in the back.  And it was a hot day, my wife [Lucretia 'Lu' Whitten] tells about that.  And I said, "Come on, Lu (unclear)," we had to go to somebody's house.  And, and we did.  And I said, "Lu, it's time to go home."  And that was it.  I couldn't get up, right there, just like that.  And the people we were visiting with, they didn't believe.  I'd just been with her a couple of years--a couple of hours ago.  "He's in the hospital right now, and that's a stroke, yep."  And they have medicine now that if they do it quick, then they will be--hurt--then it will be better.  But strokes are tough, and you can't do anything about it, right then.  When it starts, you have to do something.  My mother [Emma Carr Whitten] had a stroke.  In my, in my family, they have other strokes.  And they only do this, let it run its course.  And that was the worse thing to do, but that's all they knew.  So it changes your life all the way, always, the whole, always.  I was in the hospital for two months, and I couldn't, and my wife, I couldn't, couldn't, said, "Who is she?  Who is she?"  I couldn't say his name, I couldn't anything.  The whole memory is gone for a while.  And strokes are different for different people, but for me, I couldn't, I couldn't talk.  I couldn't, couldn't say anything.  I couldn't, I couldn't write.  I couldn't, I was just here. And people would--my wife would say, "Why don't you, you can't visit him," 'cause we said, "I can't do anything just, just like this."  But they kept me in the, in the hospital for two months, and I was due better.  But it's a very, very frightening thing for a stroke.  It's, it's tough.
Story_ID: 15225
Speaker 1: And what do you still want to do that you haven't done yet?
Speaker 2: (Laughs), I don't, you know, my life is, is pretty regulated right now.  And I just, I don't have any ambition to do things different except take care of my wife [Lucretia 'Lu' Whitten] and take care, together.  We're together.  Other than that, I don't have, I don't, I don't need to travel.  I don't have to do anything.  I like to cook.  I like to, I like to clean a little bit.  I look at TV a little bit.  I just, I'm just--I like the church, go to church.  I go to my fraternity [Iota Lambda Sigma], had a meeting last night, and I like that.  But I don't have a, a goal rather than to continue to look at my wife and take care together.
Story_ID: 15226
Speaker 1: For those people who are interested in going into the field of education, what kind of advice do you have for them?
Speaker 2: I would say you have to make sure that you want to do that.  And don't, don't just jump in and jump out.  You have to learn and to make sure, you have to make sure that you are the good person taking care of the children or the students.  If you can do it, if you want to do that, that's fine.  But if you just, "It's a job"--it's not a job.  It's more than that.  And you have to take it that way.
Story_ID: 15227
Speaker 1: In your opinion, how have Baltimore [Maryland] city schools changed since you began your career in Baltimore city schools back in the early '50s [1950s], how have they changed today?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's, the families are different.  The families are different.
Speaker 1: How so?
Speaker 2: There are no, no mothers and fathers together.  And they don't care what the children are doing, and they're not reading with children.  They're not doing--that's, that's one of the problems.  Now, the people have, have moved from Baltimore, and they are in the, in the suburbs, suburbs and we had, we had two hundred, almost two hundred thousand, two hundred thousand--two hundred thousand kids then.  But now, it's about a hundred and fourteen [thousand], something like that.  It's a small, for Baltimore, it's a small, smaller operation than, than--and I think one of the problems is that they don't--as good teachers.  I look from, from my, my impression, that we had good teachers, the best.  Their bond--their minds are better, and they, you know, and there're operations, and they, they go some place else to make money.  And it's not just, just money, but you also have good leadership.  That's a big problem too for the, for the buildings, just the building, not the, the system, but for the building.  You need good, good strong and very professional leaders.
Story_ID: 15228
Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: That I did it, did it my way (laughs).  And I was, I was, I'm proud of what happened, and I was, I didn't make a lot of money, but I helped a lot of people.  And one of the things is that I have about four, four or five guys who are teachers--shop teachers because of me.  And some of the principals would say, "Yes, you were good, I learned from you."  And I remember that.  And they said that.
Speaker 1: Why do you think history is important?
Speaker 2: What?
Speaker 1: Why do you think history is important?
Speaker 2: History, history?  It's, it's because you, you've been there, and you don't want to go back.  You want to go forward, and to get forward, you have to go back when you started.  And that's history for me.
Story_ID: 15229
Speaker 1: And what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community?
Speaker 2: Drugs, education, health, don't get too many children you're prepared for it; too many teenaged children.  And that's a problem for us, all of us.  And it happens in my church, it happens everywhere.  And the other thing is health, the other kind of health. We have so many people are fat and too big.  And they're not getting better, and that, it's bad for us.  It's bad for the children and for the community.  You have to be healthy.
Story_ID: 15230
Speaker 1: What would you like for your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: I had opportunities and I tried to take advantage of, for that, and to give what I, what I gained.  I--they gave me opportunities and I tried to, to advance ahead with that.
Story_ID: 15231
Speaker 1: Okay. Here you have facing you is Benjamin [Whitten] Sr. and Ben [Benjamin Whitten], Jr.  They're on their way to church, and this was taken around 1968.
Speaker 2: [Benjamin Whitten, Sr. (left) and son, Benjamin Whitten, Jr. before church, 1968. From the collection of Benjamin Carr Whitten.]
Story_ID: 15232
Speaker 1: Ben and 'Lu' [wife, Lucretia Whitten] on a cruise, and we left from Baltimore [Maryland] at the Marine Terminal.  That was around 1980.
Speaker 2: Okay, about 1980.
Speaker 1: [Benjamin Whitten and wife, Lucretia 'Lu' Whitten, on a cruise, 1980. From the collection of Benjamin Carr Whitten.]
Story_ID: 15233
Speaker 1: Again, this is another cruise that we [Benjamin Whitten and wife, Lucretia 'Lu' Whitten] enjoyed very much.  And we dressed in this karate outfit, and I think one of the skits, we broke a board with our strength.
Speaker 2: About what year--?
Speaker 1: And this was around 1985.
Speaker 2: [Benjamin Whitten and wife, Lucretia 'Lu' Whitten, participate in cruise ship activities, 1985. From the collection of Benjamin Carr Whitten.]
Story_ID: 15234
Speaker 1: And this was a really--I wish I could tell you where we were going, but this was on a cruise, and this was around 1990, Ben and 'Lu' [wife, Lucretia Whitten].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: [Benjamin Whitten (center) and wife, Lucretia (right), being greeted by the ship's staff at a cruise event, 1990. From the collection of Benjamin Carr Whitten.]
Story_ID: 15235
Speaker 1: Ben [Benjamin Whitten], 'Lu' [wife Lucretia Whitten] and [son] Ben [Benjamin Whitten], Jr.  We were taking him to a debutante's ball.  He was an escort for a debutante.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) About what year?
Speaker 1: 1985.
Speaker 2: [Benjamin Whitten, Sr. (left) and wife, Lucretia 'Lu' Whitten (center), escort their son, Benjamin Whitten, Jr. (right) to a debutante ball, 1985. From the collection of Benjamin Carr Whitten.]
Story_ID: 15236
Speaker 1: Pictured here, pictured here are members of the Board of Trustees of the Baltimore Urban League, along with John Jacob, the executive director and Benjamin Whitten, CEO [chief executive officer], local chapter, Baltimore, Maryland.  This picture was taken in 1987.
Speaker 2: [Benjamin Whitten (right) with executives from the Baltimore Urban League, Baltimore, Maryland, 1987. From the collection of Benjamin Carr Whitten.]
Story_ID: 15237
Speaker 1: This is a family picture of Ben Whitten's family, mother [Emma Carr Whitten] and all his brothers and sisters.
Speaker 2: Taken about when?
Speaker 1: Taken in 1969.
Speaker 2: [Benjamin Whitten's family, including his mother, Emma Carr Whitten, wife Lucretia 'Lu' Whitten (front row, center) and siblings, Charles Whitten, Ann Whitten, and Toby Whitten, 1969. From the collection of Benjamin Carr Whitten.]
Story_ID: 15238
Speaker 1: Portrait of Ben and 'Lu' [wife Lucretia Whitten], just going out for an afternoon, and this was taken perhaps around 1995.
Speaker 2: [Benjamin Whitten and wife, Lucretia 'Lu' Whitten, ca. 1995. From the collection of Benjamin Carr Whitten.]
Story_ID: 15239
Speaker 1: This is a picture of Ben's mother [Emma Carr Whitten] with her three children, Charles [Whitten], Toby [Whitten], and Ann, and they must have been taken when Charles was about five years old.  This has been a long time.  He was born in 19--it was probably around 1929 this picture was made.
Speaker 2: [Benjamin Whitten's mother, Emma Carr Whitten (center), and his siblings, Charles Whitten, Toby Whitten, and Ann Whitten, 1929. From the collection of Benjamin Carr Whitten.]
Story_ID: 15240
Speaker 1: This picture, you will see Mrs. [Emma Carr] Whitten, Ben's mother, her daughter-in-law, Lucretia 'Lu' [Whitten] and our son, her grandson, Benjamin [Whitten, Jr.] and this was taken in 1967.
Speaker 2: [Benjamin Whitten's mother, Emma Carr Whitten (right), wife, Lucretia 'Lu' Whitten (left), and son, Benjamin Whitten, Jr., 1967. From the collection of Benjamin Carr Whitten.]
Story_ID: 15241
Speaker 1: This is a picture of Ben's mother and her husband, Tobias Emanuel Whitten, Emma [Carr] Whitten.
Speaker 2: About what year?
Speaker 1: This had to have been 1922 or '23 [1923].
Speaker 2: There's another person there.  This is Uncle--Doc.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's Doc.
Speaker 2: Okay, and what's his full name?
Speaker 1: His--Doc--,
Speaker 2: What was his name--Johnson.
Speaker 1: Dr. Johnson.
Speaker 2: [Benjamin Whitten's mother, Emma Carr Whitten (center), father, Tobias Emanuel Whitten (right), uncle, Dr. Johnson, and unidentified sibling (Charles Whitten?), ca. 1922. From the collection of Benjamin Carr Whitten.]
Story_ID: 15242
Speaker 1: Carver Vocational [Technical] High School [Baltimore, Maryland] where he was vice principal. And this was in the early '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: [Benjamin Whitten, vice principal of Carver Vocational Technical High School, Baltimore, Maryland, ca. 1980s. From the collection of Benjamin Carr Whitten.]
Story_ID: 15243
Speaker 1: This picture is Ben's daddy.  His name is Toby [Tobias] Emanuel [Whitten], and I suspect this picture was taken early in life, in 1920, around 1920.
Speaker 2: [Benjamin Whitten's father, Tobias Emanuel Whitten, ca. 1920s. From the collection of Benjamin Carr Whitten.]
Story_ID: 15244
Speaker 1: Picture here would be Aunt Mary and Uncle Greer and a nephew which was taken probably in the early '30s [1930s].
Speaker 2: Okay, do you know their last names?
Speaker 1: Yes, Mary Greer, Connelly Greer.
Speaker 2: [Benjamin Whitten's aunt, Mary Greer and uncle, Connelly Greer (right), and a nephew, early 1930s. From the collection of Benjamin Carr Whitten.]
Story_ID: 15245
Speaker 1: This is a cute picture of Ben and his brother, Charles [Whitten] to the right, and Ben in the chair, sitting, which was taken in, around 1924.
Speaker 2: [Benjamin Whitten (seated) and his brother, Charles Whitten (standing), ca. 1924. From the collection of Benjamin Carr Whitten.]
Story_ID: 15246
Speaker 1: This is a lovely picture of Ben's mother [Emma Carr Whitten], and I would suspect this would be taken probably in the early 1920s.
Speaker 2: Okay, Emma Whitten.
Speaker 1: No, earlier than that.
Speaker 2: Early 1900s.
Speaker 1: The twenty--nineteen, teens.
Speaker 2: Okay, so the early 1900s? Okay.
Speaker 1: Around 1915.
Speaker 2: That's before she married, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: [Benjamin Whitten's mother, Emma Carr Whitten, ca. 1915. From the collection of Benjamin Carr Whitten.]
