Story_ID: 158791
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is Brenda Wood.  And B-R-E-N-D-A, W-O-O-D.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: September 8th, 1955 in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: D.C. General Hospital (laughter), if you wanna get specific.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: I am the primetime news anchor for the NBC affiliate, WXIA TV in Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today--oh, goodness.  Geez, I, you know, I--February, I believe it's February 20th, 2014.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are at WXIA TV, One Monroe Place, Atlanta, 30324.
Speaker 1: Okay, it's actually the 21st, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Twenty first, it's February 21st [2014].
Story_ID: 158792
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we ask as sort of a warm up, I guess--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and they only require a short answer.  The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: I do.
Speaker 1: And what is it?
Speaker 2: Macaroni and cheese.  Unfortunately, I'm sitting on a lot of it (laughter).  Yes.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Favorite color, goodness.  I guess teal.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I love the fall.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Probably for now it would be probably Turks [and] Caicos [Islands]. Yeah, I love that, love that island.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes, I guess, no, I really don't.  I have lots of sayings, but, so, yes, no, but not one favorite.
Speaker 1: You don't have anything you use on the air at all?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 158793
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side.  But we'll separate them out and so--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: All right, well, don't mean to be complicated right off the top, but I do have two mothers.  So my biological mother is Bernice Blackmon Bray.  And B-L-A-C-K-M-O-N for Blackmon, B-R-A-Y.  And what did you need from, about her?  Just name?
Speaker 1: No, date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: That I, you know, it's easy enough to find in records.  I do not know it right off hand.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My biological mother passed away when I was five.  She was thirty-two.  I was eventually adopted by my aunt by marriage.  She was my aunt, and her name was Alma Blackmon--Alma Montgomery Blackmon.  And that is who I spent all the rest of my life with.
Speaker 1: So they were sisters, right?
Speaker 2: They were sisters-in-law.
Speaker 1: Okay, sisters-in-law.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Alma married Bernice's brother.
Speaker 1: I see.  Okay, all right.  That's, all right.  So, now do you know where your biological mother was born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Raleigh, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, and--
Speaker 2: And Alma was born in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: So, hence, her name is Alma Montgomery Blackmon.  She married a Blackmon, and Bernice Blackmon had two brothers.  One of them was Henry Blackmon, and that was my uncle who became my dad, adoptive dad.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: So I'm my own first cousin (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right, okay, that's right, this is (laughter)--and you're right, you're right.
Story_ID: 158794
Speaker 1: Tell us what you know about your aunt, your stepmother [sic, adoptive mother]--
Speaker 2: My--
Speaker 1: She adopted, she's your mother, really.
Speaker 2: Yes--
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: --she adopted me when I was, I--my biological mother died when I was five.  Alma Blackmon took me in, and then she and Henry [Blackmon], though they were estranged at the time, and they eventually divorced, but they were still married when they adopted me when I was eight.  So about three years later.  And you wanted to know more about her?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: She was born in Washington, D.C.  She, by profession was an early childhood educator with the D.C. public schools.
Speaker 1: Now, was her family roots in D.C.?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right, she had family roots in D.C.  And--
Speaker 2: Her dad was James Montgomery, James and--oh, God, what was her mother's name?  Oh, I can't remember her mom's name.  She would kill me if I knew--if she knew that I had forgotten.  But, and he was also a teacher in the D.C. public school system.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He taught shop, I think, at [Paul Laurence] Dunbar High School [Washington, D.C.], I believe.
Speaker 1: Dunbar.
Speaker 2: Alma, his daughter, my adoptive mother, was a kindergarten teacher for many years in D.C. and then became a supervisor for early childhood education in the D.C. system, school system.  That was what she did professionally, but she was also a phenomenal classical pianist and choral conductor and singer.  So she was quite the musician, and she and her sister both were very, very well known in musical circles in Washington [D.C].
Story_ID: 158795
Speaker 1: Well, so their family has a long history of educators, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: She goes, and is the grandfather [James Montgomery], is that where the educator--I mean the higher education starts or does it go back even further than your grandfather on your mother's [Alma Montgomery Blackmon] side?
Speaker 2: The, I think that's where it really started.  His father was a slave, and I, you know, I don't have a lot of information, but his father was one of fourteen children.  They, I think came from Virginia.  I wanna say Blackstone, Virginia, if that's correct.  But he was one of fourteen.  He was a Montgomery.  His slave--as has been told to me, his slave owner, his master, his master's wife was by law forbidden to teach them how to read.  But she took an interest in them, and I don't know all fourteen, but certainly--I don't know about all fourteen, but certainly, my grandfather's father.  And so instead of teaching them, him to read, she taught him Solfeggio, which is the musical notation, you know, Do Re Mi Fa So La Ti--she taught him how to read music that way.  And so that's how the musicianship began in the family, interestingly enough.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's, yeah, so could your great-grandfather play an instrument?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I, that I don't know.  Probably.  Alma's  dad--I never referred to him as my grandfather 'cause I didn't know him.  But I guess, you know, on paper, he would have been my grandfather.  But he played the bass guitar, the base--acoustic base.  And I think actually was majoring in that in school.  He was (unclear), he was a student at one of the very few schools that accepted black students, and I can't--if you would the name?
Speaker 1: Oberlin [College, Oberlin, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: No, but if you name me another one.  But he was one of--and not a music school, not a music school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it wasn't a Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia].  It wasn't at Clark AU [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] 'cause it was here in the South.  But it was somewhere, where he went--
Speaker 1: A black school?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he was majoring in music.  Then he became a Seventh Day Adventist, and decided to give up jazz music 'cause that's what he was playing in the clubs.  He was playing jazz music and then became a teacher instead.  But, yes, music was in his bones.
Speaker 1: Okay, was it Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't Fisk.  I think I would have remembered--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay, it wasn't Fisk.
Speaker 2: --it was someplace else (laughter).  So.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Think of another one later on (laughter), and--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, fine.  It's not that critical, but we'll--but that, the point, so he teaches school.  Is there a story behind his conversion to Seventh Day Adventist?
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, I don't know what it is.  I'm sure there is, but I don't know what it is.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: All right.  So your mother was raised in a family where her father was a musician and a school teacher.
Speaker 1: Um-hum, and her mother was a homemaker.  And she had a sister, Margaret Montgomery, who also taught in the [Washington] D.C. public schools and was also a singer and pianist as well, phenomenal, just two very gifted sisters.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, where did your mother go to college?
Speaker 1: She went to D.C., she went to D.C. Teachers College [later part of the University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.], is where she--did she get--she got her master's from there.  I'm trying to think.  She didn't go to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  She did, she taught at Howard.  She taught early childhood education at Howard for some years, but graduated from D.C. Teachers College.
Story_ID: 158796
Speaker 1: So I'm gonna skip to your father's side.  And then we'll--
Speaker 2: Adoptive dad.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Henry Blackmon.
Speaker 1: So Henry Blackmon who is actually your biological mother's [Bernice Blackmon Bray] brother, right?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: All right, so Henry Blackmon.  And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Raleigh, North Carolina, but I don't know his date of birth, but easy enough to find.  I should have done my homework before I started this interview.
Speaker 1: I imagine they're born in the '20s [1920s], but I, you know--
Speaker 2: Well, Alma [Montgomery Blackmon] was born--he was a little younger than Alma.  Alma was born in 1921.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, yes, probably, you know, maybe 1926, '28 [1928], somewhere in there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hum, in Raleigh.
Speaker 1: Okay, in Raleigh, and well, what can you tell us about his side of the family?
Speaker 2: Not very much.  He was one of three kids.  His mother, Ruth Smith Blackmon, was a domestic in Raleigh.  I never met his biological dad because by the time I came along, his mother and father were divorced.  And so Henry--and he was a junior.  So Henry Blackmon, Sr. divorced and went--stayed in the Raleigh area and remarried and had a large family, who are still there.  The Blackmon's are still there in Raleigh.  But I never met Henry, Sr.  And as, and I don't know at what point in, at what point in Henry, Jr.'s life, that his parents divorced.  So I don't know whether he was raised by a single parent, frankly, or not.  I don't know.  And, of course, all these people are dead now.  So, but he was one of three.  He became, he joined the [U.S.] Military--he went to Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  But I think he joined the Military first, served in the Military for two years or whatever the stint is and then came to Howard.
Speaker 1: [U.S.] Army?
Speaker 2: Army, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then went to Howard is, I think the sequence.
Speaker 1: So this is around the time of the War.  I don't know if he was--did he serve in World War II?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he didn't, I don't--I don't know when.  I don't think he saw battle.  I'm pretty sure he didn't see any battle, but he did serve in the [U.S.] Military.  So it might have been right after World War II [WWII].  I'm not sure.  Let me just not even guess.  I don't know.
Speaker 1: So he was able to go to Howard on the G.I. Bill, I guess, you know--
Speaker 2: Probably, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he was a music major there, had a beautiful singing voice, and that's how he and Alma met.  She was, she was the pianist for his voice teacher.  And she was also taking voice from his voice teacher, and I think, you know, they crossed paths there, had the same voice teacher.  So they met in Washington, D.C.  He went on to pursue a singing career.  He did teach for a brief time in the black school in North Carolina.
Speaker 1: North Carolina A & T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina], Central [North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina]--
Speaker 2: Un-un.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) Winston-Salem [State University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], there's a few black schools.
Speaker 2: Yes, and none of those, of course.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Some of these questions when we finish with the interview, I can like quickly pick up the phone, my phone and get all this information for you.  But anyway, he taught for a while in North Carolina and then went on to pursue a singing career.  He traveled with 'Porgy and Bess', with a black singing company, and he traveled overseas with 'Porgy and Bess.'  And as a matter of fact, I believe [HM] Maya Angelou also was in that same company that was, that did 'Porgy and Bess.'  She was in the chorus, as was he.  But somehow or another, while they were overseas, and I guess, you know, in the performances, he had a solo.  And someone in Europe heard his voice, loved his work and offered to sponsor him and come back and to do a singing tour of his own in Europe.  And he and Alma were married, but, you know, he's pursuing this career.  So he got his sponsorship together.  He put together a concert, and he went to Europe, and started his career there and stayed because it worked out quite well.  The marriage, however, didn't.  So they, you know, eventually became estranged and then divorced.  But he had a very successful career there and remarried a Dutch woman, became a naturalized Dutch citizen, and just had a very, very successful life there as a concert singer.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he didn't come back to the--did he come back--you didn't see much of him then?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't.  When Alma adopted, when Alma took me in, she was, you know, he was already established--establishing is life overseas.  So I really didn't know him, and I, my first recollection of him was--'cause he, I don't even remember if he made it back for my mother's funeral, which would be his sister.  So the first time I remember seeing him was when he came back to the [United] States for my grandmother's funeral in '60 [1960]--my mother died in '60 [1960].  Grandmother died in '62 [1962].  So like two or sixty--yeah, like two years later, um-hum.  So he came back to the [United] States then.  And that was really kind of my first time really remembering meeting him.
Speaker 1: And you were seven?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: So, yeah.  It's--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And then, and it was a, you know, was just there for the funeral and that was it.  They adopted me, I guess, the next year.  And at that time, the courts really did not look favorably on adoptions if the parents were divorced.  So, though he had asked my mom for a divorce prior to that, she asked him if he would hold off until they got through the paperwork and the legality of adoption, which he agreed to do.
Story_ID: 158797
Speaker 1: At that time, were you already with your mother or--
Speaker 2: I was already with Alma [Montgomery Blackmon].
Speaker 1: Alma, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: She dressed me for the, for my mother's [Bernice Blackmon Bray] funeral.  So she took me in the night she died.
Speaker 1: All right, all right, so you had been living with Alma before your biological mother died?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, but right after.
Speaker 2: Right after.
Speaker 1: Okay, right after.
Speaker 2: She, you know, because they were all in Washington [D.C.], even though Henry [Blackmon] was overseas, you know, Alma was friends with the family, of course.  And so when I was born, she would--you know, she told me that she would come periodically, you know, on her lunch breaks from school and she'd bring the little baby clothes, and she'd come and visit Bernice and the baby and so forth.  So she had a relationship with Bernice.  And so when Bernice died, of course, she was one of the family members who came to the house that night.  And I'm an only child.  My biological father was not in the picture.  And--
Speaker 1: Do you have any knowledge about him at all in terms of--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I do.  His name is Welvin Bray [ph.].  He had a sorted life.  Welvin, at the time of my mother's death, I think was in, was in jail.  So he was, he was in and out of jail.  And my grandmother was there, actually happened to be visiting from Raleigh [North Carolina] when my mother died.  But she was a, you know, she was an elderly woman and really didn't have the wherewithal to take of this little girl now.  So there really wasn't anybody else.  Bernice's other brother--one brother was in Europe.  The other brother, Ben [ph.], was not in a position to take care of a little girl either.  He had his own issues with a wife and family and so forth.  And so Alma is the one who just, you know, 'cause it was like, "Well, what's gonna happen to Brenda?"  And she said, "I'll take her.  I'm a kindergarten teacher.  She's five.  I know how to, you know, I know children."  And so it kind of worked out that way.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, that had to be a pretty tough time in your life--
Speaker 2: It was, it was.  You know, I do remember it.
Speaker 1: But you had someone who was willing to step up and--
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.
Story_ID: 158798
Speaker 1: We always ask the question, like who do you think you take after?  But I guess there's only one person you could really, gonna take after, is your stepmother [sic, adoptive mother], I guess, right, in this situation?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: I don't know what biological traits or things that are passed on from your mother [Bernice Blackmon Bray] and your--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't know either--
Speaker 1: --uncle's side of the family, but, you know.
Speaker 2: I don't.  I have no idea (laughter), frankly.  My--you know, of course, Henry [Blackmon] sings.  I do have, I do sing.  I don't know if Bernice ever sang.  I understand that her brother, Ben [ph.], also had a very nice voice, I never heard.  So maybe music ran in that, you know, whole part of the family as well.
Speaker 1: Well, you do use your voice, and--
Speaker 2: Yes, I do.
Speaker 1: --and you're a performer of sorts, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --as a news anchor.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess that's true.
Speaker 1: So, if he was in 'Porgy and Bess,' and he's a performer in Europe, you know, your uncle, that's--that runs on that side of the family, I guess--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you'd have to say.  But then the performance does run in your mother's side too.
Speaker 2: Yes, she was quite the performer, yes (laughter).  When Alma [Montgomery Blackmon] would walk into a room, she'd fill the room when she's, you know, she was, she wasn't shy.  She was always very vocal, opinionated.  I mean she was a choral conductor, so, you know, she was a leader, you know, very quick witted, very smart lady, you know, very talented.  And, you know, and very independent minded, very independent.  So, and then probably even more so because she became a single parent.  And she has an unbelievable story as well.  This is a woman who at the age of twenty-six was diagnosed with cervical cancer and or, cancer--I take that back, it's cancer of the uterus and pretty much came back from death.  She was the first, she was the youngest person in Washington [D.C.], in that area to be cured of cancer in 1946 when, you know, people thought you could catch cancer from touching somebody who had cancer.  You know, I mean there was no research going on for cancer.  So people knew very little about it.  And the whole story of her survival, and as a matter of fact, it was in her recovery after cancer surgery that she married Henry [Blackmon].  And she wrote a book about her whole ordeal, her life story.  It's amazing.
Speaker 1: What's the title of the book?
Speaker 2: It's, I wish I had brought one.  It's called, 'This is my Story.'  And, you know, it's self-published.  But it really is a fascinating read in terms of how, how, you know, the archaic treatment for cancer then, and just the phenomenal, I mean the fact that she, that she survived (laughter), how they treated her and sort of the spiritual encounter that she had with an angel.  I mean it's an amazing story.  But this, but this woman is just, you know, she was an over comer.  She was a fighter.  She was a leader.  She was a musician.  You know, if you met Alma, you would never forget, you know, I mean she would always make an indelible mark on anyone with whom she came in contact, just an amazing woman.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're an only child--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --raised, and so--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Not spoiled, no, no (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, we wouldn't suggest that.
Speaker 2: But she was, let me just say, she was, because of her cancer, she could not have children.  And she always wanted a child.  And then, you know, life is just funny, isn't it?  You know, so she ends up with this child.  And she always counted me as just her biggest blessing.  I always counted her as my biggest blessing, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, now--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I lost her about four years ago, so.  But she was the greatest thing that ever happened to me.
Story_ID: 158799
Speaker 1: Did you grow up in Tacoma Park [Maryland]?
Speaker 2: I grew up in Washington [D.C]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Washington.
Speaker 2: Not Maryland, not Virginia, (laughter) but Washington.  I grew up on Binning Road, if you're familiar with the D.C. area.  I don't know, not far from East Capitol Street and the old JFK Stadium.  So, near East Capitol Street on Binning Road in Northeast Washington.
Speaker 1: Okay, and can you--well, can you describe where you grew up and the neighborhood and what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: (Chuckle) I guess, you know, it's fair to call it the hood, you know (laughter).  It was, it wasn't a fancy part of town at all.  We lived in a new apartment complex called Fort Chaplain, which was sort of the fancy duds on the hood street (laughter).  I went to Smothers Elementary School [Washington, D.C.] up the street, so I walked to school.  The Shrimp Boat was a block up the street from where we lived, which was, you know, and anybody who's my age would know the Shrimp Boat, if they grew up in Washington.  You know, of course, it's not there anymore.  Would--we didn't eat shrimp so we never went there (laughter), but it was the famous place.  You know, I would walk to Ace's Delicatessen which was, you know, just a half a block from my place, every day, and, you know, get a steak sub and pickle and a dill pickle and candy, you know, soda.  There was a small midrise apartment complex across the street from us.  You know, it was a time--this was in the '60's [1960s], early '70s [1970s] where the people across the street would sit outside in the yard in this complex, it's midrise apartments.  So there was, wasn't really a yard, yard, you know, it's just a communal space.  But, you know, people would sit out and they'd kind of, the old folks would kind of keep an eye on what was going on, on the street, you know.  They'd see the young kids coming home from school.  I would come home from school.  My mom [Alma Montgomery Blackmon] was still at work, so, you know, I was one of the latch-key kids that would come home.
Story_ID: 158800
Speaker 1: Okay, now, let's go back to when your mother passed.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: And you have a story to--
Speaker 2: Well, my mother [Bernice Blackmon Bray] was thirty-two.  And at thirty-two, you're supposed to be in good health, right?  But she, she died an alcoholic.  She would--she worked at National Institutes of Health in the cafeteria.  She had not gone to college.  She graduated from high school in Raleigh [North Carolina].  But as soon as she turned, as soon as she graduated and turned eighteen, she ran off.  She married a guy named Johnny Corbin [ph.], I understand, and went to [Washington] D.C.  And that's how she ended up there.  Everybody, the family really was trying to escape, A, I think a very oppressive mother, and segregation, which was big time in Raleigh.  So Henry [Blackmon] joined the [U.S.] Military, and Bernice and Ben [ph.] ran off with loves of their lives to [Washington] D.C.  And that's how they ended up there.  But Bernice somehow or another, you know, just became quite addicted to alcohol and passed away at thirty-two and literally just dropped dead, just dropped dead.  And my understanding from Alma [Montgomery Blackmon] is that the physician said that, you know, she--her blood alcohol, her blood alcohol level was like, she was saturated.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this was an alcohol--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: She was saturated.
Speaker 1: --poisoning--
Speaker 2: Alcohol, but she was an alcoholic.  I mean she didn't eat.  She just drank.
Speaker 1: And this happens sometimes to college students in the United States and others, you know, I mean they were young.  You can drink to that point or you--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess so.  I mean, you know, she--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) (unclear) it probably does, you know.
Speaker 2: --always drank.  Yeah.  So, that's, you know, she just dropped dead.  And eventually, her brother, Ben, many years later, probably a good ten or twelve years later died the same way.  He was an alcoholic as well.  So Henry Blackmon was really, of the three siblings, you know, the only one to have lived a very successful life.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 158801
Speaker 1: And you said that it seems--appears that they were trying to get as far away as they could from--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right, from segregation.
Speaker 1: And he ended up in Europe.
Speaker 2: Right, and even with Henry [Blackmon], you know, he became--he had, he had a dual citizenship.  And so he never gave up his American citizenship, but became a Dutch citizen.  And his--we ended up reuniting after I became an adult.  And it's, we have a--we had a blended family, you know.  And so his, anyway, his wife and three sons are now, you know, we're all family.  But he really blocked out a lot of memory of living in Raleigh, North Carolina because of the racism that he encountered there and just the ugliness and, you know.  He was, he really was very tainted by that so much so that he had really blocked it out.  So by the time I became an adult, got married, we sort of reconnected.  I reconnected with Henry.  He's married now to a Dutch woman.  We invited him to come back to the States.  He had not been back to the United States in thirty years.  He was so afraid--this was probably in the '80s [1980s] by now.  He was so afraid to come with his Dutch wife at my invitation.  I mean he called me several times from Holland, asking, you know, "Are you sure it's gonna be all right?  Or, you know, 'cause they're probably gonna burn a cross in your yard, and, you know, it's gonna be, you know, an upheaval in your neighborhood."  And I was like, "Henry, it's okay.  It's not that anymore."
Speaker 1: For him, United States is frozen in--
Speaker 2: In time, exactly.
Speaker 1: Time, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Things are 1960 for him.
Speaker 2: Um-hum, that's right.  He's passed away now too, but, yeah, it was, you know, it was sort of an awakening for him to come back to the United States in the '80s [1980s] and see that, okay, maybe it's all right if I walk down the street with my Dutch wife (laughter).  Yeah.
Speaker 1: At least, most of the time it is (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) At least most of the time, not always.  And, you know--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And then it's a different story in 2014.  I don't know where we're going, but (laughter), yeah.  Sorry, that's on the side, I'm sorry.
Story_ID: 158802
Speaker 1: So you, you're raised as a single child, and do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean sadly, you know, it's, the earliest memory is the death of my, of my mom [Bernice Blackmon Bray], you know.  I remember the day very well.  After that, you know, I guess the next memory would be Alma [Montgomer Blackmon] taking me in and fixing me gingerbread cookies, a gingerbread boy cookie.  That was how she lured me to her house (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, did you go to kindergarten?
Speaker 2: I had already attended kindergarten by the time my biological mother died.  So my, yes, so when I--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: This was in the summertime between--
Speaker 2: Yes, she died in July of '60, 1960.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, I mean were you with her when she passed or--
Speaker 2: Yes.  She, it was overnight.  So we were asleep.  And she had gotten up in the middle of the night to get a glass of water, and came back and sat on the side of the bed and just keeled over.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I woke up in the chaos of the ambulance coming to the house.  You know, my grandmother was there, and she was, you know, it was a lot of chaos.
Story_ID: 158803
Speaker 1: So, life with your new mother [Alma Montgomery Blackmon] starts in '55 [1955], and you said you went to Smothers Elementary [Washington, D.C.]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: In '60 [1960].
Speaker 1: In '60 [1960], I guess, yeah.
Speaker 2: Smothers Elementary.
Speaker 1: Smothers Elementary.
Speaker 2: Went to Woodson Junior High School [Washington, D.C.], which was a walk--that was down the street.
Speaker 1: Now, what, well, what were you interested in, in, at Smothers?  I mean I know you, kids get basically the same education, but--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --what interested you the most?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, my, I was suddenly thrust into a very musical world.  So though my, Bernice [Blackmon Bray]--though Alma was an educator, all of her spare time was, dealt with music.  I mean she was either teaching voice or, you know, conducting a concert or playing a concert somewhere.  So all our weekend time, off time, summertime, was involved in music.  So I wanted to, I wanted to be a musician.  I wanted to be a singer (laughter), yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you have favorite singers?
Speaker 2: I--
Speaker 1: Or songs?  I mean now this is, now, your mother's in SDA [Seventh Day Adventist], right?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, so does the SDA, I mean do they shy away from the secular music and you only listen to certain kind?
Speaker 2: They, you know, by the book SDAs, yes.  But my mom was, you know, didn't, it--she had this talent, you know.  So the very conservative Seventh Day Adventist would say, you know, don't go to the theater, don't read novels, you know, stay away from secular music.  And she really, her life wasn't built around secular music so much, though we listened to it.  She enjoyed it.  There wasn't really, I don't think there was an edict, you know, not to play classical music.  She was the music, minister of music at her church--at our church.  So she was the choral director there, and, so, you know, a lot of what she conducted and played was either classical or, you know, classical religious music.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, yeah, I was gonna ask if the SDA only plays a certain kind of religious music or if they ever play gospel?
Speaker 2: Now, they do.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, very much so.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: You know, it's still, it's a conservative denomination, but, you know, they're--it's a broad spectrum now, much more so than it used to be.
Speaker 1: You know, the SDA, I think more so than, and I guess people would argue with this, but I think more so than any other denomination, protestant denomination, seems to have an international kind of a--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: -flavor to it.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Churches, mission churches all over the world.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And people coming from all over the world to SDA churches.
Speaker 2: Correct, correct.  It, is a world church.  It has the largest parochial school system, second only to the Catholic church.  And it has quite a few hospitals as well around the world.
Speaker 1: Right.  They have quite a few hospitals.  In almost every major city--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --there's an SDA hospital.  And SDA, part of the SDA doctrine is vegetarianism.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and you know, that's not--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: And they (unclear) (simultaneous)--more practice if not doctrine.
Speaker 2: It's encouraged.  It's not required to be vegetarian.  It is encouraged just for healthy living because that's part of the tenets of the church, to be, you know, to try to live a healthy lifestyle.  Your body is, you know, the temple of the Lord and all of that.  One of the requirements, and one of the things that goes with the tenets of the church, though, also, is no pork.  So that's not encouraged.  That's part of it (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, no pork, no shellfish, that kind of thing.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, certain things are absolutely forbidden, and--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --then within that spectrum, you can either get better or (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes (laughter), correct.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you grow up in a vegetarian household?
Speaker 2: No, I grew up a steak and potatoes girl (laughter).  I didn't become vegetarian until adulthood, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you go to an--so I take that Smothers was not a SDA school?
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't.  I didn't go to full on, Seven Day Adventists education until high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and that's when I went to Takoma Academy [Takoma, Maryland], and then I went to Oakwood College [Huntsville, Alabama] for two years, and then to Loma Linda University [Loma Linda, California].  All of those are Seventh Day Adventist schools.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 158804
Speaker 1: So did you get good grades in elementary school at this level--(unclear) (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: I did.  I did, yeah.
Speaker 1: So did you have a lot of attention with your homework and all, and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Yes, I mean my mom's [Alma Montgomery Blackmon] an educator, and, you know, she's in the long line of educators, so, you know, school was very important, school work, getting your school work done.  So you, and you weren't going to cross paths with Alma (laughter).  You were gonna get your school work done.
Speaker 1: Were there any other special teachers, other than your mother in, at Smothers [Elementary School, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Oh, at Smothers--now, my mom didn't teach at Smothers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But my, yes, two very favorite teachers were Theresa Cook [ph.] and I can't remember, Mrs. Galloway [ph.] was my fifth--sixth grade teacher, and Ms. Cook was my fifth grade teacher, and loved them to death.  They were great.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Great teachers.
Speaker 1: All right, so I take it, growing up, church was a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Very much so.
Speaker 1: So what was your home church?
Speaker 2: It was DuPont Park--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Seventh Day Adventist Church in Northeast [D.C.].
Speaker 1: Okay, and did you have like responsibilities as a youth in the church and different things you'd have to do?
Speaker 2: I didn't really have responsibilities.  My mom, as I said, was the minister of music there.  At one point, she was also the--when I became a teenager, she took on the role of youth leader as well, one year.  But I didn't really, you know, have any responsibilities.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Speaker 2: I sang in her choir.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I sang in the youth choir, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Story_ID: 158805
Speaker 1: The next school after Smothers [Elementary School, Washington, D.C.] was, what?
Speaker 2: I went to Woodson Junior High [Washington, D.C.] for seventh grade, and then I went to a Seventh Day Adventist school at DuPont Park Church for eighth grade, for that one year at DuPont Park.  They had a program from kindergarten through, K-through eighth.  So I went to eighth grade, yes, I went to eighth grade there.  And I went to fourth grade there too, don't know why (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know why I went to fourth grade there, but anyway, eighth grade.  And then after I graduated from there, I went to Takoma Academy [Takoma Park, Maryland] for nine through twelve.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So are there any special teachers in the junior high school?
Speaker 2: No, no, my--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --yeah, my favorite ones are Mrs. Cook [ph.] and Ms. Galloway [ph.].
Speaker 1: So were your interests changing any?  You know, now, when you were in, I guess, oh, you had to have been about, had to be about eight years ago, I guess, when the March on Washington [1963] took place and all that?
Speaker 2: Yes, very good.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yep, my mom [Alma Montgomery Blackmon] went to that.  She and her girlfriend went.  I stayed at Barbara Cook's [ph.] house for the weekend (laughter).  She didn't take me, but I do remember it distinctly.
Story_ID: 158806
Speaker 1: So are you playing the piano now in--
Speaker 2: Well, I did take piano lessons.  My mom [Alma Montgomery Blackmon] taught me, and you know how that goes, like when you're trying to teach your own child how to drive a stick shift or any car, it's not--it doesn't go well.  And then I took piano lessons at Howard University [Washington D.C.].  They had a children's program there, and I took piano lessons there.  But I was not one to practice.  And so, my mom always said I was her, one of--I was her worst student when it came to the piano.
Speaker 1: So you're not a natural pianist?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Un-un (laughter), I went at--I think, I always say it's my mom's fault because she was--and she literally, literally sat down and just started playing.  Her father [James Montgomery] taught piano lessons.  She would sit there and, you know, watch him teach piano.  And I guess, she just--I don't know.  You know, it was a gift.  She literally, at the age of five, she sat down and just started playing and could read anything, could play by ear 'cause she had perfect pitch.  So she could play by ear, anything she heard.  But anything you put in front of her, she could also play.  So I'm figuring, well, if she could do that, I could do that.  So that's why I didn't practice.  I would just go put my hand son the keyboard and just wait (laughter) for something, you know, sparks to fly.  I don't know.  But that didn't work out too good (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 158807
Speaker 1: So, now, did you pay--considering what you're doing today, did you pay special attention to news people on television?
Speaker 2: No, not really.  I do remember, I was--I remember when JC Hayward and Max Robinson arrived at Channel 9 in Washington [D.C.] and loved them, probably, I guess, because I don't know this to be a fact, but we watched Channel 9 all the time.  And they were the first blacks that I saw on TV giving the news.  So, my mom [Alma Montgomery Blackmon] was very, very proud of that.  She loved Max Robinson, you know.  They were always in--so I watched them growing up.  I can't say, though, that I, you know, that was not--I didn't look--I don't know.  You know, I, I admired them greatly, but I don't really recall thinking one day I want to be JC Hayward, you know what I'm saying?  Don't--it wasn't that.  But I did watch them all the time.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were keenly aware of them, but you weren't--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --you didn't see them as future, you know--
Speaker 2: No, you know, at the time, I wanted to be a Broadway singer, or you know opera singer.  That's kind of where my head was 'cause that's, that'a what I was hearing all the time.
Story_ID: 158808
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you, who were your favorite singers then?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, of course, I knew of Leontyne Price and so I had to, have to count her in.  But I have to say, and this is probably not anybody that you've heard of, unless you, you know, you really are a true music aficionado.  But Joyce Bryant was my mom's [Alma Montgomery Blackmon] best friend.  And Joyce used to sing in nightclubs in Los Angeles [California], in Hollywood [California] back in the '50s [1950s].  And you can look her up.  But--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Now, we just--
Speaker 2: --she's sort of a torch--what do you call it?  A torch singer, you know, singer?
Speaker 1: We just, [HM] Xernona Clayton set an Urban League record for the highest grossing fundraiser in 1960--no, fifty--it must have been '58 [1958] by bringing Joyce Bryant back--
Speaker 2: Get out of here.
Speaker 1: --to speak at the Morris Hotel--I mean to sing at the Morris Hotel.  They had a crowd at the--
Speaker 2: Oh, wow.
Speaker 1: --the police had to arrive on the scene because the crowd was so large--
Speaker 2: Oh, wow.
Speaker 1: --for Joyce Bryant.
Speaker 2: Joyce was my mom's best friend.  And she lived with us because Joyce had been Seventh Day Adventist 'cause she had this wonderful voice.  The church didn't, didn't have a place for her.  So she left the church and she had a career.  But then she came back to the church.
Speaker 1: And broke the hearts of thousands of people.
Speaker 2: Yes, (laughter) okay.  So you know Joyce.  And so I, you know, I grew up calling her Aunt Joyce.  And she, I don't know how she and ma, ma got together, but anyway, when I came into ma's life, Joyce was already there.  She had come back to the church.  Alma was her voice teacher, and her accompanist.  And so, you know, that was--so Joyce was just the epitome for me.  She was the ultimate singer for me, loved, loved, loved her, wanted to be her (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, I've never, I wasn't conscious of Joyce Bryant until today.  And we interviewed Xernona Clayton--
Speaker 2: That's so funny.
Speaker 1: --two hours ago.  She mentioned or three hours ago, she mentioned Joyce Bryant.
Speaker 2: Oh, my God.
Speaker 1: So Joyce Bryant strikes again today.
Speaker 2: I didn't even know Xernona knew her.  Oh, my gosh, yeah.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, this the way it happens sometimes, but--
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, they--nobody could sing 'He's Got the Whole World in His Hand' like Joyce Bryant.  Oh, as a kid, I just, you know--and she, because my mom was her accompaniment--accompanist, I would go to all her concerts.  I'm sitting there on the front row as a little kid, and I'm just, my, you know, it's just like heaven for me.
Speaker 1: So your mother was her accompanist?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, I don't know if Xernona knows that.  So--
Speaker 2: Probably doesn't.
Speaker 1: Yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I didn't, you know, no, so I'm ready to call Xernona now (laughter), and say, share this.  Yeah, that's funny.
Speaker 1: And it truly is, it truly is very strange.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, okay, so Joyce Bryant, so, yeah, she was--yeah, Xernona said, you probably won't know about her now but then, she was admired by--
Speaker 2: She was something else.
Speaker 1: --thousands and thousands of people.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, and she was so gorgeous, just, oh, my gosh.  She was as black as your shoe, and just gorgeous woman.  Oh, my gosh, yeah, like I said, I wanted to be her (laughter).  Yeah.
Story_ID: 158809
Speaker 1: My mom [Alma Montgomery Blackmon] also was Roberta Flack's first piano teacher.  So I grew up with Roberta as well.  She, Roberta got married from our house.  And, you know, Roberta was a classical musician before she--and she was also a teacher in the [Washington] D.C. public schools.  She taught music in junior high.
Speaker 2: Yeah, now, Robert Flack, from what I understand, did not believe that she was a singer?
Speaker 1: No, she did not.  She was a pianist.  And as I said, my mom taught her piano, but then as, you know, when she became an adult, they were very good friends.  And so Roberta would--sometimes Roberta would come and help fill out the alto section in some cantata my mom was conducting.  And she needed some extra voices.  Sometimes Roberta would come and help play.  My mom used to teach, used to play at the Tivoli Opera Restaurant in Washington, D.C., in Georgetown and was the musical director there.  This was a restaurant where operatic singers would sing in the aisles of the restaurant to the diners there.  And my mom was the accompanist for all of these singers who would come through.  And it worked out great 'cause she literally could read anything.  So it didn't matter what singer would come through, temporary or was there permanently, in house.  They'd put down, plop down, you know, plop down some music, and she'd just play for them.  Tivoli needed an additional pianist.  Roberta came in, and on her invite and auditioned, and Alma asked if she wanted to have a second job.  So Roberta became also a pianist at the Tivoli Opera Restaurant.  But the owner of the Tivoli, Mr. Henry, eventually opened a jazz bar.  He knew--oh, we're running out of time again?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay. He knew that Roberta was dabbling in jazz.  By this time, she had married Steve Novosel, which was a white guy.  Her family disowned her because of that, and so that's why she married from our house.  My god dad, my godfather walked her down the aisle.  Mr. Henry opened a jazz bar and asked Roberta to be the talent, the entertainer for that jazz bar.  And it, that's at Mr. Henry's.  That was the name of the club in D.C.  And that's where she was discovered.  It was an outgrowth of the Tivoli.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she was discovered in sixty--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So, I'm going so divergent (unclear) I'm sorry (laughter).
Speaker 2: She was discovered around 1968 or '69 [1969], something like that or somewhere--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah, '69 [1969], '70 [1970], um-hum.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So we'd go to Mr. Henry's every Sunday afternoon and sit and listen to Roberta.
Speaker 2: Okay, any other--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --celebrity friends that your mother had that--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) No, no, not at the--you know, Jessie Norman went to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] so we knew her, you know, when she was a student at Howard.  And my godfather and she were good friends.  He's a singer too.  He, my godfather--my mom was also his vocal coach and pianist, and accompanist, and he eventually became the choral conductor for the D.C. Youth Chorale in Washington.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So music, music, music, everywhere.
Story_ID: 158810
Speaker 1: Now, did you have a favorite style of music when you were young?
Speaker 2: I, you know, I liked classical.  That's what I grew up with, operas.
Speaker 1: You said you could envision yourself on Broadway.
Speaker 2: I wanted to be a Broadway singer.
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite Broadway show or--
Speaker 2: Oh, you know, loved Broadway musicals, so, you know, I don't know, everything from 'West Side Story' to 'Camelot', yeah, 'Fiddler on the Roof.'
Speaker 1: Did you listen to it at home or at the library?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes, at home.  We had all of that, all the time.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: So I, there's an inner Maria in here (laughter).  There's a Maria in here, trying to come out (laughter).  At some point, I'm gonna do 'West Side Story' (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, you were, I guess when 'West Side Story' came out, you were really a small--
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, when the movie version was at the--
Speaker 2: That was the first movie I ever saw.  She took me 'cause Adventists, Seventh Day Adventists didn't go to the movies.  Of course, when I was living with Bernice [Blackmon Bray], I mean I really wasn't exposed to very much at all.  I came to live with Alma [Montgomery Blackmon], and, you know, she lived a little beyond the boundaries of Seventh Day Adventists, so we went to the movies.  And she took me to see 'West Side Story.'  It just, oh, my gosh, it was, it was life, life changing for me, I loved it.
Story_ID: 158811
Speaker 1: High school, now, you're at a Seventh Day Adventist high school [Takoma Academy, Takoma Park, Maryland]].  How was it different from public school?  Or was there much difference?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, it was a little more, just--not a, probably a lot more restrained, smaller, certainly.  You know, we didn't have the conflict of basketball games or football games or so forth on the Sabbath.  You know what I'm saying.  We didn't have conflicts around the Sabbath.  So that made life easier.  You could take a, you could be involved in social activities and not have to worry about the Sabbath.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were there from '69 [1969], I guess to '73 [1973]?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, I graduated in '73 [1973].
Speaker 1: So did you have to go over there on a bus?
Speaker 2: My mom [Alma Montgomery Blackmon] drove me.
Speaker 1: She drove you over--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a long drive, but, yeah.
Story_ID: 158812
Speaker 1: Nineteen-sixty-eight [1968] was a pivotal year in [Washington] D.C.--
Speaker 2: Yes, it was.
Speaker 1: --because of the riots after [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --was assassinated.
Speaker 2: Yep, we had the National Guard posted right outside our house on Binning Road [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: You were eighth grade, an eighth grade student then?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Remember it well.
Speaker 1: All right.  Were you at home when you heard or were you at, still at school?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was at home.  And, yeah, that was, that was a bad time.  I remember sitting on the floor watching TV, you know, watching all of the un--everything unfolding.  My mom [Alma Montgomery Blackmon] had a--I don't remember.  I don't remember if they cancelled, they must have cancelled school the next day.  I don't remember.  I just remember my mom having to drive from work home the next day, and all the rioting was going on.  And they were calling out the National Guard and, you know, I remember her just being afraid.  And I think she got stopped at one place and I don't know--I don't remember, it seems--I wanna say there was, you know, she, you know, put her hand out there, "Black Power" or something (laughter).  It was her password to get through (laughter), the crowd, you know, so they wouldn't turn her car over or something crazy like that.  It was a crazy time.  Yeah, I remember it well.
Speaker 1: Okay, I think--so was there substantial property damage in your neighborhood at all?
Speaker 2: Not in our neighborhood, but, but I'm not really sure why, you know.  I mean, but--
Speaker 1: Northeast wasn't hit that bad.  I know--
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't.  I, Northwest, Southwest, Southeast [Washington, D.C.]--
Speaker 1: Southeast was really hit hard.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But we had a, I just remember seeing, you know, they had the National Guard trucks, tanks or whatever in the street, and, you know, a whole line of guardsmen just standing on, you know, at the ready, right in front of where we lived.
Story_ID: 158813
Speaker 1: So you're in high school [Takoma Academy, Takoma Park, Maryland] from '69 [1969] to '73 [1973]?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And you say it's a little more stayed, not too many distractions.  Were there any activities for you to get involved in, in high school?
Speaker 2: No, you know, we didn't, we didn't have a prom so to speak.  I was kind of a militant.  You know, I had a big Afro, and, you know, yeah, I was all about the Afro and the Black Power, and so my white principal was not appreciative of that (laughter).
Speaker 1: Did the black students kind of bond together there?
Speaker 2: It wasn't many of us.  It was me and Gary Stroman [ph.] in the ninth grade.  It was just the two of us (laughter).  By the time I graduated, you know, maybe there were twenty black students at the school.  I went back as their graduating speaking maybe fifteen years ago, and the school is all, all--it's either all black--it's all black, and Hispanic.  And I was just floored.  Wow, 'cause, you know, it was just the two of us in ninth grade.  So, you know, times have changed, but, yeah, it was a small number of us.
Speaker 1: Now, did you get any sense of the international flavor of the SDA [Seventh Day Adventist] in that school?  Were there any international students there?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean there were students--well, not really.  I'm sure there were some kids whose families were from the Caribbean, but, you know, but they all lived in the Washington, D.C.-Maryland area.  You know, I, I've always known that it was a world church, but Takoma Academy was really a lily-white school, you know.  I mean I think that was kind of like largely its purpose (laughter).  But, you know, times change.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you, when it came time for graduation, like what--so you were thinking about a music career then?
Speaker 2: Well, by that time, no, because it was high school I took a speech class, and my teacher was Arnie Nielsen [ph.], and it's probably the only other teacher that I would reference to you, Mr. Nielsen.  It was during speech class that I realized, I kind of like this communication thing.
Story_ID: 158814
Speaker 1: High school, I was asking you like what you were, what your career aspirations were and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, in, it was in speech class when, you know, because in speech, you have to write speeches, but you have to do extemporaneous speaking, that kind of, you know, all of that.  And it was in that class where I kind of discovered, well, I can talk (laughter).  I can talk convincingly.  It--and it feels okay.  It feels comfortable.  So that's when, that was the point where, and that probably was eleventh grade, where I decided, you know what?  I think I wanna do communications.  And I'm not even sure I knew all of that, what that meant.  In the '70s [1970s], that was sort of an unusual major.  You know, everybody was majoring in education or, you know, pre-med or something like that.  So, and I'm not sure where I even got the phrase communication.  But that's when I decided I wanted to go into the field of communication in some manner.
Speaker 1: Had you been involved in the theatre or anything--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --like that before?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And had you been, were you ever the person that the teachers would call upon to speak for the class or the--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --Emcee of youth programming?
Speaker 2: No, because, here again, it was a mostly white school.  You know, I was kind of a militant.  They really didn't--they weren't giving, they weren't giving out a whole lot of opportunities to blacks at the school [Takoma Academy, Takoma Park, Maryland].  They just weren't.
Speaker 1: They didn't see you as the face of the school (laughter)?
Speaker 2: No, no (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) No, no, no.
Story_ID: 158815
Speaker 1: Now, did you--how were your grades?  Did you have--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I was a good student.  I was an A student, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, so did you achieve any honors upon graduation?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I graduated with honors.  I don't, you know, I think that's what they call it.  They're graduating with honors.  And I had, I was a, I was a member of the National Honor Society.  I was a part of that club.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now, did you get counseling about where to go to school?
Speaker 2: Well, I wanted to go to Howard University [Washington D.C.] because I was done with going to white schools, is what I said to my mom [Alma Montgomery Blackmon] (laughter).  So I applied.  I got accepted, but my junior year, my mom had another bout with cancer.  And it was a very, very, very serious bout with cancer that she went to--she was at NIH [National Institutes of Health], she spent three months in the hospital, had radical, radical surgery.  I lived with my godparents for the time she was there.  And she ended up retiring on disability from the [Washington] D.C. public schools.  She didn't argue with me, you know, wherever you wanna go to college.  So by the time I graduated, she was on the other side of the cancer, but still recovering, recovering from this radical surgery.  I wanted to go to Howard, but she was retiring.  She decided she was gonna quit teaching, quite--by this time she was a supervisor for early childhood education.  She had an offer to come teach at Oakwood College in Huntsville, Alabama.  And I was graduating, looking, I mean it was time for me to go to college, and she asked if I would move--she, no, here's what she said.  She said, "I'll move--you decide where you wanna go to college, and I'll make a decision about whether I go to Huntsville to teach or not.  This is your, you know, you're at a stage of life where you have to--it's now your turn to decide."  And I had already been accepted to Howard.  I was ready to go, to party (laughter).  They had a great communications program there.  I had done some internship work with the Howard University radio station, had an inside track there.  And then she has this offer to teach at this small, historically black college in Huntsville, Alabama, of all places.  And she let me make the decision, and I decided to go to Huntsville.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Not exactly, entirely sure why, you know.  I mean it's one of those God moments.
Speaker 1: Did you feel that your mother needed you at that point, just recovering from that illness?
Speaker 2: Yes, she would have stayed in D.C. if I had decided to go to Howard.  She just would have stayed there.  I, I think part of my reasoning for choosing to go to Huntsville was for her, you know.  I just felt like that she was excited about it.  I think it was a place to start anew.  They wanted her to be the choral conductor for the touring choir, you know.  It was everything right up her alley, and she went there to teach English.  And so decided instead to go to Huntsville, went to Oakwood.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They did not have a communications department (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, you were there--now, what was your major there?
Speaker 2: I think I declared communications.  They didn't have a department there, but I went, you know.  The first two years, you know, you're doing basics anyway.  So, and then I ended up transferring to Loma Linda [University, Loma Linda, California], A, because they had, it was an [Seventh Day] Adventist [SDA] school that did have a communications department there, and, you know, I had a boyfriend who was in medical school there (laughter).  So I followed him out there.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were in Huntsville [Alabama] for two years?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And what was Huntsville like--
Speaker 2: But we moved.  We literally picked up and moved to Huntsville.  Oh, I thought I was gonna shrivel up and die (laughter), from Washington, D.C. to Huntsville, Alabama, and I'm eighteen.  Oh, my God (laughter).  Yeah, I just thought, okay, my world has come to an end (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, there're a lot of black people in Huntsville, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, 'cause Alabama A & M [Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical] University, Huntsville, Alabama] is there.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes, I mean I didn't know that at the time, you know, at the time.
Speaker 1: Now, Oakwood, I'd never heard of Oakwood until--I don't, I can't remember having heard of it, but it's a, it's a private, black college there--
Speaker 2: Um-hum, it's an HBCU [historically black colleges and universities].
Speaker 1: --in Huntsville.
Speaker 2: Um-hum, Seventh Day Adventist.  It's the only Seventh Day--only black Seventh Day Adventist College in the world.  It's now a university, I should say.  It's Oakwood University now.
Speaker 1: Okay, SDA college.  Now, were there any special teachers or experiences there that you wanna share with us?
Speaker 2: No, not really, you know, I sang in the, in the touring choir that my mom was the choral conductor of.  And we traveled every, we traveled in the middle of the year and in the, yeah, mostly in the middle of the year.  We went all over the country with it.  It was great.  That was the best experience, yeah.
Story_ID: 158816
Speaker 1: Now Loma Linda University [Loma Linda, California], so you met a fellow at Oakwood College--
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: --who went to medical school in--
Speaker 2: At Loma Linda [University School of Medicine, Loma Linda, California].
Speaker 1: At Loma Linda.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now, Loma Linda, I've seen the name on the side of health food items--
Speaker 2: Yes (laughter)--
Speaker 1: --in the food store.
Speaker 2: But they have, they have a very, very well-regarded medical school there, medical and dental school at Loma Linda.  And if you recall, you may remember, oh, some time ago, the first in--I think it was infant heart transplant.  Do you remember the heart transplant with the baboon heart?
Speaker 1: Hum--
Speaker 2: It was very controversial.
Speaker 1: Was that the one with Christiaan Barnard, the surgeon from South Africa or--
Speaker 2: Un-un.
Speaker 1: No, okay.
Speaker 2: I wanna say, it was like a newborn heart transplant, and they used a baboon heart.  That was done at Loma Linda at the hospital there.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they had a good medical school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, very much so.
Speaker 1: I take it that was a successful--
Speaker 2: Yes, it was.  It was, but I think they were--I'm saying that to say I think they--that they were one of the pioneers of infant heart transplants.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 158817
Speaker 1: So, now, what was--now, you graduated [from Loma Linda University, Loma Linda, California] summa cum laude, so that's, you can't get any better, right?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: So your grades were good, and you majored in communications, speech and communications.
Speaker 2: Um-hum, because that was the only communications degree that they had there.  It might have been something else.  I really wanted to go into film.  I wanted to make feature films.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, but, you know, the only communications degree they had was speech communication and mass media.
Speaker 1: Now, you wanted to go into feature film as a--
Speaker 2: Director, writer, never intended to be on camera, thought about doing documentaries as well, directing, because I liked the, I liked the process of investigating issues and controversies, and that, so documentary was also sort of on my radar, feature film, winning the Oscar or making a documentary, along those lines.  But director and writing, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you saw yourself as an investigative filmmaker, doing--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --documentaries?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, making statement pieces.
Speaker 1: Yeah, did you have any, were there any films that you saw that inspired you, you know, to (unclear) direct?
Speaker 2: I can't say that so much.  No, I don't--that's a good question.  Now, nothing comes to mind.  But I loved, I loved watching movies in general.  I took a film class in college.  I enjoyed, I enjoyed watching films and analyzing it, you know, so what is that film saying?  What's the message?  What's the underlying, you know, theme?  You know, I liked analyzing film.  So I guess that, I guess that's probably what drew me to that.  I had a master's fellowship when I graduated Loma Linda [University, Loma Linda, California] to go to Ohio State University [Columbus, Ohio] in film.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you go?
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 158818
Speaker 1: I was--by this time I was engaged.  My fiance was slated to graduate in December, and then we were gonna get married.  And then I was gonna start the master's fellowship there in Ohio [at Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio].  He was gonna do his residency there.  So between June of graduation from undergrad and December I had this free time.  So I applied for a job somewhere in Huntsville [Alabama].  And I, you know, I had done a little bit of radio in college at the college radio station, and I had done some internships--
Speaker 2: I was gonna ask you if they had a station there?
Speaker 1: Yeah, they did.  It was all automated, so, yeah, I didn't do very much but punch buttons.  And I had done some internships in Los Angeles [California] with a couple of independent film companies.  So I had a small resume.  I'd sent it back home to then Huntsville.  And I just, you know, sent it everywhere to radio, TV, newspapers, just, you know, I just needed something to do.  And I wanted to do something in communications.  And--
Speaker 2: Now, this is in the space between Loma Linda [University, Loma Linda, California] and Ohio State?
Speaker 1: Correct.
Speaker 2: Would have been Ohio State.
Speaker 1: Right, so I sent out my resume like in April.  I knew I was gonna be graduating in June, so I had put together a little resume and sent it out before graduation.  I got an inquiry before graduation from a couple of newspapers, little local newspapers, couple of radio stations that were interested, and a television station.  And my first week back home from, after graduation, I only went to the TV station for the interview, not smart, you know.  It's like, "Oh, I don't wanna work at a newspaper.  And I don't wanna work at a radio station."  I wanted to--and the reason why I wanted to do the TV was because they shot film.  And this is 1977.  So they're still shooting film.  So in my little brain, I'm thinking, well, I wanna do film, and they do film.  So I'll (laughter) do film.  So I went, I accepted the, the invitation to come and do an interview at the television station there.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you saw yourself as behind the cameras kind of--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, right, but they--and they were, I knew they were looking for a reporter.  And I had taken one journalism class.  So, you know, I wasn't so much interested--what drew me to the TV station wasn't that I wanted to be a reporter or let me see what reporting is like?  It was, I, you know, I don't know.  I knew nothing.  So, you know, it was like, they shoot film, and I wanna do film.  So I'll go to the television station and apply to be a reporter.  And it doesn't really connect.  But that's what I did.  And Adrian Gibson was the news director at the time, and he interviewed me, and I said, really all the wrong things, thinking back on it.  You know, I said, I don't wanna be, I'm not interested in being a reporter.  You know, have you ever done any reporting?  No, taken, you know, have you taken classes?  Just one.  Yeah, well, what do you see in your future?  Well, I wanna be a filmmaker.  Do you wanna be a reporter?  "No, not really.  And by the way, I'm leaving in six months 'cause I'm going to Ohio State to get my master's in filmmaking.  And then I'll be gone.  Oh, and on top of that, I don't work on Friday nights or Saturdays 'cause I'm Seventh Day Adventist."  And this man hired me (laughter).  I don't know why.  I did a, they put me in front of the camera on the news set in the studio and asked, you know, just said, talk, you know, just talk to the camera.  And I did, and I don't even know what I said.
Speaker 2: This is your first time talking, I mean being the talent on a television program.
Speaker 1: (No audible response) 'Cause, you know, we didn't have the--different from today.  At, at--neither at Oakwood [College, Huntsville, Alabama] nor at Loma Linda did they have a studio set up, you know, did they have a, you know, a little news operation.  They had none of that where I was, none of that.  So it really was the first time I'd been in a studio, the first time I'd talked in front of a camera or any of that.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So did they build your work around your religion and other--
Speaker 1: Yeah, they did.  They gave me a Sunday through Thursday schedule.  Fortunately, because they're in Huntsville, they knew of Oakwood's existence.  They knew of the Seventh Day Adventist College.  So they--and the woman that I was replacing who was also a black female, ironically, left to go to Ohio State University to work on her master's degree.  Isn't that just funny how life works.  So, you know, and because it was the '70's [1970s], and I filled two quotas, I was black and female, you know, I would, I was, you know, I was a twofer.  So they wanted to hire--they had a slot for (laughter) a twofer.  They were losing one, a black female.  And so they get to hire one.  So that probably was more of the motivating factor than anything else (laughter) in hiring me.  I was there (laughter).  I was a warm body (laughter).
Speaker 2: Now, well, you had the credentials which some, it was like a driver's license in some ways.  You have a degree in communications.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So they can say, they can justify your hiring by pointing to these degrees.
Speaker 1: Right.  It wasn't a degree in journalism.
Speaker 2: I mean in communications.
Speaker 1: That would have been helpful.  Well, yeah, it was in communications.  You said it right.  You know, it was very broad, very generic, yeah.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: But I filled the bill.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, and ever--anyone ever told you that you looked like a television talent?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Really, up to that point?
Speaker 1: Oh, no.  No, as a matter--
Speaker 2: Interesting.
Speaker 1: --of fact, when I was in college, people would say to me, you know, "What's your major?"  "Communications."  "Oh, what's that?"  You know, that--it's the '70s [1970s].  It was a new major.  "What's that?"  And my standard answer in explaining what that was, you know, "Well, you know, I wanna go into filmmaking." "Huh?"  And then my retort would be, "Well, anything but news."
Story_ID: 158819
Speaker 1: (Laughter.)
Speaker 2: So WAA--
Speaker 1: Y.
Speaker 2: Y--WAAY TV--
Speaker 1: Um-hum--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --yeah, it's Huntsville [Alabama].
Speaker 1: Channel 31.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, Huntsville serves probably a broad area since it's a smaller place in Alabama, is that true?
Speaker 1: Yes, I don't know how broad.  At the time, it was the, I wanna say it was like the ninety-fifth, the ninety-first market in the country.  But Huntsville is a unique market in that, you know, NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] is there, Redstar Arsenal [sic, Redstone Arsenal] is there.  There's a lot of high-tech companies there.  So it's this little oasis in the middle of Alabama.  And then you've got Alabama A & M [Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University, Huntsville, Alabama] and you have University of Alabama, Huntsville [Huntsville, Alabama].  You have Oakwood College [Huntsville, Alabama], you know, so you have a lot of higher instances of learning there as well.  So it's not a bad, you know, it's not a bad news market.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The station is fam--was family-owned, which is really a nice situation.  You know, you're not, you're not part of some big media conglomerate, you know.  So they have the ability and the flexibility to take a little bit more interest in you.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, and the station was affiliated with NBC [National Broadcasting Company] or--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Um-hum, NBC.
Speaker 2: Okay, NBC.  All right, so, now you were there for--19--this is 1977 when you join them?
Speaker 1: Yes, and they hired me as a reporter, and then I would do the, I would anchor--I anchored the five-minute cut-in's in the mornings, during the 'Today Show' at twenty-five past the hour.  And I did that too.
Speaker 2: So, did you model your reporting--
Speaker 1: After anybody?
Speaker 2: Yeah, after anyone?
Speaker 1: I didn't know enough to do that (laughter).  No.
Speaker 2: So it just turned out right.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I was groping in the dark (laughter), sink or whatever, whatever I could hold onto.
Story_ID: 158820
Speaker 1: So now, are you married by this time?  Or you--did your--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, I was not married by that time.
Speaker 1: Did your fiance go to Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: No, we--he and I broke up.
Speaker 1: Oh, you broke up.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, so--
Speaker 2: And I got talked out of--so I got hired in June, right--it really was like two weeks after graduation.  I got hired there as a reporter.  And, you know, it was going.  I was learning my way.  And I just thought it was gonna be short lived.  By, I wanna say by, maybe September or October, I got a new news director, Dave Daughtry. And he knew that my time was coming to an end, where, you know, I would--I didn't hide it.  You know, everybody knew I wasn't, I was not gonna be there long, and when he came onboard, he pulled me aside and said, "I really would like to see you stay."  He said, "You have a really brilliant future in this business if you'll stay, if you'll stay with it.  You can have a really successful career."  He said, "I know a lot of people who get their master's degrees and never do anything in this business."  He said, "You have a chance to do something."  So about that same time, I had met another young man that I was falling in love with and kind of wanted to see that relationship blossom as well.  So I ended up not going to Ohio State.  It was a tough, it was really a tough decision.  And I will, I--in all honesty, I probably made the decision more based on my heart and this new relationship than based on prospects for a great career in television reporting, television journalism.  I still didn't have a passion for that.
Speaker 1: All right, but you stayed at WAAY?
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 158821
Speaker 1: So you, so all together, you were there from '77 [1977] until--
Speaker 2: Well, in '78 [1978], I got an offer to go to Nashville [Tennessee], at WSM [WSMV-TV], and I accepted it.  I was not ready, and I'm not even sure why I accepted.  I think part of it, in the back of my head, well, this is the career path, you know, this is what you're supposed to do.  This is the next step.  And so I went as a reporter in Nashville at WSM, hated it, was not ready for it, had not really learned enough--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: What was your unreadiness?  What was--
Speaker 2: I just feel--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --it, the journalist (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I just wasn't a strong enough reporter to have, I mean I got the job, you know, I got offered the job.  I didn't apply for it.  It came looking for me, and I think that's part of the reason why I said, okay, you know, well, my God, this is what, I guess is supposed to be the next step.  So I went, but it never felt comfortable to me.  It was very, very stressful.  I just felt like it was always so hard every day to produce a story.  So I wasn't there long at all.  I was there two months.  And here's why I was there two months (laughter).  The general manager from my station in, at WAAY in Huntsville [Alabama] called me on a fluke trip in the middle of the week, back home.  I was so miserable, like on a Wednesday, I just drove home to Huntsville.  And I just needed, I don't know, mom [Alma Montgomery Blackmon]to fix me some food (laughter) and love me.  And low and behold I get this phone call from the general manager to my mom's house, looking for me.
Speaker 1: Now, this is a day off, right?
Speaker 2: No, I had to drive back that morning to go back to work.  I mean it literally was in the middle of the week.
Speaker 1: So this was early in the morning, he called you or--
Speaker 2: I drove home.  I was there in the evening.  No, it was like 8:00 o'clock at night.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He calls my mom's house looking for me.  And I just happened to be there.  And he wanted, he talked to me and asked if I would consider coming back to the station.  They had just done some research, and in the research, discovered that I was the most popular reporter that they had on their staff.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, I get it.  The station manager for WAAY--
Speaker 2: In Huntsville, correct, yes, yes--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --in Huntsville called you, not the one from Nashville, okay.
Speaker 2: Not Nashville, correct.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Sorry if I didn't make that clear.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Mr. Smith.  And, you know, offered me a job back at a higher salary.  You know, I was, I--my initial salary at WAAY was, I think, seven or ten thousand a year.  And he offered me a job back as a reporter with the possibility of becoming an anchor, and he would raise my salary to $12,000.  And so, you know, it was the best news I could have possibly heard, but, you know, I'm trying to play hard to get.  So my answer was, "You know, well, I'll, you know, I'll think about it.  Things are going very well in Nashville" (laughter), which they were not.  I mean, you know, I, I still had a job in Nashville, but I wasn't happy.  And then I waited a couple days and called him back and accepted.  And so I came back after about two or two months in Nashville, I came back to Huntsville.  And I came back as a reporter and within a week or two, they made me the anchor.
Speaker 1: Was it easy to leave Nashville--I mean I know you didn't like the--but they didn't have you under a contract or anything?
Speaker 2: Good question.  No, I wasn't under a contract, as I recall 'cause I couldn't have gotten out of it that easily, you know.  They didn't put people under contracts as much as they do now.
Speaker 1: Were you still in some kind of probationary period or something?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Often jobs will give you like three or four months to--
Speaker 2: No, I wasn't.  I went to the news director, and I just, you know, I just said, "I'm really not happy here."  And he was very, you know, he was very gracious and had good things to say about me, you know.  It's like, "We would love to keep you here, you know, but if you, you know, have another offer and you don't wanna stay, we, you know, we don't wanna keep you--we don't wanna make your life miserable."
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 158822
Speaker 1: We have a note here that you got married in '79 [1979], right?
Speaker 2: So I came back to Huntsville [Alabama] in '78 [1978] and then got married to--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --to, yeah, to that guy.
Speaker 1: And you married a physician, it says--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he's a clinical psychologist.  So he's Ph.D.
Speaker 1: Now, this is the same one that was--
Speaker 2: Not in Hunts--not in--
Speaker 1: Not the one that was in (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, he was a physician, but I didn't marry him.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Speaker 2: I married a Ph.D. instead.
Speaker 1: Ph.D. in psychology, okay.
Speaker 2: And he was teaching, he was on the faculty at Oakwood College [Huntsville, Alabama], teaching psychology.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  Okay, you met him as a student or did you meet--
Speaker 2: No, I actually--okay, it gets a little twisted.  So he's actually my mother's [Alma Montgomery Blackmon] godson (laughter).  He grew up in Washington [D.C.]--he, he was born in Washington.  But his family moved away when he was eight.  And I had not even come into Alma's life by that time.  So I didn't really know him.  And then met him for the first time when my mom came to Oakwood to play a concert there.  And he was a senior.  I was still in high school.  And I was just traveling along with her.  And she hadn't seen him in years.  And so they reintroduced, you know, they kind of met each other again.  And she's like, "Oh, my gosh, my godson is a college student now, and all that.  Brenda, get in here.  I want you to meet my godson."  So that's the first time I met him.  And then when I, by the time I graduated from college and came back to work in Huntsville, he was on the faculty there.  And so we got reacquainted then.
