Story_ID: 238980
Speaker 1: All right.  My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Sure.  It's [HistoryMaker] Rufus Williams, R-U-F-U-S, W-I-L-L-I-A-M-S.
Speaker 1: Do you have a middle name?
Speaker 2: I do not.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: I think if I had a middle name I probably would never have--no one would ever have known Rufus.  I would have used the middle name.
Speaker 1: Yeah and I actually--it's an interesting first name and it's, it's kind of a rustic kind of a name and, and but is there a story behind it?
Speaker 2: You know I don't know, but it's, it's interesting as I watch it hit the common lexicon.  It was a challenge growing up with that name because I was teased many, many times and agreed that I would never agree with myself that if I ever had a son, I would make sure that his name was not Rufus and tried to make sure he had one that he wouldn't get teased about.  It's my father's [Rufus William, Sr.] name.  I'm actually--he's a senior.  I'm a junior.  I don't use junior a lot because in my neighborhood everybody who was junior was June Bug and I didn't wanna to be June Bug.  So trying to identify all those things, the junior kind of dropped off.  And I don't go by it.  But it's my father's name.  I'm not sure where it came in, in the family beyond that.
Speaker 1: It was a popular name in the 19th century.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well it's a biblical name.  I haven't found the, the exact place where it comes from.  And in my limited research when I was a child, it meant Latin redhead.  And I also recall there was a Rufus Laboe [ph.] that used to come across in the 'Bewitched' show when it came on.  So those were just a few places that I caught it.  But didn't know a lot--it used to be able to go around and you didn't need to know my last name, 'cause it was usually only one Rufus.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it's interesting to see that it's now become a bit more popular.
Speaker 1: Yeah, there was a Rufus Ridley [ph.] in school with me when I was a kid.
Speaker 2: Probably the only Rufus.
Speaker 1: He was.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  And sir what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Sure.  I was born December 30, 1956 in Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Wow, that's an interesting one.  I (laughter) am, I'm a CPA by training, a Certified Public Accountant.  I have a business, Olympus LLC [Chicago, Illinois].  And my business I do business management and contract negotiation for athletes and entertainers.  In addition to that, I currently hold the position as president of the [Chicago] Board of Education of Chicago Public Schools [CPS].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: It is February 21st, 2008.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in my office at the board of education, City of Chicago [Illinois], 125 South Clark Street on the sixth floor--
Story_ID: 238981
Speaker 1: All right now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask of everyone.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 1: And they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first question is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes, I do.  What is it, is probably the next question (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)  Yes, what, what is it?
Speaker 2: What is your favorite food?  That's an interesting question.  My favorite food for a long time was spaghetti.  But I don't get it, I don't get it a lot so I think my favorite food is catfish.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Red.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Favorite, a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I love the summer time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Bermuda.
Speaker 1: All right.  The last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes.  From the poem 'Invictus' by Paul Henley [sic. William Ernest Henley].  "I am the master of my fate, I am the captain of my soul."
Speaker 1: Now that is interesting.  A lot of people that we interview quote 'Invictus.'  It has a special place in the black community it seems, you know.  So I don't, you know I don't know I just thought I'd say that.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, it's interesting.  I'm not sure who you've interviewed so far, but I will tell you that if a lot them were my fraternity brothers.  We learned it under a considerable amount of duress and it's one of the things that sticks with us.  It certainly sticks with me because I had to continue to recite it and recite it with meaning.  And it's a phrase that I also taught my son [Bradford Williams] although he hasn't pledged.  I don't know if he will.  But it's powerful and it's, it's self-motivating.
Speaker 1: This Kappa Alpha Psi [Fraternity]?
Speaker 2: Kappa Alpha Psi (laughter).
Speaker 1: I remember Dr. Arthur Edward Thomas used to be the president of Central State [University, Wilberforce, Ohio] used to recite it at every speech he made.
Speaker 2: Very easy to do.  And I could probably stand and do it because you do learn it.  But you know a lot of those things you, as you're kind of going through it, you don't get it.  I mean we were under pressure to learn a lot of things.  But it's something that was really, really important and meaningful and it lives with me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I think of all the poems that you know that wasn't written by a black person that seems to be the most popular one.
Story_ID: 238982
Speaker 1: Now, tell me, I'm gonna ask you about your ancestors and I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family first, then your father's [Rufus Williams, Sr.] side.  So we'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Sure.  Her name is Dicye, D-I-C-Y-E, Belle, B-E-L-L-E, Williams.  Her maiden name was Ward, W-A-R-D.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born in Mangham, Louisiana on August 7th, 1929.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How do you spell Mangham?
Speaker 2: M-A-N-G-H-A-M.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now what do you know about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace that side?
Speaker 2: Not very far.  Actually I can only go to my grandparents [Virgin Estis and Leroy Ward].  It's--I know my mother was a sharecropper and I understood and often understand that the--there was a period in our history that people to this day don't like to talk about.  And just the notion that my mother was a sharecropper I thought was just fascinating.  But you know how far back and right before sharecropping was slavery.  So we never took it back farther than that.  Does that mean my grandmother was a slave?  I don't think so, but I don't know.  My grandmother was born in 1904 so I think slavery was over in 1904, but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sure, it was over in 1865, so.
Speaker 2: --exactly.  So I suspect she was sharecropping too and that's kind of where they were, but we never went much further beyond that.
Speaker 1: She's probably the daughter and granddaughter of slaves you think.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, are there any stories about sharecropping in Louisiana?
Speaker 2: Not really.  Not that I heard a lot about.  You know I will tell you that when I was a child, I'm the fifth of six children and vacation was always all eight of us would pile into the car and drive down to Louisiana and visit my grandmother's.  And we'd visit them in northern Louisiana and we'd get back in the car and come back up.  When I was in college [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College] in Baton Rouge, Louisiana, driving from Baton Rouge up to Grambling [Louisiana], northern Louisiana, was truly the first time that I saw cotton on the vine.  And got out of the car and just kind of stared at it and had that you know that moment in history that took me there.  I think I grabbed some of it and brought some home just because of all that it was and what it meant whatever it was that it meant to me in the '70s [1970s], but we never, never talked about it beyond that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So Mangham is northern Louisiana near Grambling, I guess?
Speaker 2: Right.  Near Grambling, near Monroe [Louisiana].  You know, if you get down there, there are so many small towns in Louisiana that I'm still being introduced to.  But that's where they were from.  My father was from Rayville [Louisiana], which is on the other side of Monroe and somehow they kind of came together in there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, are there any stories that your mother told of growing up there, and what it was like down there?
Speaker 2: No.  You know it wasn't--we, we never sat down and had the griot sessions with our parents.  Here in Chicago [Illinois] and certainly by the time that I came of age, we were--they were working hard to kind of get us through.  And you know the notion of what history was or the notion of what was going on was just not one that we ever stopped and, and talked about.  My mother was the youngest of three children.  And I think my aunt, who was the oldest of the three, I think she's the oldest of the three, was probably the one with the most stories, but I you know, we never, there was never a time when we sat down and just talked about what had happened before then.
Story_ID: 238983
Speaker 1: Were there people in your neighborhood in Chicago [Illinois] from down home [Louisiana] that they [Williams' parents, Rufus Williams, Sr. and Dicye Ward Williams] knew?
Speaker 2: There was ultimately when we first--I guess my parents lived a few places before they landed in the place that they are now in Chicago, all on the West Side.  And when my parents finally bought a house, the house that they bought was down the street from a lady who had grown up down the street from my mother in, in Louisiana, which I thought was in and of itself just really interesting that you could be this far away and move down the street from someone who you knew growing up.  And they remained friends of course, to this day.  Both of them are still alive.  But there weren't many other people who we knew, who I knew from down there who were up here.
Speaker 1: So there are no relatives up here which they moved up, huh?
Speaker 2: Not in Chicago.  My uncle moved to Detroit [Michigan], my mother's brother.  My mother's sisters moved to--her step sisters actually moved to Milwaukee [Wisconsin].  So we've got family in Milwaukee, in Detroit and in Chicago.
Speaker 1: So I take it from what you're saying that none of them spoke with reverie about returning to Louisiana or--
Speaker 2: No, and there is some land in the family down there.  There have been conversations, particularly my uncle, had talked about moving back down at some point when he retired.  He moved up but he worked for Chrysler in Detroit.  But you know with all those conversations when the time came after he retired, I guess Detroit was more comfortable to him.  So no one has ever moved back from having moved up here.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did your mother--was your mother married before she moved up to Chicago or did she?
Speaker 2: My mother was not married when she moved up here.  She came up and my father came up after she did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they got married then when they got here in about 1950.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now did she have a chance to finish school down in Mangham [Louisiana]?
Speaker 1: No.  And finishing school probably meant different things then.  She got as far as the tenth grade and then she came here.
Speaker 2: I hear that a lot of the schools, the colored schools, only went to the tenth grade.
Speaker 1: Which could have a, could be a big reason why.  In my history, in my research is kind of giving the same information.  Learning more about how schools first went up to just sixth grade, then eighth grade and then high school and then there was this high schools would develop so there would be this constant opening into going to the state colleges.  But at that time, 1950 when they moved up here, 'cause I say my uncle came up first.  And he lived in Chicago before he went to Detroit to find even better opportunity there.  I think every--they were part of this whole Great Migration during that time of folks who were just coming up and looking for something better.
Story_ID: 238984
Speaker 1: Now, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Sure.  His name is Rufus Williams [Sr.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Spelled just like mine.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: He was born in Rayville, Louisiana on July 23rd, 1928.
Speaker 1: Now do you know anything about his side of the family?  How far back can you trace?
Speaker 2: Not a lot.  My father, my father's mother's name was Lula Carlton [ph.] who had married Bill [ph.] Carlton.  My father's, father's name was Johnson Williams [ph.].  And he died, he died fairly early and I'm not sure how.  This is my mother's natural father died very, very early.  I think she told me that he was shot.  Shot coming out of a church or going into a church or something.  I'm not sure the, the circumstances.  From my father's side it was really my mother [sic. paternal grandmother], mother Lula, we called her who lived in Rayville who we'd go and visit and never heard much about, about his father.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you don't know what--how his father passed?
Speaker 2: I don't, I don't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think he was--as my mother [Dicye Ward Williams] tells me he was born--his mother and father were not married when he was born.  And he wasn't, he wasn't around any other time.  I never got--I never met him.  I never saw him.  I have no idea what he looks like.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  (Coughing) Now did your father have a chance to go to school?
Speaker 2: He did (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Down in Rayville.
Speaker 2: He did, he stopped, he stopped around fourteen years old and whatever that was.  He was an only child.  And he worked.  His working was probably to take care a lot of--taking care of him because my mother had a very abled husband at the time.  But he may have been doing that as well to help take care of my mother--my grandmother or it may just have been the way things were in Louisiana--northern Louisiana at that time, but he, he stopped and he, and he was working at fourteen years old and not going to school any more.
Speaker 1: Was he doing like farm work?
Speaker 2: More agricultural type work until he came up, until he came north.  One, in pursuit of my mother and in pursuit of something better.
Story_ID: 238985
Speaker 1: Now is there a story about how they [Williams' parents, Rufus Williams, Sr. and Dicye Ward Williams] met that they tell?
Speaker 2: They haven't told me that.  I haven't asked them.  I just--as I've been told, he was working in Monroe [Louisiana] and he was hanging around, when he had time, hanging around the high school and came across my mom and charmed her.  And they were together and then they split and after they split my mom came north and he followed her up here.  So I think it was part of these guys with, who were working wherever they were and had a little time to go around the high schools in, in pursuit.  So that's kind of what I gleaned from the pieces of the story that they told me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So they, they came up--your mother came up [to Chicago, Illinois] in 1950 you said?
Speaker 2: She came up around 1949.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know they got married in 1950 so it's somewhere right around in there that they, they both came.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now, when you--what did your father do for a living when he got here to Chicago?
Speaker 2: When he first got here, well, actually my father got one job when he got here.  He worked at a company called Sun Chemical [Chicago, Illinois] and he worked there until he retired.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now is that associated with Sunoco [Inc.; Sun Oil Company, Inc.], is that the Sun Oil Company [Inc.] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  No, that would be Sun Oil Company.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Sun Chemical was more printing ink and dyes and such.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Located right down by Midway Airport [Chicago Midway International Airport, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 238986
Speaker 1: When you think about your parents' [Rufus Williams, Sr. and Dicye Ward Williams] personalities and talents and you know special gifts and dispositions, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I--from a visual standpoint, I take after my mother the most.  My mother is a very friendly sort.  I'd like to think that I'm kind of friendly.  So I think that personality comes from her.  My father was reputed to be good at math and pretty sharp.  And I think that part, I hope I picked up some of that, that gene from him.  So it's kind of a mixture, but I think far more of the visual and the personality comes from my mother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But you said your father worked the same job [Sun Chemical, Chicago, Illinois] the whole time he was here?
Speaker 1: He worked the same job all the time he was here.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 238987
Speaker 1: Now where did your family live?
Speaker 2: We lived on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois].  When I was born, I understand we lived over on Walnut Street, 3510 West Walnut.  We moved soon after that to 1631 South Drake [Avenue], where we lived in a (throat clearing), excuse me, a--it was a flat.  We lived on the second floor of a two flat.  And the landlord lived on the first floor.  Another family lived in the basement.  (Throat clearing) Excuse me, our flat was three, three bedrooms for all eight of us.  And one of the bedrooms was rented out.  So two bedrooms and one bath for all eight of us and then whoever the renter was in the back, Ms. Core [ph.], who lived in the back room.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And in about 1967, we moved from there up to 3431 West Carroll [Avenue] still on the West Side.  And that's the house that my parents [Rufus Williams, Sr. and Dicye Ward Williams] bought.  My dad's first house.  And it is where my mother still lives today.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, now what part of town is that called now?
Speaker 2: That's called West Garfield [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And Carroll is where we lived at first and where we live now, my parents at least, is still in West Garfield.  When they lived at 16th [Street] and Drake, that's North Lawndale [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Story_ID: 238988
Speaker 1: Now do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: The earliest would be living on 16th [Street] and Drake [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois].  And I recall you know being in this big family and kind of watching what the older kids were doing all the time.  I used--I, I recall this in the floor playing with books or reading and being able to write my name fairly early in life.  That's probably the earliest I can think back to when something of consciousness was really, really happening.  I tried to go to school when I was four.  My birthday being later in the year, there was a cut off.  I think it was probably October 1st.  And because I was ready at four years old, I was looking forward to going on to, to kindergarten.  And I have an older brother [Leroy Williams] who I was always--there are two boys in our family.  He's the one up from me.  So it's always real close in trying to emulate whatever I was saying so I was looking forward to going to school when that first chance came.  And I remember going down to [Sol R.] Crown [Elementary School; Crown Elementary Community Academy Fine Arts Center, Chicago, Illinois] that first day.  And I remember them sending me and my mom [Dicye Ward Williams] back home and her telling me I had to wait a year, which seemed like forever.  And I'm sure I cried which felt like forever.  But the next year came and we went on to kindergarten but that's kind of where I was in, in the pecking order just trying to be at the same place that the other five were ahead of me.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I bet, I mean, when you're four years old, a year is a fifth of your life (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I said, "Wait a year, wow."  And I knew I was ready because I don't know, I don't know what you do.  I still try to figure out what it is you're supposed to know when you get to kindergarten.  But I thought at that point being able to do the things I did were--I was ready for kindergarten.  I was excited about going and while I knew there were a lot of kids ultimately when I went who cried and that separation, I was just so ready to go, just so ready to be there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were able to start when you were five and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Story_ID: 238989
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Where we were you know, I remember a few things.  My mother [Dicye Ward Williams], probably even to this day, her best dishes were fried chicken, rice or a pork roast.  And I recall times I don't know why I recall this, but I do.  We didn't grow up in what I thought was poor.  I knew that every Friday--I knew my father [Rufus Williams, Sr.] worked all the time.  He worked long hours it felt like.  And every Friday he went grocery shopping.  And every Friday we'd go downstairs anxious to bring in the groceries.  My brother [Leroy Williams] and I would do things like or at least yeah we would count like a bag of oranges.  We'd count how many oranges were in the bag and we--usually there were about eight.  So, okay there's an orange for everyone.  And so we'd eat ours pretty--he'd eat his first and I'd eat mine before he ate mine because he could punk me.  And then we'd watch and if by Tuesday, somebody hadn't eaten theirs then it was fair game.  So we kind of took and rationed things.  Although I never thought--that was just the life that we had.  I do recall very vividly one Saturday that I was really, really hungry.  And for whatever reason I don't know whether it was my fault or whether there wasn't any food around, but I was waiting all day to eat.  And I, I was a little bit finicky so I didn't eat greens.  I don't know why but I didn't eat greens.  But that Saturday my mother made this big pot of greens.  It was about six o'clock in the evening and from that day I have loved greens 'cause it never tasted as good as they did right then.  And anytime I think about at this point, at this time, what our circumstances were, I reflect back to that day when I was so hungry and greens were all that we had on that day.  So you know when I think about what things were like, that's kind of what things were like in terms of sights, sights and sounds.  I knew that we had some--there was the other family, there were a lot of kids around.
Story_ID: 238990
Speaker 1: And on 16th [Street] and Drake [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois] at that time, there were also a lot of gangs.  There weren't a lot of gangs; there was a gang.  And they were the Vice Lords [Almighty Vice Lord Nation].  And the Vice Lords were really prominent.  Because I had sisters, it wasn't an issue.  But we'd watch.  There was a guy name Ricky [ph.].  We looked up to Ricky.  Ricky was like the coolest, coolest guy.  And Ricky's sisters lived downstairs and we played with all the time.  It seemed that when Ricky turned thirteen, which seemed like really, really old to me then, but when Ricky turned thirteen and then things changed.  And were all these Vice Lords were all up and down the street.  And we'd see them.  They never bothered us so it was just the Vice--those guys were Vice Lords and it didn't mean anything.  But I remember one day Ricky coming home and Ricky had been beaten up.  And Ricky didn't have any shoes on.  What happened to Ricky?  The Vice Lords got him in the alley, tried to make him join.  They took his shoes.  Making him walk through some glass and sent him home.  The next day Ricky left.  And Ricky moved down south.  And I have no idea what happened to Ricky from that, from that moment.  But that's kind of the way those things were.  We were always required to be in the house before the street lights came on.  And sometimes we could go out but we were told not to go off the porch.  And anytime I was seen sitting with the big boys, that was a problem.  I didn't know why that was a problem for me. I'm trying to get full of whatever knowledge I can get so I'm just sitting, sitting with them.  They seemed like nice guys.  But I remember once getting, getting the whooping of my life for sitting on the porch with those guys and I never did it again.  My mother [Dicye Ward Williams] was so upset that I was sitting there and I couldn't understand the logic.  But I understood that after that day I was not to be hanging out with them anymore.  And I never did.  We moved before my brother [Leroy Williams] came of age that the same--a similar situation would happen with Ricky probably right before that.  And again, you know I had sisters and my sisters they weren't I don't think there were girl gangs back then so they were all okay.  And you know they went to Farragut High School [Farragut Career Academy, Chicago, Illinois].  I'm sure if the Vice Lords went to school, that's where they were.  'Cause it's--there were all neighborhood schools then.  But we never had any, any direct issues.  And so when we moved everything was, everything was good.  But that's kind of how, how things were at that time.  We used to--you know I remember getting a, getting a bike and I remember the first time I got to ride my bike in the street and kind of riding around, but it was always that by the time the street lights--we were never out after the street lights came one 'cause that was, there was hell to pay.  So we love when day light saving time came 'cause it gave us another hour.  Every now and then recently I've had occasion to be back over in the neighborhood and I drive up to 1631 South Drake and just stand there and just kind of stare at it.  I've never been back in there.  But just stare at it and look and kind of get some sense of dimension 'cause everything seemed so big when you're small.  And we had a--the way the houses are, the houses are close together.  This is the way that Chicago [Illinois] is.  And there was gangway that we used to spend a lot of time in the gangway.  And we'd scale the wall and we'd try to scale up like Spiderman.  Although Spiderman, we didn't know Spiderman.  We tried to just scale as high as you could go and I know we got frighteningly high at some point.  No one ever fell, no one ever got hurt, but it, it was apparently you know I wanna go look in the gangway again just to see how narrow or how big it was.  But it's hands on and we'd just go up and it was just we just had a blast doing that.  It was a lot of the way in which we spent, spent our summers.  You know just spent our time that we had in that gangway probably six, eight, ten of us scaling walls you know doing whatever it was, whatever else we did.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, did you, did the Vice Lords have identifier or did they wear certain colors or something you know or how--?
Speaker 1: Not that I recall.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I just knew that--and there weren't--you know gangs then I learned more about them later on.  I knew that they were--we were told that some of them were Vice Lords.  I think I would overhear my sisters telling stories about somebody, some incident happening because they would be on their way to school.  And then I think--I recall just one incident they ever talked about where it was, it came out prominent that this happened because somebody was a Vice Lord.  But I think the gangs that I knew about then were the Vice Lords and the Latin Kings [The Almighty Latin King Nation].  'Cause on the way to Farragut, those were the two schools that, that were there.  And sometimes we'd go to the movies which was down in Marshall Square [Chicago, Illinois] and we'd have to walk into Latin King territory to do that.  Never had any issues or incidents.  It was just some knowledge that we had about what was going on--
Story_ID: 238991
Speaker 1: --When you lived over in Lawndale [Chicago, Illinois], did you, did you frequent the Better Boys Foundation [(BBF) Chicago, Illinois]?  Was that place?
Speaker 2: Well it's interesting.  No, I didn't.  I frequented the BBR, the Better Boys Republic [sic. Boys Brotherhood Republic, Chicago, Illinois].  The Better Boys Republic was right on 15th [Street] and Hamlin [Avenue].  And they had more children's programs at that time.  I remember going there and playing Bitty Basketball.  We'd go there for summer camp.  We'd go there for--we go--I was a Cub Scout but we went to a different place for Cub Scouts.  But that was--the BBR was where we hung out.  As I got older and learned more about the--the Better Boys Foundation was kind of I knew it was, it was a little bit further away from my house.  And my history of the Better Boys Foundation tells me that it was more of an older guys club at that time.  It was a boxing club. And I was too young to be boxing.  So we didn't, didn't go there.  And I didn't get much time in the Better Boys Foundation until later on when I got out of, out of high school [Orr Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois].
Story_ID: 238992
Speaker 1: All right now, well tell us about school now.  What was your first high school, I mean your, your first grade school?
Speaker 2: My first grade school was [Sol R.] Crown [Elementary School; Crown Elementary Community Academy Fine Arts Center, Chicago, Illinois].  Crown was at 18th [sic. 21st Street] and St. Louis [Avenue].  I went there--I went there as a four year old and got sent home.  Went back as a five year old and started there I think when spring came.  I remember a long march from Crown to [Anton] Dvorak [Elementary School; Dvorak School of Excellence, Chicago, Illinois], Anton Dvorak at 16th [Street] and Central Park [Avenue].  And I was in Dvorak in kindergarten.  So I couldn't have been at Crown more than it wasn't even a year that Dvorak opened.
Speaker 1: Okay, Dvorak, okay.  And okay--
Speaker 2: And I was at Dvorak from then kindergarten until fifth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was a brand new school.  I've--interestingly enough most of the schools that I went to in Chicago Public Schools [CPS] were brand new buildings or relatively new buildings.  But Dvorak, [HistoryMaker] Barbara [A.] Sizemore was the principal at Dvorak.  She is a legend in, in education.  And I recall very well her calling all the parents in and telling them, "We are trying to teach these children to read.  I know that many of you have to move, but we need you to not move at least until the summer time.  Because if you continue to do that, we can't get the work done that we need to get done."  She was a very tough lady.  But she--and I think because of that she got her point across very, very well.  She was--we--I think we may have had another principal before I left.  I remember someone named Ms. Brown Miller [ph.].  But I think that may have been at Dvorak.  But of all the places I've been, Dr. Sizemore made the most memorable impression on where we were and what we did.  Dvorak was interesting as well.  And I don't know why things were.  I have to do some research on Chicago Public Schools.  But by kindergarten, first grade, I remember being, I remember being there in room, I think it was room 112 when I learned about [President] John [Fitzgerald] Kennedy being killed.  When I got to second grade, there were a lot of grades that were combined.  So my second grade class was second and third grade.  In fourth grade, it was fourth, fifth and sixth all in the same classroom.  And I understand there was a gifted track that we were on.  And that's why it's been explained to me that these grades were combined.  So, when I went to second grade, I was still a bit troubled that I was one of the older kids in the class because that year they sent me back home and my birthday being later.  I don't know whether it was true or not.  But when I was in second grade, I'll admit this now on camera,  I've got this little scar on the back of my head because they used to say I was sitting right in front the teacher's desk and the teacher would leave and we'd start pulling out chairs from under.  You know we'd start playing.  And when she came back in we were all quiet.  And so at this point, I think somebody got up and we were sliding chairs out and you fall on the floor and everybody laugh.  And so I was pull--I pulled somebody's chairs out, somebody's chair out, they fell on the floor, everybody laughed.  I went back to my chair.  Somebody snatched it out and I hit the floor.  When I fell back, I hit the teacher--I hit the desk.  And right after that the teacher came back in.  No big deal.  I'm just--I'm embarrassed.  But we get back up and then somebody said, "[HistoryMaker] Rufus [Williams], your head is bleeding."  And I reached back and my hand was full of blood.  Of course I screamed.  They rushed me down to the principal's office.  They called my mother [Diyce Ward Williams].  I tell them you know--"Well how did this happen?"  "I slipped out of my chair and hit the desk."  I went home that day, came back the next day and they moved my chair.  They moved me to a different spot.  The way the classes were set up, the second graders were here, and the third graders were in the other part of the room.  So they moved me back.  The third graders said let him come sit back here.  So I sat with the third grade guys.  And they used to do the third grade work and then they do the second grade work right after that.  So because I was sitting with them, I'd do the third grade work.  And then I'd do the second grade work.  So I covered both grades that year.  And the next year I moved up to fourth grade.  And I been okay since then 'cause it felt like I was back on track, even though they send me back home when I, when I was four.  We stayed at Dvorak until fifth grade.  And we're kind of looking, for me, looking--I think Hess [Upper Grade Center, Chicago, Illinois] would have been the school that I was going to next.  It's kind of the track that everybody was going.  But at that point rather than moving and going to Hess, I was staying there for sixth--Hess was seventh and eighth grade.  But rather than that, we moved to this new neighborhood and went to, I went to Morton Upper Grade Center [Morton School of Excellence, Chicago, Illinois] for sixth, seventh and eighth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Morton Upper Grade Center, where is that?
Speaker 1: Morton is on Franklin [Boulevard] and Troy [Street].
Story_ID: 238993
Speaker 1: Now when you were in grade school [Anton Dvorak Elementary School; Dvorak School of Excellence, Chicago, Illinois], were there any special teachers that took an interest in you or, or that you admired (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, it felt like they all did actually.  I had, I had, I had the opportunity to have lunch with Dr. [HistoryMaker Barbara A.] Sizemore back when I, once when I became an adult.  And she was asking me about my kindergarten teacher and my first grade teacher, who I really don't remember.  But I did in second grade.  I think, I think it was in second grade, her name was Ms. Lennon [ph.].  And Ms. Lennon lived not far from where we lived.  But she was just a wonderful lady who I thought you know just, she was just a, just a really nice person.  And I remember her a lot because she had a son name Colson [ph.] who was also in our class.  Again I have no idea what happened to all my old friends.  But I remember Ms. Lennon.  When I went to fourth grade, the teacher's name was Ms. Sayad, S-A-Y-A-D.  And I remember her because I remember she did take a special interest.  I recall in fourth grade, my brother [Leroy Williams] and I were in the same class.  My brother, my sister had been in the same class.  All of us are kind of two or three years apart.  And I recall Ms. Sayad inviting my brother and I over to her house one, one Saturday, I think.  And don't really know why but I just thought it was just interesting.  I remember going there.  I remember meeting her husband.  I remember having a root beer float.  It was the first time I've ever had one.  And that seemed to be special.  I (throat clearing), excuse me, it felt to me like I struggled through fourth grade.  Thought maybe that double wasn't, wasn't quite earned.  The pace just seemed a lot faster.  When I got to fourth grade, it got--I caught up in fifth and things kind of went along.  Like I thought they would before but you know those two in grade school, I thought really did stand out.
Story_ID: 238994
Speaker 1: Morton [Upper Grade Center; Morton School of Excellence, Chicago, Illinois] was like a middle school like?
Speaker 2: Morton was an upper grade center and Hess [Upper Grade Center, Chicago, Illinois] was an upper grade center.  The push now and Chicago Public Schools [CPS] are not--we don't have a lot of middle schools.  But they were prominent then.  Hess was known--Hess--when my sisters were there, Al Raby [Albert Raby] was, was at Hess.  And Al Raby was part of the contingent if you recall that brought [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] to Chicago [Illinois], or dealt and helped work with him.  And you know one of the interesting things for me even back when we were still on 16th Street and going to BBR [Boys Brotherhood Republic, Chicago, Illinois], BBR was at 16th [sic. 15th Street] and Hamlin [Avenue], I mentioned.  Martin Luther King at the time that he lived in Chicago, lived at 16th and Hamlin.  And one day when we were coming from BBR, we were coming down the street and suddenly Martin Luther King and someone else came out of the building that he lived in.  And we had seen him on TV and we all as we do, we ran and we surrounded him.  And I just remember having the opportunity to just reach up and touch him.  And I went home and said, "Wow we saw Martin Luther King today."  It wasn't long after that and I don't--'cause I was young, I don't recall the separation in years, but he was such a, such a big figure that you know watching all the things that happened, all the things that were going on.  I remember, I remember the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party] when I lived on 16th Street.  And I remember how cool I thought they were because of the tam.  I thought that black tam was just, that was just, they were just cool.
Speaker 1: I see.  Fred Hampton and Mark Clark--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --and some of the others?
Speaker 2: Right.  And so we'd watch them because they were always around.  I mean there were Black Panthers somewhere.  So we had the Vice Lords [Almighty Vice Lord Nation] that weren't that distinguished.  But the Black Panthers distinguished themselves because of the, the tams and the, the attire, and just the glasses and the militance, and--
Speaker 1: Now had they emerged in--now Dr. King was in, on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] in 1966?
Speaker 2: Sixty-six [1966], right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  He was assassinated in '68 [1968], so.
Speaker 2: Right and we moved from over there in '67 [1967].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So the Panthers were emerging.  We were seeing them around then, seeing them at the corners selling the Panther newspaper [The Black Panther Community News Service; The Black Panther Intercommunal News Service].
Story_ID: 238995
Speaker 1: And they would just--there was this I don't know what it was, but it was just this, just this--the '60s [1960s] were an, were an amazing time.  And while I was still kind of young, I could still appreciate all that was going on and not knowing what all the other struggles were you know.  I think back now, will remember for instance when we used to take our trips down to visit my [maternal] grandparents [Virgin Estis and Leroy Ward].  When we were in Rayville [Louisiana], we'd go to the movies.  I remember going to the movies.  And I remember going around I was a little guy, and I remember going around the side and going up to the balcony.  And any time we went to the movies, we always went around the side and up to the balcony.  It never occurred to me that I was in the balcony because we couldn't go anyplace else until, until now as I'm under--later as I understood more of our history it's kind of a wild moment in you know because of being born in '56 [1956] and coming of age in the '60s [1960s], and when all the change was happening.  I didn't see all the--I mean, I didn't see the white and colored signs.  I didn't see those things.  But I think we were--my, my time was like right behind that.  So we did start to see integration.  I remember being at [Anton] Dvorak [Elementary School; Dvorak School of Excellence, Chicago, Illinois] and taking a gifted student's test, me and one white kid sitting there, and that was just natural to me.  I didn't--it didn't occur to me after that you know.  I went through the rest of school.  There were--when I look back at pictures that I've seen maybe one from elementary school, there were--I saw smatterings of white children but only early and then they were gone.  So I think that kid I took the test with maybe his family moved right after that because the, the neighborhoods were changing.  Lawndale [Chicago, Illinois] was primarily Jewish so maybe he was Jewish.  But there weren't many after that and he may--that's the only time I really remember there being someone.  When we moved further--we moved to our new place, we bought it from a white lady.  And at that time, there was still a few on the block.  But they did start to, start to go.  And so when I went to Morton Upper Grade Center [Morton School of Excellence, Chicago, Illinois], I didn't--I don't recall there being white children there.  But it's just the way it was.
Story_ID: 238996
Speaker 1: When I went to Lane Tech [Albert Grannis Lane Technical High School; Lane Technical College Prep High School, Chicago, Illinois] for my freshmen year, there were--that was really the time when I really felt like I was--this is the first time I'm really going to school with white kids.  And that was 1970.  And I stayed there just for that year.  And I transferred from there--at that point I transferred to Orr [Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois].  And when I got to Orr, Orr was more white.  I had heard about, before I went there, I had heard about the fights that were happening between black kids and white kids at, at Orr.  But it happened before I got there.  So when I got there, it was white kids, black kids and Puerto Ricans.  And we didn't have any racial fights.  When I got to Lane Tech, when I got to Lane Tech, there were, there must have been a gang called the [Chicago] Gaylords then because I'd see the scribblings around the walls.  And my brother [Leroy Williams] used to tell me when he first--my brother was at Lane Tech too.  He graduated from there.  So he'd tell me the year he was there about some fights before I got there, fights that were taking place.  But when I got there, there were no fights that happened.  I was always ready for it.  But I was just a little bit younger before those things came.  My understanding, my push, my--I, I love the '60s [1960s].  I wish we could bring back a lot of the things that happened then because I think the movement and what people--what people were about and what people stood for and all those things are pretty well ingrained in me and it's some of the rationale of not making excuses, not having a sense of victimization, but self-empowerment, that kind of I think helps to move us forward.  And certainly with everyone who's been successful that I've met, you don't become a success by having a view of victimization, you become that by really self-empowerment, and the '60s [1960s], were a lot of that for me.  And I think through the music and watching the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party] and listening to the speeches of Malcom X and listening to [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], were the things that were really memorable to me from back then.
Story_ID: 238997
Speaker 1: Now, you were twelve years old when [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was assassinated in Memphis [Tennessee] and--
Speaker 2: Actually eleven.
Speaker 1: Okay, eleven.  And the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] had one of the worst riots in the country or rebellions as some people say.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But what, but what's your memory of what happened?
Speaker 2: Well I tell you too, there must have been something that happened about 1965 when--I remember going to summer camp at the BBR [Boys Brotherhood Republic, Chicago, Illinois].  And that one must have been the first riot because there were [Illinois Army] National Guards that were stationed on 16th Street.  And there was looting and burning that had taken place.  And usually it happened at night and we kind of went to where we were going and looking at these guys, they were you know had the streets under control.  It was an interesting time.  We had moved, we had moved up to Carroll Street [sic. Carroll Avenue] when Martin Luther King was killed.  And there was a little store around the corner that we used to all go to.  We'd play in the playground.  There was a vacant lot.  And then there was a store, that was the only thing on this vacant lot on St. Louis [Avenue].  And I remember looking out the back and seeing--you would just look out and see the flames.  And there were flames I think the store lasted a day.  But we'd look over and we could see Madison Street from our, from our backyard.  And you could just see all the flames and everything in the air.  And we just tried to figure out what's burning.  What's going on?  And the next day, we, me and my brother [Leroy Williams], and our friends, took a walk around the neighborhood and looked at all the devastation that was there.  It was just--and we'd see all the places, the shops where people had put up signs saying soul brother.  Soul brother whether they were or not I mean some were, and some clearly weren't.  But that was really saving people.  There was a store at the corner, Pops Store [ph.], which it came back later on in my, in my history.  But Pops [ph.] was this old Jewish guy who sold [Converse] All Stars.  All Stars back in the day were the shoe. It wasn't Nike, it wasn't Puma, it was All Stars.  And we used to down on Maxwell--when you got to the point that you could, you'd go down on Maxwell Street and get you a pair of All Stars.  And it was $8.16 if you could really negotiate well to get them.  And Pops sold All Stars at the corner.  And Pop's All Stars were probably a dollar more.  And that dollar meant a lot when you saved up for a long time to get $8.16.  I think I got my first pair of All Stars when I was in eighth grade [at Morton Upper Grade Center; Morton School of Excellence, Chicago, Illinois].  And I remember going down to the playground and everybody stepping on them.  But Pops' store right there at the corner actually survived.  And I--you know, Pop was he was a mean ornery son of a gun.  But for whatever the reasons were, everybody respected Pops enough to let his store be.  And Pops store comes back up because I did eventually get involved with the Better Boys Foundation [(BBF), Chicago, Illinois], got involved they helped, help me get through college [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  And one of the main benefactors of the Better Boys Foundation, Better Boys Foundation was started by a guy named Joe Kellman [Joseph Kellman].  We now have a school named after him [Joseph Kellman Corporate Community Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] over on Sacramento [Boulevard].  But Joe Kellman's good friend in the Better Boys Foundation was a guy named Marvin Zimmerman.  And as I got involved--Marvin was just a tough old ornery guy.  Still is to this day.  But as I got to know Marvin and told him where I was--where I lived, Marvin told me that Pops, whose store was on the corner, was actually his father.  And so it was just--it was interesting how that happened.  But when Pop's store survived, but in many of the other places that we went, it was all burned down.  We used to shop on Madison Street, Madison Street from, Madison Street from about where the park [Garfield Park, Chicago, Illinois] starts at, at Homan [Avenue].  So from Homan to Kedzie [Avenue] was all shopping district.  And there was a Community Discount Store that was there.  And we used to go and get a lot of things from Community Discount.  There was also a Robert Hall [Clothes, Inc.] that was a little bit farther west on Washington [Street] and Pulaski [Road].  And there was a Goldblatt's on Madison and Pulaski, 'cause the big shopping center was on Madison and Pulaski.  Robert Hall is where we used to go and get all of our Easter clothes and our Christmas, and our back to school clothes.  But whenever we were shopping that was where we went.  And Community Discount you know we at Easter time, I remember I guess shirts must not have had buttons back then.  They all had cufflinks.  And we'd go to Community Discount and get our cufflinks and our shirts and our ties and our hats.  But we'd go to Robert Hall and get our suits.  And I recall our church was around the corner from Community Discount right on Madison--on Homan and Lake [Street].  But and watching how Madison Street was being burned down, the question I'd never gone down--we hadn't gone downtown to shop.  We went in the neighborhood.  But to watch all of that go away in 1968 was pretty, pretty amazing.  We did just see flames, just flames everywhere.  And now even driving down Madison, if you drive from downtown out to Pulaski, there is still remnants of the devastation that took place there.  I mean it's still the street is--it will, it will, it will someday revive itself and you see pockets of it coming back.  But that's really what we saw in the aftermath of Dr. King's death.
Story_ID: 238998
Speaker 1: Now, you were talking--when you were talking about clothes, my mind went back to those days did you all have a particular style of dress in those days?  I know you did.  But can you describe what people dressed like?
Speaker 2: Well, I recall Gouster and Ivy League and I recall trying to be, trying to decide which one that was.  Which is kind of interesting as we watch this hip-hop phenomenon and big clothes and then we watch Kanye West who brings back Ivy League so the whole thing still, still evolves.  But that's the first style that I recall.  I recall, recall Conks, you know the processes that guys would, would get if they were allowed to.  'Cause I recall being told I would never be allowed to get one of those.  And I wore a lot of I think I just wore--I remember Hush Puppies because I thought they made you--I thought they were the lightest shoes I ever had.  We'd only get, we'd only clothes and shoes once or twice a year.  When school started and we'd get something at Easter.  So whatever you got, you really took care of, it really had to get you through.  And you know I do recall wearing shoes when the front flap would kind flop a little bit and trying not to let anybody see it or you find tape or you find ways to, to put it together.  It wasn't a sense that you could just go get something new because of what that was.  When we got to--in our--there was, it was--we went to church every Sunday.  And so going to church meant you had a suit that you wore to church every Sunday.  And that's what we got usually at Easter.  And that Easter suit kind of got you through.  Everybody would want to wear their East--I wanna--soon after Easter, or soon after Christmas or right after the first day of school, people would wear their new clothes to school.  And you got teased if you wore new clothes to school.  So even with my son [Bradford Williams], when we'd get him new things, I tell him just don't wear it the first day.  Wear it--you know we kind of figure it out and school started back then on Wednesday.  And you were okay if you wore your new clothes the next week.  But just don't wear them on the first day of school, whatever they were.  And so that's kind of the routine that, that we got into.
Speaker 1: Was there a reason for that?
Speaker 2: Just trying not to get teased.  You know and whatever you could do not to get teased was what you did. And if you wore new clothes, you got--I don't know whether it was because everybody else didn't have new clothes or whether that was just a separating point that, that was.  But I remember very vividly that you didn't wear your new clothes right after the first day of school.  And there was--I always wanted to wear my new suit to school.  I don't know why.  But I always did.  But I wouldn't wear it right after Easter.  I would look for the next chance that I got to wear my new suit to school so it wouldn't be seen as, as Easter clothes.  But usually that day after Easter, everybody came to school dressed up.
Story_ID: 238999
Speaker 1: What church did you attend?
Speaker 2: We went to Garfield.  Garfield Park Missionary Baptist Church [Chicago, Illinois] right at Homan [Avenue] and Lake [Street].  And Garfield Park, eventually there were some of the ministers that switched from there and went to Christian Love [Missionary Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois].  And some of us went to--some of my family went to Christian Love some stayed at Garfield.  Garfield moved from that spot to Central Park [Avenue] and Ferdinand [Street] and then moved from Central Park and Ferdinand to, now it's the Original Greater Garfield Missionary Baptist Church which is on Division [Street] and Hamlin [Avenue].  And my dad [Rufus Williams, Sr.] was a member there, deacon still until the day he died.  And that's where my mom [Dicye Ward Williams] attends now.  It was always a little store front church.  To this day, it's a little store front church.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that was a big--were you--did, did you spend a lot of time there, when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: We had to go every Sunday.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was not--we didn't look forward to it necessarily.  I thought it was church service was just too long.  And the ministers talked for much, much too long.  And it seemed, I recall getting in trouble because the minister came over for dinner after church and I was concerned that he was eating up all the chicken.  And in my youth I blurted out, "Mama, he's gonna eat up all the chicken."  And I had issues as a result of that but I just--it went, it went too long.  And my mother was lenient with us.  So we'd go to Sunday school and then we'd stay in church but until about the time when the sermon began.  At about that time we could get it--we were excused so we could go out and go to the park across the street or go to the drug store at the corner and get a little something.  But we didn't--and then you often once a month you know there were programs.  So there was the Easter program, the Christmas program that we all had our verses we had to go memorize and say and recite.  So we were pretty much there.  When I was in eighth grade, because of varying things--I mean you go to Sunday school you do what you're supposed to do.  You understand the lessons that you're supposed to learn.  And then they call on us to recite things at times in church.  And there became this notion that they would make me--that I was gonna be a preacher and I was gonna be a deacon young.  I didn't wanna do, that's not--I didn't see that.  That wasn't--I wasn't getting cool points for that.  And so I started to pull back because I didn't want them to see--you know and I wasn't ever gonna act dumb but I just didn't want to be a preacher.  That's not what I wanted to do.  And so as the opportunities came for us to make more decisions on our own, I started to pull further, further back.  I had some concerns about the church.  My oldest sister [Evelyn Williams], my oldest sister died 1977.  She committed suicide.  And I recall the, the issues that she was having coming up to that moment.  And some of those issues related to a boyfriend she had in church.  And as I can best understand it, she confided in the minister and her confiding became public at church.  And soon after that, she took her life.  And it gave me a problem with, with church and all these other things.  1977 I was in college [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  But throughout high school [Orr Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], the requirement to go to church, I mean we were rebellious in high--you know we were rebellious by then.  So I had you know my sisters had all grown--gone off to college, me and my brother [Leroy Williams] and we were pushing the ends of the envelope.  So if we weren't do--if we didn't have to go to church, we didn't go.  So new rules were imposed and my father's rule was if we go to a party on Saturday, we go to church on Sunday.  So we kind of managed around that until we could get to a point where we didn't have to go all the time.  And so by the time I got to, to 1977, and this happened, I don't know whether it just gave me more reason not to go, but it certainly gave me pause.  And that pause continues.  And I don't see everything quite as clear.  Does it shake my faith?  Do I think there is a supreme being?  Do I think you know--those things I--you know I believe what I believe.  I don't question what other people believe.  But the impact that--the devastation of my sister's death did cause some different issues with church and me.
Story_ID: 239000
Speaker 1: We were speaking before the break of sort of the betrayal by the minister of your sister's [Evelyn Williams] story which led, you think it led, to her suicide--
Speaker 2: It was--and it's interesting because she was--her boyfriend--she was, she was very involved in the church [Garfield Park Missionary Baptist Church; Original Greater Garfield Missionary Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois].  And her boyfriend was very involved in the church.  And they had some issues which she confided and then it just--it came out in the church.  And it really you know I had gone by visit her.  She lived out on Austin [Boulevard] and Harrison [Street].  And I just stopped by to visit she and her son.  And it was a bit after that my mother [Dicye Ward Williams] had gone over to see them and she can--she said she was there and my sister was there and my nephew was there.  And then my sister disappeared.  And she said she had gone to the bathroom, the water was running.  The back door was open and she was just gone.  And she had been crying a lot.  And that was the last time that anybody knew that she had been seen alive.  So we looked for her for a couple of days.  And we found her car.  They found--they located her car down by Fairbanks [Court] and Ohio [Street].  And so they started looking around there and her body was found in the Chicago River.  And it was difficult for a while.  It's been '77 [1977] so it's been a few years.  But it was hard when you get around Chicago [Illinois] around Michigan [Avenue] and the Chicago River to think of that being the death place of my sister, it was just hard.  I remember--I recall the first time I drove my mother through there.  Had--wasn't thinking about it at the time.  I was going on with life.  And my mother just totally blew a gasket.  Just, just was really, really upset.  She's beyond it now.  But it's just, it was hard.  And that made you know '77 [1977] was just kind of that up and down period, but losing her in that way was just hard for everyone.
Story_ID: 239001
Speaker 1: When you were in high school, did you have a favorite subject?
Speaker 2: Math--you know I went to Lane Tech [Albert Grannis Lane Technical High School; Lane Technical College Prep High School, Chicago, Illinois] my freshman year.  And I was a good student.  I wasn't--other than that hiccup in fourth grade, I was pretty much an E student, which is what we got back then, Es, Fs, Gs and U's.  I got to Lane Tech, it was--you had to test well enough to get in.  And at that time, the way schools were, if you lived north of Roosevelt Road, and you were smart, you went to Lane Tech.  If you lived south of Roosevelt Road, and you were smart, you went to [Robert] Lindblom [High School; Robert Lindblom Math and Science Academy, Chicago, Illinois].  And so we had moved, 16th Street, we were north of Roosevelt Road.  I tested well enough.  I recall the counselor telling my mother [Dicye Ward Williams], "Very few people from here get the opportunity to go to this school.  And Rufus has the opportunity.  And so that's what we're recommending."  My mother said okay.  I was unhappy.  And I thought high school would be the finally the point where I could go someplace and not be somebody's little brother.  And my brother [Leroy Williams] was at Lane Tech and so I didn't want to be anybody's little brother.  And so there we went.  And Lane Tech for us, for me, it was a long bus ride.  It was two long bus rides.  We'd ride up Homan Avenue up to Addison [Street] and Gordon Tech [Gordon Technical High School; DePaul College Prep, Chicago, Illinois] was there too.  And so Gordon Tech was all boys.  Lane Tech was all boys.  And you got this long you know--no matter what time you got there, the buses, litany of them, were all full coming down Addison.  And so I'd get on the bus whenever I could.  And inevitably--Lane Tech is a really big school.  And as you might expect, my locker and my first period class was far from one another as they could be.  And you couldn't wear your coat to class.  They had very strict--couldn't wear your coat to class.  You had to go to your locker before you got to class.  And they always play the National Anthem ['The Star-Spangled Banner'] and the fight song every morning.  And the hall monitors were football players.  And Lane Tech was the number one school in everything except basketball.  So the football players were big and they were the hall monitors and I think every morning I slid along the side of, of the lockers from my locker to my electrical engineering class so I could get there in time.  And I always go in and say I was right outside when the National Anthem began.  But I was, I turned from a really good student into what I felt like was an okay student.  And the grades I got were primarily Cs.  I got a B in algebra.  Everything else was a C.  I think I got a B or an A in PE [Physical Education], which you really got if you came and your clothes were starched.  So I figured that part out and got a, got a good grade in PE and a good grade in algebra.  Math continued to be my best subject as I went through.  It could have been because I heard my father [Rufus Williams, Sr.] was good in math so I figured I could just--I could get that one.
Story_ID: 239002
Speaker 1: But also at Lane Tech [Albert Grannis Lane Technical High School; Lane Technical College Prep High School, Chicago, Illinois], I was a student.  I wasn't involved in any extracurricular activities.  I tried out for the basketball team, thought I was good enough to make it but somehow I didn't.  And school was just school.  So it was a long bus ride.  I hated going.  It was all boys.  At Lane Tech at the time, it was 1970 so afros were starting to come in and I was growing one.  They had--you had to take swimming once a week.  And of course you put your afro in the swimming pool, it shrinks.  And coming home on the bus always had some drama because Von Steuben [Metropolitan High School; Friedrich W. Von Steuben Metropolitan Science Center, Chicago, Illinois], the students from Von Steuben were also on the bus.  That was the only place we saw girls.  And of course, I'm a little guy.  Get on, they tease me or you know they weren't really teasing me they were being friendly but I was just shy and reserved.  But I did wanna look good when I got on.  So that was the only real highlight for me of going to Lane Tech and my grades were kind of just okay.  But one, because it was all boys, two, because of the, the difficulty of the bus ride, three, because I didn't wanna follow my brother [Leroy Williams] anymore, four, because in my mind, I was always gonna play some sport in high school.  And although I wasn't good in elementary school, I was getting better.  And I thought by then I'd gotten good enough to make a team.  I didn't wanna go to Lane Tech any more.  And I was bound and determined not to go to Lane Tech any more.   I was gonna transfer.  I had--I used to spend the summers any place other than Chicago [Illinois].  So I would go and spend the summers in Louisiana or I'd spend the summers in Detroit [Michigan] with my uncle.  I decided I was gonna move to Detroit and go to Henry Ford High School [Detroit, Michigan], which I had never seen, don't know anything about.  But the guys who I was playing basketball with when I was there for the summer, that's where they went.  So that's where I was going.  Anything to get me out of Lane Tech all boys.  At Lane Tech you had to swim nude as well.  So that was I thought the most humiliating thing.  And their explanation didn't make any sense to me.  But you know I figured that--I just figured well I thought maybe there were some people with some strange issues but it went on for years and years the nude swimming.  And all that--there was, there wasn't much that I liked about being in school there.  So I was determined to, to transfer.  And ultimately the next year girls were admitted into Lane Tech.  So I thought, okay maybe things were looking up.  But the girls were smart obviously because they were there.  And the boys were rabid.  So they were all over them.  And I didn't feel like that much competition particularly when I was shy and reserved anyway.  So ultimately, I was able to--my parents [Rufus Williams, Sr. and Dicye Ward Williams] allowed me to transfer to Orr [Academy] High School [Chicago, Illinois] where I was back with people that I'd gone to elementary school [Anton Dvorak Elementary School; Dvorak School of Excellence, Chicago, Illinois] with.
Story_ID: 239003
Speaker 1: --And for me at that point, you know, I thought--I knew I was going to college.  That had never in my mind, I--my dream, my plan was I was playing sports in high school.  I was gonna be--run something in high school.  And I was going away to college.  And at the time I was going to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California].  That was my--Rufus' [HistoryMaker Rufus Williams] plan.  So I thought going to Lane Tech [Albert Grannis Lane Technical High School; Lane Technical College Prep High School, Chicago, Illinois] that first year, the classes I was taking had put me on a college preparatory run then I would follow that through and it would get me in.  So although they were not as--I now know that clearly were not as challenging as it would have been at Lane Tech.  I thought the classes that I was taking were gonna make the difference for me.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So how did you do [at Orr Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 1: Not too bad.  I got--my grades went up.  My grades went up.  I did continue to take this college curriculum courses because it's always obvious because there are fewer and fewer people in the classes that you're taking as you go further on.  My experience at Orr was great. I got there and I did--
Story_ID: 239004
Speaker 1: When I was in eighth grade [at Morton Upper Grade Center, Chicago, Illinois] I wanted to be on the basketball team.  I tried out for the basketball team.  I didn't make the basketball team.  And I didn't make it probably because I wasn't very good.  So I rode the bench for the whole year and I, I was the guy who got in the game with forty seconds left.  And you'd go in and they want you to play as hard as you can with forty seconds left.  And you know at some point later on, the coach talked to me about being the statistician.  Because I was you know pretty good in, in my books.  And I didn't want to be the manager or statistician, I wanted to be the guy out there where everybody was cheering for.  So I decided that year I was never gonna ride the bench any more.  Also in eighth grade I thought I was being one of the smarter kids there, I thought I'd run for student council president.  And I did.  And I ran against Bobo Fowler [ph.].  And I remember you know we used to go over to Garfield Park [Chicago, Illinois] all the time.  That's where we spent all of our free time at the golden dome [Garfield Park Fieldhouse, Chicago, Illinois].  And Bobo was in drama.  And I--we were there trying to play basketball and doing whatever else we were doing.  And so it came time for the elections, I figure I was pretty--people, everybody knows me, and I'm smart so I'll run for student council president.  And we went in and it was the day to give our speeches.  And I sat there while we were waiting and I wrote down a few notes to give my speech and I got up and who know--I don't know what I said.  But Bobo got up after I did and Bobo promised everything.  I mean Bobo had us taking this class trip in eighth grade was always to Springfield [Illinois] because you studied the Illinois Constitution.  I recall Bobo distinctly saying if we go to Springfield, that's not enough.  We're gonna go to [Washington] D.C., we're gonna go to Paris [France].  And people were up in their seats and they were clapping and everybody was loving Bobo and I was sitting there saying, wow, Bobo is you know, Bobo is promising everything--he can't do all that.  But the election came, Bobo won, I lost.  And I decided then, I recalled two lessons from eighth grade.  One was I'm not ever riding anybody's bench anymore.  I will work as hard as I have to so I won't have to be on the bench or else I won't do it.  And I will never go into another speech unprepared.
Story_ID: 239005
Speaker 1: I went on and when I got to high school, when I got to--I went to Lane Tech [Albert Grannis Lane Technical High School; Lane Technical College Prep High School, Chicago, Illinois], I didn't make the team.  I did--we still played basketball all the time and there was the St. Louis playground [St. Louis Playlot Park, Chicago, Illinois] is kind of where everybody played in my neighborhood.  And it's--if you talk to some other guys, anybody who was playing basketball around that time had to come through St. Louis playground.  For the, for the younger guys, we had a basket--the basketball stayed at my house.  I don't know why.  But it was, the basketball was always at my house.  It was behind the door.  All we needed was for the weather to get up to twenty-nine degrees.  If it was twenty-nine degrees, I'd come down, me and my brother [Leroy Williams] would go down, go down the street with the ball and then out of--from somewhere there would be enough people to put together a three on three game almost instantly.  All it had to be is twenty-nine degrees and no snow on the, on the playground floor.  So my skills got better over that time.  When I got to Orr [Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], I tried out for the team.  I made the team, made the fro-soph [freshman-sophomore] team.  And I recall in the first game at Saint Michael's [Saint Michael's Central High School, Chicago, Illinois], Turtle [ph.] was starting before me.  I was coming off the bench.  But I had gotten a lot better than I was in eighth grade.  And for some reason I don't know whether Turtle had bad [Converse] All Stars or what but he kept slipping and I got--I was put in the game.  In that first quarter in the game, I scored ten points.  I remember the jump shot from the top of the key.  I remember stealing the ball and I laid it in.  It must have been from--I didn't wanna miss 'cause I was showing off 'cause there was cheerleader I was really, who I thought was just the hottest but I was shy.  But I just really had a really, really good game.  And then I started.  And by the time the season was over, the team votes for the MVP.  And these same guys who I didn't--who I rode the bench with as in eighth grade [at Morton Upper Grade Center, Chicago, Illinois], voted me the Most Valuable Player two years later.  My grades were, were, were well, were good.  They were better than they had been at Lane Tech.  It was still challenging.  I was there with girls.  I got real sweet on another one who was in my chemistry class.  She was a pom pom girl who ended up being my girlfriend all through high school, Sharon [ph.].  And it was--it turned out really, really good.
Story_ID: 239006
Speaker 1: There were still, interesting--so we moved away from the Vice Lords [Almighty Vice Lord Nation] when I was in--on 16th Street [Chicago, Illinois].  And when I was at Morton [Upper Grade Center, Chicago, Illinois], there was another gang that we heard about called the Black Souls.  And the Black Souls hung out around Maypole Street.  So I spent my whole life staying off of Maypole Street on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois].  But the Souls again, they used to come over to the Golden Dome [Garfield Park Fieldhouse, Chicago, Illinois] where we played all the time.  And so they knew who we were.  They knew we weren't in any gang.  And they didn't bother us when we were there.  But school was another thing.  So there was an alley between Kedzie [Avenue] and Troy [Street] that everybody when through coming from Morton, came through the alley.  Until we realized, we got into eighth grade, that about 3:15 [P.M.] which is when everybody got out of school, the Souls would also come through that alley and they were recruiting people.  And what they do is they stop you.  They tell you to be at the meeting on Tuesday.  And you had to go to a meeting on Maypole on Tuesday.  And they charge you two dollars dues and you know you did whatever else gang people did.  So hearing about this, we made it a point to stay away from the Souls.  Because if you don't see me, you can't recruit me.  And I remember what happened to Ricky [ph.].  So the way Morton was, Morton is a pretty glass school.  But we would go, we would start on the third floor 3:15 and it felt like we started running then so by the time we got to the first floor, we'd be in full stride.  And my route home was about in the opposite direction just so I'd never get caught by these guys.  So all I need to do was not get caught at school.  When we went to the park district, they'd be at Garfield Park [Chicago, Illinois] in the boxing pulling the golden gloves program.  So we'd see them there and they never bothered us there.  It was only in this--at this area from school.  So one day one of my good friends, Ronald Ford [ph.], Ronald was ahead of us and he went through the alley.  And word got back to us quickly.  They got Ron.  And Ronald was going through this alley and this guy was coming towards him.  So Ronald moves and the guy moves.  Ronald moves this way, and the guy moves this way.  So it was clear that he is locked in on him.  And so Ronald tries to get around him and he bumps him.  Ronald says, "Excuse me."  And the guy says, "Excuse me my ass."  Then Ronald gets beaten down in the alley.  Ronald ends up being recruited into this gang.  So his run is different from that, from that point.  For the rest of us knowing this, we just always went in the, in the other direction.  And the other direction took us through the Supreme Gangsters [Black Gangster Disciple Nation] neighborhood.  But for whatever reason, the Supreme Gangsters didn't seem as tough, certainly not as the Vice Lords and not as tough as the Souls.  So we were okay going through there.  Me and--I had a friend named Ronny Hodges [ph.].  And Ronny and I would walk home and I'd leave Ronny and I'd walk, cut across Franklin [Avenue] and it was all fine.  So we avoided that.  And then when I went to Orr [Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], I had to go through because now the gangs is starting to branch out more.  The neighborhoods are starting to change.  And I had to go through the Black Souls and the Gangsters and there was some other gang over there.  But if I was walking to school or walking home, I had to go through three different gangs' neighborhoods.  If I was taking the bus, it was different.
Story_ID: 239007
Speaker 1: Playing basketball at that time, I think gave us a different level of safety.  So because I always thought if you, if you're in a gang and you're in the wrong gang, that's a problem.  If you're in a gang and you're not doing what they ask you to do, that's a problem.  But if you're not in any gang, then you got a chance.  And so, because I played basketball [at Orr Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], they knew who I was.  Because they all at the games cheering.  And I didn't realize until later on I must have gotten some immunity because of this because I never had a problem.  And I recall when I, when I did win for most valuable player, I recall the trophy that I got.  It was a big trophy.  I brought it home.  I walked, I walked home that day with this trophy right here.  And it was one of the few times that I'd walk home.  I usually walk to school and take the bus home.  But I walked through these gang neighborhoods with my trophy after my first year.  And I never ever had a problem with the gangs any time in high school.  And even when we did have a game, we'd get on the bus going home or to the party or wherever we were going, I would hear about the gangsters jumping on the bus and robbing everybody.  But it was usually the bus after we got off.  And so it was always just curious to me.  I would also tell you that you know as I have grown to know, the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] was a pretty rough area.  People talked about drugs and all.  I was never exposed to that.  I used to party with my brother [Leroy Williams] and with the pom pom girls, with everybody.  We partied on Thursday, Friday, and Sat--on Thursday, Friday, Saturday and Sunday.  Pretty much every week.  And we'd go to St. Phillips [ph.] and party on Sunday afternoons and there was some house party some place.  We used to walk down the street.  We loved the winter time because the winter was cold.  The gangs were away.  When it got warm, then things got a little dicey.  But we used to walk around listening for a party and we'd go in.  Cause that's we--that's just kind of what we were doing.  And we never ever had any issues.  I never ever saw any drugs or anything.  I went to my thirtieth year reunion and I was talking to the pom pom girls who were typically the ones who we partied with.  And they told me that they were there but we were protecting you.  You know so we kept you away from all that stuff.  And I just I mean I, I appreciate, I really appreciated that.  I don't know why.  I don't know why they kept me away from all those things if everybody else was--others were engaged.  But my sense was always I was an athlete and so my body was pure.  I was still, I still had NBA [National Basketball Association] dreams at that time or at least wanted to make sure I had the opportunity.  And so drinking or doing anything wasn't anything that I was interested in.  But it was just interesting that they made a conscious effort to keep those things away from me during, during that time.
Speaker 2: I think even now there's a sense in that in the black community, somebody looks like they're gonna make it, then people give them a break.
Speaker 1: Yeah maybe.
Speaker 2: And you hear bad stories about honor students getting shot accidentally.  But usually on purpose it seems like.  I mean I don't know, but that's your experience too?
Speaker 1: It is.  And I think people even then you--people are always trying to identify who was gonna make it.  And we look now at some of those people who are identified and a lot of them are my good friends.  And we talk about you know and some typically older than me.  But we talk about the folks who people just said that they're gonna make it.  And it's usually those who were just doing different than everybody else was doing.  They had a job, they had a car.  They were studying.  They were in college.  They were--it was just something that people said that you know I don't how this is gonna turn out.  They're gonna go someplace.  My question was always and to this day, as I try to move along our system, if you know that what that person is doing is gonna give them a better opportunity, why aren't you doing it and why isn't everybody doing it?  And for me again, you know I used to read 'Archie' and 'Betty' [Archie series] comic books.  And I--and the 'Archie and Betty' comic books, Archie, Betty and Jug Head, Betty and Veronica always loved the guy who was a student council president and captain of the basketball team and all these things.  And I look at that and say, okay I want Betty and Veronica to love me too.  So these are the things that I'm going to do.  And these are the places I'm gonna go.
Story_ID: 239008
Speaker 1: And I hated Chicago [Illinois] when I was a kid 'cause it just seemed so dangerous and it seemed so--life was just hard.  It was harder getting through neighborhoods.  But I thought life had to be better someplace else and UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] was--I was a basketball fan and UCLA was this basketball dynasty.
Speaker 2: Did you apply to UCLA?
Speaker 1: No, I didn't (laughter).  But that was my dream, you know, I was gonna go to UCLA.  When it came time, I, I never did.  It may have been fear, it may have been--you know I think a lot of things were really--I wish my college counselors were, were better.  I wish my high school [Orr Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] guidance counselors were better.  And I turned at a point I think I was asking them about something and they couldn't give me a good enough answer at which point I decided to counsel myself.  But you know I--quite frankly, when I went to college, I did not know that Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] was a black school.  Or else, I would have applied there.  The more I know about it--you know I went to Southern [University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], HBCU [historically black colleges and universities].  And when we get together as my friends from HBCUs, we all have the best one.  So clearly, it's a heavy conversation with me and the guys from FAMU [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida] or me and anybody from Grambling [State University, Grambling, Louisiana].  And the Morehouse guys I just give them their due.  Because quite frankly, I would have loved to have gone to Morehouse.  And I wanted my daughter [Jada Brown] to go an HBCU.  Couldn't convince her, she went to Tulane [University, New Orleans, Louisiana].  The only HBCU that was on my son's [Bradford Williams] list was Morehouse.  Other than that, we were looking at some, some other things.  So when it came time to go you know I scored my ACT test was not what I wanted it to be.  It was not what I thought I could do.  But it was almost as if they had a party for me for the score that I got.  And I think that was also limiting to what some of the other places were so I start--I knew we didn't have a lot of money when college came around and I also knew that there were you know a number of us before me that my parents [Rufus Williams, Sr. and Dicye Ward Williams] had paid or helped them to get through so I was kind of dealing with not a lot of resources.
Story_ID: 239009
Speaker 1: So, some of your other brothers and sisters went to college?
Speaker 2: Everybody, everybody went.  Everybody went and my oldest sister [Evelyn Williams], I remember dropping her off at Crane Junior College [Malcolm X College, Chicago, Illinois].  And so I know she at least went through junior college.  My next oldest sister, my next two oldest sisters [Virginia Williams and Delores Williams] went to Grambling [State University, Grambling, Louisiana].  One graduated.  She's now a principal down in New Iberia, Louisiana.  The other one left Grambling and graduated from Roosevelt [University, Chicago, Illinois]. Excuse me, she now works for the DEA, [U.S.] Drug Enforcement Agency.  My brother [Leroy Williams] went to and he was ahead of the game.  He went to the College of Automation [Phillips College of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] but didn't stay.  Got caught up in--the streets have taken control of him.  And my younger sister [Carol Williams] went to University of Southwestern Louisiana [University of Louisiana at Lafayette] in Lafayette, Louisiana, but then transferred to Southern [University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and graduated from there.  So everybody went.
Story_ID: 239010
Speaker 1: So how did you decide to go to Southern [University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]?  Was there a natural connection down in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (laughter) I was actually, I was looking to go to college.  I was looking to play basketball.  I was looking for a scholarship.  Because I scored as I did, I started getting letters.  I got letters from West Point [Unites States Military Academy, West Point, New York] which I thought, wow.  And I started to follow some of those.  My basketball coach [at Orr Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] took me up to Lake Forest College [Lake Forest, Illinois] which had show some interest.  And we took this drive up there, we saw the campus.  We were good to go.  I was going to Lake Forest College.  I was gonna play basketball.  A week before it was time to go, when I was you know I was getting my trunk together, they sent my letter, my award letter.  And the difference in what they were giving me and what I needed was more than my parents [Rufus Williams, Sr. and Dicye Ward Williams] could pay.  And so I went from this high of going away to college.  And I was really excited.  'Cause I did, I became captain of the basketball team.  I became president of the senior class.  I was voted most likely to succeed.  So everything was in line when I graduated from high school.  A week before it was time to go, I sat down with my parents, with my dad who said "I don't have that kind of money."  And I ended up not going to college.  And it was one of the most difficult times of my life, probably the most.  But I cried and I cried and I cried for six months (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)  And was this the fall semester after you graduated?
Speaker 2: Well yeah--
Story_ID: 239011
Speaker 1: And the only job--I had worked at Burger King when I was in high school and working at Burger King, you know, I played basketball.  We had worked out an arrangement.  So on the nights when we had games or practice, everybody else started at 5:00.  I could start at 6:00.  But that also meant I worked later.  And sometimes you had to close.  And one of the nights when I was closing--and closing it meant you cleaned it up and got it you know spic and span for the next day.  Usually finish at about one o'clock in the morning.  I was hustling.  I was working hard just trying to get out of there.  And so I recall somebody saying, "Okay brother let's go in the back."  And I had to clean the shake machine.  And I turned around and all I remember seeing was this gun.  I have no idea what this guy looked like.  And I looked around and there was nobody else out front but me.  And so I walk in the back and back then, we were wearing elephant leg bell bottom pants wearing.  And my mother [Dicye Ward Williams] used to sew clothes and she didn't you know didn't take a lot for elephant legs.  And I used to wear a lot of turtle necks and elephant leg pants.  That was my look.  And platform shoes wearing and I had a big afro.  So I liked all that because it had me about six feet tall.  I weigh [sic.] about 5'7".  But as I--and I used to carry my wallet, I never carried my money in a place that I thought you could just see.  Because I'm was thought savvy to the street.  But my pants, I used to carry my wallet in my waist band.  And so when this guy sent us in the back, I think I had about forty dollars in my wallet, which was a lot of money, lot, lot of money.  And so I peeped around as I went through the swinging door and I didn't see him so I tossed my wallet in between the refrigerators and went in the back and everyone was there stretched out.  And there was another guy back there with a shot gun and said, "Get down on the floor."  So I got down on the floor with everybody else and then they started asking about the safe and the money you know I don't know anything.  And he take the manager and said, "Okay everybody in the refrigerator.  You come with me."  They took him up to the front and we're all locked in the refrigerator.  And I don't know how long we were in there but I got all kind of thoughts going through my mind then we hear gunshot.  And the next thought was they are about to open this door, they're gonna blow us all way.  And so you know we're trying, I'm trying to just be strategic.  And I've already decided first shot I hear I'm dead.  They can put the gun to somebody's head and shoot it.  [HistoryMaker] Rufus [Williams] dies on the spot.  And we were in there for I don't know how long.  But then suddenly the door snatched open and it was as if you know my heart fell out.  But it was the manager that they had taken with them.  And he told us well you know they took him up front and made him empty the safe.  He had given them mostly change.  So as they were at the door and pulling it out, they turned around and cursed him and shot and he dove and they just shot him in the thumb.  But it was frightening for us from the inside.  So, it wasn't long after that that I stopped a week, I stopped working at Burger King because I just you know the fear of being any place and at that time was just tremendous.  And you know when I go to the garage I'm peeping around so that nobody sneaks up on me.  Because I felt like somebody must have snuck up somebody that's the only way they could have gotten in.  Well after I graduated from Orr [Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], Sears Roebuck and Company [Chicago, Illinois] was at Homan [Avenue] and Arthington [Street] and that was where my friends were all going to get jobs.  Seemed like everybody could get a job at Sears, except me.
Story_ID: 239012
Speaker 1: All right, so you're trying to get a job at Sears [Roebuck and Co., Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Trying to get a job at Sears.  Yeah all my friends could get jobs there.  And I heard Sears was hiring.  They'd always come back and say Sears is hiring.  And I'd go down to Sears and inevitably they were not hiring when I got there.  So my days were always bad.  So now I'm out of coll--I'm out of high school [Orr Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] and I find I can't go to college.  All my friends are gone off to school or something.  And here I am most likely to succeed, man of the--you know, big man on, on high school campus and I'm the one at home.  It was just very, very hard.  The only job that I could get was back at Burger King.  And I did not in my life plan had nothing to do with me graduating high school and working for $1.90 an hour at Burger King.  So I went back to Orr.  And there was one teacher Mr. Phillips, Reginald Phillips [ph.].  And Mr. Phillips used to teach contemporary American history.  You were warned about taking Mr. Phillips' class as a senior because he was notorious for flunking seniors.  But I went in and Mr. Phillips was the most charming man.  I mean he was fun, he was interesting until the last day to drop and add classes.  And then it was Dr. Jekyll, Mr. Hyde.  He made life miserable.  And he seemed to make it more miserable for me because I played basketball because of all these other things, he'd ask--I mean he was a great teacher.  He has us reading things like the 'Communist Manifesto' [Friedrich Engels and Karl Marx] and analyzing that.  He had us reading "Conspicuous Consumption" ['The Theory of the Leisure Class: An Economic Study of Institutions,' Thorstein Veblen] and kind of understanding it was contemporary American history.  So I'd work really hard for Mr. Phillips and Mr. Phillips--I got a D in the class.  And I had always kept myself at the point, I knew I was doing better than everybody in the class.  I figured with grade on the curb I'm okay.  And even here I knew I was doing better than everybody else 'cause we'd have the conversations about exams, and papers and all.  The first marking period I got a D.  Second marking period, I got a D.  I said, "Mr. Phillips, why--I know I'm doing better, why is this?"  And he said--and Mr. Phillips would do things like, he would, he would come in and he'd have us read something and he'd start asking questions.  And I'd get ready for Mr. Phillips.  'Cause I knew if we had a game, he'd come in and he'd just give me a hard time for playing basketball.  "How many you score last night?  Yeah, I saw you out there."  And he'd starting shooting baskets into, into the garbage can.  And just give me a hard time and then he start asking questions about the material.  And I was ready.  He'd ask and I'd answer.  He'd ask and I'd answer.  Class was, was fifty minutes.  This went on for thirty-five minutes.  Until he started asking questions I couldn't answer and he said, "See I knew you didn't do all your work."  I said, "Mr. Phillips, the questions you're asking, that's not even part of the homework assignment."  "Yeah, but if you did that much, you should have gone further."  So he was pushing kind of in that way and when I went and talked to him, he said, "You know, yeah you're doing better than everybody else, but you can do better.  And until you give me everything that you can, a D is what you're gonna get."  And a D was so close to an F, I couldn't imagine not graduating because I flunked this class that I needed.  So I dug in and when I get a--I did a term paper and I got an A minus on the term paper from Mr. Phillips.  I think everybody at Orr knew that I got an A minus on that term paper because I ran through the hall showing it to everyone.  I was so proud ended up getting a B from that class.  But me and Mr. Phillips ended up having a good relationship.  And the lessons that he taught me then still apply today and I still tell people about him because what he told me in that was doing better than everybody else is not good enough.  It's only good enough if you do all that you can do.
Story_ID: 239013
Speaker 1: I went back to Orr [Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] when I didn't go to college and I was talking with Mr. [Reginald] Phillips [ph.] and Mr. Phillips said--he started talking to me about historically black colleges [and universities, HBCUs] and maybe I should take a look at them because my issue was money.  And I had a sister who had--my two sisters [Virginia Williams and Delores Williams] had gone to Grambling [State University, Grambling, Louisiana].  And so I figured okay maybe I should apply to Grambling.  My parents [Rufus Williams, Sr. and Dicye Ward Williams] were able to afford that for them maybe they can afford that for me.  And my sister who is still down in New Iberia [Louisiana] married a guy who went to Southern [University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and there's such a competition between Southern and Grambling.  When I say I'm applying to Grambling he said, "Oh, then you have to apply to Southern."  Fine.  So I applied to Southern.  I was so anxious to get away to school and when I also, when I talked to Mr. Phillips, he said, "[HistoryMaker] Rufus [Williams], what you should do is keep your mind active.  So why don't you go to junior college.  Just extend the mode of studying and doing something."  And so I went to [Wilbur] Wright Junior College [Wilbur Wright College, Chicago, Illinois] at night.  I took two courses.  And then when I got accepted into Southern and I saw what it was gonna cost, I think I paid $967.50 for a five day meal ticket, my books, my tuition and all down at Southern for that first semester.  And I was due down there on January 4.  I was thrilled.  And I left and went down to Southern.  I had applied to both Southern and Grambling.  Grambling was my, my preference because my sisters had gone there and I knew the history of Grambling, didn't know a lot about Southern.  When I got to Southern I had probably been at Southern for four days and then my acceptance letter from Grambling came.  But by then I was at Southern and that's kind of, kind of where I was and the way in which--the way that, the way that happened.  Didn't know still my dad had made the commitment for the first year--for the first semester, but he didn't commit to anything beyond that.  So I had no idea how I was coming back to school after that.  I figured I would piece my way through this, or, you know, we'll see.
Story_ID: 239014
Speaker 1: But I got there [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and I was excited about being there.  That first semester, I got all A's and one B in my classes.  Two weeks after being there though I'll tell you I wanted to come back home because I missed home, missed my friends, didn't know anybody down there.  It's a, it's a different culture.  And I'm a thousand miles away knowing no one.  But my--I called home, my mom [Dicye Ward Williams] said, "You know, no you should--you'll stay, you'll stay."  And you know it got--you get through it and it gets better.  My grades were good.  I came back home [Chicago, Illinois] that summer.  Good friend of mine, James Crawford [ph.], James has a whole bunch of brothers and sisters, a bunch of brothers, a couple of sisters.  I was at his house and he had a brother who worked for the Better Boys Foundation [(BBF), Chicago, Illinois].  And he was a scholarship counselor for the Better Boys Foundation.  And he said, "I understand you need money for school?"  "I do."  And he told me to come over to, to BBF.  Well I went and filled out all these applications.  And ultimately, another guy Primus Mootry was the education director there, brought me downtown to a meeting at A.G. Becker [& Co., Chicago, Illinois] and they had a scholarship fund and he presented me.  And A.G. Becker called me a week before I was to leave going back to school that fall and gave me $750 for college.  And they promised to do that for me for the duration of my college stay, which was wonderful.  Because I thought then with the money I had gotten my father [Rufus Williams, Sr.] during that summer to commit to giving me $500 a semester.  And I figured then--I got through my first semester on a five day meal ticket, obviously it's seven days a week.  And most people in Southern went home.  Most of them are from Louisiana.  Friday afternoon, the campus starts to empty, except in football season.  And I went down in January.  So it was you know during that period everybody scatters.  And I had struggled through the weekends.  I didn't wanna--I went to my sister's house probably every other weekend that first semester.  You know and that was good.  But I didn't wanna be a burden.  So I got through on Vienna sausage and Goobers and whatever else through the weekend.  If I could just--I had enough money I thought if I can just hold on until Sunday afternoon.  If I can get through Sunday at three o'clock, then I can go to the restaurant and get something to eat.  But if I do that too early, I won't have enough money to get me through.  And so that's how I made it through then.  But once I got this scholarship, I figure I can get a seven day meal ticket and everything would be, would be great with the money that my father was adding in.
Story_ID: 239015
Speaker 1: One of the things that was part of the scholarship, scholarship applications they asked us, if you get this scholarship from the Better Boys Foundation [(BBF), Chicago, Illinois] that means you're taking money out of the community.  What are you going to do to replace what you're taking out?  And we had to write an essay answering that question.  I was, I mean I understood what it was like not to have the money to go.  I saw what my life would be like if I didn't go to college.  And so I took that very seriously and the commitment that they made to me.  And what I--I took that to mean I needed to give back just as it was being given to me.  And so and so I did.  And a few years after I got out of college [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], I ran into Primus Mootry who was the guy who took me down to A.G. Becker [& Co., Chicago, Illinois].  He invited me to a Better Boys Foundation meeting.  I talked about my life.  You know my three years of history after college and joined the board of the Better Boys Foundation.  And I think all those things kind of lead to me from the philanthropic side coming to the, to be the president of the [Chicago] Board of Education now.  But, I didn't, I didn't apply to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California].  I had talked, I talked to a counselor, I wanted to be a I thought an accountant because I was good in math.  I couldn't figure out how math, I couldn't make any money--If I was, if I studied math in college, I'd probably be a teacher.  I didn't think that I wanted to be a teacher.  I wanted to do--I didn't think I had the patience to be a teacher and I wanted to do something different.  So I figure accounting would be a good match for that and as long as people have money, they would need accountants, I would get a job.  And I knew that after college I needed to get a job.  So that was the pursuit at that time and because I was going to Lake Forest College [Lake Forest, Illinois] and I was going there to play basketball.  UCLA never came up again.  Although I thought once I left Chicago [Illinois], I was gonna get a job in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and never come back here.  That was gonna be my way out and life was gonna be different than I had ever seen it.
Story_ID: 239016
Speaker 1: Did you play [basket]ball at Southern [University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: When I got to Southern I was, I think I was probably at the top of my game.  And I went down in January.  There was a guy who played for Cregier [Vocational High School, Chicago, Illinois] here who was really, really good.  When I got to Southern, I saw that he was at Southern.  So I said, okay I'm down here.  There's this one guy I know who he is.  And I went over and talked to him.  But he was really, really good.  And I was still okay--I was still very confident in my abilities.  So I figured Larry [ph.] would probably be playing varsity.  I should be able to make fro-soph [freshman-sophomore].  And I looked at the guys who were playing and I felt you know as most ball players do, I can, I can take him.  So I tried out for the team when tryouts came that fall.  And all the time in my life, I think that was the time that I was really, really I was probably at the top of my game.  And I had a good tryout.  The guys who were on the team were calling me over and telling me how good I had played.  And you know sometimes you just know, I just got it.  So I went back the next day when the head coach came.  And they called guys out.  When they call guys out to play before the head coach, they didn't call me.  And he watched and then he left.  And so as I understood that year, they didn't pick anybody.  They dropped the junior varsity team.  They only had varsity.  You had fifteen guys on scholarship, only twelve spots.  So, there was no, no place.  I went back, I threw my shoes in the lock--in my closet and dropped basketball for six months.  But I thought, I thought I was good enough.  And I took them back out and I played intermural ball.  And I played fraternity, inter-fraternal ball and still enjoy the game.  At least I did until recently when I suffered my debilitating injury.  But I didn't play in college.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, so just recently have you hurt yourself?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I hurt my--in December playing with my--my son [Bradford Williams] is really good and as he grew up I mean of all the things that I wanted to do and couldn't do for varying reasons, all the things that this point, points in my life, I wish I could.  He was--he had to.  So things like playing the piano.  I, of course, never tried.  But he can play.  He was good in this, he was good in school.  Just, just a smart guy.  But I also didn't want him--I knew he'd be smart because he had to be.  We--he didn't have a--we brought him up not to have that choice.  And we brought him up to enjoy school.  But I also didn't want him I thought for me if there was any place that I was nerdy, playing basketball would solve that.  So, he played basketball from very early on.  He played all sports from very early on.  But basketball he really took to.  And you know I was, I probably--because I'm not big, I prided myself on speed.  And I'm fast except when I play with him.  He's just--he was lights out.  So I was playing with these young guys, and I could see what was happening and I went over to do something and I blew out my knee.  So I am now retired from basketball.
Story_ID: 239017
Speaker 1: Now did you join KAPhi [sic. Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity] in college?
Speaker 2: I did.  I got down to Southern [University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  I didn't know a lot of people, didn't know a lot about fraternities.  I knew about Kappa Carnival because Kappa Carnival was big for folks from Chicago [Illinois] and [HistoryMaker] Herb Kent used to talk about it all the time.  So I was very well aware that and it seemed to me the Kappas ruled because that's what I heard a lot about.  I have a cousin, first cousin, who had gone to Grambling [State University, Grambling, Louisiana] who pledged Kappa.  So I figured you know if I wasn't thinking about it but that seemed like that's where I'd be.  But I got down to Southern and I lived in a suite.  And living in the suite, our--you know you kind of adapt to the people who are there.  And these guys were from small towns in Louisiana.  And they weren't interested in fraternity so I wasn't either.  And one day, not much different than what you see in Spike Lee's movie, that was the Ques [members, Omega Psi Phi Fraternity] were having--they were doing their thing.  And everybody's out watching them.  And again this was in the '70s [1970s].  Now my fro had gotten big by then.  Well the Ques shaved their heads and they had gone through all this ritual and I'm looking, "I guess I'm not pledging a fraternity."  Years went on, a couple years, (throat clearing) and as I watched, watched was taking place on campus and I had kind of come into my own and decided you know what and I was starting to talk to some, I had more confidence. I was talking to more girls.  And I was talking to some AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority].  And they were telling me that I should pledge Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity] and I said, "Yep I'm pledging Alpha."  And I noticed at that time, life had gotten better for me.  (Throat clearing) I had--I used to come home for the summers and I'd work.  So I worked two jobs.  I was getting my scholarship from Better Boys Foundation [(BBF), Chicago, Illinois].  In my second year, I heard that they had an economic scholarship, but you had to have at least a 3.0 or 3.2 [GPA] and have majored in economics.  But they didn't have anybody who fit that requirement.  But then I heard about it, so I changed my major to economics so I could get the scholarship.  So between that scholarship from the government, the BBR scholarship and the money I was saving from working, life had changed.  So I had talked my mother [Dicye Ward Williams] into letting me move off campus.  I had enough money to get an apartment.  And at HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities] they're pretty restrictive about who can visit you in your dorm.  Through the working that I had done, I had managed to get a car.  So in 1977, I had a 1976 [Chevrolet] Camaro.  So life had just--things and I, I would take half the money that I made in the summer.  I had two jobs.  I didn't have a lot of time to play, but half of it I spent on clothes and the other half I saved.  So I bought a, I got a car.  I think my Camaro cost less than $5,000.  My mother was helping me with it.  And my notes were like $145 a month.  So we could, we could get through that.  And I'd pay in the--you know I'd pay in the summertime and pay some while I was at school and she cover, help me cover the rest.  So, life had just changed.  And what I noticed when I was on campus, what I was telling AKAs I was gonna pledge Alpha, there was a period when all the Kappas that I saw were asking me if I was gonna pledge.  And I was telling them yeah, but next semester.  And I'd see another one and he'd ask me.  And there were guys I didn't even know they were Kappas that were asking me.  And this one day I was in the business college and I was talking to the AKAs and I was telling them I'm gonna pledge Alpha next semester.  I left them and I walked over to the union.  When I got to the union, I saw the [gramd] polemarch, the president of Kappa.  And he said so--and the lines had already started that week.  This was Thursday.  The line started on Monday.  I guess they got initiated Sunday night.  And he said, "So, are you gonna pledge?"  And he talked to me a little bit.  And I said, "Yes."  And we talked about initiation.  So they initiated me that night into--onto the line.  And it was interesting because the next day when I went back to the business college and I saw the same AKAs who I had told I was pledging Alpha next, next, next semester and I had my scroll on, they were just kind of in, in shock.  But because I was pledging I couldn't explain, I couldn't talk to them until I could find some, some way to do it where big brothers weren't watching.  But I thought from my history and my background and my core, was Kappa Alpha Psi.  And so that's what, that's what led me to that.
Story_ID: 239018
Speaker 1: Is there any story about Southern [University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] we need to talk about before we graduate you?  Now, you're--this is 1970--what are we talking about, '70 [1970]?
Speaker 2: I went there in '74 [1974].
Speaker 1: Four [1974], okay.  So--
Speaker 2: We can talk a bit about Southern. Southern was you know being from Chicago [Illinois], it was an interesting place.  And the first thing when I got there I still had this Grambling [State University, Grambling, Louisiana] thing on my mind.  And so I said to somebody, "I can't wait until we play Grambling because I can't wait to see their band in person."  And this guy said to me, "Man, wait til you see Southern's band."  And so we went to the football game and we got there early and I watched the drum line come in and we watched the game and I thought you know football in Chicago wasn't, you know, when I was in high school [Orr Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] maybe you went to the game, maybe you didn't.  But at Lane Tech [Albert Grannis Lane Technical High School; Lane Technical College Prep High School, Chicago, Illinois] everybody went.  But at Orr maybe you went, maybe you didn't.  Everybody was waiting for basketball.  And if you went, you're sitting outside.  So you just throw on something you don't wanna get messed up sitting in bleachers.  And so that's kind of how I was getting dressed and I went out into the, went out in the yard and I see all these people going to the game and they were dressed up in their Sunday finest.  So I went back to my room.  I didn't, I mean, all I owned were jeans.  They were nice jeans.  They were starched jeans.  So we would wear them starched and they keep--almost cut yourself on the crease.  I went back in and got dressed and went to the game.  And when Southern's band came out and performed, it was so good, I almost cried.  And from that point, Grambling's band was persona non grata.  Southern was the right thing and the right place.  I started to get you know when football season came, I just got much more comfortable in the school and the school just became a great, great place.  My grades stayed good.  I mean I was getting all A's and one B every semester except for one.  I had--I asked a friend, young lady to pre-register for me and she added, she gave me more hours than I could--that I should have had.  So when the workload got higher, I didn't have much time to do anything else.  So I would go to class, go to dinner, go to sleep.  And then wake up at about 10:30, 11:00 and study.  In Baton Rouge [Louisiana], at 11:00 there was nothing.  There was no--TV went off and radio went off.  So with no distractions and I was rested, so then I got my studying done.  That was the only semester that--that was the first semester that I got straight A's with this heavier load.  So everything just worked out there and then as it went on then I pledged [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity] and all the shyness and reserve that I thought I still had, when you pledge it goes away because they had me do things in front of people that you don't plan to do.  And so you have a Greek show and you're out stepping and performing and then part of the Greek show and pledging, was we actually had to go and do a performance.  We had to sing on stage in front of people.  And you know we had dance steps and our crimps and tuxedos.  And after that was, that was during hell week.  So the next week we go over where the fraternity and I'm walking through and there were some young ladies that I see and you know with my brothers and I introduce myself and they say, "Oh I know who you are."  And it was kind of at that point, I became confident.  And so when I became a senior, I ran for senior class president.  And my girlfriend then had run for Miss Southern.  And she became Miss Southern and I was senior class president.  And so I felt by the time you know from going down there and being this guy from Chicago who doesn't know anyone till the time that I left. And when I was at Southern, Southern was the largest historically black college [HBCU] in the nation.  I felt going from a point that I got there and knew no one to graduating and having life just change before me, going on job offers in my senior year.  Going all over the country at somebody else's expense, having the offers just coming in all the time, life had really, really changed.
Story_ID: 239019
Speaker 1: So I thought by then, I don't know everybody on Southern's [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] campus, but I think everybody knows me.  And I had a brother-in-law when I went down there who told me, "[HistoryMaker] Rufus [Williams], you going to college."  He also went to Grambling [State University, Grambling, Louisiana] and came up and went to Roosevelt [University, Chicago, Illinois] and graduated from Roosevelt with my sister.  He said, "When you get there remember this, the students will know you.  What you wanna do, is when you walk across campus, you want the instructors to know who you are.  You want them to say I wish I had him in my class because of what I've heard about them."  And I think by the time I became a junior and I was in my senior year, I took a class called business policies.  I had--that was the only class I had on Tuesday.  And that was the day whenever I had a plant visit, a trip to go and see a company, that was the day I took it because I had only one class and it was a relatively easy class.  I got a C in that class.  And I recall professors having arguments in the college of business about me getting a C in the class.  And he told the--he told the business policies instructor that if I got a C it was because he didn't know how to teach.  Because there was no way I should have gotten a C.  And at that moment I felt that what the, the recommendation that my brother-in-law had given me had come true.  And it's one that I try to give to students when I talk to them as well.  The students will know you.  You want the instructors to know you.  I also noted as I was in class that being able to answer questions and I wasn't prone to raising my hand to answer questions, but if they called on me I was ready.  It also got the attention that I wanted to get then.  So people just noticed that you know being smart is a good thing.  And for whatever reason, you get to this other point that, that there's this cool area that you can't get out of.  But everybody respects those who are successful.  Everybody respects those who are smart.  And for me I thought my ability to play basketball, my being in a fraternity and being smart, would be the things that would keep me you know with that edge that would make that--help add that differentiation from where everything else was.  So while Southern was my last of all the choices of schools to go to, I think and I would often reflect back and ask, would I be better, would I have gotten further, would something else have happened had I gone to some of the other choices of schools that I had?  And I think the answer is not.  I think that it gave me a wonderful texture for everything, certainly being at an HBCU [historically black colleges and universities] in the 1970s.
Story_ID: 239020
Speaker 1: And we [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] had Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture].  They wouldn't let him speak in the [student] union.  So we're in an alley talking to Stokely Carmichael.  I thought that--this is just awesome.  I remember when Muhammad Ali came down.  And everybody's in the football stadium and he rolls in in this motorcade and suddenly he's out of the window.  You know we were yelling, "Ali, Ali, Ali."  You see this fist come out, "Ali."  And he jumps out and he just mesmerized us for that time.
Speaker 2: Is this in '77 [1977] when he, he retook the championship?
Speaker 1: This is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Or just before?
Speaker 1: --I graduated in '78 [1978] so yeah it was.
Speaker 2: Yeah okay.
Speaker 1: Yes it was.  And he came in and I remember very, very well.  It may have--actually it was before that.  It was--yeah because in '77 [1977] I would have had my balance.  It was before I had my balance.  It was soon after I got into school.  It was probably in '76 [1976].  But he stood there and he's looking out in the crowd and he called up eight women.  All drop dead gorgeous.  All of different shades.  And he said, "Look, why would we ever go to white women?  You can stay with black women.  And this is the array, whatever you want.  This is what we have."  And it was--I mean he just--he took us--he was--it was just such an amazing moment.  And as I sat there I said you know what, this is not happening in the University of Illinois and this certainly isn't happening at Lake Forest College [Lake Forest, Illinois].  You know I remember when [HistoryMaker Reverend] Jesse [L.] Jackson came down.  And I remember when we were in the mini dome [F.G. Clark Activity Center] and he gave his you know, "I am somebody"--and everybody and I mean it was just it was one of those moments that I knew this isn't--being at a historically black college [HBCU] makes this happen.  When I was a freshman, there was guy who was a sophomore, who ran for student government association president.  And I remember him because he had a, he had a little sports car, [Triumph] TR7 a little triangular type deal.  I was like, "Wow, he's got a sports car and he's a sophomore and he's student government association president."  And I thought about that being possible.  All the things that were possible at a predominantly black college that would be more difficult if you were someplace else.  And so I looked at what all of our possibilities were while we were there and tried to get as much as I could out of that experience.  So even when I pledge and the guys I pledge with, you know we, the Kappas [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity] weren't at that point the main fraternity on the yard.  But it was the one that was in my heart.  And you know in my senior year we had from my line, we had the guy who was the president of, of accounting society.  We had the president of men's federation.  We had the quarterback of the football team.  We had the captain of the baseball team.  I was president of the senior class.  I mean we had, we had the guys who were really running the campus right there in our fraternity and on my line.  So you know when I kind of saw those things and saw what was possible, I think it helps to--helps me to be very confident in wherever I am and whatever I'm doing because I did have a chance to really run things and be there in the places where I could.
Story_ID: 239021
Speaker 1: Now, your first job, you got a job right out of--was it--that true? Right out of college (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  Two weeks after I graduated, I graduated on December 15th of 1978 and on December 29th [1978] I started Arthur Andersen [and Co.; Arthur Andersen LLP, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Now how did that take place? How did--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, during that time, I guess there were a lot of companies who were looking to diversify and if you were looking for black people, go where they are.  And we were at Southern [University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  My academic career was pretty stellar while I was there--
Story_ID: 239022
Speaker 1: I graduated with a 3.75 GPA.  And I had been involved--you know, I was class president.  I was in a fraternity [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity].  I had been involved in a number of things on campus.  So when companies came looking, our placement office was pretty busy and I had a lot of interviews.  I was not looking to come back to Chicago [Illinois] as I had said earlier.  But you know the job offers I was getting and the places I was going it seemed like Minneapolis [Minnesota] came down a lot.  And every time I went there, it was really, really cold.  I had a couple of interviews out in California but not with jobs that I wanted.  And I learned more about public accounting from one of my fraternity brothers and thought well they've got offices every place and maybe it makes sense for me to go back to Chicago because I do have some roots, I do have some basis upon starting.  So I interviewed with the big eight firms.  And I got an offer from Arthur Andersen [and Co.; Arthur Andersen LLP, Chicago, Illinois] and decided to take it.  There weren't a lot of people who were from Southern [University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Chicago, Illinois] who were getting offers from Arthur Andersen.  There weren't a lot who were getting offers from big eight firms so I knew it was a big deal.  And when I came up, that's kind of where we went.
Story_ID: 239023
Speaker 1: Winter of 1979 was one of the worst winters in Chicago [Illinois].  There was a big snowstorm that winter.  We--when you go to Arthur Andersen [and Co.; Arthur Andersen LLP, Chicago, Illinois], Arthur Andersen always began with a two week stint out in St. Charles [Illinois], where the training facility is.  And so I went out to St. Charles.  I drove out in my little [Chevrolet] Camaro.  And our two weeks was collapsed into a week and a half.  And they take you through the Arthur Andersen way.  So it was things like you were in class all day where you learn the way in which worksheets work and kind of how they want you to do things so the people at Arthur Andersen could follow it.  But it was also some very other basic things.  So we all went down to the cafeteria and ate.  And they serve, you know you come to your table and they have the setup of the, you know the glasses and the silverware.  So you learned how to eat when you went to a restaurant without somebody saying this is what you do.  But there were matrons there that kind of made sure that people were doing things the right way.  And it was even to the point that if you took off--we wore suits.  You didn't go there.  You weren't in jeans.  You dressed as if you were going to a client.  And at lunch time if a guy got up and took his jacket off and throw it on back of the chair, they come and tap you on the shoulder and ask you to put your jacket back on.  So you really did learn how things worked and you got the training.  And they give you homework to kind of finish the stuff that you were doing.  And I had, I had concerns.  Had concerns about my ability to be successful in this environment.  One because the information they were giving us was so technical and it was information that I, some I hadn't been exposed to.  Not in the ways in which they were giving it to us.  And I had one auditing class.  And it wasn't quite like what I was learning there.  So I was concerned.  And they give you this work to.  And they didn't expect you to finish it.  But I don't--I wasn't accustomed to homework assignments that I'm not expected to finish.  So I was working really hard trying to learn what they were teaching me.  And I recall one of the partners telling me he said, "[HistoryMaker] Rufus [Williams], you gonna do well here."  And I didn't know why he said that because I felt like I was struggling through all the things they were trying to teach us.  I was trying hard to grasp it.  And I was working hard to try and do the homework.  I don't know, I still to this day don't know why he said that, but I remember it.  And we got through that time.  We came back and I think the first assignment I got they sent me up to work on some tax returns for some partners, but nobody was really giving me any direction.  And I didn't really know what I was supposed to do.  But I knew they had me in a really nice office on a really high floor downtown.  And life was just different.  And I was coming to work in a suit, which is what I always thought would be the modicum of success.  And I was going to an office downtown and it was great.  And you know I got my check and I figured out how much I was making per minute, per second and you know and it was just very different than Burger King.
Story_ID: 239024
Speaker 1: But I was, still had this--I still had this level of insecurity.  And then you start to go out on assignments and the levels at Arthur Andersen [and Co.; Arthur Andersen LLP, Chicago, Illinois], when you first start, you're known as an IA.  Then you move to an EA then a semi-senior, then a senior.  IA stands for inexperienced assistant.  An inexperienced assistant, that's about as low as you can be.  You're a assistant with no experience whatsoever and you're expected to do some fairly not totally menial but I mean if there was Xeroxing to be done, you were the one to be doing that.  If there was coffee to be gotten, you were the one who was getting it.  And the next year when you became an experienced assistant an EA, then life got better because there should be an IA who can do all those things.  But what we also knew was that they had hired some four hundred people to do the exact same job.  And there was a pyramiding effect so every year people would leave.  Either you were moving up or you were moving out if you weren't confident enough to continue on.  So I knew the, I knew the challenge that was there and I knew that at that time, a partner at Arthur Andersen made six figures, made a $100,000 and I figured if I could hang here for twelve or thirteen years, I can make $100,000 you know let me just, let me figure out how to do this.  And so, I worked hard.  Sometime in May, I met this lady who I ultimately ended up marrying.  I met her at an after work party, Jaye [Morgan Williams].  And Jaye was working at, I think she was working at Exchange [National] Bank [of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].  But she was smart.  She had graduated from [the University of] Illinois.  She was you know we talked.  She was making around the same amount of money as I was.  And, and we hit it off.  Jaye, she understood, and I talked to her about my, my insecurities.  And I remember her sending me this card and she said, the card said something like you shouldn't--it's not that you feel--you shouldn't feel so insecure, you actually are insecure.  And I got it and it made me mad, then I knew it was a joking card.  But I worked with that until I went on my first assignment.  And my first assignment I got back an evaluation and our evaluations were average, above-average, superior--average, above-average, outstanding.  And I got back an evaluation that said above-average.  And I thought about it and said, okay, well presumably everybody here is average.  Everybody--that's what average means.  And so if I get one that's above-average that means here I was better than everybody else.  So I shouldn't have this--I'm not as bad as I thought I was.  So this insecurity thing started to go away.  And because I began in December, our promotions came in June or in the summertime.  And I had only been there for that six months.  And that six months didn't mean anything.  So next period, I was still an IA but I was like an experienced IA, so I was a little bit better and my confidence just continued on.  And so now I was on a point and I continued to get above-average evaluations.  So I was at this point and you can get promoted faster if you're better than everybody else.  And so, I figure at that point I'm working hard to get promoted faster because no different than when I was in--when I couldn't go to kindergarten on time.  I feel like I'm a little bit behind.  So I wanna catch up.  And I'm a little bit behind only because I didn't go to college right away or I would have been moving at a faster pace through this firm.  So I'm trying to get promoted faster.  I'm working hard, I'm getting good evaluations.  And so when it comes time to get a promotion, everybody doesn't become a semi-senior, some people become seniors after experienced assistant.  And I was looking to do that because I had this six months under my belt and I was getting above-average evaluations and of course, I did not get promoted to senior, I got promoted to semi-senior and so I'm mad.  I'm trying--I go down and I talk to the people in personnel, human resources, and say, "Why am I not getting promoted?"  "Well they thought you could use a little more seasoning.  I didn't think it would hurt you."  And so I see that but I'm not happy about it.  So I go on and I think about leaving.  I think about leaving Arthur Andersen and I'm gonna leave and I've got a friend in Houston [Texas] who is working for Arthur Andersen and knows everybody and life is good for him.  So I go down to Houston to look at some positions, getting out of Chicago [Illinois].  I know a lot of people in Houston because everybody from Southern [University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] goes there.  And I go and I do some interviewing and the places I'm interviewing, the jobs I'm interviewing for, I don't really like.  So I decide to suck it up and come back and go on.  And I get promoted to senior.  Not that exciting because I thought it should have been the year before.  But it's kind of exciting because there aren't a lot of black people who get to that point, and haven't gotten to that point.
Story_ID: 239025
Speaker 1: Arthur Andersen [and Co.; Arthur Andersen LLP, Chicago, Illinois] was founded in Chicago [Illinois].  Arthur Andersen was the world's largest accounting firm.  Arthur Andersen was arguably the best accounting firm.  Chicago was the largest office.  But there just weren't a lot of black people there.  So I become a senior and I'm one of few and you know we, we get there and when you start there, you don't have, you don't have an office.  You don't have a cubicle.  You have a drawer that you put your things in.  And so when you become a senior you get a cubicle with your name on it.  So I was happy to get a cubicle with my name on it.  This is Rufus' [HistoryMaker Rufus Williams] spot.  And then I'm pushing on and you become a manager after three years.  If you make it through the next three years then you're progressing on.  So I figure and some--and you can make it in two years if you're really good.  And so I'm pushing to try to be really good and making it in two--I'm gonna make up this year somewhere along the way.  So I'm pushing hard to get promoted in two years.  And I know the jobs you need to work on a big job, you need to work on these kinds of clients.  You know you need to show this and I know what the things are that you need and I'm giving them.  And so I get through that second year and I've gone and worked on this assignment in Puerto Rico and I've done--I've gotten just and an, an outstanding evaluation so I know everything is right where it should be.  And Rufus is gonna make manager in two years.  And the list came out.  And I didn't make it.  And I was, I was to say I was angry would be an understatement.  I mean I was almost walking through the halls asking somebody to bump into me just so I could get into a fight.  I was really, really, really troubled because I know that I had done everything that had needed to be done.  And I knew that I was better than a lot of the people there who were getting promoted already.  And they were getting promoted you know and that after having only been there for in management--a senior for two years.  And so I was really, really upset.  And I went in and talked to the managing partner of my area.  And I talked to my counseling partner.  And I talked to folks because somebody need to help me understand this. Arthur Andersen had two black partners, Dave Kelly [David Kelly] and Odell Hicks [Jr.].  And I had developed a relationship with Dave Kelly.  They were partners in tax.  And I went up and I showed Dave all of my evaluations.  And I said, "Dave maybe you can intervene.  I need somebody to--I mean I should be a manager.  And this doesn't make any sense."  And so Dave, he talked to some people and came back and you know as things go, they didn't change anything.  But what my partner, the partner in charge of my division came back and said look, "They thought that you could use another year of seasoning."  I said, "Okay, I would guarantee you everybody could use another year of seasoning, but you didn't everybody else that same answer.  So why is it that I have to get that other year of seasoning?"  He said "Look, it's not gonna happen this year, but I will guarantee you unless something goes totally off next year, you will be made a manager."  And I went on, it's fine 'cause I didn't--you know I could have gone out and started looking at other positions, but I knew my options would be better if I left Arthur Andersen as a manager than it would if I left as a senior, seemingly a senior that didn't get promoted.  So we laid out what my schedule, my calendar was for the next year and the clients I was gonna work on.
Story_ID: 239026
Speaker 1: They [Arthur Andersen and Co.; Arthur Andersen LLP, Chicago, Illinois] sent me to work on a company, a new client down in St. Louis [Missouri].  And that was in 1984.  I went down to St. Louis and I did not know that, I didn't know until I was done that St. Louis was quite as racist as it seemed to be when I was down there.  But the experience was really interesting because I worked as is typically the case I was the only, the only black working on this assignment.  I was the one with the experience in the industry which is why I went down there.  I would get on a plane either Sunday night and go down and I would get on the plane on Friday and come back every week.  We had just brought a house, a townhouse down in Dearborn Park [Chicago, Illinois], my to-be-wife [Jaye Morgan Williams].  And I and so we were working on that every weekend and I'd get back on the plane and go back down to St. Louis during the week.  This is throughout the entire summer.  And I was working with some people those who were under me, those who were over me that were just all involved but it wasn't--I didn't feel like I was having the people who were working under me they weren't responding in the ways in which I thought they should in certain situations.  You know things like expecting me to drive to lunch.  Which you know, no you drive to lunch.  That's not you know, you--it's--you drive to lunch.  So we went through all of that.  We get through the assignment and the assignment because it was a first time through a new assignment.  We're working with people who are inexperienced.  It was kind of tough.  And in the end, they filled out an evaluation for me, which was by far the absolute worst evaluation I have ever had.  And I was up for manager.  The evaluation was so bad that they, they had just gone too far.  And so when I showed it to the managing partner, I said, "Look, you know, this is the evaluation they gave me."  And he told me that the guy who was the partner on that job had been his best man but he wasn't even speaking to him anymore.  So he understood kind of what I was up against when I was there and some of the things that they included were just--it was so wrong that it was just way off.  He said, "[HistoryMaker] Rufus [Williams], we can put this one aside unless there's another one that comes in like this.  Then you know everything--we're still on track with that I suggested to you."  So we went on and then in April--so I learned a lot about St. Louis at that time.  It wasn't for me a bad experience because I didn't know anything about St. Louis or the people.  I met some nice people down there while I did some good work.  And we went on.  April came.  We had somebody leave from a different assignment and they needed somebody to go and do it.  And they called me to go and do, do this assignment.  The assignment was the First National Bank of Cicero [Cicero, Illinois].  Growing up in Chicago [Illinois], I spent my whole life trying to avoid Cicero [Illinois].  And this is what I told them.  I said, "You know what, first you send me to St. Louis and now you need to understand this is not a--this is a matter of safety.  This is a matter of, of whether I will make it out of there alive.  I have gone and you should have promoted me last year.  Now you're putting me in these assignments that I just couldn't possibly have a chance with and you're sending me to Cicero of all places."  Ultimately, I went and did the First National Bank of Cicero.  And I'd drive in and I was nervous 'cause I truly spent my entire life avoiding Cicero.  But I'd go in and I recall the first time going into the bank and just feeling the intensity as I walked in.  And we went on and we did our work and the work went well.  I mean I think I was able to certainly gain the respect of the clients and get done all that we had to do.  And there were times that I would just sit there and say I cannot believe that I am in a bank vault in Cicero, Illinois.  I would never ever have imagined this.  But we got through it.  It went well.  I did a good job and my promotion came as it should have at the end of it.  So--
Speaker 2: So what year is this that you're promoted finally?
Speaker 1: I was promoted in 1985.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So you're promoted to manager?
Speaker 1: Promoted to manager in 1985.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 239027
Speaker 1: The next point for manager is partner.  So you know you do a good six years--six, seven years at partner--manager, and you become a partner.  And now as a manager, you get an office.  I mean it's a much bigger deal.  And given all the history of Arthur Andersen [and Co.; Arthur Andersen LLP, Chicago, Illinois], the audit department is the biggest department at Arthur Andersen.  They had never had a black audit manager until I became one.  And it was really interesting because now I do, I've got a nice office, I've got a secretary, I'm responsible for a lot of--a lot more things at this point.  And I stayed at Arthur Andersen as a manager for three years.  At that three year point, then you got a decision to make.  Either you gotta kick in really hard and make partner or you need to think about doing something different.  My son [Bradford Williams] was born in 1988.  I had a daughter [Jada Brown], I missed--I didn't capture my daughter.  I had a daughter in 1978.  She was born in October, a couple of months before I graduated from college [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  She grew up in Louisiana with her mother.  She and I stayed in touch.  Never, never two weeks passed we weren't in some level of communication.  She is now in Chicago [Illinois].  She's a nurse at Northwestern [Memorial Hospital, Chicago, Illinois].  And so my son was born, my wife [Jaye Morgan Williams] and I in 1988.  And that was kind of as I watched and we lived down in Dearborn Park [Chicago, Illinois] and I'd walk from Arthur Andersen on Monroe [Street] home and I notice I'd get closer, I'd get closer to home and my pace would get faster.  And at this time, I had been, had been involved in Better Boys Foundation [(BBF), Chicago, Illinois].  I got back on the board after, not long after I got with Arthur Andersen after three years.  I was a senior, semi-senior when I joined, senior when I joined the board.  In 1989, I became president of the Better Boys Foundation.  So I was, I had been treasurer for a few years.  I was very involved.  And the Better Boys Foundation was a social service agency that had a huge reach, although it was on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois], we had a lot of corporate involvement.  We put on a banquet every year where we brought in the top football players in the nation for our awards banquet.  So I was starting to get to know all these people from the position that I was in.
Story_ID: 239028
Speaker 1: And I'd watch at Arthur Andersen [and Co.; Arthur Andersen LLP, Chicago, Illinois] and I had partners there who would suggest that they wish they had the network of people that I had.  And I would look at the lives that they had and the life that I had.  And I kind of liked the life that I had.  I didn't wanna be--in order to make partner, I thought I needed to really bear in in one area and just know it really, really well from the accounting standpoint.  And I didn't know that I really wanted to know one area really, really well in accounting and have my life be, be spent on that.  I thought all the way up to that point, I was an accountant but if you just saw me it's not what you would expect of me.  And, and I liked that.  And I liked, it's kind of how I thought I was all the way through but I looked at the life and what it would take for me at that point to become a partner.  And I thought about the history of the firm with me.  And I didn't feel like when it came time and you know once you're a manager, you're now in the room.  So when we're making, when promotions are being made for people to become a senior or a manager, I know how the process works 'cause I am now in the room and I understand this.  And I--and as they put the board up and you look at the people and the evaluations then people stand and talk about whether this person should be promoted or not I'm now in the room.  I know how this works.  And I could only imagine what they said when my turn had come.  And when you began, when it's time to become a partner, the room is smaller and I'm sure the judgments are tighter.  I didn't trust that they would make me a partner.  I didn't trust that they would do what they were supposed to do because it didn't feel to me they had done what they were supposed to do coming up to those other points.  I looked at that and I looked at how much and how involved I wanted to be with my son [Bradford Williams].  I thought about the life of a partner versus the life that I was having and the one I kind of saw at this point.  And decided maybe it's time for me to think about doing something different.  And all the while you're at Arthur Andersen, people are calling because they knew that Arthur Andersen hired people from the top of the class.  And they train them really well.  And if you were continuing to move through, you were probably pretty competent.  So the headhunters were calling.  All the executive recruiters were calling all of the time.
Story_ID: 239029
Speaker 1: When I was on the board of Better Boys Foundation [(BBF), Chicago, Illinois], I had an opportunity to meet Vern Loucks [Vernon R. Loucks, Jr.].  Vern Loucks was the chairman of Baxter [Healthcare Corporation; Baxter International, Deerfield, Illinois].  And I met Vern talking about [HistoryMaker] Marva Collins' school [Westside Preparatory School, Chicago, Illinois] because he was trying to figure out you know Marva Collins was doing some great things.  But is it replicable.  If it's not replicable, then it's one lady whose got a great idea and can move one school but we're trying to see if we can replicate this.  And he and I just engaged in an interesting conversation one day.  And I left and it was, wow I just stood there and spent half an hour talking to the chairman of a Fortune 100 company.  As the headhunters started to call one of the calls I got was from--was for a position at Baxter.  And I thought about it and said you know I, I'm ready to go.  A position in internal audit is not what I wanna do but it's only gonna be for two or three years.  And I like the company.  I didn't like--I started getting in trouble with Arthur Andersen [and Co.; Arthur Andersen LLP, Chicago, Illinois] also because I didn't think that what we did really provided value.  I thought that you know we provided some confidence to the public, but I didn't think we really helped move society along.  And when I thought about Baxter, I said, "You know Baxter is responsible for hospitals.  They supply 70 percent of everything a hospital needs."  So they do good--what they do, the work they do, the business is good.  I met the chairman and I like him.  And I know him.  I know him, I met him at least enough to talk to him so he may know who I am.  So if that's kind of how this company is, then maybe I'll do it.  And I left and started working at Baxter Healthcare in September of 1988.  And I, you know, I started the commute from Dearborn Park [Chicago, Illinois] up to Deerfield [Illinois].  I was traveling a lot at Baxter.  Travel--the places I was going were not great places.  I was going to places like Cleveland [Ohio], Mississippi, the King Street, [Charleston] South Carolina.  Sometimes I'd go out to California.  Nice--California was a nice place, but it was always where our plants were.  So it wasn't like I was going to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] I was going to Irvine [California] and Ontario [California].  But it was good and it was good work and it was good training and I liked the people and I like you know I was, I was motivated and I could--from my experience at Arthur Andersen I was working as I worked at Arthur Andersen and I knew that I could get some things done.  And we'd come up with ideas and done some things and I think we were really, I was, I was gonna do well at Baxter.  I really enjoyed it.  And I'd come up with a concept and we brought in all the people in finance from all over the world and for three days we had them explain what their business was.  To try identify where the risk were and what we were gonna do to try to mitigate those, at least in our audit work.  And that kind of catapulted me to another point.  And they talked to me after nine months about a possible promotion.  And it, it was a little over a year about a possible promotion, which I wasn't expecting for three years.  Then they explained to me why they couldn't give me that promotion, and--which I understood and we went on.
Story_ID: 239030
Speaker 1: Around that same time, Joe Kellman [Joseph Kellman] who's the founder of Better Boys Foundation [(BBF), Chicago, Illinois] had a birthday.  And I went to the party.  And I ran into an old friend who was also on the board of Better Boys Foundation named Jeff Jacobs [Jeffrey D. Jacobs].  And Jeff Jacobs had distinguished himself by being the agent for Oprah Winfrey.  And Jeff had also decided to give up his firm and go inside and work exclusively with Oprah.  And they had--she had just bought the studio [Harpo Studios Inc., Chicago, Illinois] over on Randolph [Street], and was looking to do more.  But she needed at that time you know her staff, she had been working at ABC and she was looking for people to kind of help to manage it.  And Jeff asked me.  You know we talked that night he called me after that and asked me if I'd be interested.  And I thought real quickly and said, "Sure."  So I went down to the--drove down to the studio, met with Jeff, met Oprah, looked at the show.  Saw some of those things.  And then in March of that year, I joined Harpo.  I was the thirty-fourth employee at Harpo and I joined as the vice president controller.
Speaker 2: So this is in 198--
Speaker 1: That is in 1990.
Speaker 2: Ninety [1990].  Okay.
Speaker 1: So I stayed, I stayed at Baxter [Healthcare Corporation; Baxter International, Deerfield, Illinois] for a year and half.  In that time, we actually started to move up to the--as soon as I got to Baxter, we decided to go buy a house.  Because now we got a child [Bradford Williams] and I am working in the suburbs and we'll go buy a house out in the suburbs.  And my wife [Jaye Morgan Williams] and son and I went out looking up along the North Shore [Illinois].  Look at all these places.  Finally found a place that we liked.  It was in Long Grove [Illinois].  And we drove back from Long Grove to Deerfield [Illinois] and then drove from Deerfield, downtown.  It took us as long to get from Long Grove to the office as from downtown [Chicago, Illinois].  At which point I decided you know what, I don't know if I want my son to grow up in the suburbs.  I want him to be comfortable with who he is.  So maybe I'll deal with the commute.  And we stayed downtown. (Coughing) Excuse me, and I just told her to look for a house in the city.  And she found one in Lincoln Park [Chicago, Illinois], which is where we live now.  So we moved to Lincoln Park.  And I did that, I did that commute.  It was fortuitous given that I was only at Baxter for a year and a half so I didn't have this commute from suburbs now down into, to Harpo [Studios Inc., Chicago, Illinois] for just a commute from Lincoln Park down there which was the first time I remember the drive just down Halsted [Street] and I'm there was just, it was wonderful after driving you know all the way up to Deerfield every day for a year and a half.
Story_ID: 239031
Speaker 1: --You're starting at Harpo [Studios Inc., Chicago, Illinois], now we have you at Harpo (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  Yeah.  I started at Harpo--
Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety [1990]?
Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety [1990].  I had been at--it was really interesting and fascinating and wild because I knew that you know I was still doing something that was meaningful was important to me and I knew that there were times that Oprah [Winfrey] and I could have a conversation and we might, I might say something or we might engage in something that she would go on and what she says is now gonna impact twenty million people.  And really being there watching how this company grows for me I always had this sense that I wanted to be an entre--I wanted to work for myself.  I wanted to be on--I wanted to be in charge because I thought that my judgment, I trusted my judgment as well as I trusted anybody else's.  But going there, I knew okay I will never be the chairman of Harpo, Oprah has that one.  I will never be president of Harpo, Jeff [Jeffrey D. Jacobs] has that.  But I think I can get a lot out of this experience because as this company grows, I will grow.  And those were the things that I understood.  So I didn't wanna just do--now obviously the financial part was what I was there to do, but it was--we were a small company and there was so much that was going on, I just wanted to learn more about it because prior to going there, I knew no more about TV than turning it on and watching it.  So this just exposed me to an entirely different area of things.  And, and there we went.  So I'm, I'm not sure, I mean I've been gone from Harpo for some time now.  I know that she's expanded in a number of different businesses to a number of different places.
Story_ID: 239032
Speaker 1: But to be there [Harpo Studios Inc., Chicago, Illinois], to help set up the systems, to be there and help set up her foundation [Oprah Winfrey Foundation; Oprah Winfrey Leadership Academy Foundation], which that was one of the very interesting things there.  I mean after I'd been there for six months, an email went out to everybody that said, "If anybody, if you have any requests, any money requests from Oprah [Winfrey], send those to [HistoryMaker] Rufus [Williams]."  And the next day they came rolling in with three bins of mail and plopped them in my office, which I just looked at for a few weeks and said, somehow I've gotta figure this thing out.  And one of the things that I knew that the only way I--you can help somebody give away their money is to try to understand how they think and what is important to them.  And so those were some of the wonderful conversations that I've had with her.  Because we just tried to figure out from the perks that she was in and what she wanted to do.  How we help to do that.  And I think you know in so many cases, what you leave is more about how you live than what you do while you're there.  So we're, we're going to impact a lot of different places and judgments are going to be made based on these things that we do.  And so once every two months or so, I'd go sit down with her for a session.  And I'd come in with, you know we kind of stopped and identified some things.  And we identified women's issues, children's issues and education as being the things that were most important to her.  And so I could work through all of these things and come down to what I'd go in and talk to her about giving you know how we were gonna handle these requests that came in.  And that's where we really got into some real deep and intensive conversation.
Story_ID: 239033
Speaker 1: And you have to imagine that talking to Oprah [Winfrey], you know it's gonna be introspective.  And I was trying hard not to become an '[The] Oprah Winfrey Show' when we were talking so I was kind on offense as much as I could trying to learn more about her but also trying not to give up a lot about me.  But on my own, I was really learning more about who I was and, and some of the things that may otherwise come through in trying to guard off her asking me those questions.  But we did get into some deep philosophical things and the question that she would ask, and the probably the one that I remember most is if you--she would suggest that everything that you are, is pretty determined by the time you get out of high school.  Everything else is frosting.  So if you were gone today, what would they put on your tombstone?  What would people say about you?  And I'd listen to that and I didn't really know the answer but it made me think about it.  And then think about, is what they--I think they would put there, could I change that?  Or what is it that I want people to say about me?  You know have I really done what I think I wanted to do?
Story_ID: 239034
Speaker 1: And you know kind of going through all those things and, and you know my mother [Dicye Ward Williams] was really excited about me working for Oprah [Winfrey].  And it's an exciting place [Harpo Studios Inc., Chicago, Illinois] and I think everybody who works there is excited about working there.  And a lot of people still try to get jobs there.  But there came a point and, and you know we weren't--it was--the experience was magnificent.  I mean we did things that I never thought that I would do.  So you know it was things we--a weekend she decides we're gonna go--Aretha Franklin invites her to Radio City Music Hall [New York, New York] to see a concert and she invites me to go along.  So, you know, ten of us go to you know get on a private plane and go to New York [New York] and we see Aretha Franklin and Peabo Bryson.  We leave Radio City Music Hall, not from the back door, but we go back up across the stage.  And we go up to Aretha's dressing room and we talk with her for a while.  And the next morning we get up and we leave and in Baltimore [Maryland] where Oprah used to live, there was the Polo Grill [Baltimore, Maryland] that has, she says has the best fried lobster anywhere.  I've never had fried lobster.  Maybe that's my favorite food.  So we go to, we fly to Baltimore and we go to the Polo Grill and we meet with some people and we have fried lobster and crab cakes.  And we get back on the plane and we come back to Chicago [Illinois].  And we get back.  I take my wife [Jaye Morgan Williams] fried lobster and it's still warm from Baltimore.  And it was just you know just one of those experiences the kind of thing that takes place that I sit sometimes and say I never knew life was gonna take me here.  But it was you know that kind of experience and you know soon after I got there, Alex Haley was there and they were talking about doing 'Queen.'  And, no I'm sorry, they were talking--he was talking about doing a movie about Madam C.J. Walker. And that led to an event at Alex Haley's farm in Tennessee where all of Oprah's staff went and we were there with Alex Haley for a weekend.  And I've got my autographed copy of 'Roots[: The Saga of an American Family,' Alex Haley] you know from Alex Haley, which is one of my, my key treasures.  But you know to sit there on the porch at Alex Haley's farm and talk to him after having watched 'Roots' it's just--you know these are the experiences that I never ever would have imagined that I could have.  And you know it's all just you know it's all just part of life and, and we're going and we're growing and it's great.  It was just a wonderful, wonderful experience.  But as we go through all those things, then I move to different parts in her enterprise.  I was CFO.  I was vice president of strategic planning.  I was--you know, I ran her foundation [Oprah Winfrey Foundation; Oprah Winfrey Leadership Academy Foundation].
Story_ID: 239035
Speaker 1: You know we reached points later on and the real decision was where do I go from here?  And Oprah [Winfrey] at the time, her contract was every two years.  And the biggest issue was, is she gonna renew her contract?  And every two years was all this conversation, all this speculation.  Will she?  Won't she?  Will she?  Won't she?  And even inside we didn't know.  And you know, now I know what her story was in leaving Channel 7 [WLS-TV, Chicago, Illinois] 'cause she wanted another day of vacation and they said no.  She triggered the clause.  She bought the corporation.  She syndicates.  The rest is history.  So this one time when it was time for her contract to be renewed and she was vacillating on whether she--she asked for two weeks to think about it.  And to me, if she's thinking about it that means the answer might be no.  And I can't wait until that happens and have a year to kind of get my life in order.  I understand in the entertainment business, people do pilots.  Pilots run for thirteen weeks.  Everybody says nope it didn't work and you go find another job.  I get that.  But that's not the life that I know.  I'm a lot more stable.  So with that I started thinking about what will I do next?  And how do I, how do I make sure that I'm prepared for that?  So I started really thinking about what came next for me.  And it kind of followed--I will tell you after I had been at Harpo [Studios Inc., Chicago, Illinois] for a year, I got a call from the CFO of Baxter [Healthcare Corporation; Baxter International, Deerfield, Illinois].  And it led to him asking me to come back and become my boss from when I was there before, which was really intriguing.  And I went back and we went through the process and ultimately I had to do a few interviews.  They did offer me the position to come back and be you know at a much higher level in the organization.
Speaker 2: So what, what year is this?
Speaker 1: This was 1991.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I had gone to a [Chicago] Bulls game with Jeff [Jeffrey D. Jacobs] and Jeff was--we were talking about a number of things.  I told him about this offer from Baxter.  And Jeff said well--then he started talking to me about the virtues of staying at Harpo.  He says, "Well you know I'm gonna have to tell Oprah about this conversation."  I said, "Yeah I understand."  So the next day I get to the office and our offices were fish bowls.  So all glass and mine was down the hall from hers.  And she walks by and she looks over and at me a couple of times with the--you know the kind of over your shoulder look.  And she says, "I guess we need to talk."  I said, "Yeah, I think so."  So we set up to talk the next day.  And I went in and we talked about the future.  And the future being where the company is going, where am I in that.  I can--"Oprah I can, I got the accounting stuff, but it's really a question of what else can I learn from this?  Because we can go a lot of places and I don't wanna just be here.  I'm gonna learn everything that happens.  Because everything will either be money in or money out.  I just need to be closer to where the action is.  I need to understand better what we're doing.  I wanna be a part of that."  And with all those things, it was really a question--I could have sat down, I thought and figured out what my life was gonna be like had I gone back to Baxter.  These what my raises were gonna be.  When I reach this point, I'll get stock options you know.  This is kind of I can, I can map this out.  Or I can stay here and not know anything because I hadn't gotten a raise yet and I've been here for fourteen months.  But it's wildly exciting and I can see.  So I decided, against my wife's [Jaye Morgan Williams] judgment, to stay at Harpo and do that.
Story_ID: 239036
Speaker 1: Later on when she [Oprah Winfrey] was thinking about these things, I decided to sit down and figure out if I'm gonna do something different, what would that be?  And what makes me unique?  Because I still wanted to do something on my own.  And I came up with a concept of being a business manager for wealthy people.  Those who came into wealth quickly and didn't either have the time or the expertise to manage it.  And that was probably in 1987, '88 [1988] that I was having this thought, 1997 or '98 [1998].  And then I started going out and I talked to some sports agents.  And they were by and large interested in me joining them.  But as I thought more about me joining them, I thought I was giving up more than what I would be getting in that process, so I stayed at Harpo [Studios Inc., Chicago, Illinois].  And I stayed there in kind of a more diminished capacity.  I, you know, went more part time because I was really looking to try to do something else.  And she and I had talked about these things.  And it all led to at one point in 2000, we were--we were having the life conversation that tended to come up often when we were--this philosophical conversation.  We were going through the philanthropy things.  And in that conversation we came to the point that it probably made sense for me to go on and pursue something else.
Story_ID: 239037
Speaker 1: At that time, there was, there was a young lady who had been interning at Harpo [Studios Inc., Chicago, Illinois].  And I'd see her.  She was clearly interning, clearly young, very attractive.  I'd wave you know as we went through and I learned later that she had actually married this professional baseball player who she met at the basketball All Star game with another young lady who worked at Harpo who I knew very well because I had helped her get a job there because she had been a scholarship recipient of the Better Boys Foundation [(BBF), Chicago, Illinois] and they had become friends.  And so she married--I learned that Deleon [Richards] had married Gary Sheffield and you know I thought that was, wow.  In 2000, Gary had been involved in a lot of businesses and he was cap--just providing a lot of money for working capital for those businesses.  And Deleon had talked to her friend.  Her friend had told her you know what you should probably talk to [HistoryMaker] Rufus [Williams].  And she did and so we talked in that May.  That was in '99 [1999].  We talked in May of '99 [1999], and then we talked again in October.  Around Thanksgiving, Gary and Deleon came to Chicago [Illinois] because Deleon lived in North Chicago.  And I met them for dinner.  We hit it off.  I flew down to St. Petersburg [Florida] where they lived right after Christmas and started helping Gary manage through these businesses.  And, and really managing through them was kind of managing them away because I didn't think--as they were, he was putting in too much money.  And I didn't think that they were really gonna be successful given what they were.  So we started managing them away.  And over that next six month period, I spent a lot of time working with Gary and a lot of time working with Harpo.  And then came the conversation with Oprah [Winfrey] and just figured you know what, this is really what I was looking to do.  I can't have a better client to start with.  So, or this was about as good of a client to start with as you can have.  And so I decided to leave and start my own business doing business management for athletes and entertainers.
Speaker 2: Okay, so what did you call your business?
Speaker 1: Olympus.
Speaker 2: Olympus?
Speaker 1: Olympus LLC [Chicago, Illinois].  It was right around, you know, that was right around the, right around the [2000 Summer] Olympics [Sydney, Australia].  And I think it was around the millennium [2000] and a lot of people were naming stuff Millennium.  It was around the Olympics.  I had gone down.  I had actually gone down to the [1996 Summer] Olympics in Atlanta [Georgia] with my son [Bradford Williams].  We were two blocks away when the bomb went off.  And it was just kind of in all of these things I decided you know in thinking about what my business was, I'm sure that was there and I thought about it and the people who I would work with and Mount Olympus [Greece] being the place where the gods alight from, it seemed like the right place to provide that stability.  And so I named my company Olympus Incorporated and started, started providing that service to whoever I thought could use it focusing primarily on athletes and entertainers.  Figuring that I--the work that I could do, it was really thinking about Oprah has a staff of people managing all these things for her.  What about those people who come into the wealth and don't have the time or the capacity and have a staff working for them.  This is the uniqueness of what I have because I probably, probably are not gonna encounter people who have as much money as she does.  Probably have not, will not encounter people who have had as many options to do what a number of things that she does.  So I will probably either not see anything I haven't seen before or certainly won't see anything I can't help figure out.  And with that, I thought those were the uniqueness of my abilities and I started my business based on that.  Over the years, things, things go as they go and as I would expect, I have an opportunity to show my full competency to my clients and particularly in Gary's case, it moves on beyond just managing his money to also negotiating his contracts.  So it goes full circle.  And that's what my business has become.
Story_ID: 239038
Speaker 1: Gary Sheffield, how much money does he bring in a year, annually?
Speaker 2: For him?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: (Laughter)  Well, when the first contract that we negotiated was actually with the New York Yankees.  Gary became a free agent after he was with the Atlanta Braves and he had been working, Scott Boras--he had an agent named Jim Neader who, there was a blow up and when he was playing for the [Los Angeles] Dodgers and in this blow up, there had been some things that were, that were understood to be promised that didn't come out.  And there were times when really the sense was that his agent should have been there and he wasn't.  And when things blew up really badly, it seemed that the only way out was that somebody was gonna have to take the hit.  And that ended up being Jim Neader.  And Gary hired Scott Boras to be his agent.  There were a lot of things that should have happened but as it turned out, Scott Boras, when Gary became a free agent, well he was looking that he was gonna become a free agent, he decided that he didn't wanna keep Scott Boras on as an agent, that he would do it himself.
Speaker 1: Now Boras is B-O-R-A-S, right?
Speaker 2: B-O-R-A-S.  And so we talked about it.  He sent a letter to Scott Boras thanking him and excusing him.  Scott Boras was not accustomed to losing clients.  So Scott called Gary and asked for a meeting.  And Gary said fine.  And as he--we had developed--he called me and asked me if I could be in Miami [Florida] on Friday.  So I went to Miami and when Scott Boras and his guy came to Gary's room, I opened the door and the four of us sat down and met.  And Scott went on to try to explain why he should still be Gary's agent.  And we explained why he shouldn't.  Scott didn't know who I was I mean it was really interesting, because I try to present all the time.  And even in those cases, I didn't always wear a tie, but I always wore a suit.  I was always I thought appropriate.  So and you know it was just interesting to watch him as he sat there was peeping over still trying to figure out you know who--he knew, should have known who I was.  Because I was involved with Gary beforehand, but it may have been for a number of reasons including his arrogance that he didn't, or he acted as if he didn't.  So we went through--went through that.  At the end of the day, Scott was removed and Gary was gonna represent himself.  When it came time for the free agency period to come, and we talked, it didn't make sense that Gary was going to field all these calls that were gonna come in and negotiate through all these things.  And so I became a certified agent and I became Gary's agent.  And as we talked with the Braves, as we talked with the [Los Angeles] Angels, as we talked with the [Baltimore] Orioles, the [New York] Mets and everybody else, I'd managed through all those things, had all the conversations including our stealth visit to George Steinbrenner down in Tampa [Florida] where we sat and, and talked thorough a number of things.  But ultimately led to Gary signing with the, with the Yankees.  When he signed with the Yankees, we signed him--he, we got a, we got a three year deal, a three year deal that paid $13 million a year.  We didn't get a no trade contract.  It was a deal where everybody else interestingly enough was offering the same thing.  The other offers that we were getting were for two years and $10 million.  And I have to tell you for a boy who grew up at 16th [Street] and Drake [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois], who remembers the day when all he got to eat that day was greens, the first time I turned down $10 million for somebody to play base--$10 million a year to play baseball, I hung up the phone and I sat there and just stared at it and said, "I can't believe I just turned down $10 million for someone to play baseball."  And I sat there trying to distinguish between all of these things but ultimately, we got him to $13 million.  And as I was negotiating through my first deal, and because it was in New York [New York], the media became very rabid about everything we were doing.  And so every day I get calls about where we were.  And I knew that whatever we did was gonna be highly scrutinized and this was my first contract and I was doing this.  I was out negotiating on my own.  And so I recall The New York Times on a Sunday, my wife [Jaye Morgan Williams] had invited some friends over for brunch.  Everything had kind of reached a crescendo right then.  We come to an agreement, except we hadn't looked at the document.  And while the people came over for brunch, I was upstairs in my office going through the contract and I just grabbed The New York Times which said everything what Sheffield has done except the contract.  And I called my son [Bradford Williams] and said, "Brad, how can they possibly know?"  Because we just got to this point last night.  So, I knew how scrutinized it was gonna be with all the different media sources in New York and so we finished it.  We got it done.  I watched it and I watched the scrutiny which never ever came because I knew I felt comfortable we had done as well as we could.  Didn't really get criticized until it was time for them to either take or not take his no trade contract--trade him.  Which they decided they would pick up his option year and, and trade him.  And then there was all the conversation about how he didn't get a no trade, how I didn't negotiate a no trade clause in there.  But even so, we got Gary traded to the Detroit Tigers and we got his contract extended.  So he went from making $13 million a year to another $13 million for the next year and then two more years with $14 million, playing as a designated hitter as opposed to being in the outfield.  It was, it was--and we got a number of other things in there.  So I thought for a guy from 16th and Drake, we had come a long way to get to the point of negotiating through those things.  So that's kind of what, where Gary is.  It's been a $39 million then plus interest which comes to about $41 million for his contract in Detroit [Michigan] and then add on another $28 million and I mean for his contract in New York, then another $28 million in Detroit.
Story_ID: 239039
Speaker 1: That sounds pretty good to me.  Do you have other clients now?
Speaker 2: I do have other clients.  I don't really--I mean Gary [Sheffield] is the one who's most in the public domain.  So he's the one that I talk about.  The other ones because of the different kind of work I do with them, I don't talk about that list of them--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --at all.
Speaker 1: Well, to those watching this tape, let me predict that the [Detroit] Tigers are gonna win the whole thing this year.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Two thousand eight [2008] because they got a whip.  But you know that's, that's neither here nor there.
Speaker 2: Yeah, nah, that's a fair prediction because I you know I was--I hated when he left the [New York] Yankees because I was looking forward to getting my World Series ring.  So I wanna walk around with one of these big gaudy rings or at least not walk around with it but have one I can show that I was participating in that (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)  Oh, they're gonna get it.  Placido Polanco, [Miguel] Cabrera, I mean they gotta--[Magglio] Ordonez, they got a whip.
Speaker 2: It's an exciting time and they've got wonderful people in Detroit [Michigan].  I mean the management is great.  The ownership is great.  They believe in people.  They believe in family.  They believe in team.  And I've have spent time with them.  It's just, it's a good place to be.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's a good feeling around a ballpark.
Speaker 2: It really is.  I'll tell you, it's very different than what you feel when you're around Yankee Stadium [Bronx, New York, New York].
Story_ID: 239040
Speaker 1: So now that takes us to, you know, we're in the middle--I guess what 2004, 2005 (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Yeah, I mean that [Gary Sheffield's contract negotiation] was done actually in 2006.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So this one, I mean this Olympus LLC [Chicago, Illinois] is your, is it your sole means of income then, right?
Speaker 2: That is yes.
Speaker 1: That's it?
Speaker 2: That is it.  That is it.  And a couple of years ago, my son [Bradford Williams] was in--I've been involved in education in that--from Better Boys Foundation [(BBF), Chicago, Illinois] after being president of the Better Boys Foundation I got more involved in education related things.  And I kind of--wherever my son was, I was, I was.  So he was at Francis [W.] Parker School [Chicago, Illinois], I was ultimately asked to be on the board, which I was happy to do.  When he left Francis Parker and went to Whitney [M.] Young [Magnet High School, Chicago, Illinois], we got--I got involved at Whitney Young.  And then was appointed to a local school council spot.  Ran for a local school council position, and was elected president of the local school council.
Speaker 1: Now what year is this?  This is 2000--
Speaker 2: He went to, he graduated in 2006--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --so he went there in 2004.  I got on local school council in 2003.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you became the president in--
Speaker 2: I became the president in 2003.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right now that's a high profile position and it's one that you get a lot of scrutiny because the parents at Whitney Young are some top flight achievers and they're not you know playing around--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --they really want--
Speaker 2: Well everybody wants--I mean you got high, very accomplished students and you've got parents who--they are accomplished because their parents are making sure in most cases that they are.  Whitney Young is one of the top schools in the country.  And to be at that position at that school, I mean to be in that school is a wonderful thing.  And to be appointed to that position I thought was really--said a lot.
Speaker 1: I think that it's the top public high school in the country, if not the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  It certainly, it certainly way up on that list--
Speaker 1: --I mean yeah, or it's close if it's not at the top.
Speaker 2: It is really a special place.  And what we were trying to do and what I was trying to do was to help move it further, further forward.  I think anytime you been some place you want to know that you been there and I was trying to do that at Whitney Young.  And there was a--it was interesting because Serena Williams and Venus Williams were doing a tour of cities.  They were raising money for Ronald McDonald Houses [Ronald McDonald House Charities] and they were making a stop in Chicago [Illinois].  They were going to Whitney Young and they were gonna do a seminar for students over there.  Serena had played in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] the day before.  And she pulled some abdominal muscles.  So they were late getting, getting there.  The mayor [Mayor Richard M. Daley] was coming over to give them a key to the city.  And the mayor came over because I was a local school council president, I was dispatched to entertain him, keep him company while we were waiting for the ladies to get there.  And he and I covered--we talked about a lot of things.  We talked about Whitney Young, we talked about Providence St. Mel [School, Chicago, Illinois], I was still on the board of that.  We talked about Francis Parker.  The mayor had been principal for a day at Orr [Academy] High School [Chicago, Illinois] for a number of years and was kind of frustrated with how the school wasn't getting.  And as he was telling me all of this frustration, I said, "Well, mayor, you know I was--I graduated from Orr."  And at that time, I had been in the public domain because Gary [Sheffield]'s wife [Deleon Richards Sheffield] was being--they were being extorted by this guy who said he had a video tape.  And that had become a really big story and so my face had been plastered all over the news for a few days.  And so the mayor kind of knew who I was when he came in.  We spent this hour talking and talking about education.  And a few months later, a month later, I got a call from his office asking if I could come and meet with him, which led to him asking me if I would be on the [Chicago] Board of Education.  Which I had obviously accepted.  And a year after that, the gentleman who's the president [HistoryMaker] Michael Scott [Sr.], decided to step down and recommended that I replace him.  So I went from--it was kind of a really quick ascent, but through all those things, from president of the local school council at Whitney Young, to the president of the board of education for the City of Chicago.
Speaker 1: What year did you become president?
Speaker 2: I became president in 2006.
Story_ID: 239041
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, now how has, how's it been being president of the [Chicago] Board of Education?
Speaker 2: There is no more important job that I can have.  I am a product of Chicago Public Schools [CPS].  My son [Bradford Williams] is--my son left private school and picked Whitney [M.] Young [Magnet High School, Chicago, Illinois].  He didn't pick public schools.  He picked Whitney Young of all the schools in the city and he could have gotten into all of them.  So that was a very conscious decision.  Watching him go through public school and my son decided that he wanted to go to Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut].  And he decided to apply early.  And he applied only to Yale and he got in.  So he has been one of those that we continue to say--that I continue to say if this--we know the schools are good.  We know that this is what they can do.  And it is my push to try and get everybody not to go to Yale, but get everybody at a point that they can feel confident to go wherever they wanna go.  I know that it works.  I know that it worked for me.  I know that it worked, it worked for him.  It is one of the biggest challenges because there is so many things to do.  And for me I am trying to change a lot of things and I know more than anything.  I'm trying to change a culture.  I'm trying to change a culture outside where we know that our children can be successful, that we know that parents are the key people that make that work.  I'm trying to make sure that the right accountability and the right pressure is put in the right places.  But I think more than anything else if we believe that we can get something done and we put forth the work to get it done, then we can get it done.  I don't think we're putting forth the work to get it done.  I don't think the people believe well enough that our children can be successful.  And that is the culture that I'm trying to change.  I'm trying to change it on the outside and I'm trying to change it on the inside.  Our district is the third largest school system in the nation.  I think that as we go the nation goes.  When we show them we can do we can show the world that we can do.  So it's a really big undertaking as we look to the future.  And to me, you know I go out to schools as much as I can.  I read to children.  When I look in the eyes of a kindergarten kid, I was at a school today for their African American history month and as those children sat there and they looked up at me when they learned who I was in some awe, I know that that child is expecting me to do the best I can by him.  And in some fifteen years or so, he will let me know one way or another whether or not I have.  The mayor is responsible for our schools in Chicago [Illinois].  And under him is the board of education.  And I'm the president of the board of education.  He makes it painfully clear all the time that I am responsible for our schools and I take that responsibility very seriously.  So as we try to move it and I try to move it with expecting excellence, I'm not accepting excuses, not accepting victimization.  Recognizing that we don't have all the resources that we need, I expect everybody to do everything they can with the resources that we have.  And we will work on the other hand to try to get more.  But I think you know there were times and places and schools where there was nothing and people have gotten to a lot.  We've got a lot of work to do and I fully believe that we can get it done.
Story_ID: 239042
Speaker 1: Now whose place did you take, I mean who?
Speaker 2: That was a gentleman named [HistoryMaker] Michael Scott [Sr.], who interestingly (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)  Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: --enough, Michael Scott is also from North Lawndale [Chicago, Illinois].  Michael Scott got a scholarship from Better Boys Foundation [(BBF), Chicago, Illinois].  Michael Scott and I got to know each other when I was president of the Better Boys Foundation.  And I think that Michael's ability to say you know what I think I've done my five years and I can step away, had a lot to do with the history that he and I had.  And I'm excited that of the comfort that he had with recommending me.  And I'm excited by the comfort that the mayor [Mayor Richard M. Daley] has had in appointing me.  I wasn't--I remember when Ken Smith [HistoryMaker Kenneth Smith, Sr.] became president of the [Chicago] Board of Education, the first African American president of the board of education.  I can tell you that I had not ever heard of a president of the Board of Education before Ken Smith.  In all the years I was in school, I have--I look at the wall now with all the pictures on it.  The name means nothing to me.  When Michael became president of the board of education, I did look at him in awe because I know the enormity of the job.  So it was not one that I ever thought that I would get because Michael was there and I knew Michael when he was there before I was ever involved even at Whitney [M.] Young [Magnet High School, Chicago, Illinois].  So to think that I now have the responsibility--the same responsibility you know I don't ever have an opportunity to stop and say, wow I have this responsibility but what I do know is that there are a lot of people who are counting on the work that we get done.  And I know that I'm responsible for that work that we get done.  And, in the time that I have I'm gonna push us as far, as fast and as hard as we can.  Because I know that our children are counting on us to do that.
Story_ID: 239043
Speaker 1: You know when people say, when they talk about the public schools, is that the teachers often complain about the parents are not--absent or not, there're not even any parents in some cases to even bring to the school.
Speaker 2: And they're right.  But you know the notion and the reality is we teach children where we find them.  And we can't make any excuses about that.  So if the parents aren't doing what they should do, then I am my brother's keeper.  And if that means the teacher needs to do more or the grandmother needs to do more or the community group needs to do more, then do it.  It's gotta get done for the benefit of the children.  It's one of those places that we have a power parents [Power of Parents] conference in, in Chicago Public Schools [CPS].  And the first person that I brought in for our power parents conference was Bill Cosby.  Bill Cosby pushes a message of taking responsibility.  And it is unpopular which is baffling to me because at some point you have to look at yourself as you are, and then you grow from there.  And Bill Cosby and the notion that he pushes says you know it--when he, when he first talked at the fiftieth anniversary of Brown versus The Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], he talked about--he was talking to a group of people who were his people.  And he was saying this is the truth of where we are and we need to get better.  And the media took it to a different place.  And I think the message that he espouses is a message that we need to hear.  I think the message of responsibility is one we need to have and it may not--you may not, you may be the worst parent ever.  But that child should be then parented by somebody because it needs to happen.  And we have to really look at that and get in control of it.  It makes no sense that African Americans at this point score lower than everyone else on standardized tests.  It's not because we can't, it's because somewhere we got out of kilter.  Every time we look at the success that happens, and I do--this is one of the reasons I do point out my son [Bradford Williams].  Because if African American males at the bottom of the heap, it should mean that every African American male is at the bottom of the heap.  We see too many of us who are not at the bottom of the heap.  So we know that we can do it.  The issue is why aren't we?  And what are the things that are keeping us from doing that.
Story_ID: 239044
Speaker 1: So, as I move through this process and I understand the fragmentation of the family, the family structure is very different.  The males are very much absent.  Children see men in ways in which they have not ever seen them before.  So often the images of men that they see are you know we're dealing with generational poverty.  You've got places where you have never seen an adult get up and go to work.  The men that you see on the street on the corners doing whatever they're doing or you see 'em on TV doing the perp walk, we're trying to change all that.  So we develop programs.  And one of the programs I'm real proud of is the Real Men Read program, where we have men going into schools for one hour per month to read books to children.
Speaker 2: Now where you recruit the men to do this?  Are they the parents or who are they?
Speaker 1: Well I started out first (throat clearing) I emptied my rolodex.  And we began this process and we went through you know we wanted to get people who people wanted to be around.  So I asked the mayor [Mayor Richard M. Daley] to be an honorary chairman.  Our system is 39 percent Latino.  Eighty percent of Latinos are Mexican.  So I ask the consulate [sic. consul general] of Mexico to be an honorary chairman.  At the time I happen to know the consulate then, Carlos Sada [Carlos Manuel Sada Solana].  And I ask a very popular senator from the area to be an honorary chairman, [HistoryMaker] Barack Obama.  And those--that's where we began and then I did--go through my rolodex, called all of my friends and asked them to be on our steering committee.  And then I made sure that we had the right diversity on the steering committee so I called people I didn't know who I thought were people in the right place that people would follow and asked them to be on our steering committee.  And all I wanted from them was their name.  But if they would read, I wanted that too.  And from that point, I went around and when I saw a man who I thought would be the kind of man who should be before our children, I would ask them for their business card.  I would tell them about the program.  I would tell them how small the ask was because all I'm asking you for is one hour per month, if you do more than that great.  All I'm asking for is one hour per month.  And the men responded.  And so now we started first in Englewood [Chicago, Illinois], North Lawndale [Chicago, Illinois] and South Lawndale [Chicago, Illinois] in the first year.  And we had thirty-four schools and about three hundred men.  We now have over six hundred men and we're in over eighty-four schools impacting some sixteen thousand students.  I am only limited at this point by resources.  By the ability to buy books.  Because we give a book--every book we read, we give a copy of it to the child we read to.  And men are--I mean I went to my [Kappa Alpha Psi] Fraternity meetings.  I sent people to the Alpha [Phi Alpha Fraternity] meetings.  I went to Real Men Cook [Chicago, Illinois] and the Ques [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity] were cooking and I went over and talked to them and got them involved.  So wherever we would find men, we would bring them in.  And it's been, it's been a wonderful program.  And I know it's doing the things that we want it to do because I still go into schools and I still see an absence of men.  And so we need our boys to know what men really look like.  What men really do.   What their possibilities are, that men value education.  I need girls to see who men really are and what men really value and to know what they should expect from men as well.  So it has been, it's been one that we're not talking about, been having real intense conversations about bringing it out on a national basis.  But it's been a wonderful program in our schools.
Story_ID: 239045
Speaker 1: Now how did the community directly--I know you hear the media reported about what Bill Cosby says, but how did the community in the room with him respond to him?
Speaker 2: The people responded well.  I mean I think we did two things when he first came in.  We did one [Power of Parents conference] and that was just for parents.  And the parents heard the message from him and heard the message from some other special people that we had come.  But response was good and the media response was also not bad.  But then we did something else that evening which is the thing that I'm really gonna follow up on.  Where we had a segment that was called Just for Men.  And we had ten thousand boys and men in the room to listen to Bill Cosby and that one was really special.  And to walk out, when he and I walked out on the stage with the rest of the panel, and I walked up to the podium, as actually as we were sitting there he just started patting me on the back.  And I said, "Isn't this amazing?"  He said, "That's why I'm patting you on the back."  But just to see all the testosterone, all these men who were there to hear this message.  And I got up and did my piece and then we had someone get up and do their piece.  And Dr. Cosby went on and on and on.  And he was--I mean it was such good stuff and it was just such a good, a good following.  What I have to do and it's been now over a year since we did that.  And we've done some other things like the Real Men Read program came in after that.  We still have an issue with males in our society.  And I didn't expect bringing Bill Cosby, have him talk to them would cure that issue.  But we've got to figure out the answer.  And we've got to do some things that get us closer to that.
Story_ID: 239046
Speaker 1: So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  Is that your primary concern about the black community today?
Speaker 1: My primary, well I'm responsible for the educational system in our city [Chicago, Illinois].  And so I'm primarily concerned about all of them.  But I can't escape where, where I'm from.  I can't escape where I am.  And I do know as I try to move the system along, who's at the bottom of it.  We can't move it.  Our weakest link defines us.  And so I--it's clearly recognizable that this is an issue.  As our system is 49 percent African American, if we can take care of our--and we have this achievement gap currently, so our Asian students and our white students are doing fine.  If we can get our Latina students and our African American students to that level, then we've done wonderful things.  And so I have to focus on where our challenges are.  But I'm still very sensitive to our top students and I'm still very sensitive to our other ethnicities.  And I spent a lot of time with all Latino students as well.  But I do know that this is a group that I have a platform and a responsibility for and I'm gonna do what I can to help to elevate, elevate, elevate us.
Story_ID: 239047
Speaker 1: What are some of the other programs that you've initiated?
Speaker 2: It's been interesting.  My predecessor [HistoryMaker Michael Scott, Sr.] started a program called ballroom dancing [Having A Ball program] where we have fifth graders doing the cha-cha and waltzing and tango.  And learning about the culture of those dances and the, and the places where they're from.  And what we've been able to do, well Michael had it in one class per school and about eighteen schools.  We now expanded that to all fifth graders throughout--to one hundred schools throughout the district and it's not just one class in the school, but it's everybody in fifth grade whose doing that.  We continue on with these parenting issues and the parenting conferences [Power of Parents conference].  We've been able to really look in and we're starting right now to do some real effective things we believe in the school system [Chicago Public Schools (CPS)] in general.  So I have a board meeting for instance next week where the board will vote on consolidations, turnarounds, closings, which is pretty dramatic measures as being watched throughout the nation and what's happening in Chicago [Illinois].  And I think it's the right thing to do.  It's upsetting some people.  It's upsetting some adults, but we're doing what's best for children.  And I think as we continue to do that and we continue to move this system forward, I have one mantra.  I--we need to answer every question with what's in the best interest of the children.  And if we do that, then I think we're looking at the right things.  So you know there's a, there's a theory in Chicago that says in politics, "Don't send me nobody nobody sent."  I never got into politics other than the, you know running for student council president.  But I understand that I'm in a political position.  But I wasn't sent.  I met the mayor [Mayor Richard M. Daley] at Whitney [M.] Young [Magnet High School, Chicago, Illinois].  He asked me to be on the [Chicago] Board [of Education].  Michael recommended me to be president.  The mayor did whatever he has to do and then appointed me.  I'm not beholden to anybody in this position.  So the things that I do or things that I believe are altruistic in trying to move the system forward and not thinking about the politics of what we have to do.  So I'm hopeful that in this because I have been able to come to this position without any baggage, without any favors due that we can certainly do what's right.  Ken Smith [HistoryMaker Kenneth Smith, Sr.] was the first black president.  I get a little bit troubled at times when I see some of us responding to what the schools do, simply because we are an institution.  I'm never gonna forget where I'm from and I'm never gonna forget what this is about.  I think that within that, I'm gonna certainly try to make sure that I'm not harming our people, I'm not harming anybody in the work that we do.  Not children.  If there are adults who get displaced in this process, then it's probably a reason for that.  But I think all the good ones are gonna be picked up.  And if there are people that shouldn't be there, then they probably shouldn't be there.
Story_ID: 239048
Speaker 1: I had a very interesting conversation with Dr. [HistoryMaker] Barbara [A.] Sizemore who was my principal when I was in elementary school [Anton Dvorak Elementary School; Dvorak School of Excellence, Chicago, Illinois] when I was working with Oprah [Winfrey] and we're trying to talk--we were talking about education.  And one of the things she told me was that at some of our schools our children can't learn because those-"You know what [HistoryMaker] Rufus [Williams], you know why they can't learn?"  "Dr. Sizemore, why?"  "Because those teachers don't like them.  And if you don't like somebody you can't teach them."  And I haven't forgotten that.  And so my sense is if you don't--you can tell in different ways whether or not somebody really cares about your learning.  And in these cases where we're not getting to that right level of elevation, if you are good, you're gonna be back there.  But I think what we--as our responsibility in spite of unions, in spite of politics, in spite of voting for local school councils, in spite of all those things, to elevate the educational process for each and every one of these children.  And if the parents aren't getting them there, we're the ones who are charged with the responsibility for teaching them.  We're the ones who are gonna be gauged and judged by how well they're doing.  I take that responsibility very seriously.  And we're gonna do a good job with it.  So as I look through some of the places where there has been this imbalance over years, you can see it, you can see it in facilities be it on the South [Side, Chicago, Illinois] and West Side [Chicago, Illinois] versus the North [Side, Chicago, Illinois] and northwest side.  You can see that.  I can't fix it all at once, very keenly aware of it.  And when we get the resources to do it, I know what the pieces are that we need to sure up and I know where the things are that we need to do inside and we will do those things.  So it's a monumental task and I am excited about what our possibilities are all the time.  I'm trying hard not to get my ear too far in.  I'm trying to keep things at the level that I should be but I think because I don't have the baggage, we will move and we will be as flexible as we can.  It creates a level of frustration at times because people aren't getting done the things they should, but I think we're gonna be good.
Story_ID: 239049
Speaker 1: Now do you have a, given yourself like a term? You know, how long do you think you'll serve [on the Chicago Board of Education]?
Speaker 2: My predecessors have each been in this position for five years.  I've been here now for a year and a half.  I will be here as long as I can.  I don't know how long that is.  It takes a lot of time, energy and effort and it doesn't pay.  That is, you know I wish I was independently wealthy so I can just do this.  But I'm not.  So I still have to make sure I can pay for Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] and I can you know still put food on the table and do those things.  That's the challenge that I have.  So as long as I can be here, I will and I'm hopeful that whenever I'm done be if it's tomorrow, that there will be some impact that's been shown positively from the time that I've spent.
Story_ID: 239050
Speaker 1: When you look back at everything you've done to this point--and you're still a young man--
Speaker 2: Thank you (laughter).
Speaker 1: --what would you consider--is there anything that you would con--major that you would consider changing, if you could?
Speaker 2: If I went back through my history you know I don't know given all the things if I had stayed at Lane Tech [Albert Grannis Lane Technical High School; Lane Technical College Prep High School, Chicago, Illinois] and been more challenged, maybe I would have moved and looked at some different things going through.  But I couldn't change that.  And my parents [Rufus Williams, Sr. and Dicye Ward Williams] couldn't know any more than they knew.  I think as I stop and look back at all those things, I think all those things were right.  There is some other smaller decisions that I would have liked to have changed, probably.  But I think at every point I try to look hard and make--and do the best that I can for then.  And then when I can do better than I try to do better.  I'm happy with the life I have.  I'm happy with the wife [Jaye Morgan Williams] I have.  I'm happy with my children [Jada Brown and Bradford Williams].  I think that's really the measure of a man how he cares for his children and I think when I look at them and see where they are and how they're doing, then we got that part right.  I'm excited about the possibility that I have to make that same impact on 400,000 children.  I think it's a wonderful opportunity.  I think it's one that many people don't get and I'm gonna try to do the best that I can by it.  If I could do something different, you know I think I'm pretty good with how things are.  I'm trying to live this life without regrets and so far I'm pretty good.
Story_ID: 239051
Speaker 1: Okay now we ask everybody this but you're, once again, you're a young man.  When you look back now on everything you've done, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: I hope my legacy will be the social work that I've done.  I hope my legacy and even you know when I think about even when I was at Arthur Andersen [and Co.; Arthur Andersen LLC, Chicago, Illinois] I stayed a little longer than I wanted to because I know I was in the room to help make decisions and I knew my presence as being a manager was helping some other people get through the firm.  I've tried hard to help people.  I've tried hard to present myself properly and have people see us, see us as a people through what I'm trying to, to show.  So I think when I look back at my legacy probably the biggest place that I've been is a place that I am now.  And I'm hopeful that people, everybody in our schools [Chicago Public Schools (CPS)] will, not like I was, they will know who the president of the [Chicago] Board of Education was.  And they will appreciate what the president of the board of education, and the board of education in fact did for them while they were coming through.
Story_ID: 239052
Speaker 1: Okay, now is there anything I have not asked you that we need to cover before I ask my last question?  Now you told us something about your family already, so--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --I think we're pretty--
Speaker 2: I don't think so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The last question is similar to legacy, but a little different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: You know I always, it's kind of that question.  If you have a party, you always hope that somebody shows up.  You know on my last day, I hope that somebody thinks enough of me to show up.  And when people talk about who I was, I, I don't, I have a hard time thinking of people who don't like me.  Not that I'm going around trying to be liked.  But I have a hard time thinking of any true enemies that I have.  Not because I'm doing everything that people want me to do, but I hope it's just in the way that I live that people understand that I'm trying to leave a world a better place than it was when I found it.  And if I can do that in every place that I go, then I think that I fulfilled my responsibility in that way.  Recognizing that at times the footsteps get bigger and I'm always in awe, I'm in awe when people introduce me. I'm in awe when people clap.  I remember going back to Orr [Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] and speaking to my--speaking to the faculty there.  And as I told my story, I got a standing ovation at the end.  And I thought, wow I got a standing ovation.  And it, it does some things in one I don't think that my story is great, I think that there's still always a story to be written.  And whenever that happens I don't think that--I mean I'm always happy for it.  I hope it means that I've done a good job.  And I'm hopeful that when I'm done, people will still--I hope my legacy will be in whatever he did, he did a good job.
