Story_ID: 475093
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Togo Dennis West, Jr. [HistoryMaker Togo D. West, Jr.].  The first Togo is spelled T-O-G-O, middle name Dennis, D-E-N-N-I-S, the last name is West, W-E-S-T, and it's junior.
Speaker 1: All right, and, now, I know there has to be story behind the name Togo, and we can all suspect it has something to do with the African country.  But can you tell us what the story is?
Speaker 2: The name is actually Japanese in origin in terms of my family, although there are no Japanese antecedents in my family.  Though I was born in North Carolina, my dad [Togo D. West, Sr.] was born in Washington, D.C. and grew up here.  He was born in 1905.  The middle of three boys, the family lived right in Southeast Washington.  The family home still stands, 1320 27th Street, Southeast, and I drive it periodically.  Grandmother [Mary Chinn West], at the time that she was great with child, was a reader of the newspaper--she'd gone to Howard University [Washington, D.C.], and during that time, the war between Russia and Japan was underway out in the Pacific in a battle called the Battle of Tsushima Strait.  It occurred between the Russian and the Japanese fleets.  The Japanese defeated the Russians, which was a big deal worldwide.  And this was Japan's emergence as a naval power.  It got a lot of play in the press here in Washington, and the hero of that battle was a Japanese admiral whose family name, his patron name, was Togo, Admiral Togo [T≈g≈ Heihachir≈].  There's as many Togo--families of Togos in the Tokyo [Japan] phone book I think as there would be Smiths in the Manhattan [New York] phone book.  And Grandmother simply plucked the family name of that admiral right out of the pages of the paper and pinned on her boy who was about to be born.  So growing up in Washington in my dad's childhood were the three West boys.  The eldest was Douglas [Douglas B. West], the youngest was Carlton [Carlton S. West] and there was the middle boy, Togo.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he named his son after him.
Speaker 1: Do you think the significance of that battle for black people in this country going through racial strife was that an army of color defeated an army of Europeans?
Speaker 2: It, it could certainly have had a significance.  I never had the conversation with Grandmother to understand what moved her.  And when Dad described this to me years and years ago, and it's almost lost.  I don't even have a memory of his telling me.  I just know that's the family history on that, but I suspect at a time when blacks in this city were very aware of the current--as they were everywhere, it certainly could have been a significant matter.  I just don't know.
Speaker 1: What is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Date is June 21, 1942, which I said, throughout my life was the first day of summer, the longest day of the year, summer solstices, Winston-Salem, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay, Winston-Salem, North Carolina, all right.
Speaker 2: Born in Kate Bittings Reynolds Memorial Hospital [sic. Kate Bitting Reynolds Memorial Hospital, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], which was a hospital built with the funds contributed by the R.J. Reynolds family, the tobacco family there in Winston-Salem (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was this a black hospital?
Speaker 2: --for black, for the black populous.  It is no longer a hospital, another one of the victims of integration over the years.  But it was a well-staffed, well-run, all black doctors and nurses and black patients.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, and sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a lawyer.  I think I can say I've, I've served roughly half my time as a lawyer or in private industry, roughly half of it in government--not as a careerist, but appointed to various positions.  I was Bill Clinton's [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] secretary of the army for five years.  And then after that secretary of veterans affairs.  In the Carter administration [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.], I was the general counsel of the [U.S.] Navy under the [U.S.] Department of Defense.  I've served as the senior vice president of Northrop [Northrop Corporation; Northrop Grumman Corporation].  So I've been a government appointee, but I've always considered myself to have been trained, educated and to have pursued a career in the law.
Speaker 1: All right, now what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is July 8--7th (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) February 8?
Speaker 2: Oh, why do I think--today, yes.  February the 8th, 2007.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are in my office, TLI Leadership Group [Transformational Leadership Institute], in the Brawner Building at 888 17th Street, NW, Washington, D.C.  And that address is very important to me.  Years ago, I practiced law at 888 16th Street for Covington and Burling [Covington and Burling LLP, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Okay, ironically, that's the building we arrived at first today by mistake (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Which is the motion picture building--
Story_ID: 475094
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that the office compels me to ask everyone (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: --and they only require a short answer.  The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes, that's my short answer.  Do I need to say what it is?  It is probably--it's probably two, my wife's [Gail Berry West] spaghetti and my wife's chili.
Speaker 1: All right, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Ah, the blue of the University of North Carolina [University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina], Carolina blue, not because I went there, although I'm from that state.  It's just that I've always liked that shade of blue.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Right around my birthday, summer.
Speaker 1: Summer solstice, right.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: My wife and I take cruises, and so they could take us anywhere.  But I prefer warm places.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I have at least two, maybe more, and they both came from my father [Togo D. West, Sr.].  The first is Latin, cogito ergo sum, "I think therefore, I am."  And the other also from him was this, he once said to a group of teachers, "You teach the life you live."
Story_ID: 475095
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Togo D. West, Sr.] side, but we'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Evelyn Carter West.  I guess her maiden would have been Evelyn Earline Carter, E-V-E-L-Y-N, Earline, E-A-R-L-I-N-E, Carter, C-A-R-T-E-R, and West, W-E-S-T.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Mom always told me that her birthday was 10/11/12.  So that's October 11th, 1912.  She was born in Tuscaloosa, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Tuscaloosa, okay.  All right, what do you know about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them and?
Speaker 2: Well, just a, just a few generations back.  Mother was one of seven children, born there to her mom [Mary L. Carter] and dad.  Her dad's name was Louis Carter [Louis J. Carter, Sr.], and I'm trying to remember her mother's name.  Louis Carter she describes as, as completely light skinned with blue eyes.  I mean he could have been white.  He wasn't.  Grandmother was very dark.  Mother was the third child of the seven.  She was the old--the eldest of the three daughters.  There were three girls and four boys.  Her, her grandfather was named Sheppard [ph.].  And that's on her father's side.  Now, they're all Alabamians.  And that's about as far back as my memory of that, that family discussion goes.  My grand- my grandfather--her father, Louis Carter, worked for the--as so many African Americans did, worked for the trains.
Speaker 1: Okay, for the railroad.
Speaker 2: He traveled on the railroad, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, was he a porter or a brakeman or?
Speaker 2: I don't know what, what he did, what his job was.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, are there any stories from that side of the family that were passed down?
Speaker 2: Well, as you can tell, it was a family of--just from my early--that was a family of very mixed coloring.  My Aunt Arthurene [Arthurene Carter], the third of the daughters and probably the youngest of the whole, all seven, was quite, quite dark.  My mother, and I'll show you pictures of her, was probably not--well, when she died she was very fair, but I think that was health, but was not a, was not a dark person.  I never get the mulattoes and all that straight in my mind but she had some brothers who were as fair skinned as her father, my grandfather.  And so the story is that Uncle Pat, Patrick Carter, went off to Chicago [Illinois] and as so many stories in black families go, passed for white and that there was a second brother [Louis J. Carter, Jr.] who did the same thing.  And, you know, that would always be referred to from time to time, there are--there were the three girls, my mother, Evelyn, her middle sister, Lettie Claude [Lettie Carter], a very typical name for those days, and the third girl, Arthurene, were very close.  And I saw them more than anyone else.  And they often talked about that.  And they'd always say, well, you know, Pat went off and--that was the story of the time.  But families living in the circumstances that my mother's family did, had lots of stories like that.
Story_ID: 475096
Speaker 1: I have no stories about how they lived under segregation.  Mother [Evelyn Carter West], herself, grew up there, went to a local school that seems to have been a private school, Stillman academy for blacks [Stillman Institute; Stillman College, Tuscaloosa, Alabama], which led to her--and that school still exists, which led to her going off to Hampton, what was then Hampton Institute, now Hampton University, in Tidewater, Virginia [sic. Hampton, Virginia].  Mother, Mother's ambition was to be a concert pianist.  She was very talented, a very talented musician.  She, she did get into Hampton.  She had thought she'd go to conservatory, but she had to work her way through school.  She did so playing the piano around the area there at Hampton.  She always had a job playing the organ on Sundays in churches and ended up with her, with her music background.  Now, what Mom did with her life was to return from Hampton, not back to Alabama, but to Winston-Salem [North Carolina], where I was born, and get a job as a public school teacher, teaching music and that whole era, from the time she started 'til the time she retired, public schools were still investing in things like art education, music education and the like.  So she worked her entire career as a full time, not part time, full-time music teacher in the public schools of Winston-Salem, North Carolina.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, did your mother talk about growing up and have any stories about growing up that she (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, not really.  The stories I got from my family were less of Mom or Dad [Togo D. West, Sr.] sitting down and telling me, hearing them talk about it.  I was an only child.  And so, you know what happens with children.  They're always on the fringes of things.  So I'd hear her talking to my, to my aunts [Arthurene Carter and Lettie Carter], and that's how I learned anything.  But I never heard her much talk about her childhood.  I got the impression that it was a comfortable one.  Even with seven children, Papa, as we called Louis Carter [Louis J. Carter, Sr.], was able to provide for his children.  Things weren't very expensive in their part of Tuscaloosa [Alabama] in those days.  So she lived reasonably well.  He could not afford to pay her tuition at Hampton, and yet the family encouraged her to go and she did.  So I don't, I don't have a lot of stories.  You're right.  Alabama would be a time when you hear things about segregation and all that, never heard any of that from Mom in talking about that.
Speaker 2: Were there any stories about what white people you might be related to 'cause I know a lot of people don't know.  And then some people do know.
Speaker 1: I should have brought it with me (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) White families or the patron of the family.
Speaker 1: --there's a picture of this man, Sheppard [ph.], my mother's grandfather, which looks to me to be entirely white.  And it's, it's at home in my bookcase.  I just forgot to bring it.  But I never heard any story other than, this is my grandfather.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So there wasn't a relationship with a white family in town or anything?
Speaker 1: Oh, no.  It could well have been.  I just never heard that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: What--the reason is this.  In my very early life, Mom occasionally would take me in the summer because we all got out of school for the summer.  They're teachers, so we all had the summer off.  And I'd visit with the family there, but I spent my time there running around with the, with my cousins, playing outside, rarely sitting as I think you often might and hearing, you know, the older folks tell stories.  So I never got to know that.  Later, the sisters and my grandfather and grandmother [Mary L. Carter] moved to St. Louis [Missouri].  So from time to time, I'd go out there to visit them, but I never heard any of those stories.  I'm sure there must have been some, but I never heard them.
Story_ID: 475097
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Same as mine.  Togo Dennis West [Togo D. West, Sr.], and he's senior, T-O-G-O, D-E-N-N-I-S, W-E-S-T.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Well, he was born in Washington, D.C., as were his brothers [Douglas B. West and Carlton S. West].  And his year is 1905.  And he was also October, but he's October the 7th.  So that my parents' birthdays were just a few days, four days apart, 7th and 11th.
Speaker 1: Okay, you told us the story of how he was named, but what else about the family?  Are there any stories about his side (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, if you--when you see the picture of my mother [Evelyn Carter West], and I want to go back to her for a minute, you'll notice she has high cheekbones.  So there was clearly a lot of Indian [Native American] in her side of the family, the Carters and the Sheppards [ph.].  And that's not uncommon in families--well, in African American families in the United States, but certainly in the South, Alabama, the Carolinas, right up through Virginia.  Well--
Speaker 1: Did you know the Indian group that she was related to (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Mom, Mom said Cherokee often, but I was never clear, and I'd have to go back and look at where these Indian groups were.  Whether she was talking about down there or the fact that my father's family also had significant--well, some, some Indian blood in them.  The stories there are, in terms of Dad's family, he's one of three boys as I said.  (Cough) I'm so sorry, excuse me.  Grandmother also at one--well, his mother was Mary Ella Chinn, C-H-I-N [sic.], West [Mary Chinn West].  But the Chinn is a name I'll come back to.  And his father was Peter W. West.  Peter was within my family and a very close circle of family friends, not, not a broad circle, my nickname.  And why does a kid named Togo [HistoryMaker Togo D. West, Jr.] need a nickname?  He doesn't, but this was a way of giving his dad some recognition, and so I was Pete to Dad and Mom.  Occasionally, Mom would call me Togo, Jr., but mostly within the home, I was Pete and within relatives, I was Pete, and a few people in Winston-Salem [North Carolina], my name was Pete.  So Peter West.  Peter, Dad's father, was the son of a white construction company operator in early Washington, D.C.  Now, I have to say, early Washington, D.C. is, that's quite a ways back.  I mean Dad was born in 1905, then we're talking even further back.  And if you go to 1320 27th Street Southeast, where the family home was.  It's now out of the family.  It still stands.  It's one of maybe only two single-family homes on that block, and it's typical old Washington, the rounded turrets and the narrow facade, an up and down house.  But it's free standing with a bay window on each floor all the way up.  That house was built by and for Peter West by his father, the white construction person.  Now--and his name would have been West too, and I don't remember what my father's grandfather's first name was.  But my father told me, over time, that he was the contractor who cut the initial parts of Pennsylvania Avenue and Minnesota Avenue right there where they cross in North and Southeast Washington, right after you cross that bridge there, go past Barney Circle [Washington, D.C.] and cross the bridge and go up to that intersection.  In one direction, Minnesota heads essentially south towards Anacostia [Washington, D.C.] and the other direction, it heads the other way and (cough) (unclear), then running east, west, I guess.  So it was the first house (clears throat) excuse me, in that area.
Story_ID: 475098
Speaker 1: --Free-standing house in that whole area.  The West family, if you will, were the first ones on that block by a long shot at a time when it wasn't a block.  Now, that's Dad's [Togo D. West, Sr.] story to me.  That's my understanding.  And I've always thought what I should do is go back, check the records, maybe even reacquire the house, but it still stands, and I go by and look at it.  And I'm glad to see that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That was quite a leg up for Dad's granddad.  It meant basically that that generation, this, this son of this white man and his family, and the next generation too, really wouldn't have to worry about where they lived and what they owned, just had to pay the taxes.  And, in fact, the stories in the family were that there were other pieces of property that Grandmother [Mary Chinn West] and Grandfather owned around Washington [D.C.] during that period (cough) excuse me.
Speaker 2: Now, this house would have been before the turn of the century, 1880s maybe?
Speaker 1: Not certain, but I wouldn't be surprised.  What I'm struck by is it's still there.  And when you see it (cough), excuse me, you'll recognize it immediately.  It's every one of the old houses around Washington.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Having said that, it was never quite clear to me what my grandfather did, Peter West [Peter W. West], Dad's dad because eventually, on that block--and it's no longer there.  I drove past it a couple of weeks ago, a huge apartment building was built.  Not huge in stories because it was, you could only get so many stories in, but it stretched from basically Pennsylvania Avenue down to Minnesota [Avenue].  If you consider that I said, it's roughly where they intersected, this building would have extended this way on the block.  And so it's quite large.  And as far as I could tell as a youngster coming to Washington every summer, just about, to spend time with my grandmother and uncle [Carlton S. West] and cousins, Peter West was the caretaker, the resident manager of the apartment, that apartment building across the street.  I don't have a lot of memories of him.  He died early in my life, but I have some.  I remember that sometimes he'd spend the night in the house.  Other times he'd be across in the apartment building.  That's what he did.  Dad says that Papa Pete dropped dead getting off a streetcar track--a streetcar, getting off a streetcar one day.  And I've always had that image in my mind of Papa Pete sort of getting off the streetcar and then falling on his face.  It's actually not a pretty picture when you think about it, but that's what a kid carries around with him.
Story_ID: 475099
Speaker 1: Grandmother--and I don't know the age at which she died or the year.  I just know that for most of my life, both my grandfathers--no, grandfather, Papa Pete [Peter W. West], has, has not been alive.  Mary Ella Chinn Carter [sic. Mary Chinn West], however, was a different breed of cat.  She lived for quite a long time.  She died in--well, quite a long.  She died in her mid-to-late eighties, I think.  I always remember her there at thirty, 1320 27th Street SE in a bedroom on the back, rear of the second floor.  Douglas [Douglas B. West], well, let's see, let me take them in order.  Let's deal with her family.  She was one of at least three daughters herself and maybe even a brother or two.  But the sister I remember best was my Aunt Arrah, spelled A-R-R-A-H, not like an arrow, but A-R-R-A-H.  And I guess it was Arrah Chinn, and her last name is Carpenter, Arrah Chinn Carpenter.
Speaker 2: Now, the last name Chinn is sort of unusual but is there a story (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, the story about, yeah, there is a story.  The Chinns come from a part in Virginia.  My mother [Evelyn Carter West] would always talk about going down in Virginia to finish our kin--to visit our kinfolk.  And you now see why I don't have quite as much in my memory about mother's side of the family.  She came to Washington [D.C.] so often with Dad [Togo D. West, Sr.] and me every summer to visit here.  And she became the expert in Dad's side of the family.  And the Chinns lived in a settlement called Chinntown [Virginia].  Now, for years I thought this was an interesting story, and pretty much believed it.  But it didn't put any--it didn't have any flesh on its bones until a woman called me at the defense department [U.S. Department of Defense] when I was secretary of the army, said she was a distant cousin, that she had been keeping the history of the family and wanted to come to me.  And she came to see me at the Pentagon [Washington, D.C.].  She lives in Alexandria [Virginia], but I don't have her name in my mind right now.  And she had gone down, she had been to see Chinntown--I thought that was great.  It actually exists, gone to a gravesite and told me quite a bit about the family.  But the Chinns can be located in Northern Virginia history as a sort of significant, almost a clan I suppose, group of blacks living there.  The story of where their property came from and how they acquired it, I'm not that clear on.  I assumed it had something to do with going from slavery to freed person, to owning property, whether it's either given to you by an ancestor who was white and who owned it or what have you.  But the Chinns--you're right.  It's an unusual, but if I were trying to trace the clearest connection in my family, it would be right through Chinns in Northern Virginia.  Aunt Arrah and--Arrah Chinn and Mary Ella Chinn both ended up living in Washington.  And Aunt Arrah produced at least, well, produced a daughter and a son [James H. Carpenter], both of whom became good friends--the daughter, Helen Carpenter [Helen A. Carpenter] became a good friend of Mom's when we used to visit.  The brother became a doctor, and his sons and daughters, in fact, (unclear) became my playmates when I came to Washington.  The stories are mostly then about the Chinn family and about who they married and how they intermarried, but it's rather general for me.  It's their existence there and the fact that that's our connection in the area.
Story_ID: 475100
Speaker 1: Well, it's a whole lot of Chinns living in one spot, but what did your grandparents do in D.C. [Washington, D.C.]?  Well, you said, Peter [Peter W. West] ran (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Peter, as far as I know--
Speaker 1: --managed a building.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I don't know what else he did, but during my time Grandmother [Mary Chinn West] owned property.  And I think may have--some of it may have rented.  I know that eventually the boys--Douglas [Douglas B. West], the eldest brother of my father [Togo D. West, Sr.], my dad always described to others in my presence, as a genius.  He could learn anything.  Douglas did not go to college.  He ran away from home in high school.  And though my parent--grandparents apparently never got him to come back--I'm not sure they wanted to, because apparently, the brothers and everyone knew where to find him.  Dad used to say that Douglas could teach himself plumbing, electrical wiring, carpentry and that he just was the smartest person dad had ever known.  And actually, dad was pretty was pretty smart himself.  But Douglas made a life here.  There's a Douglas West, Jr. [ph.].  I don't, haven't seen them since one of--my other uncle's funeral.  Carlton [Carlton S. West] was in the Second World War [World War II, WWII].  He was young enough to fit right in, served abroad, had aspirations to be a painter, came back to Washington after the war, came back to the old home place, and appears to have been dominated a lot by my grandmother.  He may have had a girl, as I understand it, that he wanted to marry, a young woman.  She vetoed it.  He never went far with his artistry.  When I knew him best during the summers we came here when I was in elementary school [St. Benedict the Moor School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] and high school [Atkins High School; Atkins Academic and Technology High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], he, he worked at the pharmacy that my cousin, James--well, my dad's, my dad's first cousin, Dr. James Carpenter [James H. Carpenter], the family I told you about, the children of Aunt Arrah [Arrah Chinn Carpenter], owned in Alexandria, Virginia.  And so I can remember every day at about noon, he'd get on the bus and ride over to Alexandria [Virginia], and he'd work at the pharmacy all night, come back, and then I could hear him turn on the baseball game, and listen to the old Senators [Washington Senators].  So Carlton spent all his time at home.
Story_ID: 475101
Speaker 1: Did your father [Togo D. West, Sr.] go to college too? Did he--?
Speaker 2: Dad--I'm never quite clear on just what Grandmother [Mary Chinn West] did at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], but Dad gave me the impression that she was in a nursing program at Howard University.  I've always thought, boy, that'd have to be a long time back.  You know, how formal was it?  But if it's true, then Dad was the second generation to go to Howard University.  He attended the old Dunbar High School [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School] here in Washington [D.C.], and he filled me with stories about Charles R. Drew.  He said he was called "Chunk" Drew, and I've never said that to Sylvia Drew [Sylvia Drew Ivie], Charles Drew's daughter, who was my classmate in law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] or to [HistoryMaker] Charlene Drew Jarvis, in the city council [Council of the District of Columbia] here.  But apparently, that Drew--Charles Drew was there about the time dad was, maybe a little ahead or a little after.  Also Bill Hastie [William H. Hastie], Judge Hastie, was there about that time, Dad says.  So after Dunbar, and the thing about Dunbar and Howard too, is there were opportunities for him to be in the cadet corps.  Now, if you look at the picture in his senior year in the yearbook, he took it in his high school cadet uniform.  That's how much he enjoyed that, and, in fact, I noticed in the yearbook, he wrote--or they wrote that his, his plan was to be math teacher or an army officer.  And when he went to Howard, his undergraduate major was mathematics.  And in his senior year, he was commander of the Army ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] there.  And so he pursued both of them.  It looks as if, when I look back, it may have taken him more than just the basic four years to finish.  I saw that his commission is in 1932, and you normally--his commission from ROTC, and they were--at least by the time I went to Howard, they commissioned you on the day that you graduated.  So that's about right then.  But, yes, he went to Howard University, and I think he probably graduated around '32 [1932], ten years before I was born.
Story_ID: 475102
Speaker 1: What did he--so he majored in math.  Did he teach math and, or--
Speaker 2: Well, two things.  When Dad [Togo D. West, Sr.] graduated, he was really very enamored of the potential of being a [U.S.] military officer.  He was commissioned a second lieutenant of infantry.  But it seems as if he somehow fell between the wars.  He was never called to active duty.  He got himself a teaching certificate, even while he pursued a master's [degree] in math, and I guess he--I'm not sure whether he did that at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] or not now that I think about it.  He ended up getting a master's years later, but it was from Worcester--from Clark University in Worcester, Massachusetts.  Briefly, he was the principal of a small, black school on the Eastern Shore of Maryland.  I don't know its name.  And then he apparently joined what appeared to be a kind of steady inward migration of blacks with teaching credentials into the schools of North Carolina, public schools of North Carolina.  I say that because what I grew up in, in Winston-Salem [North Carolina], was virtually a colony of blacks from other parts of the country who had their college degrees and who were teaching in the public schools.  Dad went there, he said later--well, later, when I heard him explain it, he went there for the money.  The public schools of North Carolina were paying blacks and probably other teachers as well more than they could make anywhere else.  He could make more there than he could here in Washington [D.C.].
Speaker 1: That's interesting because normally black teachers and administrators in southern public schools were paid much less than the white teachers.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: I'm sure that was the case anyway.  I'm just saying that--
Speaker 1: It was just the scale was higher there than--
Speaker 2: Than here.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Also, as is probably, as undoubtedly is true today, it cost less to live.  A dollar would go further.  What I thought was striking about it was that if you kind of look at Dad in high school [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.] and in college, he obviously had ambitions.  You know, he wanted to do things.  But he chooses to move to the South, and he never left, apparently never considered leaving, liked his life there, found it rewarding, stimulating.  And he went there--he was recruited, and I'm not sure whether it was true of Mom [Evelyn Carter West].  Mom also did the same thing.  That's how they met.  She left Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], went to North Carolina to teach.  They met as teachers in the North Carolina school system (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is there--
Story_ID: 475103
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is there a story about how they met that they tell?
Speaker 2: Not much.  Dad [Togo D. West, Sr.] was, probably thought of himself as a sought-after bachelor (laughter); don't we all?  Mom [Evelyn Carter West] was probably considered a relatively attractive young woman.  She had a very distinctive high cheekbone, looked a lot like an Indian [Native American].  They were single, but a lot of teachers that got there when they were there were single.  I sort of watched that whole generation age.  I grew up with their children.  Dad was staying with a family, one of whom was a teacher, who introduced the two of them.  And they ended up getting married.  Mother told the story of how there was another teacher at Dad's high school where he taught, who was linked with him.  And so there was a contest for their--for his attention.
Story_ID: 475104
Speaker 1: This is what happened.  The interesting thing about Dad [Togo D. West, Sr.] is he was recruited by the then principal at my high school, the school I ended up graduating from, Atkins High School [Atkins Academic and Technology High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], to teach math.  He eventually coached basketball and football, eventually became head of the math department.  Before I get to the end of it, the point is, he was employed by the same employer all his life.  He went there to teach in the high school there, Atkins High School, just as it was getting going, high school for--it was the only high school for African Americans, for blacks, for the colored, in those days for Negroes, in Winston-Salem [North Carolina].  There was another one out in the county, Carver High School [Winston-Salem, North Carolina], named obviously, for George Washington Carver.  Similarly, the one black high school, very competitive, the principal actively recruited from all over the East Coast.  And so most people who taught at that school held degrees from outside of North Carolina by and large.  And that's interesting because Winston-Salem had its own teachers college, Winston-Salem Teachers College, still there.  It's now Winston-Salem State University [Winston-Salem, North Carolina].  A and T [Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University] was just up the road in Greensboro [North Carolina].  They were turning out lots of college graduates, but this principal wanted to recruit from outside of, of North Carolina.  They had the same incentives that I assume other public schools had at that time, systems, and that is, you were paid ultimately based on tenure, how long you successfully stayed there, and on educational level.  So that all of them, in Dad's and Mom's [Evelyn Carter West] circle, were trying to work on their master's degrees to increase their pay.  And I think, the farther along they got, the more their pay increased.  And that's why I came to Washington [D.C.] so often in summer.  Mom and Dad would finish up, school would close.  I'd be out of school, pack us in the car--we didn't travel by train, didn't travel by bus, and drive up to Washington, D.C.  We'd spend some time at the home place.  Grandmother [Mary Chinn West] was there, Carlton [Carlton S. West] was there.  They would leave me, drive to New York [New York] where Dad dropped Mom off and she went to Columbia [Teachers College, Columbia University, New York, New York] to the teachers college there, stayed with some friends.  He went on up, initially, to Penn State [Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania], where he was getting his degree.  Well, eventually, he changed that and started going up to Clark University in Worcester, Mass [Worcester, Massachusetts].  And they did that for years until they got their master's.  But in all that time, he taught at Atkins, progressing until he became, by the time I was in high school, the vice principal, the assistant principal and head of the math department.  And then he became the principal of the school after I had gone off to college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  But he worked in that one school, in that high school, teaching there, for essentially thirty-two years.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: Who does that anymore?
Speaker 2: Very few people.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: At the same place all the--yeah, not these days.
Story_ID: 475105
Speaker 1: Now, you're the only child?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Mother [Evelyn Carter West], well, I think there were about six years apart in their ages, and I think Mother was in her thirties before I was born.  And I'm given to understand just from hearing them talk that after I was born, she was not able to have any more children.  So it may have been a difficult birth.  I don't know.  But I was the only child.  That was a--I'm sure there are downsides to that.  For me, that was a blessing all my life.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: For one thing, even then teachers, no matter how the pay is increased, no matter what the, the low cost of living there, they are nonetheless not paid that well.  And so it was much easier for them to have a life and rear a child if they're only paying the expenses of, of one child and themselves.  So that was--it was not a rich or lush life, but it was comfortable.  My parents never worried about money, and they taught me not to have that as my focus.  By the same token, they believed in, in not buying the fanciest of goods, but good quality and then taking care of it for a long time.  Every day, I'd come home from school.  I'd take off my school clothes and put on play clothes, old clothes.  And so Mother and Dad [Togo D. West, Sr.] were able to have a--what for me was a very pleasant life, at a time when they were not making a lot of money.
Story_ID: 475106
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  There is a baby picture around--I'm not sure I'll be showing to you today--I don't think I have it with me, of me sitting in a chair.  And I guess I'm a year or so, maybe two, old.  And they're taking a picture of me.  And you can see in the picture that I'm not that thrilled about it.  I mean it's not that I'm crying, but I see a look in my eyes that says, "Okay, now, I don't really wanna be here."  And it may be imagination, but I think I remember that (laughter) when they took that picture.  More, a little bit later and a more definite one, is that there was a time when my mother [Evelyn Carter West] was in a wedding, and I remember being in the pew as she came down the aisle, and I saw her.  And I just saw her dress, and I wanted to reach out and touch it.  Then a hand reached out and pulled it away, and she looked over, gave me smile.  I have that memory.
Story_ID: 475107
Speaker 1: What part of town did you live in?  Was there a name for the part of town that you lived in?
Speaker 2: East Winston [Winston-Salem, North Carolina], East Winston.  It's interesting because the neighborhood no longer exists.  It was just, the name--I remember the--my parents [Evelyn Carter West and Togo D. West, Sr.] first lived in an apartment building, but one of those small garden types.  And, oh, now, that's an early memory.  I remember living in that, that--on the second floor.  It was one of the larger apartments, but they were all small, but they had a little balcony.  I remember how it was laid out, living room, and then you got to where the hallway was and the kitchen and back to the bedrooms.  And there was a friend of the family who lived right on that same floor, but really, it's a very small apartment in the neighborhood.  That was 1401 Wallace Street in Winston-Salem, North Carolina.  Just up the street were some single-family homes, one of them owned by a professor who taught at Winston-Salem [Winston-Salem State University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], then what was Winston-Salem Teachers College, which was only two blocks further up.  And I remember Mother always said his name was T-Totsie Brown [ph.], Mr. Brown, taught at, taught at the college.
Speaker 1: T-Totsie Brown?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, I have no idea why that was his name, but he was a nice fellow.  I mean it was, he didn't--it's not as if you saw him tottering down the street drunk, no.  But he was a nice gentleman and his wife, and I guess he had children who were grown.  Eventually, we moved while I was still quite young.  I don't think I was in school yet.  So that's an early memory for me, that we moved up the street a couple of doors.  If that was--1401 was the apartment building, and we moved to 1409 Wallace Street.  And that was a single-family home basically with only two bedrooms, a bedroom, that would pass as a master bedroom, on the front off of a living room, but not what people consider master bedroom, just a little room with a bed where my parents slept; a second bedroom behind it that also opened basically off the living room.  The oil furnace was not in the basement.  We had no basement.  It was right there, and in fact, I can remember that it once was just a coal furnace, and the coal would be delivered and put under the house.  And I'd go down and fill up the coal and bring it in.  So we had a coal furnace there until we switched to oil and then didn't have to do that.  Had a kitchen, and in the back was a little place that we called Dad's den, but it was just like a little extension to the house and a little bathroom.  Now, that seemed to me at the time quite comfortable, but I realized years later that my parents rented that home throughout my childhood.  When I went away to college, we were living in that home.  And I remember I used to hear Mom and Dad talking about how they should have bought something well before then.  When I came back, my first Thanksgiving from Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], came home to visit, Dad picked me up at the train station, which was not far from our house.  But instead of taking me there, he took me to a home on, in another part of Washington [sic. Winston-Salem, North Carolina], near the high school [Atkins High School; Atkins Academic and Technology High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], that they had bought.  And that's the first time they had owned their own home.  They did not own their own home until after I started college--
Story_ID: 475108
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Spring came early to Winston-Salem [North Carolina], although I didn't realize it at the time.  I realize it now.  My mother [Evelyn Carter West], remember a musician, played organ for the local black Episcopal Church, St. Stephen's PE Church [sic. St. Stephen's Episcopal Church, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], Protestant Episcopal church.  It's still there.  One of its rectors is now the bishop of North Carolina, black man.
Speaker 1: Who is that? That's--
Speaker 2: Oh, it's Michael [Michael B. Curry]--oh, I can't think of his last name, but he is the bishop.  Now, he was the rector after I left, but mother, mother, while she was alive, used to call him Father Mike.  And he's well thought of in the Episcopal church.  My family and I are still in the Episcopal church.  But I was a cradle Episcopalian because of my mom.  Dad [Togo D. West, Sr.] considered himself a Baptist, never went to church.  He, he could not unwind until Sunday morning, cause he'd always--another memory.  I hadn't finished with the first one which was--let me see if I can do that and remember to come back to this one about Dad.  Easter, well, Lent and Easter Sunday, that's really when spring arrived.  Easter Sunday was a big deal then in our parish as it is everywhere.  For me, it was all, it was all the question of was Mom gonna--were Mom and Dad going to have me go to church in a new suit or new something.  I don't know that it was that important to me.  It was just part of what they did.  (Cough) Excuse me.  And if so, the question is would it be warm enough that I could wear it because, whereas here, the question would be clearly not, but there, you could almost probably wear your new summer-weight clothes to church on Easter.  The other early sight or sound involves what I did in church.  My mother, because she had to play the organ, would get there way before anybody else.  So I'd be there, and before you know it, I was an acolyte, and I was Sunday school.  So early on, I was wearing all these robes of acolyte and doing all the things.  I was very good at that.  I remember the, the arrival of Easter with so much pleasure because I--the sun and the colors and the flowers.  We had a tradition on Mother's Day, which is May, I guess, which I have never found anywhere else.  And I'm sure that the florists must be pushing it somewhere in the country that I don't know about.  We would wear a carnation or a rose or flower of some sort in our lapels to church.  If your mother was alive, it was red.  If your mother was dead, it was white.  Now, each year, I still try to do that just because it makes me feel like I'm back home, but I don't know anybody else that does.  Did--well--
Speaker 1: Yeah, we did that (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But that was an early tradition that I remember.  You asked me about early memories. I'm gonna tell you one more although it relates to later memories too.  We had a car.  We always did.  The first car that I remember because it was the first ten years of my life, was a 1942 Dodge, black.  The front was as long--no, the back was as long as the front.  It was a two-seater roadster, I guess, one bench seat that would seat two people on it.  But roadster suggests it had a convertible top.  It didn't.  It was a hardtop.  There was no back seat, and Dad drove it for ten years, and I can always remember people saying, "Are you ever gonna get a new car?"  When we traveled, because we traveled every summer, and we drove, I could sit between them sometimes.  Then I could stand in the little space behind the seat and the actually, back of the car.  And then I could get up on a little ledge below the window and sleep in it.  That's how small I was.  I remember those trips in that car as well as I remember anything, and that's the first ten years of my life.
Story_ID: 475109
Speaker 1: Most of my life before college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] centered around the high school, Atkins High School [Atkins Academic and Technology High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], because Dad's [Togo D. West, Sr.] involvement coaching and just in principaling and all that stuff meant we were at every game.  So early on, I was a basketball fan and a football fan, Atkins, Winston-Salem Teachers College [Winston-Salem State University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], and, oh, yes, the white schools too, up the road, UNC [University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina], Duke [Duke University, Durham, North Carolina], North Carolina State [North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina]--
Speaker 2: Could you attend those games?
Speaker 1: --Wake Forest [Wake Forest College; Wake Forest University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], no.
Speaker 2: Could you attend, did you see any--
Speaker 1: No, no, no, did not attend any of those games.  I could attend the TC [Trinity College; Duke University, Durham, North Carolina] games, you know, AT and T [Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina] with Al Attles, I mean I knew all them, Cleo Hill, Earl the Pearl [Earl Monroe].  They all played there.
Speaker 2: I was gonna ask you about Earl the Pearl (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He was there.
Speaker 2: When you said Winston-Salem [North Carolina], when I saw that, you know, get this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I watched him play.
Speaker 2: --image of the Pearl.
Speaker 1: Yeah, just walk right up the--two blocks up--
Story_ID: 475110
Speaker 1: The story incidentally about the house, 1409 Wallace Street, that neighborhood is no longer there.  Winston-Salem State College, now, Winston-Salem Teachers College, now Winston-Salem State University [Winston-Salem, North Carolina], continuing to expand because, frankly, the North Carolina higher education system has always generously funded the HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities] in that state, and there are a ton of them.
Speaker 2: Now, did this have anything to do with (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They took over my--
Speaker 2: --you mentioned when I asked you about where you were born, and you mentioned the hospital [Kate Bitting Reynolds Memorial Hospital, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] funded by R.J. Reynolds, did the Reynolds family or the Dukes or somebody like fund education for black people on some level or something (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, the Dukes, of course, spent their money down around Durham [North Carolina].  And so they funded Duke University [Durham, North Carolina] which initially was Trinity College, basically took the campus over, made them rename it.  All their money went there, but I'm sure there must be some Duke money--
Speaker 2: That's an Episcopal college, right, Trinity?
Speaker 1: Yep, well, no there's a different Trinity.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But this was a Trinity there in North Carolina.  If you go to Duke and go to the chapel there, I think the little plaque on the chapel still says something like Trinity College, but Duke took it over.  It became Duke University, they funded it.  And I wouldn't be surprised if North Carolina Central [North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina] didn't have some Duke money in it too.  But remember, Duke is private.  North Carolina Central, North Carolina Agricultural and Technical, A and T [Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University], A and T in Greensboro [North Carolina], Winston-Salem State College.  What was Bennett College in Greensboro is now UNC-Greensboro [sic.].  Those were all state schools.  They were funded by the legislature, and they were funded handsomely, and they still are.  If you got Winston-Salem State University now, it is continuing to grow probably than--and it was always due to, I think, a notion initially that fund those schools well, and you don't have the pressure to integrate the mainline white universities.  And at this point, who knows what the pressures are because there are a lot of blacks in the North Carolina legislature and they probably are simply to keep successful institutions going.  In terms of R.J. Reynolds tobacco money [R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] and education, it, too, went principally to white institutions.  Wake Forest University, used to be in Wake Forest, North Carolina.  It came to Winston-Salem [North Carolina] to be placed in a plot of ground just off Reynalda Road, Reynolds, on grounds originally owned by the Reynolds estate.  It's right there next door to the property owned by the original Reynolds family.  That campus which Mother [Evelyn Carter West] always called the million dollar campus was provided for them, along with a huge endowment, almost all with Reynolds.  I don't know of instances in which the Reynolds family poured money into education for blacks, but if they did it in the hospital, there may be some instances that I've missed.  Now, one thing that I will--I remember Mother always joked about it, the mascot of my high school, the one in which my Dad [Togo D. West, Sr.] taught all those years, Atkins High School [Atkins Academic and Technology High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina]--Atkins was a black man in early education in Winston-Salem, incidentally, is the camel, the Atkins High camels.  And mother always laughed and said, when they founded that school, that the black folks, the Negroes, if you will, wanted that to be the mascot because Camels was the big product of Winston-Salem in those days, and she thought that would get the Reynolds people to put money into.  She said it with a tone that suggested they were disappointed in that.  So I'm sure there's been Reynolds philanthropy in education for blacks in Winston-Salem over time.  I'm just not aware of, or as aware of it as I should be.  They certainly have been generous in a lot of ways (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I--
Speaker 1: --in that community and in that state.
Story_ID: 475111
Speaker 1: Just for those who are watching this in the future, when you think about that time period, I guess, the tobacco industry was in heaven, so many--I mean kids started smoking when they were thirteen, and continued all their whole lives.  I mean, you have a whole World War II [WWII] generations that smoked their entire--I mean smoking was such a big deal on television and anywhere else.
Speaker 2: One of my early memories is that every Saturday morning, there would be a package of samplers that would arrive in the mail, Reynolds [R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] products, a little snuff, a little this, little that.
Speaker 1: Did your parents smoke?
Speaker 2: Yes, both of them are lifelong smokers.  I assume it killed Dad [Togo D. West, Sr.].  He died right about my age, sixty-five, of high--he had a combination of high blood pressure.  He had a massive coronary.  Happily, he never had a stroke.  Through all the, all his life, he was apparently fit and able to do whatever he wanted to.  Mother [Evelyn Carter West] lived longest.  She died at the age of eighty-seven.  When she died, her heart was sound and her lungs were sound.  Well, her--her lungs are sound.  Mother's, I say, heart is sound, but, in fact, Mother, like any smoker and like African Americans had the effects of high blood pressure, hypertension.  But near the end, they both had been encouraged to stop smoking.  Dad tried, then he went back to smoking Camel filters, which I never even really knew that much about, and eventually, he was back on Camels.  So they were lifelong smokers.
Story_ID: 475112
Speaker 1: The one thing about Winston-Salem [North Carolina] growing up, and I think I can say this without fear of being corrected later, there was never an employment problem in that city.  The combination of R.J. Reynolds [R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], but overwhelmingly that, Hanes hosiery [HanesBrands, Inc., Winston-Salem, North Carolina].  There was a Hanes trucking company, and, of course, on a much smaller basis, there were other little businesses--Krispy Kreme [Krispy Kreme Doughnut Corporation, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] was quite a small business in those days, meant that the only time you found someone who was not working was if he or she elected to--and we had an area called 11th Street bottom.  And there were, people might live there who were, just elected not to, not to work.  They drank a lot.  All my classmates came from families by and large who, if they weren't engaged in something else, and they could always go and get a job down on the assembly line at R.J. Reynolds and live well.  I had classmates who had their own cars because of their parents' earnings just as ordinary workers during the segregated hay day in Winston-Salem, North Carolina at R.J. Reynolds.  They did well.  Even so--and this is still an early memory, I can remember that virtually from the start, and this is what I had started earlier.  We had one car.  Dad [Togo D. West, Sr.] used it.  When Mom [Evelyn Carter West] needed to be dropped somewhere, he dropped her, but they were both people who had things to do, so mom took the bus a lot.  I learned to take the bus with her.  This is the segregated South, Duke Power Company [Duke Energy Corporation, Charlotte, North Carolina] ran the bus service in Winston-Salem, North Carolina.  And so the rules of riding in the back, behind the line existed.  Now, no one ever gave up a seat in the back of the bus because a white person couldn't find a seat because they didn't wanna sit back there anyway.  And I often did not pay attention to that restriction because I hadn't been well trained on it.  It's not that anybody was trying to teach me to be a rebel, and I never got into any trouble because when I occasionally rode that bus line, it wasn't that crowded.  The point is, that there existed in Winston-Salem an alternate black economy.  Blacks owned their own bus line, and it was not some jitney or, or, you know, fairly--hardly existing enterprise.  The Safe Bus Company [Winston-Salem, North Carolina] was a full-service, full route, if you will, bus company, owned by blacks, financed by blacks, operated by blacks, administered by blacks, and heavily, heavily utilized by blacks.  It ran from the black areas of the city, East Winston [Winston-Salem, North Carolina] where we lived, Columbia Heights [Winston-Salem, North Carolina], also over there, what we called, Boston [Boston Cottages, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] over around 24th [Street].
Story_ID: 475113
Speaker 1: Tell me about this Safe Bus Company [Winston-Salem, North Carolina] again.  We were talking about Safe Bus Company.  The black community had a, owned its own bus company?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, the daughter of one of the senior people, Fannie Mae Adams [ph.], the daughter, Joan Adams [Joan Adams Bahner], was a classmate of mine growing up.  I'm--I know--I'll mention this quickly now and then leave it for development.  My education in Winston-Salem [North Carolina] went in three stages, maybe four, if you will.  Early on my parents [Evelyn Carter West and Togo D. West, Sr.], for kindergarten, engaged me in something, enrolled me in something called Bethlehem Center [Bethlehem Community Center, Winston-Salem, North Carolina].  I think it's still around.  It was actually more of a nursery school.  Then they put me in the local, black Catholic school.  The black parish--my parents were not Catholic.  The black parish was called St. Benedict the Moor [St Benedict's Catholic Church, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] because every black parish is in the South because the Moors were the Moors (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 2: But they had a convent that ran a school that was adjacent to it called St. Ann's Academy [Winston-Salem, North Carolina].  So my first year, or at least kindergarten, I spent there.  Then St. Ann's Academy turned all girls, and so I went to a public primary school near the house, then back--
Speaker 1: What was the name of that primary school?
Speaker 2: Columbia Heights primary [Columbia Heights Elementary School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then once the Catholic parish reopened a new school to which boys could be admitted, and they then called it St. Benedict the Moor School [Winston-Salem, North Carolina], grades one through eight, basically, my parents reenrolled me there in third grade.  That's where I went to Catholic school.  For them, it was the closest they could do to giving their son a private school education.  They had to pay a fee.  And then when I was to start high school, the nuns asked my father--these were Franciscan nuns, to come in and talk to my mother and father and said, "We're going to open St. Ann's Academy," which had continued, as the high school for girls only to boys, "and we would like your son to go there."  I was the valedictorian of my class.  My dad said, "It's time for him to see something in the public schools."  I think he also thought--he knew Atkins [Atkins High School; Atkins Academic and Technology High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] very well, and he knew that they could give me a really stellar education.
Story_ID: 475114
Speaker 1: Okay, I mention that to say that for much of that time, I could get a ride with my parents [Evelyn Carter West and Togo D. West, Sr.] in the morning to go to St. Benedict the Moor School [Winston-Salem, North Carolina], during all that time.  And a lot of my friends, including Joan Adams [Joan Adams Bahner], the daughter of the family that ran the bus lines, I didn't realize at the time, was in my class.  She eventually went off to Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] when she graduated.  Safe Bus Company [Winston-Salem, North Carolina] came into being well before I was aware of it, but my understanding is for specifically the reasons you would think.  People were tired of having to take a--put up with the services of Duke Power [Duke Power Company; Duke Energy Corporation, Charlotte, North Carolina].  They didn't always provide service throughout the entire black community.  I remember that the bus line came from downtown and stopped at the train station in my part of town.  Well, that meant that the rest of East Winston [Winston-Salem, North Carolina], which extended over to the university, Winston-Salem State College [Winston-Salem State University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], and out to Columbia Heights [Winston-Salem, North Carolina] was entirely was unserved.  And that's the way the bus services ran in Winston-Salem [North Carolina], from downtown into a neighborhood and back.  They rarely ran from one neighborhood to another.  You'd ride downtown, transfer and take it back, at least for African Americans, that's the way it seemed to work.  That bus service never ran out of downtown to the Boston [Boston Cottages, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] area or to where my high school [Atkins High School; Atkins Academic and Technology High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] was or anything.  And, indeed, it didn't--to get onto it, you had to walk into what was more the white part of downtown because in Winston-Salem, there was a black part of downtown.  We didn't just have a bus line and black taxis.  We had a black movie house, actually, two of them, one was the Lincoln Theatre [Winston-Salem, North Carolina], for obvious reasons.  The other was the Lafayette Theatre [Winston-Salem, North Carolina].  Downtown Winston-Salem, but in an area populated mainly by black businesses.  Dr. Rufus Hairston owned a very large and well-equipped pharmacy on the corner of that area.  And we could go and buy our pharmaceuticals.  In fact, I thought it was the way things were done.  And then we'd walk up the street a couple of blocks if we wanted to find the white bus company.  So obviously, for all this to work, there needed to be a black bus company, and I don't know when it was founded.  But by the time I became aware at an early age, the Safe Bus Company, I could walk just up my street to a corner of a thoroughfare.  It's now known as Martin Luther King Boulevard [sic. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive].  It connects to Martin Luther King Drive, runs a long way.  But in those days, it had a different name and it'll come to me.  But I could get on the bus there.  It would go downtown, and that's the way Safe Bus Company worked.  It would go downtown to where you would transfer to other buses that went out to other parts of the black community.  It was very successful.  It ran twenty-four hours a day, even in the middle of the night.  If you were coming back from some place, there'd be a bus that would come.  Now, the frequency, you know, after hours was quite late, but I used it sometimes to go to meetings at church [St. Stephen's Episcopal Church, Winston-Salem, North Carolina].  And I'd always, could get the bus at church, ride downtown, transfer, and come to my house or after school, if I didn't have another means.  Mother [Evelyn Carter West] and I rode that bus to church every Sunday morning, and I say, that bus as if there were only one.  They had lots of buses.  They were--and they were, they were sound.  They were modern.  In the early days, they might not have been as modern as state buses, but they were not rickety.  They were not uncomfortable, and you sat anywhere you wanted to.  And they, everybody was polite.  They knew everybody, you know, that, get on, "How you doing?"  And it was comfortable.  It was a comfortable way to live, and our money was going in the hands of people who were black and who used it to improve the service, and, yes, provided decent lives for themselves.
Story_ID: 475115
Speaker 1: Eventually, it turned out that providing mass transit in large cities, and Winston-Salem was always the third largest city in North Carolina.  That's not saying a lot, but it wasn't a tiny place.  And it became to be a fact that providing mass transit in medium to large cities was a money-losing proposition, to some respects, still is.  We use government subsidies in most, most parts of the country.  And so Duke Power [Duke Power Company; Duke Energy Corporation, Charlotte, North Carolina] eventually had to hand it over to someone to try to do it.  Eventually, Safe Bus Company [Winston-Salem, North Carolina] took over services for the entire city.  That was well after I'd left.  Unfortunately, I think that turned out the same way all the others did.  So I don't, I don't know quite what it is today, but I don't, I don't know that Safe Bus Company still operates.  But it operated well, it operated in the black, it made money for all of my childhood, for all of my college and law school years, and for decades after I'd left the city.
Speaker 2: Now, did whites ever ride on the Safe buses?
Speaker 1: Never went anywhere they wanted to go (laughter).  So Safe Bus Company, Winston Mutual [Winston Mutual Life Insurance Company, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] owned, founded, owned and operated by a black family.  Dr. Rufus Hairston's drugstore, the Lincoln Theatre [Winston-Salem, North Carolina], the Lafayette Theatre [Winston-Salem, North Carolina]--now, blacks could still go to the Carolina [Carolina Theatre, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] and the Winston [Winston Theatre, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], the two big white theaters.  It's just they were segregated so you went inside and sat on the balcony and threw popcorn down on the folks below.  So we had more theater options than white families in Winston-Salem.  And the Lincoln and the Lafayette got first-run movies.  I mean I could go there on Saturday mornings and see the, you know, the cartoons and the serials that were so popular in those days, just as easily as going up to the Carolina and sitting in their balcony.  I have to take it back.  There were no black facilities, well, facilities for blacks at the Winston Theatre.  It was all white, even the balcony.  Only the Carolina had white and black sections.
Story_ID: 475116
Speaker 1: Did you have favorite movie stars or favorite kinds of movies you'd watch as a kid?
Speaker 2: Oh, dear, let's see.  Well, you know, you always like to go on Saturdays, at least as a youngster, and see the cartoon festivals.  You know, it'd go for two or three hours, and then there'd always be the serials that would come each week.  It might be one of the cowboy things, but, you know, Roy Rogers, Hopalong Cassidy.  My favorite cowboy was the Lone Ranger, and his Indian [Native American] companion Tonto with, you know, Silver and Trigger and all that stuff.  I just thought that was pretty cool.  And, and in comic books, the Lone Ranger always wore a light blue shirt (laughter).  In terms of, you know, the other kinds of movies, well, as a kid, you know, pretty much it was the comics and the serials that you liked.  By the time of high school [Atkins High School; Atkins Academic and Technology High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], we're seeing other movies, but then you went to the movies so you could take your girlfriend.  I'm not sure how much we paid attention to those movies.
Speaker 1: Did you get a TV early on?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  We got a TV early enough so that I can remember coming home--I still remember the key players on, key stars on 'Mickey Mouse' ['The Mickey Mouse Club'], Annette Funicello and the like.  I remember 'The Mickey Mouse Club.'  I could still sing its songs.  'The Howdy Doody Show' with all those weird characters, including Princess Summerfall Winterspring (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yes, sir. Yes, sir. That's-- Flub-a-Dub.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Dilly Dally (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, (laughter) and the honking thing.  So we had TV.
Story_ID: 475117
Speaker 1: Although my early memories, again, was that, you know, my parents [Evelyn Carter West and Togo D. West, Sr.] and I would come home from school on Friday.  And while I was, before I started high school, while I was still in either or primary or elementary school, the routine was that all three schools, the two where my mother and father worked, and the one I attended, were in roughly walking distance of each other, not of our house.  But, for example, Dad's Atkins High School [Atkins Academic and Technology High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] took up half of a long block, a block equal to about three or four city blocks.  The school, the gymnasium, out back, the track, the football stadium, and the tennis court.  And then the next half of block would start with campus for 14th Street elementary school [14th Street School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] where Mom taught for a number of years.  And so we'd get up early.  Dad was an early riser, and I still am.  By 7:30, we were in the car.  By about a quarter of 8:00, you know, the town rush hour is different from in a place like this.  By twenty of 8:00 or a quarter of 8:00, I'd be dropped off at St. Benedict the Moor School [Winston-Salem, North Carolina].  I was always the first person in the entire school to arrive.  School didn't start until 8:30 in those days.  The nuns would come down, walk down from the convent.  They'd get there about 8:00.  Kids would start arriving not long after me, but we were not let into the school until 8:30 so we stood outside, even in the cold.  And then he would circle around past 14th Street and drop Mom off and go and park at his school.  And that way, he was able to be early for his.  He didn't want to get there when he was due to be there.  He wanted to be early too.  So I always got to school early.  I was always the first one there, and then at the end of the day, I'd go around to where Dad parked his car.  He parked in the same spot every day.  And he never locked it, didn't have to.  I'd get in, work on my homework until it was 3:30.  I'd get out of school at 3:00, and then he'd go--we'd pick up Mom and go home.  We'd always go home together.  Now, by the time I got into high school, that was different, you know.  But that sort of the way we were able to work our, work out our days.  And we got home in time that, you know, there'd be dinner and all that regular stuff.  On Friday, though, when we'd get home, when we didn't have a TV, Mom would order the groceries.  Families in those days could order--would order groceries.  We didn't have the big stores.  And again, black businesses.  My mother always ordered from a local, black grocery store.  We knew the family.  They went to our church.  They would take the order over the phone, pack it up, put it in bags in a box, and deliver it.  And so my memories are, as a very little kid, 'cause I was able to fit into this, I'd be sitting in the box that the groceries would come in.  Mother would not let me eat sweets, only fruit--all my life that she controlled, but I thought fruits were sweets.  To this day, for me, grapes are a great treat.  And no one ever had to say an apple a day to me, keeps the doctor away.  I eat several apples a day.  So I'd be there eating my fruit on a Friday evening after the evening meal.  Seven-thirty, 'The Lone Ranger' would come on the radio, "Hi Ho, Silver away," 'William Tell Overture' [Gioachino Rossini]. Eight o'clock, 'The Fat Man.'  Now, I don't know who remembers him, but the Fat Man was a private detective.  "Let's catch up with the Fat Man."  Eight-thirty, 'This is Your FBI.'  Now, I remember those programs.  Sundays were different because everybody remembers it on Sunday, on radio, 'The Shadow' came on, "Who knows what evil lurks in the heart of man?  The Shadow knows ha, ha, ha."  So I have a full memory of radio programs even before I get to the TV, but, yeah, we had TV, and I saw 'Mickey Mouse' ['The Mickey Mouse Club'] and all those programs when I'd get home.  But by high school, that stopped.  I didn't get home as early as my parents did by then, and a lot of times, in the early years, I have no memory of how Dad handled the fact that he coached a football team and had to stay late.  I don't have a memory of, okay, then how did I get home.  My thought must be that it was during the three years when I was in primary school or that, extended during that period when I was walking home.  The primary school was near my house.  And he stopped coaching after a while when his administrative duties became so heavy, so.
Story_ID: 475118
Speaker 1: When did you first get involved in scouting?  I know the Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America] are a big part of your life?
Speaker 2: I was a Cub Scout and I can only assume that someone mentioned it to my mom [Evelyn Carter West].  Cub Scouts start--Boy Scouts start at eleven.  You can't be a Boy Scout until you're eleven.  Cub Scouts can start as early as nine.  And Mom had me in the Cub Scouts as early as possible.  It was not--and to this day, it's not, that popular a thing to do in the black community.  And so I have to assume that Mom was encouraged by some friend because I can remember that I was in the Cub Scouts.  I was in this Cub Scout pack as they called it, and den.  And I went through all that stuff up to Webelos.  And then I had the blue uniform.  And then promptly at eleven, I became a Boy Scout and switched to a different location.  In the black community, almost--it's true actually in many communities these days, almost all scout units are attached, are hosted by a church.  Mine was First Baptist Church there in Winston-Salem [North Carolina], the black Baptist Church, where Scout Troop 68 [Troop 868] was hosted.  And that's where my Boy Scout stuff from age eleven on was done, but I was in the Cub Scouts before that.  The problem with scouting, of course, is finding--especially for Boy Scout units--it was then, it is now--African American men who have the time and who can take it on because the heart of scouting is role models who can devote the time, who can help the kids relate to the merit badge programs and encourage them to move along.  We were lucky, not only in our scout troop leader, we had several, whose names don't come to me, but because the council there, Old Hickory Council, was a segregated council.  There's a white scout executive, but there's a black scout executive for the blacks in that troop.  His name was Mr. Hinton, H-I-N-T-O-N.  He's still alive.  I saw him a few years ago when I was secretary of veterans affairs and went back.  He was an Eagle Scout, and he was determined that out of that council, some blacks were gonna make Eagle Scout.  And so we had what they called camporees which was weekend camping trips.
Speaker 1: Now, was he from that area too?  Had he been an (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was--
Speaker 1: --an Eagle Scout in the--
Speaker 2: I don't know where he grew up, but my sense is he was.  I know his--he lives in the Winston-Salem, Greensboro [North Carolina] area now.  But I didn't really know his background at the time.  It's not like he was part of the circle of teachers and people that my family knew.  I just know that over time, as the scout executive, he was always at the camporees when these troops came.  And he'd find, he'd keep track of who was making progress in merit badges, and pretty soon he pulled them together from these troops and take an interest in making sure (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So he was--
Speaker 2: --they progressed through the ranks.  But he was the motivating force.
Speaker 1: He was a scout executive.
Speaker 2: He was the scout executive of the council.
Speaker 1: He was not the leader of your troop?
Speaker 2: Not of my particular troop.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: But essentially, in the years between--you know, the scout ranks are Tenderfoot, Second Class, First Class.  Then you start the merit badges.  Five gets you a Star, ten gets you Life, and then you got to get twenty-one to be an Eagle.  And basically, when people started moving to First Class, to working on merit badges, he paid more attention, basically, intervened and became a kind of super troop leader for them.  The key was going on the camporees, the weekend scouting trips (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 475119
Speaker 1: About how many black scouting troops were there?  I assume that the Scouts [Boy Scouts of America] were segregated in North Carolina.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, they were.
Speaker 1: How many troops were in the black community?
Speaker 2: I don't know, but there were certainly more than just mine because Mr. Hinton pulled together, arranged a trip one summer.  And by then I was probably closing in on fourteen or maybe fourteen.  Fourteen is when you, in those days, became an Explorer Scout.  You got to wear the green uniform.  That was pretty cool.  And he organized a trip with the U.S. Navy for us to go aboard at Norfolk [Virginia] and actually cruise with the Navy.  Now, this is not a bunch of, an integrated bunch or a bunch of white scouts, this was a bunch of black scouts from Winston-Salem, North Carolina in roughly 19--well, it was the late, it was 19--between 1955, no, I'd say, between 1953 and 1960, right during that period.  I mean things were still segregated, and this was not a, you know, this was a Navy ship.  It was the USS Tutuila [USS Tutuila (ARG-4)], T-U-T-U-I-L-A.  Tutuila.  It was a diesel repair ship, and it was the summer of 19--boy, I'll bet it was around 1955 or '56 [1956].  But I'll tell you how you'll know exactly.  The ship was originally--the cruise was to take place by sailing--we, we, he put us on a school bus, drove us off to Norfolk.  No family in their right mind would let a scout executive do that anymore these days.  He's driving by himself.  He's got nobody else with him, takes us out to Norfolk, where we would board the ship that was due to sail to Cuba and back.  But--
Speaker 1: With you all are on board?
Speaker 2: (Nods head) Just before we got there, the ship's itinerary had to be changed.  It had to sail to Halifax, Nova Scotia [Canada] and back because Fidel Castro had come out of the jungles and had taken over.  The place was in turmoil.  Everything had changed.  That was the summer.  We made the cruise.  It was a seven-day cruise.  Every day after lunch, we'd go out on deck and have boxing matches.  And I always used to think afterward, what were we thinking about with full stomachs and we're pounding away at each other.  And we'd all have to box.  I can remember that Hinton, when Hinton introduced my match one afternoon as Tiger, whatever his name was, "Jones and Cream Puff West [HistoryMaker Togo D. West, Jr.] (laughter)."
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: I was not a huge kid in those days.  I--but we did it.  It was a great cruise.  Oh, and we ate more than we'd ever seen in our lives.  And I had not been deprived of food, but the Navy was feeding its sailors a lot of food at every meal.  And then in the evenings, we got to watch the movies on deck with the sailors.  It was a good trip, good trip.
Story_ID: 475120
Speaker 1: Another trip he organized, again, for his scouts from his segregated council [Old Hickory Council], was one that scouts across the nation take, and that was the one to a Philmont Scout Ranch, in Philmont, New Mexico [sic. Cimarron, New Mexico].  It's a big facility to Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America].  But, you know, without someone like, a dedicated guy like Hinton, willing to pull it together and arrange it, African Americans, blacks, Negroes, wouldn't get that experience in those days.  You go out there.  You, you take an expedition into the mountains.  You take pack animals with you, burros.  You ride horses.  You camp out.  You have a week-long scout ranch expedition, expedition 808-K.  I still remember the pictures, I have a picture.  Now, to fill out the numbers who could go, he had to get scouts from other councils too, other black scouts.  But it was a great experience, not everybody got to have it, because scouting was simply not that popular in the--
Speaker 2: Was it expensive for your parents [Evelyn Carter West and Togo D. West, Sr.] to pay for?
Speaker 1: No, the--see, he, he was dealing with scouts whose resources were even, from their parents, were even less than ours.  So Hinton, I'll bet got some scholarship money for them from organizations in the city.  But he also did it on the cheap.  We got to Philmont, New Mexico, from Winston-Salem, North Carolina by riding Trailways buses [Trailways National Bus System; Trailways Transportation System, Inc.], the southern route to the New Mexico in the segregated South.  We got on in North Carolina, and actually we didn't have--so the driver didn't give us a lot of trouble about where we sat.  We crossed into, what was it, Alabama, Mississippi, I forget the route, and he said to Mr. Hinton to tell the rest of us, "You're gonna have to be a little bit more careful where you sit."  I remember we passed through a city in Texas.  It was either Dallas [Texas] or Houston [Texas].  They were having a plague of locusts.  I mean these big grasshoppery things had taken over the--you walk down the street, and you'd step on their crunchy backs.  You'd look in the shop windows and the furs would have them all over them.  It was the most unusual experience I'd ever seen.  So we rode the buses there, and the bus, bus expenses in those days was not, you know, not nearly enough to break the bank, and rode the bus back.  We did not stay in any hotels on the way.  We rode the bus day and night.  We'd make stops to tidy up (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, kids can do that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, kids could do that; eat meals, you know, in transit, wherever they'd let us buy a little food.  The scouts, of course, treated us fine.  We get to Philmont Scout Ranch, we were just another expedition.  We stayed where everybody stayed.
Speaker 2: Now, that must have been great for kids in that day and age with the popularity of westerns to be able to go out to a ranch (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, we thought we were cool.  (Laughter) We just thought we were so cool.  I never got to a, to a national jamboree, which was a big thing in scouts.  But it wasn't because I didn't have the opportunity.  He put together a trip for scouts to that.  I just--it came at a time when I had other things to do by then.
Story_ID: 475121
Speaker 1: What was the tou- toughest part of becoming an Eagle Scout?
Speaker 2: Just, just doing the stuff.  You had to get twenty-one merit badges.  And some of those merit badges involved things that were not that easy for me.  For example, swimming merit badge, no problem.  I've been a swimmer all my life.  I swam competitively at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  The first-aid merit badge, you can pretty much do that.  The pioneering merit badge was routinely considered by all scouts, the ones I knew, to be the hardest one.  You had to be able to build stuff out in the wilds.  You had to do knots.  I was never good with knots.  I'm still not good with knots (laughter).  But I persevered.  You get the pioneering merit badge, and it seemed like such a huge thing to a kid, but, you know, probably not.  But I thought that was the hardest thing about it.  Now, they always have a big project at the end.  I did a civics project, but I didn't think that was that difficult.  But finding the time, when you're tempted to run out, you wanted to run out and play, have a good time, to actually sit and look in the instructions in the scout manual, and try to figure out how to do all the things you had to do to accomplish the merit badges, I thought was a little challenging because in those days, and still now, the concept is still based on the notion that scouts live outdoor lives.  They need to be able to--you had to get a cooking merit badge.  They need to be able to provide for themselves.  And nature merit badge is another hard one, identifying trees through their leaves and the like.  And those were tough for a kid of thirteen or fourteen, maybe less so for someone a little older who's a little more mature and settled down.  But sort of disciplining yourself to actually do it--well, actually, for us, we wouldn't have if it hadn't been almost competitive, you know.  You're here, you're in the overnight camporee or you're in the two weeks camp work on your merit badges.  Let's see who gets what done.  Well, then, you know, you've got to push to perform and do or else fall behind in the eyes of your peers.  Well, that was a different thing.
Story_ID: 475122
Speaker 1: Tell us about becoming an Eagle Scout.  I mean were you the--how many scouts in your troop became Eagle Scouts?
Speaker 2: Two, my closest friend and I.  There's a fellow in Atlanta, Georgia who runs his own public relations outfit and calls it--he goes by the moniker of Al Anderson [Albert H. Anderson, Jr.], Al Anderson.  But when I was growing up, he was Albert Homer Anderson, Jr.  He was always a big guy, tall and heavy, maybe even overweight sometimes.  He came by it honestly.  His dad [Albert H. Anderson, Sr.] was a tall, heavyset guy.  And his dad, like my dad [Togo D. West, Sr.], and like other principals before him, all died at what we would consider relatively early times in life, in their lives, late fifties, early to mid-sixties because the stress of being in those jobs, running the only high school, if you will, or the elementary school and the natural tendency towards high blood pressure combined.  But Albert came from a family of teachers as I did.  Now, he was one of two kids.  He had an older sister.  His dad was the principal for as long as I can remember 'til he became the principal of our high school [Atkins High School; Atkins Academic and Technology High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], of a place called Kimberley Park Elementary School [Winston-Salem, North Carolina] at first and then it became a junior high school over in that area of the city known as Boston [Boston Cottages, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], that I mentioned.  It was called Boston because there was a Boston Street [ph.] that ran through it.  Albert, Albert's mother did what my mother [Evelyn Carter West] did.  She went to St. Stephen's Protestant Episcopal Church [sic. St. Stephen's Episcopal Church, Winston-Salem, North Carolina].  So we went to the same church.  Albert's parents enrolled him in St. Benedict the Moor School [Winston-Salem, North Carolina], as did mine.  So we went through school together, same grades.  We were the same age.  So by the time we were in, what--we were in the early junior high grades, seventh and eighth grades, people considered we were probably buddies.  We hung out together.  We played.  We learned to play basketball together.  We went swimming at the public school and learned to swim together.  We ended up in the same scout troop, Scout Troop 68 [Troop 868], at First Baptist Church [Winston-Salem, North Carolina], just up the street from our, our Episcopal church together.  And, and ended up going to camp together and going through the merit badge process together.  And we were the two from our troop to end up as Eagle Scouts.  There're some Eagles from a couple of other troops because Mr. Hinton kept pushing it.  So there was probably--there were probably, oh, four or five Eagle Scouts at a time.
Story_ID: 475123
Speaker 1: Now, I went recently--I'm back in Winston-Salem [North Carolina] periodically, for meetings of the Krispy Kreme [Krispy Kreme Doughnut Corporation, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] board.  And one scout master asked me to come and speak to a class of Eagles he had, black scout master.  So the numbers, at least coming out of the Old Hickory Council or whatever the current council is called, probably suggests that there are several Eagle Scouts, you know, every year coming from there.  But back in those days, it was relatively rare.  Maybe I can think of three from other parts of the city, also black, plus the two of us.  It may have been about five or six Eagles in that class that year, but I may be off.  The counts a little high for the records.  But it was, it was not a regular thing.  I'll tell you the other thing about it, though, neither Albert [Albert H. Anderson, Jr.] nor I spent a lot of time walking around Atkins High School [Atkins Academic and Technology High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] because we became Eagles probably at the age of fifteen, and by then you're ninth or tenth grade, ten grade, I guess--walking around Atkins High School saying, "Hey, we're Eagle Scouts."  That was not, you know, or wearing our uniforms.  That was something we did in another part of our lives.  And probably when we got our Eagle rank, we maybe went to a few more weekend campouts, continued to help with mentoring others coming along.  You become an assistant scout master in the troop, things like that.  But by the time we started our junior year or high school, we were really focused more on all the high school activities that we had gotten into and in which we were beginning to have leadership roles or at least roles where, you know, we had a little more involvement and less and less attention to our scout troops.  I was trying to remember, we certainly continued to go to scout meetings regularly.  But I'll bet by the time we were seniors, we had pretty much, you know, finished anything we were doing with scouting and maybe even by the time we were juniors.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: And it was not for years later that scouting returned to our lives.  In my case, when I was in college, the very (laughter), two years later, the rule was, of course, you couldn't pledge a social fraternity until you're in the second semester of your sophomore year.  You know, the Alpha Phi Alphas [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity] and the Omega Psi Phis [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity] and the Kappa [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity], Kappas and the Phi Beta Sigmas [Phi Beta Sigma Fraternity].  But there was on Howard's [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] campus, a service fraternity called Alpha Phi Omega [Alpha Phi Omega Fraternity], mostly white.  It had been founded at Lafayette College, in Easton, Pennsylvania.  And they came and recruited me, and were allowed to recruit at the end of the first semester.  You could take a freshman in the second semester.  And I shouldn't have at the time, you know, you need to concentrate on your studies, but I agreed to do it.  So I joined the Alpha Phi Omega, participated in it, and eventually became--joined Omega Psi Phi, a social fraternity later.  And it wasn't until years later that I focused on the something that should have been apparent from the start.  Alpha Phi Omega is a fraternity that originally started as a fraternity of former Boy Scouts (laughter).
Speaker 2: So it's kind of ironic.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 475124
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: I--what's the best way to say this?  In every school I've ever attended, I've always been first in my class except for undergraduate school [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  That was reversed in law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.].  I was first there.  And that generally means that I did very well in all my courses all the time.  At the time I was going through elementary school [St. Benedict the Moor School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] and high school [Atkins High School; Atkins Academic and Technology High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], I think I would have claimed that math was my favorite because math was my father's [Togo D. West, Sr.] favorite.  It's what he did with his life, and he always wanted a son who would go into the pure applied sciences because he thought that's what the future was for young people.  So if you'd asked me then, I would say math.  Or I might have said, just because it was hard, chemistry.  In fact, my chemistry grades in college were dreadful, but I graduated (laughter), and that's that.  I had an English teacher, my third year of high school, I think, who said to me--because I was going through the, you know, guid- they had a guidance program, guidance program.  In fact, among the many things my dad did, at one time, he was the student driver teacher, the driver education teacher in addition to all his other duties.  Another time he was the guidance counselor.  And even as the assistant principal, he was the head of guidance.  He would--and so you'd go through, and you'd say, "Where you wanna go to school, what you want your major to be," and all that. "Oh, I'm gonna go, I'm gonna get a degree in aeronautical engineering and be an engineer."  She said, "That's a mistake."  She said, "You should be in English and in English literature."  She said, "Your dad's making a mistake to push you that way, and you're making a mistake to push yourself that way."  College probably proved her right, and if I look back on it, I would say, yeah, English and English literature--well, English and literature, though I didn't realize it at the time, were probably not only my favorite topics, but the ones that I was best at.  And that's my dad's fault too because he was way more of a renaissance man than I am.
Story_ID: 475125
Speaker 1: Talk about early memories.  Just memories of my childhood, if he was a math teacher, and he was widely regarded as the best.  My dad was a big deal in Winston-Salem [North Carolina].  Even today, when I go back, to the extent people know Togo West [Togo D. West, Sr.] there, it's not because--it's--I'm his son.  If you end up as the principal of the high school, but much more importantly, if you teach math there for thirty years, and you're the best teacher and the head of the department, and all the kids in the city end up funneling through you because you are the black high school [Atkins High School; Atkins Academic and Technology High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], everybody remembers you.  Everybody has come under your influence.  And they're still there, the parents of my friends and also my friends, okay, and their kids who came under my dad's influence.  And he was a great math teacher.  They all said it.  In fact, most people said I would have done much better in math in college if I'd had him as an instructor.  I only had him briefly for about six weeks before they changed my classes.  But I didn't, and that's water under the dam.  But Dad had other passions.  I can remember him at--Mom [Evelyn Carter West] and Dad didn't go out, at least not when I was part of the family, to clubs or anything like that in Winston-Salem.  I mean how many were there for blacks anyway?  They'd go visit friends in their homes and friends would come visit us.  And, of course, there'd be a time that had dinner, and they've had some drinks, and they're all--what did these friends of my parents do?  These, mostly other teachers in the public schools, recite poetry, declaim things, scenes from plays.  I mean today, I can recite 'Invictus' [William Ernest Henley].  Yes, we had it in high school, but not because I read it and learned it there but because he said it so many times from beginning to end, that is permanently engrained in my brain and incidentally, the brains of some other of my classmates.  There is a state legislator from Winston-Salem by the name of Larry Womble, who was a classmate of mine, who starts every speech with a couple of lines from 'Invictus.'  And he openly admits (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) "Black is the night that covers me and black is the pitch from pole to pole."  That's a, now, this was a, for your generation and I guess even on down through mine, that generation of black students, why was 'Invictus' such an important poem because everybody in high school--
Speaker 1: Because of the way it spoke to us.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You know.  And especially because of the way it ended, you know.  "It matters not how straight the gate, our charge with punishments to scroll, I am the master of my fate; I am the captain of my soul."  I think--and you know, Dad learned it, I'm sure, from here at Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.] where everybody--you're right, a whole generation.  I mean I don't know the story of W.E. Henley, the author and probably--perhaps I should, now I have time to go and learn it.  But it spoke to us, and you're right, "Out of the depths that cover me, black is the pitch."  Is that the black experience at one time in America or what?  So I think it spoke in a lot of different ways.  Dad, Dad would declaim that.  He would declaim Shakespeare [William Shakespeare].  He would--'The Shooting of Dan McGrew' [Robert W. Service], "A bunch of boys who were whooping it up in the Malamute saloon."  I don't know if that's great literature or not, but it was fun.  And I have those memories and that sense of him.  So, so, you know, he was a big deal there in that respect, I got to say in passing.  It was not until I came to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and met my wife [Gail Berry West] and got to know her family to realize exactly what a big deal is because Ted Berry [Theodore M. Berry] was an extraordinary man.  I admired him more than anyone else in my life except for my father.
Story_ID: 475126
Speaker 1: The being in Winston-Salem [North Carolina], the figuring out what's the course you like the most, one, it was hard for me to say then because I thought I should never admit to liking anything that wasn't super hard.  But if you ask me, looking back on it, I, I always think that being encouraged to read was great.  And there's one other thing about reading, how do only children survive the loneliness because the upside is, of being an only child is, you're never unsure of where you stand with your parents.  There's nobody competing with you.  All that they have is yours, and none of that matters.  It's the attention, the affection, frankly, to the love.  So you're never uncertain.  You grow up with supreme confidence that you are loved and cared about and cared for.  The downside is no matter how attentive parents can be, they simply can't fill in all the moments in a young kid's life.  There are times when dad's doing something and mom's doing something and the kid's there.  Well, what teachers do is they teach their kids to read.  They encourage them to read at the earliest opportunity.  I read every single thing in my parents' [Evelyn Carter West and Togo D. West, Sr.] home including a book called 'The Big Rape' [James Wakefield Burke], which I'm sure they did not mean for me to read at the early age at which I read it.  Now, in fact, it was a disappointment.  It was all about World War II [WWII] and the Nazi takeover of a town, but still it was--I thought it was gonna great (laughter).  I read my first time, Simon Templar--
Speaker 2: The Saint.
Speaker 1: The Saint novel, plucking it out of it, at a time when I wouldn't--because it opens with a line, this particular one does, in which a nun comes in, trips over the rug and says, "Oh, s-word."  Well, (laughter) not for a twelve-year old kid, please.  Or at least, and maybe it was even earlier than that.  But I read everything, including a Perry Mason mystery.  And then, and then at an early time, got introduced by my parents to the public library.  The public libraries in Winston-Salem were great then.  In fact, the public libraries of America were great then.  I could go up to the Winston branch which is, I think what was called--East Winston branch of the library [East Winston Branch Library; Malloy/Jordan East Winston Heritage Center, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], which was in one of the black sections of town, beautifully, maintained, modern, new, and why would that be?  To keep us from going all the way downtown to the new white library.  I mean it's okay because we benefited, and I didn't mind; well stocked.  I could go to the young adult section.  I could read, one of my favorite early things to read were mythology, all the Greek myths, the, the Roman myths.  There were stories, and I was a sucker--I still am today.  I'm a sucker for a good story.  In fact, I'm a sucker for a bad story.  And so I would read, and that's how I entertained myself all during that early period.  So if you ask me, and this is the longest answer possible to the question, what, what's my, what was my favorite subject?  Probably the courses that caused me to go and read stories.  Now, in elementary school, in the Catholic elementary schools, English was sentence structure, it was grammar.  It was all the things we don't teach in any schools anymore.  And it was knowing how to, how to diagram a sentence.  My kids [Hilary West and Tiffany West Smink] grew up not knowing how to diagram a sentence.  I think that's awful.  Teachers currently laugh at me because I have that attitude, but that's what Catholic teaching does to you, in fact, teaching at any of the schools back in those days.  By high school, it was literature and some speaking too.  And literature--oh, and writing, expository work.  And that was, that was fun.  So those were probably the courses I liked most.
Story_ID: 475127
Speaker 1: But you have to remember, we had in those days in our high school, a course called Negro history.  That's very interesting.
Speaker 2: I was gonna ask you about that, if there was any specific teaching of black history (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We had a Negro history course.  It was well taught.  It was thoroughly taught.  So we came away with things that my kids [Hilary West and Tiffany West Smink] did not know a thing about when they finished high school, with a knowledge of--the civics course was well taught, the history course.  We had a language program.  Two years of a foreign language was required to graduate from my high school because we had what amounts to something like the track system they used to have in Washington [D.C.]--I think most schools had it in those days, our classes in high school were set up in sections.  Ninth grade would be 9-1 through 9-10, say.  Tenth grade the same way, eleventh.  Well, 9-1 and 9-2 were the students with the best academic records from elementary school.  Ten one and 10-2, the best from the ninth and so on.  The 10--9-1 and two and 10-1 and two sections were required to take Latin.  My Latin teacher was Clara Gaines [Clara Berry Gaines], wife of Clarence "Big House" Gaines [Clarence E. Gaines].
Speaker 2: The legendary coach of--
Speaker 1: Yeah, which none of us knew at the time.  All we knew was that Mrs. Gaines was the toughest, most no-nonsense teacher we'd ever had.  We didn't hate her, but we feared her.  And the funny thing is, in the years since then, you--you always learn that your teachers, the toughest teachers are the nicest people in the world because they care about you.  So I took Latin from her.  And actually, I enjoyed Latin, but those, those were hard.  The, the other sections, 9-3 and on ten, you know, did not take a foreign language.  They took biology, and then in their third and fourth years, they would take French, two years of French, when we would be out of language in the 11-1 and 11-2 and 12-1, 12-2, we'd be taking chemistry and the like.  But Dad [Togo D. West, Sr.] wanted me to take foreign languages all years.  So I also took two years of French from a woman named Velma Friende, who of all my teachers in all my schools, is the one that I still keep in touch with.  She's still there in Winston-Salem [North Carolina].  Her husband was also a principal at a high school.  Her son's [Billy D. Friende, Jr.] now a lawyer somewhere.
Speaker 2: How do you spell her last name, please?
Speaker 1: F-R-I-E-N-D-E.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Velma Friende, and her husband who is a--was a principal in Winston-Salem, is Billy Friende [Billy D. Friende, Sr.].  Mrs. Friende is very interesting.  She was a wonderful French teacher.  And I did well in her course, although I can remember receiving from her some time during my eleventh grade years, a paper back on which she had written the words (speaking French), "Qu'est-ce que c'est, Monsieur West [HistoryMaker Togo D. West, Jr.]?"  "What is this, Mr. West?" (Laughter) I thought that was the biggest come down I'd had in a long time.  We laugh about it now when we talk about it, but she is the one that all of our class still keeps in touch and thinks of as the finest living example of what great teachers we had.  Velma Friende taught me, but she was a student and maybe of the, one of his prize students of my father.  And so she was much younger than most of the teachers, much closer to our age, and she had studied, she had gone through Atkins [Atkins High School; Atkins Academic and Technology High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] with him, and been one of his best math students, even as she was--ended up majoring in languages.  That is unique because most of the teachers at Atkins, even after I left, but certainly then, were still being recruited from outside of the Winston-Salem and North Carolina area.  But she's one that they were happy to have come back.  So.
Story_ID: 475128
Speaker 1: What other activities were involved in, in high school?  And were you involved (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, that's the problem with both high school and college, I solved a little bit in law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.].  I was involved in too many activities.  There's a newspaper around here, student newspaper, from my senior year that has a little article in it.  And I look at it.  My mother [Evelyn Carter West] was a musician, and so early on, she had me taking piano lessons, as a little kid.  That's another early memory, sitting in Ms. Bryant's, B-R-Y-A-N-T, Mrs. Bryant's parlor, black woman, lived near our home on Wallace Street, who gave private piano lessons.  Everybody always said, Mother could have taught me, but that's not a good idea.  And I'd go take my piano lessons once a week.  I hated it, just hated it.  I did it for several years.  I got a sound grounding in, you know, in the ability to read music and the structure of music.  But eventually, Mother relented.  I stopped going, but she insisted I take an instrument and so the band director at Atkins [Atkins High School; Atkins Academic and Technology High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], a friend of family's--he and his kids used to come over and visit with his wife, took me on as a private student in the clarinet.  Why the clarinet?  Because there was an old one lying around the house.  We cleaned it up, bought some reeds for it, and it was an old metal one.  Eventually, when I got good enough, they invented in one of the wooden ones that comes a loose.  And so I'd go to him once a week on Saturdays and study the clarinet during my last four years of elementary school, say sixth, sixth through eighth grades, sixth, seventh, eighth--fifth through eighth grade.  And so by the time I got to high school, I was pretty good at the clarinet, but it never occurred to me to want to be in the band.  I wanted to be on the basketball team and run track, which I did.  But the reason I ended up changing from having my father [Togo D. West, Sr.] as my math teacher was not just that it was somehow a bad idea, it was that--cause he was determined to do it.  I had had my schedule changed to accommodate band.  Mr. Wilson [ph.] said, "I taught you all these years and you're not gonna be in the band."  I thought, of course.  So I was in the band for four years.  I was good enough at it that when I graduated I got the award at commencement for the best musician or something like that in the graduating class.  Now, I will say this now so I don't have to ever say it again because it's--it was important to me then.  I realize it's less of a deal now.  But when I graduated, I got every award they had to give except the ones they gave the athletes.  Was it the averages in languages or math or science or whatever.  It turns out none of it mattered because my science for my engineering courses at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] was not as strong as it needed to be, but nonetheless, I did.  And so the band went to--at the end of my second year, third year, tenth grade in high school, so as a junior, which is a little early, he asked me to take over as student band director, which I was glad to do.  You lead practices, and you're sort of like the number one musician.  There's all these seniors saying, "Why is this jerk leading us?"  But it was basically to prepare for marching band season.  And this was a little annoying to me because in marching band seasons, the student band director, was the drum major, and you wore that stupid costume and that big high hat and you carried this thing.  And he was always saying to me, "Now, you know, can you get a strut?"  Well, I didn't know how to.  I couldn't do the things.  I couldn't twirl the thing or any of that, but I got through it.  And then when we did the show, at halftime, I was--I led the band.  So I did a lot of band.
Story_ID: 475129
Speaker 1: I played basketball.  And I actually thought I was pretty good.  I played on the JV [junior varsity].  Now, I have to tell you that, remember that my dad [Togo D. West, Sr.] was at every game because he either sold or took up tickets at the door and then walked around along with the principal at the time.  And so when I was on the JV, he saw me sitting on the bench a lot, rarely ever playing.  And he commented one night, he said, "I saw that attempt you made."  Well, the attempt I made planked off the backboard.  Now, there came a time when I got a B one semester in math, and he sat me down, and he said, "You're going to have to give up basketball."  I did, but I've always concluded, it was because I was an embarrassment to the family athletic prowess (laughter).  I ran track, the 220 [220-yard dash] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What did you--the 220?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Oh, that's a sprint.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's, it's a little bit longer--well, it's longer than the 100-yard dash, but it's not the 440 [440-yard dash].  And I wasn't bad, but I didn't do it long enough, well enough to go and win any, any state meets or anything like that.  And then the other sport was not high school [Atkins High School; Atkins Academic and Technology High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina].  It came up through the public swimming pool system.  I swam.  And I actually was pretty good at that, and I swam competitively at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I was the president of the engineers club by my graduating year.  I was on the traffic squad and was the president of it.  And I'll you what the traffic squad was in a little bit.  I was in the National Honor Society as a junior, and was its president at the end of it.  So there were a lot of school activities in which I was involved and more and more I was late getting home each day.  In my junior year--I'm sorry, my sophomore year, tenth grade, they did something--as they were now beginning to prepare for integration.  They established a county wide, not city wide, but county wide youth commission [Forsyth Youth Commission], composed of representatives from every school, black or white in the county, moving towards, incidentally, integrating the city and county systems which they did.  I was the representative, one of two representatives from my school, in the tenth and eleventh grade years.  And what was unusual for the city at that time--and there's actually an article around somewhere, the members of the youth commission elected me their chairman.  That was my last year.  So I was chairman (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This was city wide?
Speaker 1: Yeah, chairman of the--well, county wide, city and county--
Story_ID: 475130
Speaker 1: This is roll five of an interview that we began February 8, 2007.  My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns, and you, sir, are Togo West [HistoryMaker Togo D. West, Jr.], right (laughter).
Speaker 2: I am, indeed, Togo West, Jr.
Speaker 1: Togo West, Jr.
Story_ID: 475131
Speaker 1: Well we were talking about the advent, well the first little glimpses of integration in Winston-Salem, North Carolina.
Speaker 2: Um-hm. Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So do you wanna just follow up with that?
Speaker 2: Well, there was integration in Winston-Salem and integration in the State of North Carolina.  And I mention that because thirty minutes up the road was Greensboro, North Carolina where the sit-ins for the lunch counter had occurred.  In Winston-Salem, my experience is, first of all, I never attended an integrated class in an integrated school during my time in the Winston-Salem schools, through high school [Atkins High School; Atkins Academic and Technology High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina].  In fact, now that I think about it, neither did I in either college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] or law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.].  But that's a different matter.  It's clear, though, that by the time I was graduating which would have been in 1960, June of 1960, integration was coming to the schools of North Carolina and to the schools of Winston-Salem, Forsyth County school district [Winston-Salem/Forsyth County Schools].  I was trying to remember, I don't think my father [Togo D. West, Sr.] was the last black principal of my high school.  But I don't think there were many more after him.  As integration took full effect and schools changed, their make-ups changed.  But when I graduated, I was graduating from a segregated high school in a historically segregated system.  You could see the beginnings though.  I attended a special chemistry class, advanced--college class.  Some seniors from all the schools, all of them white except myself and a classmate.  And so, and that occurred at a white school with the lab at Wake Forest [Wake Forest College; Wake Forest University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] campus.  So you could see the beginnings, and the years, next few years, it took off.  But for me, my schooling in North Carolina, in Winston-Salem was all segregated.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was it a big deal for you to go to the white school for the chemistry classes?
Speaker 2: Probably--
Speaker 1: I mean, how did they treat you?  How did they, you know?
Speaker 2: It was 7:30 in the morning, so before the regular day began.  My father drove me over to the school, a white middle school, as I recall.  No, no--yes, in essentially the white section of town.  I would get out, and there would--I'd walk past a number of students who'd be there.  So it's a bit unusual.  But I encountered no hostility; curiosity, and who knows what else they were thinking; went to my class.  The teacher and the students behaved as if it were the most normal thing.  And that was the way that school year went, just that small encounter--a small, sustained encounter.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were in and out of there before the regular school day started?
Speaker 2: By 8:30, I was leaving as they were beginning to start.  In fact, I think it probably ran from 7:30 to 8:15, and then the school day began at 8:30.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that was, that was one of two integrated encounters that I would have in my senior year.  But again, special circumstances, but harbingers of things to come.
Story_ID: 475132
Speaker 1: What's the second circumstance?
Speaker 2: The school system, Forsyth County [North Carolina] and Winston-Salem [North Carolina] established something they called the Forsyth Youth Commission.  But it was done through the school system.  They picked representatives, two from each senior high school, black and white, county and city, and we met regularly, once a month I think, at some location.  I'm a little dim on exactly where it was, but it was--may have rotated among the schools.  It may have been at one of the meeting places that commonly are opened, Jaycees [United States Junior Chamber] or something.  And we'd talk about issues that would affect the youth in the school system.  And I say that was in my senior year [Atkins High School; Atkins Academic and Technology High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], but my recollection is I was elected to that commission in my school--in my sophomore year.  So as early as 1957, that effort at an integrated approach occurred.  And I attended those meetings and participated.  My senior year, I was chairman--my fellow members elected me chairman.  Somewhere in here I even have a picture where I am presenting an award to the Jaycees on behalf of the youth commission.  The life chairman was a young woman named Jane Grubbs from one of the white schools, probably R.J. Reynolds Senior High School [Richard J. Reynolds High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], big name, and we're presenting at the luncheon meeting of the chamber of commerce.  And what I recollect is when I started speaking it seemed to get so noisy.  The knives and forks clattered, the waiters made noise.  Now, that may have just been an impression at the time.  Certainly, no one acted rudely towards me.  The picture will show the gentleman who was the president receiving it attentively.  But that was the other integrated experience or integrating experience that I would have had during my, during the--as part of my school existence or school life.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, this is--
Speaker 2: But it was done after hours, obviously.
Story_ID: 475133
Speaker 1: From what you know of the times, do you think that such a scene could have taken place in Mississippi or Alabama during the same timeframe (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Probably not.  We thought, whether justifiably or not, blacks and whites, I think, of Winston-Salem [North Carolina] as a place of relative racial moderation and maybe even progressiveness.  Remember, it was the tobacco capital of the world, R.J. Reynolds tobacco capital was there--tobacco company [R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] was there.  And so there's that, that moderating influence of a company that needs a stable community to provide a labor base, does not need the disconnects of overt racial hostility to get in the way of making money.  But also the fact that they funded a number of educational and outreach efforts.  So I think there was that effect.  A similar effect probably was taking, taking place in Durham [North Carolina], one of the others--I think that's American Tobacco Company, with the Dukes there, taking over Trinity College, turning it into Duke University [Durham, North Carolina].  And incidentally, the Reynolds in Winston-Salem did the same thing.  They moved a campus [Wake Forest College; Wake Forest University] from Wake Forest, North Carolina to Winston-Salem, but they did not insist on renaming it.  But they, they established it on the grounds of what had been the historic Reynolds estate, at Reynolda there.  So that influence led to a kind of schizophrenic effect in that state which you still see the effects of.  A progressive streak and down around, well, down around Fort Bragg [North Carolina], that that still racially intolerant attitude.  Remember the stories you heard of soldiers, G.I.s coming into Fort Bragg, North Carolina and seeing that big sign there posted on the outskirts of town that said, "Welcome to Fayetteville, North Carolina, Home of the Ku Klux Klan [KKK]," and that was always a--they were still talking about it when I was secretary of the army.  And so there was that.  I mean it's the state that produced--and I remember this was happening in my high school years, the rebel from Randleman [North Carolina], Terry Sanford, state legislature, who ran for governor, and is considered, depending on your view, from moderate to liberal on the one.  And years later, Jesse Helms out of Raleigh [North Carolina], complete other end of the spectrum.  Terry Sanford, who was succeeded as senator, defeated as senator by a former supporter, Lauch Faircloth, who became a conservative Republican and became a part of the Jesse Helm brand.  So two different strains there, but in Winston-Salem, I think certainly that the whites thought of themselves as moderate and progressive.  And I think African Americans were able to pursue their lives, but within a segregated environment until the push for recognition and rights allowed them to move into the equal environment or the environment of equality.  And that's why you saw a situation in which I didn't much rebel about, over the--we were not struck by the fact that the bus system was segregated--you've already got that from me, because we had our own buses, the Safe Bus Company [Winston-Salem, North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: Or that the movies were segregated because we had our own movies, the Lincoln Theatre [Winston-Salem, North Carolina] and the Lafayette Theatre [Winston-Salem, North Carolina].  And we had our own businesses, Winston Mutual [Winston Mutual Life Insurance Company, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], one of the largest insurance companies in the South right there in Winston-Salem.  And so it was possible in that environment for African Americans, Negroes, coloreds, at the time to pursue their own economic fortunes, to have a sufficient sized, sufficient base of blacks in the community that they could provide businesses that provided services and, and build a life.
Story_ID: 475134
Speaker 1: When you were senior in high school, you were valedictorian?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And, so, were you--so, when you--I suppose you were a very popular figure on campus, I guess.  You were involved in sports.  You were valedictorian of the class, were you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I don't know how popular I was.  I was valedictorian, and you know, in those days, as happens in a lot of, a lot of high school classes of--you know, and we've all had them.  The yearbook does the superlative, the most likely to succeed, the most studious, and then some--
Speaker 1: Were you those things?
Speaker 2: --things.  The boy and girl who were best looking, the this-es and the thats.  I think I was most studious or something like that.  I actually had two superlatives, but the rule was, you could only have one so that second vote was thrown out.  But remember, I was the son of the vice principal.  So there was also that strain that says, (laughter), you know, this guy, he's having to live the goody-two shoes life.  And it's true.  My homework's always done (laughter) or else I'd be in trouble, but that's, that's less my father's role than the fact of, if you're the only child of teachers, you don't get much slack on that.  But I had friends.  I had a lot of friends.  I was in the band, and so the band traveled with the football team.  We went all over the state.  I had a lot of buddies.  A couple of my friends were the, were the football and basketball heroes, Carl Eller, bless his soul, went off to play for the--
Speaker 1: Carl, yeah, Minnesota Vikings.
Speaker 2: Minnesota Vikings.  In our day--
Speaker 1: One of the fearsome foursome, I guess.
Speaker 2: That's right.  And we were classmates, all four years.  And in our day, we knew him as Moose because Carl was always big.  And the funny thing is that Carl goes through life at Atkins High School [Atkins Academic and Technology High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] as a Moose, as Moose.  Then he ends up at--because he was in--he went to the University of Minnesota [University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Minneapolis, Minnesota] on a scholarship before he ended up with the Vikings, as did another classmate who turned out to--he did all right on the scholarship there.  But he was a little small for pro ball, so he didn't get into pro ball.  So Carl suddenly becomes Carl Eller.  There was no nickname.  The same class in our basketball and as you're hearing me, you know the story.  We always tell it.  Whatever school we're from, our team ruled, our teams ruled in the scholastic sports in the state among black schools.  We didn't play white schools, and our basketball team was extremely successful too.  They were always winning state championships, both of them.  And we had a player there by the name of Harold Hairston, who went off on a scholarship to play for NYU [New York University, New York, New York].  I always remember that the NYU had the unlikely name of the Violets, played for the NYU Violets, ended up with the Lakers [Los Angeles Lakers].  Now, he was Harold Hairston.  But when he went to college and went off to play basketball, he became Happy Hairston.
Speaker 1: That's right, Happy Hairston.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) So, you never know which one.  So those were friends of mine, still are.  Well, I just saw Carl a couple of years ago--no, last year when we dedicated the new Atkins High School.  They named the--they dedicated the auditorium to my dad, Togo D. West [Togo D. West, Sr.].  So I went down and went to that, and Harold's there; good to see him.  He's still doing good things in Minneapolis [Minnesota].  But that was the life we led, a high school that had athletic success, and these were my friends.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Happy Hairston was a quintessential role player, basketball player (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There you go.
Speaker 1: --he could rebound and get the loose balls, do the--play the defense, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, we're proud of him.
Story_ID: 475135
Speaker 1: Now, you were an Eagle Scout, you became an Eagle Scout (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I did, I was an Eagle Scout--
Speaker 1: --yeah, before--we talked about it, but did you go on to become an Explorer in high school [Atkins High School; Atkins Academic and Technology High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina]--
Speaker 2: Well, the way it is, of course, is you start as a Cub Scout, and that's up, and then at eleven, you become eligible for the Boy Scouts.  So, and all--these things always happen the same way.  It was with learning to swim as well.  I ended up swimming competitively in college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], the same thing, some friend, some mother tells your mother or dad, and they said, well, you know, and this is a good thing and so suddenly I'm enrolled in something.  And once, once I start something, I don't seem to put it down.  I stay with it until it's done, exhausted (laughter), worn out or perhaps, most highly utilized.  So I became a Cub Scout at nine, wore my little blue uniform, always had my uniforms.  And by, at eleven I became a Boy Scout, Troop 68 [Troop 868] at First Baptist Church there in Winston-Salem [North Carolina].  The scouts to this day still tend to be organized on the basis of what church will host their scout troop and you can use their basement facilities or whatever in the parish house.  And it was during that period--now, at fourteen, you were eligible to become an Eagle--an Explorer Scout and switch to the green uniform.  And so the scouting ranks, starting at Boy Scout at eleven, a Tenderfoot, the bottom part of the badge, and then second class, and then first class, the whole badge. And then you start accumulating merit badges, the first five gets you Star Scout and the next so many, Life Scout and then twenty-one, Eagle Scout.  You accumulate those right through Boy Scout and Explorer Scout, so, yes, I was an Explorer Scout, but the promotion process was working as I earned the merit badges and by fifteen or sixteen, which would have been a year or two after I'd been become an Explorer Scout, I accumulated all my merit badges, did my part--you always have to do a special project and became an Eagle Scout.  So I was right--I'd say my freshman or sophomore year of high school--
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: --by then--let's see, fourteen, freshman year of high school, to fifteen, sixteen (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right.
Story_ID: 475136
Speaker 1: Now do you think that your experiences in the scouts had anything to do with you being involved in the [U.S.] military as a--well, you were a lawyer by then, but, you know, did that influence your attraction to the military at all?
Speaker 2: I have to say one thing which is almost an answer, but not to that question precisely.  And then I'll give you the answer.  About, a while back, I attended, on behalf of Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America] here in the area, the National Capital Area Council, and I've been president of the National Capital Area Council at one point, an event which was a dinner, and they wanted to give an award to the secretary of defense, brand new secretary of defense who was Bill Gates--Bob Gates [Robert Gates], who got up and made a speech in which he said, "I always thought that all of the leadership I ever had to get, to learn, I got through the scouts and becoming an Eagle Scout."  I thought that was a pretty good statement of how I feel, and that is, oh, yes, my time in the Boy Scouts as an Eagle Scout certainly did influence something and a lot of things, but on the specific question, of Togo West, Jr. [HistoryMaker Togo D. West, Jr.], in the military, the sole influence was Togo D. West, Sr., who had gone to Howard University [Washington, D.C.]--he grew up here in Washington [D.C.], went to the old Dunbar High School [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.] with a number of people like Charles Drew [Charles R. Drew] and Bill Hastie [William H. Hastie] were all of his schoolmates, classmates, roughly the same years.  He grew up here and the house still stands, 1320 27th Street, Southeast, and he'd gone to Howard.  But the thing about life in Washington in those days and even by the time I got to college, was it had a strong cadet corps organization in the high schools, much like down in Texas.  And if you look at Dad's yearbooks from those years, and when I was secretary of the army, someone who had been in school with him brought me some copies of the yearbooks from back in those days.  And Dad was a devoted member of the cadet corps in his high school.  In fact, he took some of his yearbook pictures in his cadet corps uniform.  And when he got to Howard, he was a devoted member of the Army ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] which was there even then as it was years later when I was there.  And as Dad used to tell it, and an NCO [non-commissioned officer] who knew him, and called me up years later, described it, Dad was the quintessential, sort of star ROTC cadet, superb candidate to be an officer in the United States military.  He was a, as they called it--and we would have called it in my time, he was the major, the cadet major.  Well, that was the ranking office of the commander.  For us, it would have been brigade commander.  By then, I bet they had regimens.  He was probably the regimental commander, the best ROTC student in his graduating class, got his commission, was never called to active duty.  He spent his entire life teaching high school [Atkins High School; Atkins Academic and Technology High School] in Winston-Salem [North Carolina], and, oh, by the way, drilling his only son in the manual of arms in the basement of our home.
Speaker 1: Really, I see (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So by the time I got to Howard University, I was going to be a member of the Army ROTC.  I was going to be a member of Omega Psi Phi Fraternity.  I was going to be, if not a math student as he had been--as he had been, at least a major in the pure or applied sciences.  In 1960, a bright young kid, wants to get ahead, he's gonna be, you know, doing the Sputniky-type things maybe.  And sure enough, I majored in electrical engineering, minor in math, Army ROTC, didn't, didn't do the fraternity thing until my graduate years, but yeah, that too.  So my affiliation with the [U.S.] Army directly is a result of my dad's abiding interest in it and the fact that he was always proud of his connection to the military.
Story_ID: 475137
Speaker 1: Now, we did talk about some of your teachers, but I'm not sure who all we talked--we talked about a Ms. Gaines and--
Speaker 2: Yes, Clara Gaines [Clara Berry Gaines], Latin.
Speaker 1: Yeah, we talked about your French teacher, Velma (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Velma Friende who is--they're both still there in Winston-Salem [North Carolina], but Velma Friende is still very active in Atkins High [Atkins High School; Atkins Academic and Technology High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] things and calls me from time to time.  She was my French teacher.  She's the one who wrote on my paper, even though she gave me the best grades in the course, on one occasion (speaking French), " Qu'est-ce que c'est, Monsieur West [HistoryMaker Togo D. West, Jr.]?", you know, "What is this?"  I still remember that (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  So when you were a senior, were you a class officer when you graduated?
Speaker 2: Well, no.  All the football and basketball players were class officers that year.  They basically took over.  I was the president of the National Honor Society, the president of something called the traffic squad which was sort of the teacher-run--teacher-sponsored student run, traffic police of the school.  We had some one-way--it was a big school.  So we had, you know, one-way stairwells at different ends, and this and that and in and out.  All of that was done by student monitors, and I was the president of it.  It was a big deal.  I was the president, of course, of the engineers club.  I was a member of the, played first alto in the dance band.  What happened is that my mother [Evelyn Carter West], as a pianist, had wanted me to take piano lessons, and I took them for a while, long enough to be able to read music, but tended to rebel.  And so she sent me over to take lessons on the reeds, clarinets as a private student during my seventh and eighth grade years [at St. Benedict the Moor School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina].  And by the time I got to high school, in ninth--senior high school, ninth, tenth, eleventh and twelfth, the band director turned out--he knew this, I didn't realize it--who was the same person who had given me my private lessons, and he said, "You should be in the band."  So for all four years I played either clarinet or alto saxophone.  And I ended up being the student band director.  So by the time I graduated, I was also both the student band director and--I hesitate to mention this.  It's a kind of--I was the drum major.  I mean I actually got out there in that fancy uniform and marched in front of the band.  But I always said my role was not to prance, but to see that they performed their music, and I led the practices and things like that.  So, yeah, I had a bunch of student activities.  And I was the associate editor of the, of the school paper.  In fact, more extracurricular activities than I needed to be involved with.  I was the--member of the, chairman of the Forsyth County Youth Commission [Forsyth Youth Commission], the county wide--
Speaker 1: Right, right, we just talked about that.
Speaker 2: So I had all those things, and it was, it was a pattern of my educational (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So were you swimming and running too?
Speaker 2: Not, not yet.  I ran track--
Speaker 1: Track.
Speaker 2: --there in high school.  And I played basketball my freshman and sophomore so in JV [junior varsity].
Speaker 1: I know you told us the last time your father [Togo D. West, Sr.] made you quit because you--
Speaker 2: Well, he saw me shooting, and I think he decided, "Let's concentrate on academics," (laughter), at least where basketball was concerned.  But I still like it.  You know, you can't, you can't grow up in that community and not be an avid sports fan.  And if you're a sports fan, then you want to get out and do stuff too.
Speaker 1: And you saw Earl the Pearl [Earl Monroe] play in Winston-Salem when he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah. Yep, and Cleo Hill before him.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: They were both great.  But then, you know, Winston-Salem, like North Carolina, basketball community.
Story_ID: 475138
Speaker 1: --About how many students were--graduated with you? And out of how many (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I couldn't say.  I should have a sense of that, but I don't have a--
Speaker 1: 'Cause when you said it was a fairly large school, I was just wondering how big it was.
Speaker 2: It had all of the black senior--it had all of the black high school students in Winston-Salem [North Carolina].  Those that lives outside the city limits went to a black high school, Carver High School [Winston-Salem, North Carolina] in the county which was our principal--
Speaker 1: Rival in sports and such?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, and it drew from a number of the kids in Winston-Salem. But I don't know, but it was--but I can only say it was sizeable.  I don't have a concept of that, comparative numbers would be.
Speaker 1: I think people--the reason why I'm asking, I guess, because I think people tend to think of a school in the South as being small for some reason.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But it would--would you say it compared to any northern, big-city schools in terms of size (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It had to because the population, the black population in Winston-Salem was significant.  And there were a number of elementary school.  Eventually, they evolved from the, what?  The eight-four system, which I grew up in, to the, whatever it is, the six-three-three, I guess it is, six years of elementary, three years in junior high, three years in senior high.  And they had a number of junior, more than one junior high school feeding into Atkins [Atkins High School; Atkins Academic and Technology High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina].  So it was, it was a significant sized school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And for that reason was able to attract some superlative teachers.  I, I had excellent--well, Dad [Togo D. West, Sr.] was the head of the math department, even as he was the vice principal.  So that was a good, strong department.  The languages, chemistry, yeah. And we had, we had a Negro history course, as part of our social studies (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, you were telling me that, yeah.
Speaker 2: So it was a good, strong school with a lot of diversity.  It didn't have any trouble getting its students in.
Story_ID: 475139
Speaker 1: You want to tell us that story again, you know, about your graduation?  What was your graduation like from high school [Atkins High School; Atkins Academic and Technology High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Well, graduation was two things.  It was a class night, on a Friday night.  And that's when the valedictorian and the salutatorian gave their speeches.  So, you know, we gave our speeches.  And then, whew, that's it, we're done.  And then Saturday in the school gymnasium, so in a place that could hold all the parents and family, the graduates would sit down on the gymnasium floor and have a much briefer program in many ways, but a much more formal--no, that's not briefer, longer I suppose, but more formal, awarding of the diplomas.  The practice was--we had had the same principal for twenty, thirty years, but he finally died.  And he was replaced by my best friend's father, who had been a junior high principal in another school.  My dad [Togo D. West, Sr.] was still the assistant principal, so it was the practice of the principal to hand out the diplomas when you walked through the line.  And so this was called--
Speaker 1: What was your best friend's name?
Speaker 2: Albert Anderson [Albert H. Anderson, Jr.].
Speaker 1: Albert Anderson.
Speaker 2: And his dad was--Albert Anderson, Jr., and his dad was Albert Anderson [Albert H. Anderson, Sr.].
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Still alive, still lives--of course, we all are.  He lives in Atlanta [Georgia], went to Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], runs a, runs a business there, a media business and very good at it.  So, so we go through the line, and when I get there, Albert's dad, Mr. Anderson, makes just a little speech.  He says, "Well, Togo West [HistoryMaker Togo D. West, Jr.], the valedictorian of the class.  He's won the prizes we give for the highest four-year averages in all the categories that exist, math, sciences, languages, social studies and what--however you lump English and history in those things.  And he's also won the prize for the best musician in the graduating class."  The band director determines that, the musical director.  "And in baseball, we would call that a grand slam.  I call it a mighty fine record."  Now, you can tell how much that meant to me because I'm still remembering it virtually word-for-word.  The sad part about that is just a few short years later, Mr. Anderson, Albert Anderson, Sr., a natural death, of heart, as did my father years later.  But not that many.  My father died as a relatively young man as did he.  And Dad became principal.  Dad was appointed principal.  So that, that essentially was the end of high school for me.
Story_ID: 475140
Speaker 1: By then I knew I was going to go to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  We'd gone through that year when you talk to the guidance counselor.  My guidance counselor was, in some ways, because she also my English teacher--my dad [Togo D. West, Sr.] had been guidance counselor before that.  Dad was everything at that high school [Atkins High School; Atkins Academic and Technology High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] at one point or another, drivers ed [drivers education], basketball coach, football coach, you name it, which is not unusual when you think about it in high schools.  But she said, "Why are you gonna major in engineering?  Oh, I know.  Your dad wants you to do it.  That's such a shame."  She said, "You should major in English."  And I thought, well, okay, I hear you, but I'm gonna go do this other.  And so I had--I took the exams, had some scholarship offers because for two teachers, what they needed was a place for their kid to go extremely cheaply or best of all, for free.  And Howard, on what they called the national competitive scholarship, was the closest thing to that, that was--did not cost as much as other schools.  Plus, I had a national competitive scholarship awarded on the basis of merit, not on the basis of need in those days.  I was accepted to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], no scholarship, and was offered a scholarship to Trinity [Trinity College; Duke University, Durham, North Carolina], in which you did part of the time, you did a few years there and did some more year--and I'm trying to remember which of the engineering schools it was when you got your degree in engineering.  I wanted to do that, but my dad said, "Oh, I think, you know--," he let me fool around with it a long time, and then we sat down and had a heart-to-heart talk and said, "You probably should end up going to Howard."  And I said, that's fine, and I did.  So that had been a little drama for, you know, you have all these ideas, I would go here, I would go to MIT, I'll do this.  I never regretted that.  And so by the time of graduation, I was ready to get back to Washington [D.C.] and start school.  I spent the summer--
Speaker 2: Did your father urge you to go to Howard because he was there or did he--was that a big deal for him?
Speaker 1: I think it was almost entirely money.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Even with the scholarship to the combined program there was still gonna be some, you know, some overages, some amounts still to be paid.  As the only child of teachers in Winston-Salem [North Carolina] at that time, I did not suffer the disadvantages of economics.  My parents could provide me a home and meals and clothes and transportation.  And so I never noticed anything other than what seemed to me a normal and relatively comfortable life, not a fancy life.  My dad drove Dodges, not Cadillacs, but he drove them.  And he got a new one every three years.  And so, but by the same token, I don't think there's any possibility that they would have wanted to try to pay four years of tuition for me.  Now, as it turned out, they ended up paying some tuition and even the first year of tuition for law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] for me until I was back in the scholarship mode, and there you have it.  So, yeah, I graduated, and I was off to Howard.  I spent the summer as a lifeguard, having gotten (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In Winston-Salem?
Speaker 1: In Winston-Salem, having become a swimmer through the public school--public pools, segregated public pools in the summers.  We had two schools that had public pools, and so I was able to go there, take my beginning swimmer and intermediate and senor lifeguard and water safety instructor certificate so I could be a lifeguard.  And then, and then Howard in the fall.
Story_ID: 475141
Speaker 1: You were fairly, I guess you were sort of familiar with Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] having--
Speaker 2: Now, I, no, no (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, not at all?
Speaker 2: No, I knew their alma mater because my dad [Togo D. West, Sr.] sang it around the house and my mother [Evelyn Carter West] was a piano player.  So we sang.  But I also knew the Omega Psi Phi [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity] songs 'cause we sang those.  I didn't know Hampton's [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] alma mater, which was my mother's school because we spent all that--but, so I knew those things.  But I'd never been on the campus.  I did not do any campus interviews like, you know, my daughters [Hilary West and Tiffany West Smink], we traveled all over the country.  Not me.  I just read the material, took the exams, and considered myself lucky to be talking about college.  No, I didn't consider myself lucky.  My parents--there was never any doubt I was going to college.
Speaker 1: You knew you were going (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, they didn't leave any room for that so I shouldn't say that.  I knew a lot of--I knew something of Washington [D.C.] because I'd spent so many summers here.  But those summers had been far from Howard.  Howard's, you know, Georgia Avenue, north of Florida Avenue, you know, the old stadium, which is now, you know, part of Howard's campus and has been for a long time.  My dad's home, where he grew up, and which was the only single-family home on the block and the only family of blacks on the block, as I said, it was 1320  27th Street, Southeast.  That is the intersection as you go out Pennsylvania [Avenue], past Barney's Circle [Barney Circle, Washington, D.C.], across the bridge, just above where Minnesota Avenue cuts across.  That's an entirely different world, and even though I rode the streetcars over as far as Florida Avenue because I had an aunt that lived near there, I never got up to Howard University.  So this was--Charles R. Drew Hall, the freshman dorm, the, the Founders Library with the clock steeple, and the plaza out in front of it, the lawn there, and the, the main liberal arts building there, all of those were new to me.  It was brand new.  College life was new.  Howard University was new.  I just knew the name, the alma mater (laughter), oh, and some people there that my dad had known.  The dean of students, at that time, Stanton Wormley [Stanton Lawrence Wormley, Sr.], had known our family for a long time.  So, no, no--it wasn't Stan Wormley.  Stanton Wormley was the vice--academic vice president.  The dean of students--oh, it'll come to me.  But he'd been a family friend so Dad always told me, "Be sure and look in on him," and I did.  And dean (unclear) was a family friend too.  In fact, his brother had been a coach in the, in North Carolina.  Those names will come to me in a minute, I'm sure.  So, I knew some people and some things, but I didn't know the university at all.
Story_ID: 475142
Speaker 1: Now, you were majoring in engineering, right, at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Yes, I went there to major in mechanical engineering.  After the first semester or so, I think I--the first year or so, I switched to electrical engineering, but yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Engineering.
Speaker 1: Was the course of study difficult at all for (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.  We had a strong math department at Atkins High School [Atkins Academic and Technology High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], a lot of it attributable to my dad.  I did not have him as a teacher.  And I believe that though I entered Howard with very strong writing and reading, literary, liberal arts skills, that my math wasn't as strong as it should have been.  And I suffered for that.  So I was very challenged in engineering.  Indeed, on a number of occasions thought that I would drop out; didn't, probably, as an argument, I probably should have gotten my grades up--undergraduate school is the one time in my life that I've never graduated first in my class.  And my parents [Evelyn Carter West and Togo D. West, Sr.] who never said a word about it, but who in those days, got grades--you know, these days, I'm not sure parents get grades.  But they got my grades every semester, clearly, must have been concerned.  But they, they left me to grow.  Part of it, in addition to that was, I was still doing all these extracurricular activities.  Before I knew it, I was in a fraternity, not one of the social fraternities, but Alpha Phi Omega [Alpha Phi Omega Fraternity], a service fraternity, and took a lot of time with that.  I was on the army drill team.  I loved doing that.  I was on the army swim team.  By the end of my first year, I had to give some of that up.
Story_ID: 475143
Speaker 1: Were there any particular teachers or students that stand out at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Well, students like my first-year roommate, Taft Broome [Taft H. Broome, Jr.] , it turns out to have also come from North Carolina.  He was from, was it Boone [North Carolina]?  No.  And his dad [Taft H. Broome, Sr.] had been a principal of a small school there.  And Taft was a brilliant engineering student, ended up as president of the university senate.  I don't think he still is.  But I think he's still on the faculty at the School of Engineering [Howard University School of Engineering and Architecture; College of Engineering, Architecture, and Computer Sciences, Washington, D.C.] there.  My, a guy who lived across the hall from me, my sophomore year in college, where I lived in--not Carter Hall [sic. George W. Carver Hall], but it wasn't Drew Hall [Charles R. Drew Hall] anymore.  And it wasn't Slowe Hall [Lucy Diggs Slowe Hall] either, was a guy by the name of Pat Swygert, Haywood Patrick Swygert, [HistoryMaker] H. Patrick Swygert.  He is still the president of Howard University, the first graduate to be president.  We became good friends, in fact, the same fraternities, ended up in law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] together.  Of course, also at Drew Hall with me at the time, but engaged in different things.  There was a fellow by the name Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture].
Story_ID: 475144
Speaker 1: In that first year, '60 [1960], '61 [1961], a number of things began to develop in a far more serious (unclear), serious way in the South in terms of the surge, the struggle for fair treatment and equal rights.  In fact, the Freedom Rides started.  And Stokely [Stokely Carmichael; Kwame Ture] was one of the organizers because, you know, he was involved by then or soon after, with the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee, SNCC, became the leader.  And he was organizing these students, and they were all getting on buses and heading south.  I never went for the, what seemed to me to be the obvious reason.  But I don't think it seemed so obvious to Stokely who always treated me--and to this day treats me, with, with great courtesy and friendliness.  For me, it was, I'm from there.  I've been there.  I don't have to see what's like, and I don't have to lend my support because I do it every time, and indeed, I have my Freedom Rides every Thanksgiving, every Christmas--because I went home every holiday.  So I didn't go on the Freedom Rides as they did.  I remember one day leaving Drew Hall [Charles R. Drew Hall] and Stokely was standing with some folks outside of--I wonder, one of the buildings, classroom buildings.  And I was coming along, and he said, "Well, there goes Togo West [HistoryMaker Togo D. West, Jr.], the all--." No, "Here comes Togo West, the all-American boy."  Now, I have to say that he didn't taunt me.  No one was taunting.  They just gave me a friendly smile, and so I stopped with him and they went on.  But I always thought, when I think back on that, that it was so much caught up in those words.  So maybe it was, yes.  I was--and I--everybody is sloughing around, getting up late, taking late classes.  I'm up at the crack of dawn, and I take the earliest classes.  They were all getting pork chop boxes from, what is it?  Finley's [ph.] off campus, delivered to go to the dorm.  I'm on the meal plan, and I'm going to eat those meals.  I still believed in wearing a tie to class.  So it might be a tie and a sweater, but I was still wearing a tie in the classroom too (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that wasn't--well, today that would be very unusual to see a kid going to class in a college campus--
Speaker 1: Yeah, it wasn't all that unusual then, but still, it was more and more--
Speaker 2: It was becoming--
Speaker 1: --that you could--you wouldn't see people in t-shirts or sweat shirts, but they might have their neck open.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But you're right.  In those days, it wasn't unusual (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] was then--correct if I'm wrong.  Howard would have been more liberal, I guess, in those days--
Speaker 1: Exactly, but not Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee].
Speaker 2: --than say some of the southern schools, like Fisk, you'd have to have a tie to go to class--
Speaker 1: Or Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 2: --continental suit and all that.
Speaker 1: Yep, yep, but I was still, you know, doing the other things.  And so there was that, but there was also the reminder of the point that I'm still following the rules and not protesting.
Story_ID: 475145
Speaker 1: When, in fact, people who care about what's happening to our country and to people in our country are choosing to defy the rules when the rules have an unfair result and unfair application.  I thought that was a point well made on his part, and I did not resent it.  Ultimately, I became what I had been in high school [Atkins High School; Atkins Academic and Technology High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], a student leader, but of the group that, for those who were protesting and then, you know, eventually, by '64 [1964], '63 [1963], '64 [1964], what had started as the Free Speech Movement in California, the dirty speech movement, began to spread to campuses even including the conservative campuses of the HBCUs, historically black colleges and universities.  By then, I had a classmate--and I'm jumping ahead a little further than I want to, but let me just say anyway, named, JeRoyd Greene [JeRoyd W. Greene, Jr.; Sa'ad El-Amin].  That was law school, and I'll come back to Jay Greene.  But there were in my third and fourth year of college protests against our leadership, Jim Nabrit [James M. Nabrit, Jr.] was the president, and protests of the sort that the protesting students would say--and those students who were part of student government, were like a student officials.  You know, they become quislings.  They were part of the universities control mechanism, rather than part of the student leadership that was looking out for student interests.  And so I was president of the Student Assembly [Undergraduate Student Assembly] my last year, which was the beginning of the university-wide student government.  I was president of my fraternity in my sophomore years, so I had--I did a lot of things.  Editor of The Engineer [The Howard Engineer], the school of engineering and architecture publication, stuff like that, which, which also tends to get in the way of studies.  But, now, Pat Swygert [HistoryMaker H. Patrick Swygert], also was in law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] with me, so I'll come back to that because I had a couple of others that were there when I mentioned (unclear).  The, a year behind me, but someone I came to know then and then my wife [Gail Berry West] and I got to know even better in law school, was a young woman, very smart.  I think people found her very attractive.  She was attractive, and a natural leader in the student body.  We worked on some projects together.  Although she was liberal arts and I was engineering, so, by the name of [HistoryMaker] Sharon Pratt.  And, of course, years passed.  We were in law school together, and she ended up being the first woman and the first African American woman to be mayor of the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.], still a friend, still a good friend, along with her former husband, Arrington [Arrington Dixon], and still.  Now, Arrington was never at Howard [sic.].  He was at the Air Force Academy [United States Air Force Academy, Colorado] for two years until his brother [James W. Dixon], a graduate of the Air Force Academy was killed flying.  And Arrington dropped out of the academy, and I think he enrolled in Morgan State [sic.] and finished his degrees there.  But he used to be on campus a lot to come and see Sharon (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Arrington--
Speaker 1: Dixon.
Speaker 2: Dixon.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Arrington Dixon.  So they were, they were around the campus at the same time then too; all friends--
Story_ID: 475146
Speaker 1: In terms of the instructors, the real giants at the university [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]--well, no, there were giants everywhere.  I was about to say there were some real giants in the College of Liberal Arts [Howard University College of Arts and Sciences, Washington, D.C.], but there were giants at the School of Engineering [Howard University School of Engineering and Architecture; College of Engineering, Architecture, and Computer Sciences, Washington, D.C.] too.  I most remember the former dean, ah I'll pull his name out in a minute (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It'll come to you--
Speaker 1: It's a senior moment, but who was extraordinary.  And he set the--he was a mechanical engineer, was his background, and he set the mold for which a lot of us could aspire to.  Now, as it turns out, when I finished undergraduate school, I went to work for a summer in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] as an electrical engineering first, starter person for the, for Duquesne Light and Power [Duquesne Light and Power Company; Duquesne Light Company], the power company there, ostensibly, as a beginner on a career there, but, in fact, I just needed the summer job because I had already enrolled in law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.].  So by the time I finished engineering school, I knew I was gonna go to law school, and I had always wanted to.  And that's why I made the comment earlier that I had a guidance counselor who said--I think maybe she sensed it, but I believe that the way children spend their summers can be profoundly important to the way they grow up.  They are free from the pressures of school.  Given a chance, their imaginations get to sort of flower.  They get to follow their interests.  They get to, they get to roam around in their minds and around in the world.  And it doesn't have to be that they're left at loose ends.  They have a structured summer.  My parents [Evelyn Carter West and Togo D. West, Sr.] came to Washington [D.C.] almost every summer.  I had mentioned that.  And they'd stay for a bit.  I'd stay with my [paternal] grandmother [Mary Chinn West].  Then they'd go off to work on their master's [degree] programs because that's the way you increased your salary as a teacher.  And, now, as an only child, you've already learned how to entertain yourself, and there's one major way, reading, because you escape to a different world.  No, a different world, lots of other worlds.  And I can remember with great clarity the summer that I discovered the bookmobile that visited the neighborhood where my grandmother and uncle [Carlton S. West] lived, and where Daddy had grown up and where my grandfather [Peter W. West] lived for a time.  And so I'd go to the bookmobile every Tuesday.  I'd get this stack of books and take them back and so I'd have them to read.  Now, I had friends, all white, who lived on either side of me.  And we'd play out in the alley and have golf ball races, race the golf, colored golf balls down the alley.  And then in the evenings, wait for the Good Humor man to come around, ingenious thing, and we'd get our ice cream and sit out there.  But we never visited each other's home.  They invited me, but my grandmother wouldn't let me go because she said, "Then they'll want to come to ours."  "And, oh, why is that so bad?"  And Dad said, "Don't son, just don't (laughter), don't challenge your grandmother.  Just enjoy yourself."
Story_ID: 475147
Speaker 1: But I read one summer, every single book written by Erle Stanley Gardner, including the ones he wrote under the name, A.A. Fair because Erle Stanley Gardner is Perry Mason's author.  A.A. Fair are just other mysteries, not in Raleigh [North Carolina].  And so one hesitates to deposit it on something as trite as that.  But I do think, just the being convinced that lawyers could do exciting things and have interesting things, put it in my mind that, boy, I would like to be a lawyer, to know the rules, the interpret the rules, to tell other people what the rules are.  And so all the time I was in engineering school [Howard University School of Engineering and Architecture; College of Engineering, Architecture, and Computer Sciences, Washington, D.C.], I was beginning engineering school, but it--but slowly but surely came to the conclusion that I was gonna go to law school when I finished.
Speaker 2: Now, how old were you when you read every Erle Stanley Gardner book (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Very young, I mean this was--
Speaker 2: How old were you?
Speaker 1: This was--I'd say it's right around seventh and eighth grade.
Speaker 2: I guess you were about thirteen (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So that would be junior--that would be the first two years of junior high school [at St. Benedict the Moor School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina].  So that's not so young.  You know, that's, when you think about it, that's time to be reading.  I'd been reading, I had--by then I had read every book my father [Togo D. West, Sr.] and mother [Evelyn Carter West] had in their bookcases because they'd go away and leave me.
Speaker 2: Now most--I don't think most youth would be reading Erle Stanley Gardner at that age though, you know, a thirteen-year old, but you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Let me tell you why it was.  I had found one of his books in my dad's bookcase and read it at an earlier age.  And so when I'm wandering about the bookmobile, I'd go to the mysteries, and, in fact, that was not so unusual for me because prior to that, I used to ride my bicycle--in fact, I did ride my bicycle up to the local branch of the Winston-Salem library [East Winston Branch Library; Malloy/Jordan East Winston Heritage Center, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], located in the black community near me, not far from us.  Well, it was a ride of fifteen, twenty minutes for me, so it wasn't that close, and parked it.  And I could in.  Initially, I'd go in the young adults section for years, but then other sections.  And there is where I found additional worlds because there weren't enough books just in the house.  And so I discovered, before I took the courses in college, mythology.  When I took the humanities course, I knew all the stories because they were great fun to read.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'Bulfinch's Mythology' [Thomas Bulfinch]--
Speaker 1: Sure all that.  And they were just Greek mythology and Roman mythology, and you read them because the stories were so fascinating.  It's not like you were studying anything.  This was fun.  But also, I became very much a fan of mysteries.  Dad had had them there.  And so I have to tell you that I can't claim that all my youthful reading was necessarily (laughter) the kind that expanded my horizons in the way that they might have wanted.  But I read lots of different styles of writing.  I read lots of interesting stories.  And that was how I learned to entertain myself as a youngster.  I can remember, retreating for a moment to my childhood, my parents didn't own--my parents only owned one home in their entire lives.  And they didn't own it until my first year of college.  So prior to that, we lived in a rented house, but it was the same house, and there was a place--it was a house, in which the big oil furnace was actually not down in some basement, but was on the level--I forget where the, where it was exactly, where I could go--I mean it didn't, it wasn't a dirty thing.  It was, I could go and sit in there, and it won't--had a little nook behind it.  And I could hear my mother saying, "Where is Pete [HistoryMaker Togo D. West, Jr.]?"  That was my nickname.  Don't ask me or if you wanna ask me later, why?  That was my nickname, Pete.  "Where's Pete?"  And Dad said, "I don't know.  He's somewhere with his nose stuck in a book."  Standard answer.  So by the time I was reading all these Erle Stanley Gardner things, I was well into reading as my way of entertaining myself, and it is still to this day my preferred.
Story_ID: 475148
Speaker 1: Well, we were talking about undergrad school--well, why you chose law and the influence of Erle Stanley Gardner on you (laughter).  Now, how did--did your parents feel, how did your parents feel about that?
Speaker 2: I'll tell you what my mother [Evelyn Carter West] said--my father's [Togo D. West, Sr.] view was that I needed to go to--to continue my engineering life.  But remember, I had also been commissioned.  I was going to have to go on active duty at some point because this was Vietnam [Vietnam War] and I had a commitment, second lieutenant in artillery, field artillery.  And so once I graduated [from Howard University, Washington, D.C.], gone to work, the preferences would have been different, but they didn't spend a lot of time trying to pressure me.  I think their views in many respects were, "Well, okay, he's made his choice," and they supported me.  They paid my tuition.  My mother's comment when she heard what I wanted to do though was, "Now, you know the Red Caps who carried my bags when I came through Union Station [Winston-Salem, North Carolina] were black lawyers."  I mean her view and the--I think the view of many people in '65 [1965] when I said that was, yeah, I hear that, but what is there for black lawyers to do?  In my hometown in the South, there were black lawyers I knew.  I knew a family of them.  The woman was the first, first black woman to be a member of the bar in the State of North Carolina.  The husband and wife were both graduates of Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts].  Their sons are graduates of Harvard Law School now.  And they're still running the firm.
Speaker 1: Harvard Law School?
Speaker 2: Harvard Law School, in my childhood, a phenomenal family.
Speaker 1: What was their--what's the name of the family?
Speaker 2: Oh, you ask me these names.  I'm not coming up with them.  It was--I'll get them.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's fine (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But a very extraordinary twosome, as a family.  They went to my church, which was an important part of my life in Winston-Salem [North Carolina] that I didn't mention.  I was Episcopalian.
Speaker 1: I think, yeah, we talked about that.  You were an altar boy (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, they were members of that church [St. Stephen's Episcopal Church, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], yeah, they were members of that church.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: The father has now died, but the mother and the two boys are still there with the firm.  So anyway, I knew another lawyer, another African American lawyer that didn't live that far from us who had a practice.  But by and large my mother's view of, of opportunities for black lawyers in those days was set against the context of what she'd seen in Winston-Salem, which was you couldn't do much for them in the courts.  A black lawyer would have to have some white lawyer to go in for him, and sort of help make that deal.  And in Washington [D.C.], she hadn't seen a great deal of progress because of this.  Now, in fact, there had been a great deal of progress.  Washington, African American lawyers had done some great things by then, out of Howard law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.]--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --well before I got there.
Story_ID: 475149
Speaker 1: This is a good point in time to ask this.  Were you influenced by the Charlie Houston [Charles Hamilton Houston] group, you know, well, Nabrit [James M. Nabrit, Jr.], himself, was a, had president of the law school or head of the law school before he became president of Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Before I started Howard law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.], when I was in the engineering school [Howard University School of Engineering and Architecture; College of Engineering, Architecture, and Computer Sciences, Washington, D.C.] and sort of sorting out my life and [U.S.] Army and this and that, I hardly knew about the Howard law school tradition.  I went to Howard law school because that's where I got in.  That's the only place I applied, and I wanted to go to law school.  And that was--I was on the campus.  I applied there.  I didn't spend a lot of time looking Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] or Yale [Yale Law School, New Haven, Connecticut] or any other place.  I applied to one place, and that was that.  I learned about the traditions and the impact of that law school and its faculty and its former faculty and of James Madison Nabrit's involvement himself as dean, as a faculty member before he became president, once I got there.  I didn't know the name Charles Hamilton Houston or Langston [John Mercer Langston].  I just didn't know until I got to that law school.  Now, certainly, we all know about Brown versus Board [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954].  We all know who Thurgood Marshall was.  But I didn't even equate Thurgood Marshall or connect him with the Howard law school unless you, I read the fine lines in the articles.  So I learned everything to be learned about the traditions and impact once I was at the law school.  I'm sure lots of others went there--well, my wife [Gail Berry West], who I met there, went to Howard with a much greater appreciation.  She was the daughter of a lawyer in Cincinnati [Ohio].  He was the first black to--African American to be mayor of Cincinnati--
Speaker 1: This is Theodore M. Berry, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, he had been the youngest ever NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] chapter head.  He'd been in the fight, and so she knew all about it.  She also was a history major.  So she knew all about it.  She spent the first few weeks of our, of our getting to know each other (laughter), bringing me up to speed.
Story_ID: 475150
Speaker 1: Before we get you, I guess, into your law career--I want to go back and ask a couple more questions about, I mean follow up.  I was thinking I didn't ask, and I'm not sure right now, did the sit-ins at North Carolina A and T [Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical state University, Greensboro, North Carolina] occur when you were a freshman at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yes.
Speaker 1: That first year--
Speaker 2: I think that first year, 1960.
Speaker 1: And I just wondered like, how did you feel about that going on and, you know, and near your home and what were the students--were they really focused in on--I know of them were like Stokely [Stokely Carmichael; Kwame Ture] maybe, but I don't know who (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was an interesting time on Howard's campus.  There were lots of students who were just having their college experience, a bunch of kids down from New York and New Jersey who were far more sophisticated in the ways of the world.  And so they were busy, you know--no, I won't put it that way.  They were walking on the large stage and beginning to start campus life.  To some extent, I was caught up in that.  And even--I had a friend come, who came with me, a classmate, who also came to Howard from Winston-Salem [North Carolina].  So we were caught up in that.  And it--in the first year of 1960, it was simply a mixed thing at the campus there.  For the two of us from Winston-Salem, though, yeah, we paid attention to what was happening in Greensboro [North Carolina].  We'd been there.  That's thirty minutes away.  That's--people who go to A and T that we know or that, what was Winston-Salem's teachers college, now Winston-Salem State College [Winston-Salem State University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], competed with them in athletics.  And anyway, we had experienced and knew about the lunch counter situation in the South.  I mean right there at Woolworths [F.W. Woolworth Company] in Winston-Salem, the lunch counter was right there, couldn't eat at it.  I worked there one summer, cleaned behind the counter and all that.  One of the summers (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you actually you worked there one summer?
Speaker 2: Not the one in Greensboro, the one in Winston-Salem.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but in Winston-Salem.  So you know it was a similar situation (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, and so we all knew about that.  And so, and so it was--I was watched it with great interest.  Now, organizing something to go down and support them, well, we figured we already did support them.  But, yeah, knew about it and watched it, but it was a long way away from Howard, but very close to where we came from.
Speaker 1: Yeah, did any black person ever try to sit-in or get served, I mean it may not have been (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, when I worked there?
Speaker 1: When you worked there?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't work during the, during the open hours of the store.  I arrived at 6:00 and was--I mean I didn't--I was part of the clean-up service, the janitorial and all that stuff.  And I was a young kid.  Actually, I arrived while it was still open, but as it was closing, and that's where I'd go--it was a little summer job.  I remember I lost it because the, whoever the sub-manager who was in charge of me wanted me to stay longer.  At some point, I guess there were some people that were gonna be away or they're losing somebody, and I said, "You know, I'm not sixteen yet.  And the child labor law requires this and that."  And he said, "Oh, smart guy, knows about child labor law."
Speaker 1: Okay and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Couple of days later, I was done.
Story_ID: 475151
Speaker 1: And you were talking about the beginning of the Freedom Rides, and that was about '60 [1960], '61 [1961].  I guess that starts maybe in the second half of your--the second semester when you were in school or thereabouts (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Simultaneous) Yep, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --yeah, when they started going down (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And the fact is I just never went on any of them, knew about them, knew who was going.  It still was not a major part of the university, but it was a concern that every student noticed and knew about.  But I did not make those trips.  I didn't make those trips because I thought, I make a freedom ride every Thanksgiving, every Christmas when I go home.  And I may even have still been caught up in the life I lived in Winston-Salem [North Carolina], in which we made our progress by simply doing what we had to do to pursue our education, our interests despite what others tried to keep us from doing.  And eventually, you know--
Speaker 1: So when you traveled from--I know you told the story of the Safe Bus Company [Winston-Salem, North Carolina], how things kind of changed in Winston-Salem (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Yeah.
Speaker 1: --but when you went to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] on a bus from, you know, when you traveled on the bus, did they make you sit in the back of the bus?
Speaker 2: I didn't travel by bus.  I took a--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) traveled by train from Winston-Salem to Greensboro [North Carolina] and then another train from Greensboro to Winston-Salem--to Washington [D.C.].  And I, I don't know that the cars were segregated.  I'm sure they must have been.  I can't believe they weren't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't think in 19--in August of 1960 which is when I came to Howard University, there's any way I would have gotten on public transportation, whether intrastate or interstate in North Carolina and not have been under segregated (unclear).
Speaker 1: Okay, and now I want to ask you about--
Speaker 2: And I traveled by bus across the southern United States as a Boy Scout and we were segregated on those buses.
Story_ID: 475152
Speaker 1: I want to ask you about the liberal arts, I guess at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and, you know, I don't know if there's--I mean considering what you've done in life, I think that might be important, some of those liberal arts teachers at Howard.  And so I don't know if you had any history courses, political science with some of the people like, I don't--who were there at that time or if any of them made any impact on you?  So you say your wife [Gail Berry West] was a history major and (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --some of the history people.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and, of course, she talks about all of her history professors from Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] to this day and their impact on her.  As an engineering student, I would have gotten my liberal arts courses out of the way fairly quickly in the first and second years, and any liberal arts I would have taken after that would have been electives.
Speaker 1: I mean were there any that you remember at all that influenced your thinking as you went forward?
Speaker 2: Let me tell you who influenced me.  As much--I mean, there were giants there and they influenced us all.  But as I look back, I was as much influenced by some of my fellow students.  For example, there was, there was a trio of young men about two years ahead of me who were going through liberal arts, and who were just setting the place aflame.  They were brilliant, they had great grades, they were student leaders, president of the liberal arts student council, which was the dominant student government organization on campus until in my senior year, we created the Student Assembly [Undergraduate Student Assembly] that I mentioned earlier, and who I over time got to know and talk to.  One of them is still right here in town, Michael Winston [Michael R. Winston].  Michael Winston, we knew was going to be president of Howard University.  In fact, he ended up being the executive vice president for academic affairs or something like that.  And then he had the Moorland Spingarn Collection [Moorland-Spingarn Collection; Moorland-Spingarn Research Center, Washington, D.C.], and he still has a commission to this day, brilliant, just brilliant.  Conrad Harper [Conrad K. Harper], who went on to go to Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] and then one of the big law firms in New York [New York], just--and Jerry [ph.], a fellow that was the editor of the paper [The Hilltop] in my senior year.  But their thinking, their talking, their debates, their writing influenced me then and still do.  Now, you know, they in turn were admirers of the, you know, the giants.  I'm trying to remember.  There's a joke about one of them.  He had been there early on.  He was a Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] professor--Harvard grad, who was for years, the dean of the College of Liberal Arts [Howard University College of Arts and Sciences, Washington, D.C.] and kind of dominated the place.  And his thinking and his approach and his intellectual rigor influenced us all, influenced me for certain.  But the liberal (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: That's not Frazier, was it?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Frazier, was he still there, E. Franklin Frazier--
Speaker 2: No, I didn't, no, no, although, obviously, we're all familiar with his works and his writings.
Story_ID: 475153
Speaker 1: I tend to think in terms of my Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] experience and the influential figures there.  For someone who eventually finished the law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.], Jim Nabrit [James M. Nabrit, Jr.], then the president, not the dean.  For someone who eventually finished the law school, Clarence Clyde Ferguson [Clarence Clyde Ferguson, Jr.], the dean, when I was at the law school, who taught us, my wife [Gail Berry West] and me and Sharon [HistoryMaker Sharon Pratt] and Pat [HistoryMaker H. Patrick Swygert]--I think they were in--they weren't in--Sharon and Pat were not in my section in the law school.  So they may not have had him.  Civil procedure, one of the first-year classes in the law school.  Clarence Clyde Ferguson, a graduate of Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio], former assistant U.S. attorney, later ambassador, strides in the room, turns to the table of contents and begins his lecture for us.  And for a semester in that course, mesmerized us all and gave us, gave us all, I think the same reaction, which was so this is what law school is like.  This is what it's like to have someone learned in the professor, who teaches you about the law.  Now, in fact, anybody who's been to law school, will say, well, you--they don't really teach you that way.  What they do is, it's the case book method.  It's the, well, I guess the method first popularized by--who am I thinking?  Aristotle, the--
Speaker 2: Socratic Method?
Speaker 1: The Socratic Method, yeah, question and answer, Socratic Method.  And yet, I think we were all just sort of taken by his immense knowledge, not just of the law, but of the minutiae of what was gonna be in the cases that we were going to be addressing, about what they meant, how to weave them together into one tapestry, one fabric, of that area of the law.  Now, we had--now, Clarence Clyde Ferguson was not one of the heroes of the civil rights wars.  He was not part of that.  I mean there were others on the faculty who were.  In fact, we used to--you know, how cynical first-year students can be, we used to sort of joke and say, "My god, everybody around here wrote Brown versus the Board [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954]."  Well, yeah, maybe that's a little cynical, but it was damn near true.  That has been a major collaborative effort there at the law school and its progeny, the progeny it spawned, and frankly, we had a right to be proud of all those who had been there and who had done that.  And we had some, some--we had visiting professors, just a number who, I think had an impact on us all.
Speaker 2: People like Oliver Hill [HistoryMaker Oliver W. Hill] or Spottswood Robinson [Spottswood William Robinson III] or--
Speaker 1: Well, Spots, Spott Robinson had left for the bench by the time we got there and so had Oliver Hill.  Julian Dugas [Julian R. Dugas] was on the faculty and still, you know, bless his soul, Pat Swygert and the faculty still have him there.  He still has a connection.
Speaker 2: How do you spell his name?  What's his name?
Speaker 1: Well, we all, we all--everyone in the law school pronounced it Dugas, D-U-G-A-S, South Carolina name probably.  But I'm sure the proper--the correct pronunciation is Dugas.  But a political family here in town still.  I know a number of his people, but, you know, he had been part of that.  Oliver Morris, Red Morris, as we called him, who was our evidence professor, towering fella, married one of our classmates.
Story_ID: 475154
Speaker 1: Just back from her term as ambassador to Luxembourg, now, let me think, yeah, but before she went away to be Jimmy Carter's [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] secretary of HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development] and then secretary of HEW [U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare], Patricia Roberts Harris.  Now, Patricia Roberts Harris mesmerized us all.  She was beautiful, she was brilliant, she was outspoken, but in her outspokenness, she could be eloquent.  I remember her confirmation hearing to be secretary of HUD.  When one of the Democratic senators--I think he wanted to show that he wasn't gonna be part of the whole chorus of people who were lauding her and what a great thing it was to have this African American, he said, "But you're not really part of the African American experience, are you?  I mean you've been an ambassador, and you--and look at you."  And she said, "Senator, you don't know who you're talking to."  And then she launched into her history, her father's [Bert Fitzgerald Roberts] history, her family's history, as part of the black community that had worked as--I'm trying to remember.  Was her dad a Pullman car porter?  But, and she recounted that experience for him.  Now, he hadn't done a bad thing to do that.  It was right to say, we don't just--you walk up and we say, okay, that's it.  We can probe you, but they picked the wrong lady (laughter).  Well, she was teaching international law.  So she, yeah, she was there.  She'd been out and seen the world.  She'd done things.  Now, Pat Harris, God rest her soul, had an effect on me far before that as a young undergraduate in my ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] role, you know, you asked me earlier about what I did in the '60s [1960s], in that first '60s [1960s], how did, how was Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] reacting to the, to the rides [Freedom Rides]?  And underneath that question, I think we all remember that that was the whole point of, you know, Howard, the place that's a little bit removed from what the rest of the African world was experienced.  They were all here having the good life and not quite sensing where they need to be and where they--how long did it take to bring them into that.  And as part of that sort of proper, bourgeois as, as Stokely [Stokely Carmichael; Kwame Ture] and others, God rest his soul, would have described it, was the fact that every May, we had May Day.  We elected a May queen at the university.  Now, that does sound like shades of the South, doesn't it?  We elected a May queen, and the May queen and alma mater would have a court.  And we'd have a procession at a lovely, flower-bedecked affair down on one of the lower--down near Death Valley, which is where the pharmacy and chemistry and all those buildings were.
Speaker 2: Right, it's interesting they call that Death Valley.  I've walked through there, and the students were telling me, "This is Death Valley," I said why (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, the engineering school [Howard University School of Engineering and Architecture; College of Engineering, Architecture, and Computer Sciences, Washington, D.C.] is down there.  The chemistry, physics--
Speaker 2: That's the hard sciences.
Speaker 1: --and pharmacy, oh, yeah, Death Valley (laughter).  So, so--and we turned out, and the queens would be escorted by senior cadets.  And I was the escort for alma mater, which was a young, but not a coed, this would have to be alumna, whereas the queen, of course, was a student.  And the alumna that year who was alma mater was just a beautiful, scintillating Patricia Roberts Harris, and I was her escort.  She was on my arm, and I was in my uniform.  And she was talking away to her friends in the court, and she'd say things like, "Ah, I've got this young captain here, and dah, dah da-ta, dah."  And I just, I was lost for life.
Speaker 2: That's a great memory.
Story_ID: 475155
Speaker 1: So, then in law school then, who is the most influential, I guess, person do you think, that you encountered (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There were a number of them.  I had a professor--I still see him.  He's right here in town.  He's a member of a fraternity that I'm a member of, Jeanus Parks [Jeanus B. Parks, Jr.], Jeanus Burrell Parks.  Now, you know, what happens at places like Howard [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.], what happened then and at places Atkins High School [Atkins Academic and Technology High School] in Winston-Salem [North Carolina], is the same thing that happened in those days at places like Dunbar High School [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School] here in Washington [D.C.], and which is that, you would find those African Americans, who despite the conditions of the time, when it wasn't expected you'd get to college, let alone of the mainstream colleges.  And what's always (unclear) how did they get there?  And yet, once they had finished college, where were they to go?  Once they'd gotten their degree, who's gonna hire them?  And so often we benefited in the black community from the very lack of other opportunities they were accorded in the larger community.  They'd come back and teach in our institutions.  And so, at the Howard law school, Jeanus Burrell Parks was teaching.  Now, he was a Columbia Law [Columbia Law School, New York, New York] graduate.  Imagine that, teaching me in 1965--at the start of my law school career.  In addition to the Howard Law graduates who achieved so much, there is a Harvard Law [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] graduate by the name of Clarence Clyde Ferguson [Clarence Clyde Ferguson, Jr.], a Columbia Law graduate by the name of Jeanus Burrell Parks.  And so you get a feel for what they learned at those places.  And Jeanus Parks taught us several courses.  His influence with respect to me, in addition to everything that can happen in a law school, is his influence on career opportunities because when I was graduating from Howard Law, anticipating graduating in 1968, so I'm thinking about all this in '67 [1967] or even to '66 [1966], you begin to think.  You don't have but three years.  What are you gonna do?  I knew first of all that I was gonna have to go on active duty.  I had been extended long enough to be in law school.  I was gonna end up getting a transfer of my commission from artillery to JAG [Judge Advocate General's Corps].  At every general's corps, that's the way it worked because I had been allowed in the extended leave program; another example, U.S. Army and U.S. military being ahead of the game in providing opportunities, regardless of color.  They didn't say to me, you can't be a JAG.  They simply looked to see what my grades were and said, okay, take the bar.  If you pass the bar, you're in the program.  In the meantime, you'll be in the extended leave program, and won't be called to active duty until you're done.  So I knew, when I finished law school, I was going on active--going to go on active duty.  And so I hadn't paid as much attention as others at the law school.  And we did not have necessarily opportunities as other law schools, to compete for clerkships, to be in large law firms, to know anything about the elite practice of the law.  Well, Jeanus Parks, through his connections with Howard Westwood [Howard C. Westwood] and others in Washington, at the big law firms who had been working in the poverty programs--interesting connection to my father-in-law [Theodore M. Berry], incidentally, because remember, '60s [1960s], John Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy], '63 [1963], he's dead and then Lyndon Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] takes over--
Speaker 1: The War on Poverty, right?
Speaker 2: Lyndon Johnson says, "I am going to do something."  I'm gonna use some muscle here.  And so he gets, yes, War on Poverty, the Office of Economic Opportunity [OEO] which--and there was, and they established all these entities across the city--across the country in these cities, modeled on the program that wife's father created in Cincinnati [Ohio].  But yeah, I'll come back to that.
Story_ID: 475156
Speaker 1: And so here, in the program in Washington [D.C.], Jeanus Parks [Jeanus B. Parks, Jr.] got to know Howard Westwood [Howard C. Westwood], from Covington and Burling [Covington and Burling LLP, Washington, D.C.], and so they could talk about youngster who could--at Howard [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] who could be given an opportunity to see what the (unclear) was like.  So Jeanus Parks and the--
Speaker 2: How do you spell his first name, I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: J-E-A-N-U-S.
Speaker 2: J-E-A-N-U-S.
Speaker 1: Jean-us, Jeanus Burrell, B-U-R-R-E-L-L, Parks.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Professor Parks lives and operates in this city to this day.  God bless his soul.  So Jeanus Burrell Parks, Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York] graduate, gets to know Howard Westwood as they're on the board of the--what was it called?  The D.C. planning--well, it might have just been called the, the D.C. Community Action Program, but they were clearly action programs.  And so, so he had gotten, for a person in the class ahead of me, an opportunity to work at Arnold and Porter [Arnold and Porter LLP, Washington, D.C.].  And by then, we know what the big law firms are.  Now, this is not going in and being a lawyer.  This is to get to be a part-time law clerk during the year, go in and do research after hours.  But these are good jobs.  They're part-time jobs and you also get to know the big firms.  And I needed part-time jobs because once my wife and I married at the end of our first year of law school, we took no support from either family.  Now, Gail [Gail Berry West] hadn't needed it, my wife.  She had come sailing at the Harvard Law--Howard Law, based on her Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] magna cum laude, Phi Beta Kappa [Phi Beta Kappa Society], University of Cincinnati [Cincinnati, Ohio], completed a two-year program in one year, law student everybody wants.  Yale [Yale Law School, New Haven, Connecticut] wanted her, everybody wanted her, but she came here because her dad [Theodore M. Berry] came here to be in the Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] administration.  And so she had, the Ford Foundation [New York, New York] had got a number of fellowships at Howard as part of expanding opportunities for minorities.  So they wooed her and seduced her with a full Ford fellowship for her, her three years.  She had to keep her grades up, but she was set.  She wasn't costing her parents anything.  I didn't get mine until after I'd been at the law school for a year, and had established my record.
Story_ID: 475157
Speaker 1: One of the things I want to interject before I forget it, when you asked me both as an undergraduate [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and in law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] about the people there, who particularly influenced me, and some of the legends on the faculty, is that there were people who were--may not have been known to the public as legends and not part of the faculty itself, but part of the university leadership who had enormous impact on me and on all of us.  And one of them was Carl Anderson [HistoryMaker Carl Edwin Anderson].  Everyone there, every person who comes into contact with a student, whether at college or law school, has the opportunity to impart something to the students that they keep with them forever, some little fragment or maybe some big, overarching concept.  And I'm reminded that Carl's involvement in student activities, he was the director of student activities, so everything flowed through him.  No fraternity could get any office space or arrange this or get approval for an event without going through him.  He was the decider on whether a fraternity was in danger of being thrown off campus or whether the university, the student senate was gonna do this, the liberal arts student council was gonna do that or whether so and so qualified to run for office and a whole host of other things.  And so I was in his office lots.  And wholly aside from the big things he did, the one thing I'm remembering that I carry away from him is I learned from him how to organize myself, the little things that you and I now do naturally because over time, we've done them.  But, okay, so you have an office and you have meetings and you have phone calls and you talk to people.  How do you remember all that?  How do you keep it straight?  Well, Carl, normally would take notes, I guess, well, Carl had a yellow tablet, and every time he started to talk to somebody about something, it was a new page, a date at the top, and he'd start making notes.  So if in the middle of a conversation with me, the phone rang and it was So and So and he had to take it, flip the page, date, start taking notes.  Now, that's not so phenomenal, except that what it meant to me was, and all the years since then I've done this way, whether as a lawyer or in government, is I keep a ton of yellow tablets, and whoever walks in, new page, take notes.  Whatever call comes in, new page, take notes; end of the day, tear the notes off and put them chronologically in that month's folder for notes.  Now, later on, when you want to organize things by subject, it's there.  But if you simply want to say, did we really say that?  I have my source, and it's an easy one.  I don't have a logbook.  I'm not kept from doing it because I've got to find something, any tablet will do because I'm gonna tear those pages out and put 'em in.  I learned that from Carl, years ago, watching him run things.  And I'm just saying that as a student.  Now, is that a big thing?  In the scope of things, probably not.  In terms of organizing my ability to keep track of people and keep them from pulling the wool over my eyes (laughter), ha, ha, you bet you.  Well, but Carl was more than that.  What he was, was at the crux of so many things.  And I'm just reminded that he, like so many others has that impact or the other impact, which was his view that students and their student activities and the things they did with their lives were a legitimate concern of the university superstructure because believe you me, we say it now, and it sounds like, well, yeah, that makes sense, but most students never got that sense on most campuses.  You go on campus, and you think they don't care.  You go in the office to, you know, to pay a debt or to pay your tuition or stand in a line, they don't care.  Carl was the one face, without overdoing it, I mean it's not like he coddled us, but you knew he'd listen.  You knew he would do the right thing and tell--talk to you about the right thing.
Story_ID: 475158
Speaker 1: So, back to the point though that you were asking about in the law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.]--
Speaker 2: We were talking about--I think we closed that out and I was asking you about Charles Duncan [HistoryMaker Charles T. Duncan], and you said that he had (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, but you asked me something before that came up.  It was, well, we'll talk about Duncan, but, oh, Jeanus Parks [Jeanus B. Parks, Jr.].
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: What Jeanus Parks did, brilliant instructor he was, was he then became at the nexus of how an aspiring young student could explore the job market where the elite opportunities were.  I went to him because I learned that a student a year ahead of me, whom he'd gotten one of these jobs to work for Arnold and Porter [Arnold and Porter LLP, Washington, D.C.].  Now, it wasn't as a summer clerk.  Now, they call it summer associate where you got the fancy money.  And it wasn't as an associate.  It was a summer job, but you were doing research and working with lawyers in this firm.  And for me, this is the point I was gonna make, I hadn't--I needed summer jobs.  I always needed summer jobs to go with the scholarships that I eventually got starting my second year.  And Gail [Gail Berry West], with her scholarship, and she had summer jobs.  We, we paid our apartment, two-bedroom apartment in Park Southern [Park Southern Apartments, Washington, D.C.] when it was a brand new building, paid the gas for my Volkswagen, paid our tuition and books, didn't ask our parents for a thing, didn't have to.  But in addition to a summer job, I needed a part-time job during the year.  And so I went to him, and I said, "Can you get me that job that was just vacated there?"  He said, "I have a better idea for you."  He got on the phone and he called somebody.  And it eventually turned out that he was talking to Howard Westwood [Howard C. Westwood], one of the major partners at Covington and Burling [Covington and Burling LLP, Washington, D.C.] at the time, a man who kept a Civil War collection that outdoes my few photos here in this office, real memorabilia, quite a character, but a staunch supporter of the efforts at the local Office of Economic Opportunity [OEO] and advances for African Americans in the elite law firms, and eventually had a big role in my own career.  And I was hired in the, in the--in my last year, my third year to work as a part-time law clerk or a year-around law clerk at Covington and Burling, then the biggest law firm in the city where I got invaluable exposure, but more important to me at the time, made money.
Story_ID: 475159
Speaker 1: Now, let me go back.  In my first year of law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.], my parents [Evelyn Carter West and Togo D. West, Sr.] were paying my tuition, and I was single.  I got a part-time job working in the office of student affairs at the university--
Speaker 2: This is with Carl Anderson [HistoryMaker Carl Edwin Anderson]?
Speaker 1: Yep, I'd go up and I'd do studies and things, whatever they were doing.  And that sustained us--sustained me during that first year.  That summer, now, in September when I started to law school, my wife [Gail Berry West] did too, and we met.  Should I tell this story?  Too many people have heard it.  They don't wanna hear it again, but I'll tell it anyway.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: There we were in one of those classes they have for first-year law students to tell you how to be lawyers.  You know, it's a--you haven't started the real courses yet.  It's like late August or early September.  We were all in it, and this particular course, they had brought in an undergraduate professor who taught formal ethics to take us through a runt course of it, to get us to thinking in an organized fashion.  The problem for law students, the liberal arts students out of law school is they're still, they're still thinking and analyzing in intuitive leaps.  I know this so this is obviously the result, whereas, engineering students and the way lawyers want you to eventually think is, what do I know?  I think this fact, this fact and this.  What proceeds from that fact?  Well, these things.  And what proceeds from that, in a more organized way.  So they, you know, they want you to formalize, if all A is B, and all B is C, is all A, C?  Well, in that case, yeah.  But then all of the times when it's not.  Some B is C, for example.  So anyway, I was an engineering student.  I had not been expected to take those courses.  But I actually had had that, basic legal reasoning course, as one of my electives in my sophomore year or something.  So he's up there going through this, and a lot of people presumably should have taken it and may have forgotten it, are not following as quickly, I'm having a great time.  He and I, you know, he'd say, and I'd say.  So that was fine, and as I was coming out, and my wife--I mention that because subsequently, my wife says that's what called me to her attention.  I'm stunned to hear that.  I thought she was called to attention because I was some Adonis, but I guess not.  And so I'm walking out, and this person is walking next to me talking to her friend.  Now, though I've been at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] for five years by then, I'm still not--I've still got the Old South in me, haven't been introduced, don't know her, don't pay attention.  But I hear a voice say the problem with law school is that the books are so heavy.  And then, unintroduced, turns to me--now, we're just, you know, walking away, and says, "Here, what do you think?"  And thrusts them into my hand.  And so the way that story goes is so I carry them to her car.  That was September.  In June we were married, forty-two years ago.
Story_ID: 475160
Speaker 1: She [West's wife, Gail Berry West] was already sort of the recruit of the year for Howard [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.].  She had her scholarship so she was able to--once we were married, have a summer job.  She worked one year at, at Housing [Housing and Home Finance Agency; U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development].  When the first African American to be secretary of HUD was running, what is it, the housing administration.
Speaker 2: Housing, HUD's--
Speaker 1: It wasn't HUD by then.  They didn't have it.  It was just the housing administration.  I'll think of his name, and then the next (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Herbert Weaver [sic. Robert C. Weaver].
Speaker 1: Weaver, yeah.  When Weaver was running that.  He wasn't, he wasn't HUD yet.  He was running the--
Speaker 2: I think, yeah.
Speaker 1: So she had her summer job the next summer, and that's when her mother--because her mother [Johnnie Mae Berry] and her father [Theodore M. Berry] were all here, was at some luncheon and met a lawyer who was a partner in a patent law firm, "Oh, I've got this son who's an engineer who's in law school."  Oh, well, we might have--so the next summer, I had a job working in a--no, no, no, let me think, yes, working in a patent law firm and then continued in my second year having a part-time job at a patent law firm.  So that's when I was a patent researcher.  And then my third year, well, by the second year I was on the law review [Howard Law Journal] so I have a scholarship to pay for tuition and books and the job in the summer that helps me get--that enables me to pay our other expenses.  And then the third year, Jeanus Parks [Jeanus B. Parks, Jr.] has helped me get that job.  In the summer between the second and third year, I got a job, applied for working for the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.  Now, by now, we're talking 1966 or '67 [1967].  Let's see, I married in '66 [1966] so I was--so it's the summer of '67 [1967].  And then that'll be the fall of '67 [1967] and the spring of '68 [1968], and I'll graduate.  So it's the summer of '67 [1967].  Now, what's interesting, Lyndon Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson], of course, is president.  Joe Califano [Joseph A. Califano, Jr.] is over in the White House [Washington, D.C.], and they appoint a man who's on the staff there at the White House, he was on the national security staff at the time, to be the first African American to be the chairman of the office--of EEOC, the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, which is going to do all the job discrimination cases.  That's Clifford L. Alexander, Clifford L. Alexander, Jr.  So he's the agency head.  I didn't get to know him very well at the time.  He knew Gail's parents.  They were living in the same building.  But it was a great summer to be there because EEOC had such a backlog of cases that these young interns they hired, all of us from various law schools.  My officemate was a Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] law student named Gene Gleason [ph.].  We were reviewing these cases and recommending decisions.  We had immense power.  And so it was stimulating.  We were doing good things.  This is affirmative--this is all discrimination cases, all summer long honestly.  I felt like this is what I'd gone to law school to do.  It was a great summer.
Story_ID: 475161
Speaker 1: And this is Clifford Alexander [Clifford L. Alexander, Jr.] who becomes the first secretary of the army, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: This is, wow, this is really--okay.
Speaker 2: And I got to know him later.  In fact, the year--when he was secretary of the army for Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.], I was general counsel of the [U.S.] Navy and then the special assistant to the secretary of defense and then general counsel DMD, right during that same four-year period.  So that's the same Clifford Alexander, who also ran for mayor for the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.] before that.  When the first legislation was passed and established an elected mayor.  So Walter Washington had been the unelected mayor, appointed by the president.  And then the home rule, first Home Rule Act [District of Columbia Home Rule Act, 1973] passed, and there was a campaign.  Cliff Alexander ran for mayor, and in fact, I worked on his campaign.  I used to drive him around to his appointments in the evening.  So, so, but anyway--
Speaker 1: So when you worked for EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission], I guess there was probably no dearth of egregious violations (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Ah, this was, these were the, yeah, oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, there's--I don't even know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's why it was a backlog of cases.
Speaker 1: You know, it would seem like, like where would you even, and I guess just start anywhere.
Speaker 2: You just, they brought the cases in and put 'em on your desk.  But what they had were so many complaints that had been filed that the staff of the EEOC, and they would be hearing, but hopelessly behind.  And they used us to help try to--
Speaker 1: This was the first time we had this office, and (simultaneous) --
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Yeah.  There had been, there had been--I think it was Steve Shulman [Stephen N. Shulman], I'm trying to remember.  There had been a white director of OEO [Office of Economic Opportunity], when it was first established, for a year or so.  I'm trying to remember the--let me think of the dates of establishment.  When I think back on the act, but it was just a great deal of energy, with the appointment of Cliff and the decision that we're going to add more resources in there to try to get rid of this backlog because so many expectations had (simultaneous) --
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, how did--
Speaker 2: --been raised and they wanted delivery.
Speaker 1: Yeah, was there, I guess, was there a decision to prioritize cases based on their, I guess, their ripple effect, I guess in the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, hard to say.  But you're right to ask the question.  What were we working on?  Were we working on precedent-setting cases with overarching principles that would control large numbers of decisions or were we just processing individual complaints?  Remember we're just end of two years.  Our colleagues in other schools who have good grades are out being law clerks in big firms, so we do have experience, but we're mostly just doing the individual complaints that have been filed because there was room in the law for that.  We weren't doing a lot of--we, the interns, weren't doing a lot of work on the structural cases, if you will, so.
Speaker 1: And how big was the staff when you were there?
Speaker 2: Hard to say, but my sense was that it had been established with no real understanding of what kind of a workload and they were just inundated.  It's an interesting case study.  What I have is the limited window of my experience there.  But in some respects, it was the heyday of high expectations.  It was a time when we knew that things were gonna be righted there, and in some respects it was true.  And in other respects, life has gone on.  The backlog has been dealt with.  Some things have happened.  New administrations have come and in many respects have undercut its ability to do things.  I mean a lot of things have come and gone since then.  And that was the, that summer between my, end of my second year and beginning of my third year, last year of law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.].
Story_ID: 475162
Speaker 1: And to that point, is when the Jeanus Parks [Jeanus B. Parks, Jr.] involvement in my senior year worked out.  But he did more.  Somewhere at the end of the first month or two or maybe not long after he got me started at Covington and Burling [Covington and Burling LLP, Washington, D.C.]--let's think.  How did that proceed?  It may have been further down.  By then I was the--I had been elected by the outgoing board of the law review [Howard Law Journal] as the managing editor of the law review.  My good friend, Kellis Parker [Kellis E. Parker], was the editor in chief.  And Thurgood Marshall--
Speaker 2: And this is--
Speaker 1: --no, no, that summer, that same summer of 1967, Lyndon Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] appointed, had appointed Ramsey Clark to be attorney general of the United States.  That forced Tom Clark [Tom C. Clark] to resign from the [U.S.] Supreme Court.  That created the vacancy to which Lyndon Johnson that summer, appointed Thurgood Marshall, first African American.
Speaker 2: So Tom Clark was related to Ramsey Clark (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was his father.  Tom Clark was Ramsey Clark's father.
Speaker 2: So it was because of--
Speaker 1: Yeah, Lyndon Johnson was quite a maneuverer.  I mean he, he--it didn't bother him to--and that was classic of him.  That's what he learned in the Senate.
Speaker 2: So it would have been a conflict of interest to have the attorney general related to the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Probably, probably, and I wasn't on the inside of the administration, but I would say it would make interesting reading.  I think there are those who think that Lyndon simply, frankly, told Tom, I'm prepared to appoint Ramsey as attorney general, but you'll have to step down because whether it's a real conflict or not, I will consider it a conflict.  You know, so.
Speaker 2: This was in '67 [1967], right?
Speaker 1: It was in the '66 [1966], '67 [1967] timeframe.  What I know happened in '67 [1967] is that by August--I think it was by August--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think so.
Speaker 1: --he had nominated Thurgood Marshall to that seat and clear the [U.S.] Senate was gonna confirm him.  So there was a lot of--it was more excitement.  I mean it was a great time to be a student at Howard law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.], except for what was gonna happen.  You know, you're beginning your last year, and it's the '67 [1967], '68 [1968] school year term.  And by the time you start '68 [1968] and get going, there are riots that result from the death of Martin Luther King, Jr. [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] in the spring of '68 [1968], followed by the death of--
Speaker 2: Bobby--
Speaker 1: --Bobby Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy].
Story_ID: 475163
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That period of time, I mean, now, you're in law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] and you're in your last year (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm in my last year of law school.  We could stand on our balcony at Park Southern [Park Southern Apartments, Washington, D.C.], which still stands, but in those it was a brand new building right along Southern Avenue on the border between Washington, D.C. and Maryland and see the smoke rising of the District of Columbia.  As the riots marched up 13th [Street]--well, mostly 14th, on 14th Street, and burned out all that area, where I had lived in my last two years of undergraduate school [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], I used to walk up that street which was alive and vibrant with businesses and it was so sad.  So it started out being a great year, but by the spring it was just a terrible year for the country and for all of us, as Americans.  As a result, however, of Jeanus Parks [Jeanus B. Parks, Jr.] getting involved in my career, and getting me that part-time job, when he was, when the dean of the law school, Clarence Clyde Ferguson [Clarence Clyde Ferguson, Jr.], received a call from a colleague of his--they used to be in the U.S. Attorney's Office in the Southern District of New York [U.S. Attorney's Office for the Southern District of New York] who was then a, who had become a federal judge, sitting on the federal bench, by the name Harold R. Tyler, Jr., and what Tyler said to him was, "Clyde, a couple of years ago, I had a Howard Law grad as my law clerk."  So I wasn't the first.  That's where this story's going.  He had.  And he said, "He performed well, and I want another.  Who can you send me?"  And so Ferguson handed it to Jeanus Parks.  Jeanus Parks had me and--he had three candidates that he referred to Judge Tyler.  One was--that he mentioned to Judge Tyler.  One was the editor-in-chief of law review [Howard Law Journal], a friend of mine, Kellis Parker [Kellis E. Parker].  The other was--
Speaker 1: And Kellis Parker is the, he's related to Maceo Parker?
Speaker 2: He's his brother.
Speaker 1: His brother, right.
Speaker 2: They come from my home state of North Carolina.
Speaker 1: And he taught at Columbia [Columbia Law School, New York, New York].  So many people have mentioned Kellis Parker as a--
Speaker 2: Extraordinary.
Speaker 1: --an influential teacher, you know.  Yeah, Judge Roberts [ph.] here in the city, you know--
Speaker 2: Well, Kellis was, I think, probably the first African American law professor who actually put out a book on remedies, a case book, that got taught.  I mean it had a magnificent impact.  And, of course, he was the first black to be tenured at Columbia Law School.  And Pat Swygert [HistoryMaker H. Patrick Swygert] was the other name, and I was the one who elected to actually go up and interview with Judge Tyler.  Pat Swygert ended up taking a clerkship with Chief Judge Hastie [William H. Hastie] in the Third Circuit [U.S. Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit].  And Kellis was bent on getting his academic career going.  He went out and taught at the Davis [University of California, Davis, Davis, California] campus of the--
Speaker 1: UC, University of California system (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, and then after being a visiting professor at Columbia, stayed there.  So I went and interviewed with Tyler.  At the same time I interviewed with Tyler, so excited about what had happened at the [U.S.] Supreme Court, I applied to Thurgood Marshall.  And he was kind enough to have me down and interviewed me and had me out to dinner.  This was his first term.  He picked some, some clerks from Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] probably, but as he said, he was getting the bonus babies of the profession that year because he was the first African American.  Everybody wanted to work for him.  I thought that was fine.  Judge Tyler made me an offer.  Both of them knew each other because they were both up there in the New York courts.  And, in fact, Justice Marshall said to me when he talked to me, he said, "Well, have you applied to anybody?"  I said, "Oh, I applied to Judge Tyler."  He said, "Oh, Ace Tyler.  He's a fine judge.  If he selects you, you should do that."  So, so I ended up getting a clerkship, a federal clerkship, United States District Court for the Southern District of New York, federal clerkship, which is a great thing to get to do after law school.
Speaker 1: Now, before we get through (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And that's from Jeanus Parks, that's all I wanted to say.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Speaker 2: That was courtesy of Jeanus Parks.
Story_ID: 475164
Speaker 1: Just to go back, now, you--I just wanted to make note but you didn't do it yourself, that you graduated cum laude and you graduated first in your class--
Speaker 2: I did, I did.
Speaker 1: --at Howard law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] with all these other great people, Kellis Parker [Kellis E. Parker] and your wife [Gail Berry West], and you know, all great students.  So you--I don't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, and Kellis and I think Pat Swygert [HistoryMaker H. Patrick Swygert] was probably third in the class if not second.  So he was one of the top three.  [HistoryMaker] Sharon Pratt was one of the top graduates.  We had a fellow who would have been a top graduate, who was--who came to us.  He'd been in the [U.S.] Air Force.  He got out.  He went to Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California], came to Howard.  He was brilliant, a good friend.  His name was JeRoyd W. Greene, Jr. [Sa'ad El-Amin].  And Jay Greene was just a little bit more mature than we were 'cause he'd already been in the service, but he was outspoken with a passion.  And Jay would stand right up in class and say what he had to say, and frankly, for our time, he was a bit, a bit radical.  I remember that Jay and that summer when--one of the summers were living out at Park Southern [Park Southern Apartments, Washington, D.C.], we'd ride in my Volkswagen.  I'd pick him up, and pick up, oh, we'd cram a lot of people in that car.  I picked up Jay and Fred [Fred L. Banks, Jr.] and Tanya Banks.  They were both classmates who had gotten married. Fred Banks became a supreme court justice in Mississippi.  And Tanya Banks was the daughter--what was Tanya's--Tanya Lavelle [ph.], was it Lavelle?  She was the daughter of one of the associate deans in the Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]--was it Howard, yeah, the Howard, liberal arts school, I think, and maybe Lavelle's not the right last name.  But I have to think.  But anyway, Fred and Tanya Banks, both brilliant, and we'd all cram into that Volkswagen.  I'd have Gail [Gail Berry West] in one seat and JeRoyd Greene, Fred Banks and Tanya in the back seat.  And Fred Banks and got to be supreme court justice.  Fred used to boast.  He'd say, "I never study."  He said, "I just wait until the exam, and I read everything there is.  I'm not gonna study."  Well, different from my approach which was, I prepared for everything.  But my wife claimed, I didn't, but she's wrong.  And, of course, Kellis' approach was that at the beginning of the course, he'd stay up all night, every night, read the entire casebook, brief it on his typewriter, even in those days, and then, you know, spend the rest of the semester sort reading other stuff 'cause he'd done all that.  He slept through every class though.  He'd always fall asleep in class because he was up every night, and that's what I think contributed to his early health problems.
Story_ID: 475165
Speaker 1: Well, tell us, yeah we were talking about JeRoyd Greene [JeRoyd W. Greene, Jr.; Sa'ad El-Amin]. One of your classmates (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, but just before I was finishing a point.  Was it Kellis or--
Speaker 1: Kellis Parker [Kellis E. Parker], yeah, we were talking about Kellis Parker.  I think I made the point that you graduated first in your class and all these brilliant people (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, no, I know.  Yeah, I was just finishing the point that the business with my clerking for a federal judge, all of that was my final coda on the role of Jeanus Parks [Jeanus B. Parks, Jr.], both in my life and in the life of students, that is, he was both a professor of substance in his area, taught us several courses, but he also took a very strong role in the practical, getting us introduced into where you could find the opportunities that seemed to be reserved for people at other schools.
Speaker 1: Now, this was the first time that young, black lawyers are really introduced to a lot of these opportunities in these--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  So, now, JeRoyd Greene, one of our, one of our colorful, one of my more colorful classmates.  Oh, I wanted to tell you about the, one other aspect of my experience in the summer.  That was the last summer.  That's the summer between--the summer of '67 [1967], my last summer in law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] when I was at the EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission].  We used to ride into work, and I would give a ride to JeRoyd Greene, one of my classmates.  Jay was a very outspoken, and become part of the Free Speech Movement, the dirty speech movement and campus rights of students, even as a law school student.  And the law school sort of expected that you'd stay away from the broader involvements of the undergraduate community.  If they wanted to go and be crazy, let them.  But here at the law school, we were like the people at dent [Howard University College of Dentistry, Washington, D.C.] and med [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.].  The focus is, concentrate on your development as a professional.  If you wanna run around on campus, you may make it difficult to become a professional, and then you won't realize the ability and the greater potential once you're a professional.  But that'll have a real impact on correcting the ills of society, whatever you wanna do.  So law school was a bit disapproving, even as Jay thought he was doing what lawyers are gonna be doing, which is getting out.  So the law school thought he was putting the cart before the horse.  So there's Jay, but popular with us as classmates, that Jay's--for all the seriousness of the things he said and did when he was stirring up folks, he was great to talk to and a friend.  And so we'd give Jay a ride because he lived not too far from us.  It's on the way into town because, you know, we're journeying from way out, the farthest part of Southeast Washington [D.C.] on the part where Southern Avenue is, that part.  And not far from us are Tanya--Fred [Fred L. Banks, Jr.] and Tanya Banks.  Fred's gonna be Supreme Court--the justice of the Mississippi Supreme Court [Supreme Court of Mississippi] eventually.  We didn't know it then, but that's what he ended up doing.
Story_ID: 475166
Speaker 1: And so, and this Volkswagen Beetle of mine, it's my wife in the front seat, Jay Greene [JeRoyd W. Greene, Jr.; Sa'ad El-Amin], Fred Banks [Fred L. Banks, Jr.] and Tanya [Tanya Banks], his wife.  And Jay would inevitably get off on one of his tirades about what was going on in the community and in the nation and the--need for blacks to stand up and speak for themselves and this tendency for, "You, Togo [HistoryMaker Togo D. West, Jr.], you Togo West, look what you're studying to be.  You wanna go.  You're gonna just one of the establishment.  You wanna be in the establishment and you're gonna be, you know, you're gonna end up being an Uncle Tom."  Now, I don't remember him ever saying it, but he certainly meant it.  Now, he meant it in the nicest way, if you can mean that in the nicest way (laughter), "An apologist for the man."  But that was Jay.  And we, you know, when we think of Jay, when they say, it's not personal, it's business, I'm almost think that there's a--well, it wasn't business, it was personal.  How do you just--I mean it's just the way Jay felt about things.  And he was talking about those who were in positions in the Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] administration or in the local city government or wherever.  He said, "Your father, Gail [Gail Berry West]," who at that time, my wife, was an assistant director of the Office of Economic Opportunity [OEO], worked for Sargent Shriver [R. Sargent Shriver], that was a direct- administrator--was an administrative director and then three assistant directors, all presidential appointees, each with a major division.  And Theodore M. Berry, Gail's father, had was the Community Action Program under which were, the community action programs, which were the biggest part of OEO, the programs on the Indian [Native American] reservations, Head Start, neighborhood leaders service programs.  They were all under that.  So he had a big part.  He said, "Your dad, he's doing that job, and you think and he thinks that he's doing something good for the country and for quote our people close quote.  But in fact, he's the kind of guy we shouldn't--we should shut them down."  And then Jay said something that to this day sort of quieted us all, in fact, at first, he said, "These kind of guys should be killed."  Now, Jay was not advocating bumping off his classmate's father.  He never would.  Jay had great respect for him, said it lots of times, but when Jay was making his point in rhetoric, boy, he--and so we all, oh, god, the rest of the way in, poor, Jay, he just, "Oh, Jay you can't mean that.  I mean about that argument that people who disagree with you should kill you?"  I mean, but this is what law students do when they get passionate.  So I hate to introduce that word, but in fact, it was a discussion we had.  We never took him seriously on that score.  He never intended for us to do it except to this extent, but he regard it as a very real wrong, that we take positions in government and forget our relationship to the very people we're supposed to be helping.  So, you know, those were heady times.  It was a heady summer.
Speaker 2: So he was riding the rhetorical tide and just got carried away.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and that's what eventually led to him being encouraged to leave the law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.], but then, don't you know it.  He applies to Yale Law School [New Haven, Connecticut].  They admit him on condition that he stay to, long enough to get a graduate degree in economics as well, which he does.  And he graduates as a Yale Law graduate with an economics degree.  He goes on to be a member of the Virginia bar, to have a career there, and in Chicago [Illinois] as well; haven't been in touch with him lately.
Speaker 2: You say in Chicago at one time, he was at least or maybe now, I don't know, he was lawyer for the Nation of Islam (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, for the Nation of Islam.  Oh, indeed, became a Muslim, took a Muslim name, started with JeRoyd X. Greene, and then he had another name, eventually returned to Richmond [Virginia]--or maybe never left, well, he returned to Richmond to practice.  I know at one point, he was on the Richmond City Council.  Then I sort of lost track of him then.  But that's what you--you know, that's what happens in law school.  You meet people who have extraordinary ability and whose minds and interests carry them in various directions.
Story_ID: 475167
Speaker 1: One year ahead of me in law school was a woman for whom my wife [Gail Berry West] and I had great appreciation by the name of Gabrielle Kirk [HistoryMaker Gabrielle Kirk McDonald].  She was brilliant.  She ended up as a federal judge in Houston [Texas] and then a judge on the international court [International Criminal Tribunal], stellar career, and is still practicing law.  So you just, you have a--you see, at Howard [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.], we had the chance to be exposed to all kinds and some of the very best because even as you could find the student who was able to go to Yale Law School [New Haven, Connecticut] or to Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], we were still getting the bulk of the elite of the African American, aspirants to the legal profession, really great minds.
Speaker 2: Was there still a sense, I know back in the Charlie Houston [Charles Hamilton Houston], there was a sense of building a team to tackle the overarching civil rights challenges that black people faced in the courts.  And was there a sense at Howard that there was a mission that presided over the law school at that time.
Speaker 1: What there was, was a sense that that was the history and the tradition and the legacy of Howard.  But at that point, the urgency to build a team to tackle those problems, those issues seemed to be less imperative.  Now, that's not to say that a goodly portion of our class did not have it as precisely their mission.  And a number--a good portion of our class went out and did it.  But there were just so many member of our class.  I was not there, in my view, to go back and tackle those problems.  In my view, I wanted to get into the mainstream of the practice of law and see if I couldn't run my hand--try my hand at building a practice and relationships and being able to effect policies in cities and in the country.  But, you know, I think even many people found their commitments more sharply focused at Howard depending on which professor or which group or which thing caught your interests.  Kellis [Kellis E. Parker] wanted to go and teach.  Jay [JeRoyd W. Greene, Jr.; Sa'ad El-Amin] wanted to get back to the battle as quickly as possible.  Fred [Fred L. Banks, Jr.] was gonna go back to Mississippi and practice law and just make that structure acknowledge the capabilities of black Americans to participate in the practice of law down there.  And Mississippi is still, to this day, a difficult place to practice law.  It just--you need to be part of that society, part of that bar, and part of those mores and traditions.  And others wanted to do other things.  One was gonna go back to the islands.  We had people up from the [U.S.] Virgin Islands.  Some were gonna go back there.  So, yes, there was a sense of the legacy of the law school.  And, and it's highest tradition of service continued to be advancing, would have been that historic mission.  But we were not longer plotting the historic cases, the cases that were solved here or there, although, you know, we had on that faculty, Frank Reeves [Frank D. Reeves] and Herbert O. Reid [Herbert O. Reid, Sr.], two of the legendary lawyers in precisely that arena.  I mean the Frank Reeves building [Frank D. Reeves Municipal Center] in downtown Washington [D.C.] is one of the government buildings, who wrote a number of briefs and participated in a number of cases.  Herbert--Herb Reid, constitutional lawyer.  Both of them taught us, incidentally.  And they still very much--and their law clerks were participating and constructing and bringing lawsuits that would address civil rights issues here and around the country.  So it was happening.
Story_ID: 475168
Speaker 1: You knew you were destined to go into the [U.S.] Army, you know, right after--
Speaker 2: Did, I did.
Speaker 1: So you did--you went in, right after law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: No, I clerked.  I got a further year extension to clerk for Judge Tyler [Harold R. Tyler, Jr.] in the Southern District of New York [U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York], and then was called to active duty.
Speaker 1: Okay, were there any significant stories about clerking for Judge Tyler that you can tell me (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, there're some, there are some stories.  For one thing, you're in New York City [New York, New York].  It's the biggest court in the country, the federal.  He had, he had a couple of--some extraordinary cases.  Judge Tyler, himself, is an unusual story.  He was a Republican from upstate New York, but he was appointed to the bench by John F. Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy].  Now, that's, you know, that's a little bit of this and little bit of that.  So (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You can tell that was a long time ago (laughter).
Speaker 2: And 19--and he was appointed to the bench probably as I was starting law school because Kennedy is '60 [1960], '63 [1963], that was my first--I'm starting college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  That was my first three years of college. By the time I clerked for him, he had been on the bench maybe seven or eight years, something like that.  Tyler, before he was appointed, had been in a law firm, but he had been in the Eisenhower [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower] administration, an assistant attorney general in the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice] in charge of the Civil Rights Division.  I think he was the second or third lawyer to be the head of the Civil Rights Division.  So he brought some of those historic cases for the government around the country.  I'm trying to remember.  I think he was, for example, in charge of and involved with--well, he had a couple of those confrontations to help Eisenhower deal with.  You know, he had the Faubus [Orval Faubus] confrontation.  He had the--there was the confrontation in Alabama, a charge, Corley, god, he just used--he had, he was in the hospital at Holy Cross [Holy Cross Hospital, Silver Spring, Maryland] at the same time my second daughter [Hilary West] was born out there.  And who am I thinking of.  He ended up in a wheelchair, governor of Alabama.
Speaker 1: Oh, Wallace.
Speaker 2: George Corley Wallace [George Wallace].
Speaker 1: George Corley Wallace, yeah.
Speaker 2: And so, Tyler went through those--I'm trying to remember which was during Eisenhower, but he went through those times as an assistant attorney general.  So he was a Republican, but a Republican who had involved himself in the dynamic of the Civil Rights Movement at a time when Republicans in the justice department, in the Civil Rights Division believed they were supposed to do what it said, and not the way it's turned these days when people are trying to gut it.  I mean, he was a strong advocate.  So he came from that, and that's why he naturally gravitated and to say, "Well, I wanna get an African American up here to be a law clerk," 'cause there weren't any in those days in that court or in many court.  So that was, itself, being exposed to him and to that attitude in itself.  Now, thing about Judge Tyler is this.  When I left his office after a year to go be in the Army, he signed a picture to me.  And he said, he signed it simply, "To Togo West [HistoryMaker Togo D. West, Jr.], a fine friend and a fine partner."  Now, I have another picture and it's here in the office, that he signed a few years later that said, "To Togo West, at the conclusion of our second partnership in the hopes that there would be a third."  And there was a third.
Story_ID: 475169
Speaker 1: So, I'll skip ahead to say, I clerked for Judge Tyler [Harold R. Tyler, Jr.].  I was on active duty for four years.  I came out.  I went to the firm where I had been before Covington and Burling [Covington and Burling LLP, Washington, D.C.] for two years.  The Saturday Night Massacre occurs.  Richard Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] orders (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, this is '74 [1974], yeah.
Speaker 1: --orders the firing of the special prosecutor, Archibald Cox.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Elliot Richardson, the attorney general, refuses to do it, Richardson, and he resigns or he's told--he tells Al, Haig, Al Haig [Alexander Haig], calls him on Saturday, and he says, "I won't do it, and I quit."  Haig calls the deputy attorney general who is Ruckelshaus [William Ruckelshaus] and says, "Richardson just quit because he wouldn't follow the president's order to fire Archibald Cox."  Ruckelshaus says, "I quit, I won't do it either."  And then Haig calls the solicitor general who is Robert Bork who says, "Ah, President's charges me to do what he wants to do, I'll do it," which is why Bork never became--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --a member of the [U.S.] Supreme Court.  Then Richard Nixon is eventually out.  Gerald Ford [President Gerald Rudolph Ford, Jr.] is in.  He appoints William Bart Saxbe [William B. Saxbe], senator from Ohio, as his first attorney general, but Saxbe only stays a few months.  And then he appoints Elliot Hirsch Levi [sic. Edward H. Levi]--Levi, it's not Elliot, Attorney General Levi to be, well, the president of the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] to be attorney general, a perfect attorney general, a lapsed Democrat, but (unclear) above the law, just non-partisan.  And Levi in an effort to reconstruct the [U.S.] Department of Justice and restore morale says, "I want a federal judge to be my deputy," picks Judge Tyler.  Judge Tyler comes to Washington [D.C.] and becomes deputy attorney general.  I go over for his, his ceremony, and as I'm leaving--Tyler was a kind of tall fellow.  He sees me across the way, and he says, "I'm gonna call you."  So I go back to my office at Covington and he calls me and has me come over, and he says, "This is a great place.  We're gonna try to make some changes.  I've got two close associates.  Their titles are associate deputy attorney generals, big office next to mine right there.  Why don't you come and do one of them, and we'll run around; we'll make some (unclear)."  "Judge, I'm not a Republican."  He says, "That's okay, in this administration, I think I can get it passed."  He does.  So for a second time, I'm partnered with him.  Years later, I've also partnered with him in his law firm.  So, another point for life is, in the people that you have dealings with almost always will have an impact on you directly.  A second way is later, in terms of the things they've taught you, but thirdly, at some time you'll run across me in a career, and it's happened to me time and time again.  So, so, yes, I clerked for Judge Tyler, and as much as the experience is what it built for me in the years to come--incidentally, when I went to work for him, and I should be waiting.  I don't wanna get out of order on this, but I'll just finish off this little thing.  When I did work with him in the justice department, that second position of associate deputy attorney general had to be filled.  The first position, I basically kept an eye on the civil parts of the department for him.  There's a criminal part, you know, the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] and all.  He needed a prosecutor.  And he hired a young man who had been clerking in the Southern District [U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York] the same year I had.  I didn't know him.  He clerked for a different judge.  And so he shared a reception area.  He had a big office across from mine.  His name was Rudy Giuliani.  And, interestingly enough, we spent a lot of time working with the White House on some issues involving drug use and addiction.  The vice president with Nelson Rockefeller.  He had a young man working for him who had come with him from the governor's office, tall, African American, in those days, clean cut.  His name was Richard D. Parsons [HistoryMaker Richard Parsons].  And he's the guy who ended up as CEO of AOL-Time Warner [Time Warner, Inc.], in fact, is still the chairman, African American, except that he's bearded now.  So you, you know, over time, I had a chance to meet and make a lot of connections, all that growing out of that year that I clerked for Judge Tyler--
Story_ID: 475170
Speaker 1: So then I was on active duty as a JAG [Judge Advocate General's Corps], something I'd--my wife [Gail Berry West] and daughter [Tiffany West Smink] who were in New York [New York] with me when I came on active duty, and they stayed for six months up there while I went to my couple weeks at Fort Lee [Virginia], to get used to wearing the uniform again and then eight weeks at the University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia] which is where the Army JAG school [The Judge Advocate General's Legal Center and School, Charlottesville, Virginia] has always been, separate building always right next to the law school.  Whenever they moved the law school, the JAG school moves to a brand new building next to it, historically, I think.  And then I thought I was gonna be assigned--they gave me orders assigning me to Fort Ord, California, which was the practice, brand new JAG.  You go to a spot for a year and being assigned to Fort Ord, I knew that a year later, I'd go to Vietnam for a one-year tour, and then come back and have two years.  So that, so that the--that was the expectation.  My wife was ready.  IBM [International Business Machines Corporation], for whom she worked as a lawyer, had said, they'd move her and us out there because we, by then, had acquired two cars, and assign her to a job near me.  So we were all set.  We were gonna pack up that car and get going, and we drive out.  But the night before I got a call from the JAG career office saying, "We've got a spot opening in the Military Justice Division in the Pentagon [Washington, D.C.]."  I was third in the class, in the JAG class, which made me a distinguished graduate.  And they said, "That position is yours if you want it.  We don't advise you to take it because it's poor preparation for a career in the JAG Corps."  Well (laughter), I didn't intend a career in the JAG Corps.  And so I called my wife and just like that, we ended up back in Washington [D.C.] with me assigned to the Pentagon as a captain.  And six months after I got there, one of the deputy assistant secretaries in manpower in Veteran Affairs [U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs], a lawyer himself, who had been at Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and had been in the general counsel's honors program, was looking for an assistant and interviewed me.  And so I was moved up from the army staff to the army secretary, to the office of the assistant secretary, the (unclear) in a position called assistant for civil rights, because in 1969 and '68 [1968], the [U.S.] Army, indeed, the [U.S.] military were going through some severe problems, both in Vietnam and in Europe.  In Vietnam, they were in a combat theater; in Europe, they were a garrison state, but waiting for the big one.  And so problems of drugs and race were cropping up everywhere.  The secretary of the army then, Stan Resor [Stanley R. Resor], Democrat, wanted his assistant secretary and John Kessler [sic. Gary K. Kessler], the deputy assistant secretary, to have the ability to focus on those issues.  I was not the first in that job.  The other captain, not African American, who had left active duty.  And so for three and a half years, I was involved--and I don't wanna overstate this, but it was right there.  In the Army's development of its policies with respect to drugs and race, especially race, around the world.  I traveled with the secretary.  I wrote speeches for the secretary.  I went to meetings in the office that years later would be mine, except that a little captain, going to a meeting in the office of the secretary of the army doesn't get to sit near the secretary.  He sits way back against the wall and all the colonels sit in front of him.  But that was an extraordinary time.
Story_ID: 475171
Speaker 1: I got to know the general counsel of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] very well, Nate Jones [HistoryMaker Nathaniel R. Jones].  He's now Judge Nathaniel Jones of the United States Court of Appeals [U.S. Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit] out in Cincinnati [Ohio]--
Speaker 2: Cincinnati, right? Yes, sir.
Speaker 1: And he's now senior judge, and as, you know, funny--the way things go, years later, my--our older daughter [Tiffany West Smink] clerked for him.  But Nate Jones used to call me regularly because eventually they find out there's this young black captain there who's got a line into the secretary who works on policies.  Now, I was not an operational guy.  That was in the army staff.  But I had some army staff people who coordinated with me, who got the job done, including a great, an extraordinary colonel.  His name just flashed through.  I'll come back with it, African American, promoted to colonel.  He could have made, he could have been one of the African American generals, but had to get out and run his father-in-law's business in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and ended up as city manager of Philadelphia, Jim White [James S. White], Colonel Jim White.  But, in any event, it was because of Jim White, more than anything, that I was able to have an impact on policies, but also on what happened.  And Nate Jones would call me, either on policies or on specific cases.  Private so and so, in Heidelberg [Germany] or in one of the other locations, is having a situation.  And it's very short, and it's this, and what can you find for me?  What can you tell me?  And, of course, the understanding was, we couldn't get answers.  We couldn't figure out what was going on there.  NAACP get involved, it'd be a big mess.  So I had clout both ways.  I had clout internally because I could say, Nate Jones, NAACP, their general counsel, they want to know, do you want this?  And the other way, I could say, Nate, here's the deal, and here's what we may have to do.  And it was great working with him.  And that was only part of it.  Well, over time, the Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] administration--the Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] administration is out, and Nixon's in.  But I'm still on active duty, different secretary.  But he continued the relationship.  I traveled with him--I've traveled with him, and I can't say this was necessarily part of that hat.  It's that he would eventually end up in Europe, and so, again, that's where he'd need me.  But part of the trip, he--we ended up in Iran during the time that the Shah [Mohammad Reza Pahlavi] was in power.  And it was an extraordinary experience to see that and contrast it with now.  And I haven't been back yet, if I'm gonna get back.  But, of course, it left the [U.S.] military relationship between the Shah and the United States very strong, political relationship was very strong.  And years later in another role, I'd have a role in the U.S.'s relationship with aiding the Shah when he left Iran.  So, so that, that four-year period was spent entirely in the Pentagon [Washington, D.C.].
