Story_ID: 642442
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Jack Edward White, Jr. J-A-C-K, E-D-W-A-R-D, W-H-I-T-E, Jr. [HistoryMaker Jack White].
Speaker 1: Now, now is there a story behind the name Jack 'cause you--it's usually a nickname for John, right?
Speaker 2: My--I, I did--my, my father was the youngest of sixteen children.  And I think that by the time he came along, they had run out of names.  And so I think he was just named--he was just named Jack [Jack E. White].  He--you know, he was the last in a long line.  I don't know whether it has any special significance.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: June 30th, 1946.
Speaker 1: And where were you born?
Speaker 2: I was born in Washington, North Carolina, my mother's [Sara Williams White] hometown.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And, sir, what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: I'm a retired journalist.
Speaker 1: All right, and you were--you retired as what, senior correspondent for Time magazine?
Speaker 2: I re- I retired in 2001 as a--what they call a national correspondent for Time magazine.  I was actually a columnist for Time.  I wrote a column called Dividing Line, which appeared every two weeks in the magazine.  That was my main job there.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is February 28th, 2013.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: You're at my home in Richmond, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 642443
Speaker 1: Now before we go, go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we ask as kind of a warm up, and they on- they only require a short answer.  First one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: A favorite food?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I have many favorite foods, but one of--one of them would be chili con carne, which I make myself; it's very good.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Favorite color, navy blue.
Speaker 1: All right, a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Favorite time of the year would be either l- late spring or early fall.  I like periods of transition.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Probably New York City [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.  The last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Favorite phrase, my, my motto is a quote I have from Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], which is the, "The moral arc of the universe is long, but it bends toward justice" [sic.].
Story_ID: 642444
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side and your father's [Jack E. White] side, but separately; and then we'll put 'em together.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Sara Theodora Williams White, that's S-A-R-A, no H, Theodora, T-H-E-O-D-O-R-A, Williams, W-I-L-L-I-A-M-S, White, W-H-I-T-E [Sara Williams White].
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her date of birth is March 8th, 1925; she was born in Washington, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them and--?
Speaker 2: Well, this is actually interesting because we've always known that my mother had a white--had--was descended from white folks in, in the small town that she was from.  We had always believed that it was the guy who employed her father [Arthur Williams, Sr.], who was a chauffeur and a sort of general around--all around handyman who worked for a, a guy who owned a furniture store and an undertaking parlor in this small town.  We always thought that that was his dad.  Several years ago, one of my sisters arranged to get the DNA test done with my mother's only brother, his name is Arthur Williams [Arthur Williams, Jr.].  And when the test came back, there--the name of this white guy that we thought we were descended from was nowhere to be found, but there were all these people named Springer--that's S-P-R-I-N-G-E-R.  And when we got the census records from the 1870s, we discovered that my legal grandfather, whose name was Christopher Columbus Williams [Christopher C. Williams], had actually lived nor- next door to the man--a man named Edward Delevan Springer, who was the owner of a saw mill in a town called South Creek, North Carolina.  To cut a long story short, we traced it back.  We found out that Edward Delevan Springer had been a Union naval officer who settled in North Carolina after the Civil War.  He is a descendant of John Howland, the Pilgrim, who was one of the--who was one of the people who came over on the Mayflower, and he was my great-grandfather.  We've since made contact with one of his granddaughters--or great-granddaughter, who was--who was actually a cousin of mine, and she's an interesting person.  We've got family photographs of him; I'll show you later.  If you'd look at a picture of my grandfather, my mother's--my mother's father, and Edward Delevan Springer--Edward Delevan Springer spi- spit him out.  There's no--there's no question that he is our actual ancestor.  So it turns out we are Mayflower descendants.  (Laughter) And I, I've encouraged my sister, Marilyn [Marilyn White Holman], who's the person responsible for the DNA testing that led to this discovery, to apply for a membership in the DAR [Daughters of the American Revolution].  I think that would be hilarious if she actually got in there based on this, because Springer's ancestors include somebody who fought in the American Revolution.  His, his father fought in the War of 1812, and he fought in the, the Civil War on the Union side.  So we have kind of a strange background, but we're, we're, we're satisfied that this is correct.  Then my wife [Gayle Jessup White] is actually a [President] Thomas Jefferson descendant, not through Sally Hemings, but through another, another branch.  We don't have children together, but we would often joke that if we did have children together we would be a walking American history book, because they would be descended both from the Mayflower and from the writer of the Declaration of Independence.
Speaker 1: Okay, interesting.
Story_ID: 642445
Speaker 1: You say your [maternal] grandfather [Arthur Williams, Sr.] was a chauffeur for a man in (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, my, my grandfa- my grandfather was a--was, was left--because of his resemblance, this is what we figure anyway, because of his resemblance to his father, I think that this man's wife probably would have made life uncomfortable for him.  She had--you know, they had, they had children.  And so he left this little town called South Creek [North Carolina], and he went to Washington, North Carolina as a--he was in his teens at the time, and he started to work for a fellow who owned a, a furniture store there and also a funeral parlor.  And he became a chauffeur, and he used to pick up the corpses, you know, to bring them back to the funeral parlor, which was in the back of the furniture store at that time.  And he worked from--until he died actually.  Well he died, he died young.  He contracted tuberculosis, which at that time was epidemic in eastern North Carolina where, where, where, where Little Washington--that's--as Washington is known, is located.  Both he and my, my mother's mother [Gertrude Williams] both suffered from tuberculosis.  Both of them spent many years in sanitariums before, before they died.  And, you know, they had a p- pretty horrendous life I think because of it.  But he was a--he was a chauffeur for this guy.  His father--at least his, his legal father--because his, his real father was this Edward Delevan Springer, but his, his legal father, Christopher Columbus Williams [Christopher C. Williams], was the guy who ran the actual saw mill at the saw mill owned by Edward Delevan Springer.  So he was employed by, by Springer.  And Springer had a little compound there where the saw mill was located, and workers also lived, lived in small houses next to it.  I've got pictures of all this I can show you later.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, that's quite a history.  That's--you tell it in a succinct way too, which is good.
Story_ID: 642446
Speaker 1: So your mother [Sara Williams White] grew up in Washington, North Carolina (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In Washington, North Carolina.  She went to hi- she, she went to, to school there through high school.  And then she left h- to go to Howard University nursing school [Freedmen's Hospital School of Nursing, Washington, D.C.], and that's where she met my dad [Jack E. White].  She was one of seven sisters and one brother--one of the younger ones.  They were all very, very, very pretty girls.  And all--almost all of them made successful marriages because of the--because they were so beautiful and from this little town in, in eastern North Carolina.  But then she went off--she wanted to be a nurse.  Her mother [Gertrude Williams]--I think part of the reason for this is that her mother had spent--when she was released from sanitarium, was, was still incapacitated, and actually was bedridden for most of the last part of her life--the last--many years of her life.  And I think my mother developed some kind of sense of compassion from helping to care for her mom.  As I say--and then also, you know, the number of things that intelligent black women could do who--from poor backgrounds in small towns like that was limited.  They could be teachers, which some of her sisters became.  Or they could be nurses, but that was--or they could be housewives.  I mean, they--the, the, the things they could aspire to were, were very limited during that, that period of segregation.
Speaker 1: Did your mother share any of her aspirations with you about--you know, from that period?  Did she want to be a doctor or do more?
Speaker 2: No, I, I don't think that she--I don't think it ever--I don't think that really came to her.  I think that--I, I think that the idea of becoming a nurse I think is what was very appealing to her.  And I, I don't think she had higher aspirations.  I don't know if it ever occurred to her that she could have become a doctor.  I think she certainly was smart enough to have become one if she had wanted to be, but there were--there were--there were very few at that time.  And then, you know, she was still in nursing school when she met my dad.  And one thing led to another, and one thing led--one thing--another--met--led to me, and that led to them getting married.  My father--I mean, I don't know if I'm getting ahead of the story, but my dad was a very dashing--looked a little bit like a black Frank Sinatra--surg- a chief surgical resident at Howard [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.] at that time and quite a ladies' man, to hear him tell it.  And she had been the May queen at the nursing school, so she was a good looker.  And they (gesture)--you know, they got together.  And as I say, I resulted and they got married.  And whatever aspirations she might have had to go on collapsed under--well you know, she was our mother and housewife for, you know, the remainder of her life.  She never really had a regular job after, after leaving nursing school.
Story_ID: 642447
Speaker 1: Well let's go to your father's side of the family.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Your, your father's name is the same as yours, right?
Speaker 2: His was Jack Edward White, Sr. [Jack E. White].  He was born in Stuart, Florida in 1921.  His father was George White [George White, Sr.], who actually was born in slavery in, in 1855 or 1856, we don't know the year, in Georgia.  Moved with his family to northern Florida after emancipation.  He was--based on the research we found, which includes looking at census records, he was illiterate at the time of--when the war [Civil War] ended.  He was about twelve years old or so when the war ended.  But he somehow or other made his way to Daytona, Florida [Daytona Beach, Florida] where he went to what was they called the Cook- Cookman Institute [sic. Daytona Normal and Industrial Institute]; it's now part of Bethune-Cookman [Bethune-Cookman University].  And he became their--they--you know, they used to give you two occupations.  He was trained as a teacher, but he was also given a practical job as a carpenter and a cabinet maker--I'm sorry, coffin maker, coffin maker.  He had done all kinds of things in his youth.  He--you know, he used to--you know, they--in the, the lumber trade down there, they had these rafts of logs which they'd take down to the river, to the saw mill.  He was--and some guy gets on the back, you know, to guide this--he would do that.  He had been a farmer.  He did a lot of different things before he, he got to school and became a teacher and, and coffin maker.  And then he met my mother, whose name was Emma Clark--my grandmother, rather, whose name was Emma Clark [Emma Clark White].  He was actually her teacher.  He was a--he was in his forties, and she was a teenager when they met.  And according to the family history, she took a shine to my grandfather George and decided she was going to marry him, and she did.  And they ended up having sixteen kids of whom my father was the youngest.
Story_ID: 642448
Speaker 1: And it's a typic- pretty typical family story where the older members have less schooling, but they, they went to work and they helped--they, they each--the younger brothers or sisters go on to school.  So as you go down the ladder, you'll see like my, my, my father's oldest brother's name was George [George White, Jr.], was a tailor.  He fought in the [U.S.] Army in World War I [WWI], and then he became a tailor at some point.  And he, he lived in Newark, New Jersey.  And then he and, and the, the oldest sisters contributed financially so that the, the younger ones could go to school.  So you go from a tailor to my father's next two brothers were both--who were named Walter [Walter White] and William [William White (ph.)], were school principals in Florida while Walter was in Miami [Florida].  And William is the next--the next oldest brother was in Panama City, Florida.  They both became school principals.  His next older brother whose name is James [James White], became a dentist.  And my dad [Jack E. White] went to medical school and became a surgical oncologist and professor of oncology at Howard University medical school [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.].  So as you can see, as you go down the ladder, you know, they believed in this, this lifting the younger ones and, and helping them along.  And also, back in those days the boys had--were more likely to get a higher education than the girls.  So most of my older aunts were more housewives or took in laundry or something like that.  My, my, my father's youngest sister, Mildred [Mildred White], however, became a licensed practical nurse.  So she had more formal education than some of the--some of her elder sisters.  But they, again, they--the--you know, the aspirations for younger black girls in--from poor, poor backgrounds like my dad's were, were very limited.  I mean, my, my grandfather [George White, Sr.] by all accounts was a very impressive man.  He died when my father was twelve, but we- and they lived in Stuart, Florida at that time, where my--where my grandfather had be--had been, he had ceased becoming a teacher, and he had become a truck farmer.  And they used to send vegetables north, according to the stories my father told me.  They had--they owned their own home; they owned land and so on, which they lost during the Great Depression.  When he died, my uncle George, who was in--a tailor, as I said, in Newark, used to come home once or twice a year.  And he would buy barrels of flour and lard and all, other kinds of provisions like that to see the family through hard times like that.  And this is--they were--they really did pull together during all that period of time.  But he--as I say, they, they, they were--he was a dignified person, and he had some education.  He voted--evidently he voted up; you know, he's a staunch Repub- black--what they call a Black and Tan Republican all during that period of time.  And he was called Mr. White by, by white people in that community, so he was a person of, of considerable respect in that area.  I wish I had known him.  Obviously, he--you know, he died when my dad was twelve.
Story_ID: 642449
Speaker 1: My father [Jack E. White] was sent away to--there was no high school for blacks in Stuart [Florida] at that time, so he was sent away to high school, a boarding high school in Seneca, South Carolina.  And he finished high school young.
Speaker 2: Which one is that in Seneca, South Carolina?
Speaker 1: Seneca?
Speaker 2: Yeah, which (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was a private--that's what it was called, Seneca academy [Seneca Institute] I believe.
Speaker 2: Oh, Seneca academy, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's, it's, it's no--it's--it's no longer in existence, but it was--it was--it was--it was like Rock Hill [Rock Hill Academy, Charlottesville, Virginia] and those other places like that.  It was one of the schools that--where, where black kids from--black young men from across the South went because it offered a high school education to youngsters and to--who were--as I say, in most--in most of those towns there was no high school education for, for black kids.  He went there; he graduated young.  He graduated at fourteen from high school, and he went to Florida A and M, which I think was Florida A and M College at that time [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical College for Negroes; Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida]; I don't think it was necessarily a university at that time.  And he graduated from Florida A and M at eighteen, and then went to Howard medical--med school [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.].  He graduated from med school in 1944.  He was twenty-three years old; that was during World War II [WWII].  He told me he had the choice when he finished college of either becoming a Tuskegee Airman, or going to medical school.  They had an accelerated program.  They were trying to train doctors for the [U.S.] Army during that period of time, so he actually enlisted in the Army, and they paid his way through med school.  And he finished med school in three years instead of the regular four.  He was second in his class.  And he used to tell funny stories.  He could--he evidently had no talent for the [U.S.] military.  He used to tell funny stories about how they'd be marching around on the Howard campus and, you know, the, the commander would say, "To the rear, and march!"  And he wouldn't hear and the whole squad would be marching in one direction, and he'd be marching in the other direction.  I don't know whether those stories were true, but he used to make us laugh telling all that stuff.
Story_ID: 642450
Speaker 1: Now your father [Jack E. White] is known as one of the--one of the great surgeons of Howard [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.]--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was, he was (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) medical history and--
Speaker 2: Well, he felt--he--in medical school, he was taught by the famous Charles R. Drew, the blood bank pioneer.  And Drew actually became a father figure as well as a professional m- mentor for my dad, who had lost his father [George White, Sr.] when he was a young- youngster.  And Drew, in late 1940s or '50s [1950s], arranged for my father to be trained as a--he had been the chief surgical resident at Howard already.  He arranged for him to be trained as a cancer surgeon at Memorial Sloan Kettering [Memorial Hospital and the Sloan Kettering Institute; Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center] in, in New York City [New York, New York], and my dad was the first black physician to receive that training.  Drew had tried to arrange that for Dr. Syphax, Burke Syphax, who was a couple of years older than my dad, but for some reason or another that did work out.  So my dad ended up being the first to be--to, to receive that training--first black to receive that training, instead of--instead of Syphax.  And we went there I think in 1949 and stayed until 1951.  One of my sisters was born in New York during, during that--my older sister, Carole [Carole White], was born--was born in New York during that period.  And Dr. Drew died in 1950--April 1, 1950.  He was killed in an automobile accident in North Carolina.  My mother [Sara Williams White]--my mother was at home.  She received the phone call telling her that Dr. Drew had died, and when my father arrived home and she told him, because it was April 1st he originally thought that she was telling him a cruel April Fools' Day joke, and he became quite angry with her because he loved Dr. Drew so much.  And only after she convinced him that, that, that this was not--this was not some prank, that he had actually died, then he realized that this terrible loss had, had occurred to him.  But I was brought up to--you know, to revere Dr. Drew, as, as anyone would have.  I was--in fact, I went to school with his son, Charles [Charles R. Drew, Jr.] and I were in elementary school together in Washington [D.C.].  I haven't seen him in many years, but we were--we were close as children.  And he was a big influence in my dad's life.
Speaker 1: You, you also knew his--
Speaker 2: I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: You knew his daughter, Charlene [HistoryMaker Charlene Drew Jarvis] (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I knew--yeah, well, I knew--I knew--Charlene is older than, than, than Charles and I.  I met--I actually got to--got to know Charlene as an adult when I--after I became a, a journalist, and after she was a politician in Washington--elected official in Washington.  But we're, we're, we're very friendly now.  But she was kind of like, you know, big sister when we were kids.  And, you know, you don't really necessarily--a few years gap when you're, when you're seven or eight years old is a lot bigger than it is when you get older, you know.
Story_ID: 642451
Speaker 1: Now your father [Jack E. White] was a mentor to LaSalle Leffall [HistoryMaker LaSalle D. Leffall, Jr.], right?
Speaker 2: Yes, he was.  Leffall actually was also from Florida, and he--my father taught him in medical school, and became a mentor of his.  And Leffall also became an oncologist at Memorial Sloan Kettering [Memorial Hospital and the Sloan Kettering Institute; Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York] in, in my dad's footsteps sort of.  And they were actually surgical partners for, for many years--along with Burke Syphax, who we talked about earlier, and a younger guy named, named Funderburk, William Funderburk [William W. Funderburk].  And for many, many years, during a time when there were not many black surgeons in the South, the--this, this, this partner- surgical partnership that they formed in Washington [D.C.] operating on, on--black folks from all over the United States used to come to Howard [Freedmen's Hospital; Howard University Hospital, Washington, D.C.] to, to have their operations done that they couldn't get in their hometowns.  And I still--even now, it's 2013--I still occasionally run into people who, either they or one of their parents, or brothers and sisters, or whatnot, was operated on by my dad back in the ni- you know, in that period up until he retired in the early 1980s.  They--but they got to be very well known because they provided a service which was not available.  Also, my father and Syphax and, and Leffall and bec- were teaching at Howard [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.]. They trained some huge proportion of all the blacks who went on to become surgeons in the United States during that period of time.  Now it's different; you know, black people go to medical school all over the place.  But in those days, Howard University and Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] had a near monopoly on training of, of blacks who aspired to become physicians.  And because of that, as I say, my father had sort of an outside influence on the development of black surgeons in the Unites States for, for many, many years.  And then also, this was--this was also the way that the little bit of traveling that, that I did as a kid was associated with that, because he used to go to meetings of the National Medical Association of black--the black doctors group when we were kids, and they were all over the place.  And we'd go to those conventions, and I got to meet, you know, black people from all over--other doctors' kids from all over at those meetings, which were held in many, many different cities.
Story_ID: 642452
Speaker 1: I'm sort of surprised that your father [Jack E. White] was not on his way to the same meeting that Dr. Drew [Charles R. Drew] was on his way to when he was--
Speaker 2: No, I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) killed.
Speaker 2: --no, he wasn't--he--
Speaker 1: The one at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]?
Speaker 2: --was--my fa- my dad was--you know, was his--he was his--in 1950 he was in New York [New York]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --at, at, at--getting his training at Memorial Sloan Kettering [Memorial Hospital and the Sloan Kettering Institute; Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center].  And, and Drew was on his way to some conference I think in Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 1: No, it's the annual meeting at Tuskegee [of the John A. Andrew Clinical Society].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's what he was--he was on his way to the John Andrew Hospital [John A. Andrew Memorial Hospital, Tuskegee, Alabama].
Speaker 2: Okay, well, no.  I mean, he wouldn't have been involved in that.  He would have been in--he would have been at, you know, finishing his training in New York.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now it's possible that some other year--if, if he had done his training and, and this had been some other year, they might well have been.  As I say, they were--they were extremely close and, and they was--it's a letter I was trying to locate.  I haven't been--I can't lay my hands on it, but it had a really--there are a bunch of letters my dad--that, that Drew wrote to my dad while he was in New York.  And you can s- can see he was very lonely there.  He was--you know, he was the only black in, in--among all these, these white folks there.  And I think he felt isolated and, and, you know, alone, and he may have had a loss of confidence.  So Drew had wrote him several letters, which my mom [Sara Williams White] has, that--sort of trying to buck up his spirits and making sure that he--that he got through all this.  Let me add a few other--couple of things though.  My father was by all accounts an enormously proficient surgeon.  And when he was operating at, at Memorial Sloan Kettering, doctors from all over would come to watch him.  They had a--you know, the cliched amphi- surgical amphitheater where you could look down, and they would watch my dad; he was very fast.  And surgery--speed in surgery is a virtue because it means the patient bleeds less.  My father's nickname was The Blade because he was so quick.  And so he was kind of--it was kind of amazing to them because they had never had a black surgeon there, that he was so proficient, that he was so doggone good at it.  But Drew, you know, knew when he sent him up there that, that, that he was somebody who could--he could--that he could hang with that group 'cause they was--you know, they wasn't--they weren't gonna have to lower their standards in any way to accommodate my dad, that he was gonna be right there with him.  And he, and he was.  He, he was good at his work.
Story_ID: 642453
Speaker 1: Yeah, we were just speaking off camera how good your father [Jack E. White] was, and everybody seems to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, we're ready?
Speaker 1: Yes.  Everybody talks about how good he was--the people I've interviewed, like LaSalle Leffall [HistoryMaker Dr. LaSalle D. Leffall, Jr.] and others, that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, he taught Leffall; he taught Funderburk [William W. Funderburk]; he t- and a whole bunch of those guys.  He was friends with, with, with those that they didn't teach.  I mean, it was his, you know, his peer group.  I mean, it was a small elite corps.  Drew--what Drew was trying to do at Howard [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.] was sort of the same thing that Charles Hamilton Houston was trying to do at the, at the law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] at that time.  They were trying to produce--it's, it's kind of the embodiment of the--of, of W.E.B. Du Bois' idea, the Talented Tenth.  They were gonna--trying to produce a small cadre of really high- highly skilled, very profession- proficient teachers who could train huge numbers of people.  They had a pret- they had a pretty, they had a pretty thought out plan, Dr. Drew [Charles R. Drew] did, and, and it's a, it's a shame that he died when he did.  Because he, again, by all accounts, was this extraordinary individual who--and very farsighted and dignified individual who, who, who, who didn't--who--everything he did was part of some larger scheme that he had in mind for uplift of, of, of, of, of, of the black race.  And my dad was, was part of that.  You know, that, that was a team that he was trying to put together there that included Syphax [Burke Syphax], included my father, and a number of other physicians that, that Dr. Drew had recruited for Howard med school.
Story_ID: 642454
Speaker 1: Now when you think about your parents' personalities, with--their dispositions, their sense of humor, their habits and how they walk, how they talk, what they look like, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: In some way--I'm, I'm a lot like my dad [Jack E. White] in some ways.  I mean, I'm a--I have--a look--a look like him.  The older I get, the more I look like him.  But, I should add here, though.  I, I went to visit my mother's only brother a, a few years ago before he died.  His name is Arthur [Arthur Williams, Jr.], lived in Alabama.  And when I was looking at him, he looked remarkably like my father (laughter).  I had to tell him, "You look an awful lot like you could have been my dad's brother."  So, you know, I look like my mom [Sara Williams White] as well, but, again, you know, there's a--there's a resemblance between the two of them.  I have my father's temperament, which is not necessarily a good thing.  He was a--he, he was a, a guy with a--he had a good sense of humor, but he also had a, a very hot temper.  My mother's a much more easygoing, calm, placid kind of person; she had to be to put up with my father all those years.  He had a--but he had a classic surgeon's ego.  And you have to have a big one in order to cut into people and to think that, you know, you're gonna do, do 'em good by stabbing 'em with a very sharp knife.  And, quite frankly, I mean, my father had a lot of personal problems.  He, he, he was a drinker, and we had a tumultuous childhood because of his--because of his, his drinking and his in- inability to keep his temper under control; it was rough.
Story_ID: 642455
Speaker 1: How many brothers and sisters do you have?
Speaker 2: I have one brother, David [David White], who's, was born in 1948.  He's two years younger than I am.  And I have three sisters: Carole Diann [Carole White], who was born in Wa- in New York [New York] in 1950; Sara, who is now Sara Lorraine White Gay [Sara White Gay], who is--lives here in Richmond [Virginia].  She's a physician, she was born in Washington [D.C.] in 1953.  And my youngest sister is Marilyn Marie White, born in 1956.  She's a veteran who now works for the Food and Drug Administration in Washington.  Her name is Marilyn White Holman, and she's married to Kwame Holman, who's on PBS ['PBS NewsHour'].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  All right and, and you're the--where do you fit in the--
Speaker 2: I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: Where do you fit?  Are you the oldest, or (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm the oldest.
Speaker 1: You're the oldest.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I'm the oldest.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 642456
Speaker 1: So you lived for a brief period of time in New York City [New York, New York], I guess, after you (unclear), right?
Speaker 2: Well--okay, well--
Speaker 1: Okay, I--
Speaker 2: When I was, when I was born, my father was still finishing his medical training at Howard [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.] and getting ready to go off and be, be an intern at Boston Marine Hospital [Naval Hospital Boston, Chelsea, Massachusetts].  And they didn't have any money, so I was sent to live first with my mother's mother [Gertrude Williams], and then with my father's mother [Emma Clark White] down in Florida until I was about maybe a year old or so.  And at that's the time, my parents [Sara Williams White and Jack E. White] at this, at this point were in, in Boston [Massachusetts].  And I guess they--I guess my grandmother sent pictures of me up to my parents.  And they, they missed me and they--and they came and got me, and they took me to Boston.  So I lived in Boston, then in Washington [D.C.], and then back in New York for a period, when he was at--well he came--he came--my dad came back to Howard after he finished in Boston.  And then we were in Howard for a short period of time, then he went off to Memorial [Memorial Hospital and the Sloan Kettering Institute; Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York].  We were in New York from 19--I guess 1949 to 1951.  And then we came back to Washington where he joined the Howard medical school faculty where--and that's where he remained until he retired in the 1980s.  He originally--he started something, which was called the tumor clinic at that time.  It was in a, a building across the street from Freedmen's Hospital [Howard University Hospital, Washington, D.C.].  And that was where--what later became the oncology department at Howard.  And then later--still later became the Howard University Cancer Center, which at the time was the only university affiliate- affiliated cancer research center in the world run by black folks.  My dad founded that and, and, and, and built it and, and, and was the director of it until he retired.
Story_ID: 642457
Speaker 1: When did he retire, do you?
Speaker 2: He retired in the--let's see--around 1980.  I don't remember the year exactly, but it was--he was--he was in his sixties when he retired.  He didn't live long after, after that.  He--the great irony is that he was diagnosed with cancer himself, and it killed him.  He died at--he, he was only sixty-six when he died.  And--from cancer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I--you know, he--I mean, he had smoked and all this stuff.  He, (laughter) he didn't do--he didn't take the advice that he would, you know, give his, his own patients.  He didn't, he didn't take good care of himself, and he, he died young.
Speaker 1: Yeah it seems like (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Younger than he should have.
Speaker 1: Like just in the--yeah, they just started talking about prevention in the '60s [1960s] for some--you know.
Speaker 2: Well he, he knew.  He knew.  I mean, I--one of the, one of the, one of the most--my most powerful memories, it was in the--he died in 1988, so this would have been in the Thanksgiving of 1985.  I was in Washington [D.C.] with my former wife, Cassandra Clayton.  We were there for the Thanksgiving holiday.  And my father [Jack E. White] sat us down in the living room to tell us that he had been diagnosed with cancer.  And he was very somber about it.  He had pretty much stopped drinking by this time.  He had--you know, he was a different person than he had been when he was younger.  And Cassandra and I, you know, made all the usual reassuring noises, "Oh, you'll be fine," and all the rest of this.  And he said, "I'm not optimistic."  Well, you know, he knew.  I mean, he was (laughter) one of the best cancer people in the world.  He had seen his x-rays; he had seen all the other tests; he knew.  So he had surgery, and he had the, you know, chemotherapy and all the other--the normal drill afterwards, but by that time it was too late; the cancer had metastasized throughout his body.  And even though he had surgery, they couldn't catch it all.  He also--because of the surgery, he had (unclear) blood clots, and he suffered a stroke which interfered with his speech.  And I think if you wanna know what really killed my dad, it was the inability to talk.  He is a man who lived to talk.  And when he was--became unable to communicate with us, I don't think he thought life was worth living.  My mother [Sara Williams White] and I and my sisters [Carole White, Sara White Gay and Marilyn White Holman] have talked about this a great deal since that time about and learned about--things about what we would--we, we ourselves would do, the options we would take if, if we were ever in the same situation, that it probably would have been better for my dad if he had never had that surgery, if he had just sort of, you know, been--had medicine for his pain and coped with it, and he would have been able to talk and, and communicate with us.  And may- I don't know whether he would have lived as long, but he certainly would have had more of a life that he would have wanted to experience than the way that--the way that he did.
Story_ID: 642458
Speaker 1: So he would have benefited from hospice care or something--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) like that?
Speaker 2: He--well he was in and out of Howard University Hospital [Washington, D.C.] during the last two years of his life.  He--ultimately, he wanted to come home.  And this is another strong memory.  It was--this was right before my birthday in, in 1988; my birthday is June 30th.  I was in Washington [D.C.] and I--my, my father was--they'd bought a hospital bed and set it up there.  He had not been eating.  He was--he was a small guy to start with, but he probably weighed--he probably didn't weigh more than eighty-five pounds at that time.  The nurse who was there helping to care for him was gonna change his sheets and, and, you know, give him a bath and whatnot.  So I came down and, and lifted him out of the bed so that she could do what she needed to do.  He--at this point, you could look into his eyes, and there really wasn't much of a spark left there.  My father had always been--he's a highly intelligent, very verbal, engaging person.  It wasn't much left.  But anyway, I held him while she changed his sheets, and then we, you know, gave him a sponge bath and put his pajamas on.  And I came back to New York [New York] where I was living at that time, and then a couple of days later he died.  And I was always glad that, that my last contact with my dad, that I was actually able to help care for him at that time.  I mean, that--it meant a lot to me that I was--that I was able to sort of do that for him.  As I say, it was my--it was right--I--the way I learned about it, I was, I was on--it was right around the time of my birthday.  My sister-in-law and her husband were visiting the house.  Somehow or another they kept me out of the house all day long.  When I got home, there were all these balloons in the house--they were gonna have a surprise birthday party for me, but my mother [Sara Williams White] had called right before I got home to tell my former wife Cassandra [Cassandra Clayton] that my dad had died.  And we went ahead with the party because it was too late not to have people come.  And I also remember that my father--as I said earlier, he had been the--you know, a big party guy too, had always said, "When I die, I don't want a funeral," he said, "I, I want you to take my coffin and take it down to Murphy's Supper Club [Ed Murphy's Supper Club, Washington, D.C.]," which is where he used to hang around and watch (unclear), "line up the champagne glasses on top of the coffin, and have one last drink on Jack [Jack E. White]."  (Laughter) So, we had a party.  And then, of course, you know, we had the funeral for him at Howard--at Rankin Chapel, Howard [Andrew Rankin Memorial Chapel, Washington, D.C.].  And it was attended by extraordinary number of people.  I mean, the, the, the church was overflowing; they had to set up speakers on that, you know, sort of circular lawn they have outside so that people could hear the--could hear the, the service outside.  He had been--he had made a lot of difference to a lot of people during his medical career, which spanned, you know, all those years.  And it was really pretty moving to see that, that extraordinary number of people who showed up for his--for his funeral, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--okay, so this is 1988.
Story_ID: 642459
Speaker 1: Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] has quite a legacy there with the medical school [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.] and--
Speaker 2: I'm sorry, I couldn't hear you?
Speaker 1: No, I said Howard has quite a legacy with the medical school--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and I think--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that Drew [Charles R. Drew], though he died young, he accomplished what Houston [Charles Hamilton Houston] did on some level.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: He--I, I, I think that Charles Drew accomplished what Houston did on--with, with the law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] on some level.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: In that generation anyway.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: Right.  Well they were--I mean, they were trying to--you know, they were trying--were trying to create these centers of excellence at Howard that would have this profound--I mean, you're talking about right after World War II [WWII] period of enormous change in the United States, period of time when the Civil Rights Movement is in sort of its incipient phase; when, when the soldiers have come home and they're not willing to put up with, you know, the mess that they had--had been dumped on them prior to the war.  All of these things were--I mean, it's a period of enormous ferment.  And, I mean, from a--from early childhood I was sort of exposed to this, to this, to this thinking process.  This is a time when everything's changing for us, and to this notion of, of, of black excellence, that it was going to sort of help us to overcome.  I, I went to elementary school--my first elementary school in Washington [D.C.] was Mott Elementary School [Lucretia Mott Elementary School], which had been one of the--one of the--you know, back in those days in segregated Washington, there were a couple of elementary schools that fed to a couple of junior high schools that, that ended up feeding you to Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.], which was the academic high school where Dr. Drew actually had gone before he went to Amherst [Amherst College, Amherst, Massachusetts], and where another of other prominent people in Washington--Senator Brooke [HistoryMaker Edward Brooke], Massachusetts; Walter Washington, who went to--became mayor of Washington; and numerous others had gone.  Anyway, I was on that track.  I went to--my first three years of elementary school at--
Speaker 1: That's--
Speaker 2: --Mott, right across the street.
Speaker 1: --Mott, M-O-T-T?
Speaker 2: M-O-T-T, right
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Lucretia Mott, she was an abolitionist and a feminist, and the school was named after her.  They used to, you know, name the black schools after people who have played some kind of role.  You remember there was--Dunbar High School was named after the famous poet [Paul Laurence Dunbar].  There was a junior high school, which is now a high school [Benjamin Banneker Junior High School; Benjamin Banneker Academic High School, Washington, D.C.].  I can't--it's near Howard.  What's the name of it?  Anyway, that was--that was the, the, the academic junior high school, and that's probably where I would have gone.  I used to come home from--or I used to leave school--leave my--walk across the street to, to Freedmen's Hospital [Howard University Hospital, Washington, D.C.] where my dad [Jack E. White] had his office at that time, and I'd wait for him to take me--and later my brother [David White], when he started to going to school--take us home.  So we went to segregated schools in Washington for our first three years.  And then 1954, and the Brown decision [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka] came along.
Story_ID: 642460
Speaker 1: By this time, my family had moved to Northeast Washington [D.C.] to a neighborhood called Brookland.  We were the first black family to move into this house on--at 3809 17th Street Northeast.  My dad [Jack E. White], as a surgeon and a medical school professor, probably was, you know, professionally higher ranked than, than most of our white neighbors.  But much of them freaked out and, and, and started running as soon as we--soon as we got there.  In fact, one, one of, one of things I remember, I was a big baseball fan when I was a boy.  And we lived a few blocks from a guy named Eddie Yost--or a few houses, rather, from a guy named Eddie Yost, who was at that time third baseman for the Washington Senators.  And he was a hero of mine.  When I found out that Eddie Yost was a neighbor, I was thrilled.  My dad liked to take my brother [David White] and me for walks around the neighborhood, and he would speak to everybody whether they spoke to him or not.  And he--we saw Eddie Yost, and my dad said hi to Eddie Yost.  And Eddie Yost looked--glared at us with a, a look of such hatred that it was--it was--even for a small boy like me--why--I was shocked by it.  And he actually turned out to be one of the first white folks who sold his house and moved after that--moved out of that neighborhood after we--when we left.  Other--there were other whites, though, who remained.  The, the, the, the--their next door neighbor, Mrs. Yates [ph.], was a wonderful person who stayed there until she and her brother died.  There was a guy across the street named Mr. Dodder [ph.] who was like me, was a baseball fan.  My father was always working, so Mr. Dodder would come and play catch with me when I was a little boy, and who'd take me to baseball games at, at Griffith Stadium [Washington, D.C.], which was near the Howard campus [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  You might recall that at that time there were no, there were no black players on the Senators; they were the last, last team to get black players [sic.].  But they did have a few Latin guys who were--I guess they were really black, but they were sort of passed over as being Latin, so they weren't really quite black, you know.  But Mr. Dodder was very nice to us.  And, as I say, he--those people remained until they either died or, or got so old that they had to go into, you know, retirement homes and whatnot.  And they stayed (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) How old were you when you moved over to that--
Speaker 1: When we moved over there?
Speaker 2: --Northeast neighborhood?
Speaker 1: I would have been in--I was in third grade so.  And I was--
Speaker 2: So that's about eight?
Speaker 1: I was the--I would have been--I was a year younger than I should have been.
Speaker 2: That's seven.
Speaker 1: So I would have been seven.  'Cause I--yeah, I would've been--yeah, 'cause we--I was ten when I graduated from--when I graduated from elementary school [John Burroughs Elementary School, Washington, D.C.]--from sixth grade.
Story_ID: 642461
Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-four [1954] came and the schools in Washington [District of Columbia Public Schools] were--unlike many other places--were integrated immediately.  And I began going to the neighborhood school, which was previously a white school named Burroughs high school--it was about five or six blocks from my home on Monroe Street.  And I was--you know, most of ma- I had white teachers.  Most of my classmates those first couple of years were white.  There was one little white girl named Ronnie McDonald [ph.] who actually ended up going to school with us all the way 'til we graduated through high school.  But the racial change occurred quickly.  I went--the, the three years I went to elementary school at Burroughs [John Burroughs Elementary School, Washington, D.C.]--fourth, fifth, and sixth grade--were integrated.  I then went on to Taft Junior High School [Washington, D.C.], which was also close to, to where we were living.  And I--and that school was integrated.  But by the time I got to high school, at McKinley Tech High School [McKinley Technical High School; McKinley Technology High School, Washington, D.C.], in 1960--or--I guess I started there in 1959--no, I started there in 1960--and this tenth grader had become virtually all black by that time.  It was a very excellent high school, but there were--the schools had, had really begun to re-segregate pretty amazingly so in Washington [D.C.].  Now we only--in my graduating class from McKinley, if my recollection is correct, there were only two white people.  One was a guy named Paul Petralockus [ph.]; the other was this, this girl, Ronnie McDonald, who we had started going to school with when we were in fourth grade, and she continued with us right along.  By that time, I mean, she was genetically or, you know, ethnically white, but she was culturally black (laughter).  By that time--I think she married a black guy.  She's a wonderful person, and I liked her a lot.  But there were only those whites, and there were two Asian fellas, when everybody else in our class was black out of three hundred and some odd--you know, this year is our fiftieth anniversary.  I am eager to see, you know, who shows up.
Story_ID: 642462
Speaker 1: Now in this neighborhood that you lived in--now this is--how far is it from the Howard campus [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], is it very far?
Speaker 2: Okay, this neighborhood--this neighborhood is called Brookland, B-R-O-O-K-L-A-N-D [Washington, D.C.], and it is--it is two, two and a half miles from the Howard campus.  It's closer actually to, to Catholic University [The Catholic University of America, Washington, D.C.] than it is to Howard.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it--but, you know, it's all--everything's all--Washington [D.C.] is not a big city geographically, so everything is all the same.  When we--as I said, when we--when we first moved in the neighborhood, the first house we lived in we were the first black family to move there.  And I think that, you know, all of the, the--all of the, the, the white flight had completed itself by the time that we moved there to the house where my mother [Sara Williams White] still lives in nineteen fifty-s- I think this would have been 1957 or '58 [1958].  We moved to the house where my mom still lives, which is like a mile away from where this is; it's on Jackson Street--still the same neighborhood, but--
Speaker 1: Two different homes.
Speaker 2: --few streets over.
Speaker 1: Now, now where, where did you--now you lived near to one of the other people we, we, we interviewed, Amina Dickerson [HistoryMaker Amina J. Dickerson]--
Speaker 2: Oh, Amina Dickerson you mentioned earlier?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that--well her name at that time was Jill Dickerson.  Her, her parents, Julius [Julius Dickerson] and Ann Dickerson [Ann Stewart Dickerson], were and still are my mother's next door neighbors.  They live on 16--at the corner of 16th [Street] and Jackson Street, my mother lives in the middle of the block on Jackson Street.  And their backyard backs up to--backs up to my mother's yard.  Yeah, I grew--we grew up--one of--Jill, or Amina as she's now called, was the same age as one of my sisters; they were close friends.  And her younger sister, Julee [Julee Dickerson Thompson], is the same age as my youngest sister, Marilyn [Marilyn White Holman], and they were close friends when we were growing up.  So, yeah, we were all--we're all in there together.
Speaker 1: So did the neighborhood attract other people from Howard?  You know, who (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, let's see.  On Jackson Street--what's the name of the great black diplomat who won the Nobel Peace Prize at the UN [United Nations]?
Speaker 1: Oh, you're talking about--
Speaker 2: What's his name?  I'm ashamed--
Speaker 1: Why I can't think of, of it right now.  I should be able--
Speaker 2: I, I see his face.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I can see him--
Speaker 2: He, he lived--he--but he lived a blo- up the block from us.  His house, which is a national historic monument, is still there.  The great black--I'm have--having a senior moment; I'm not recalling names well.
Speaker 1: I don't know why that's contagious, I'm (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The great black poet who was on the faculty at Howard.
Speaker 1: Sterling Brown [Sterling A. Brown]?
Speaker 2: Sterling Brown lived in our neighborhood.  In fact, I used to cut his grass when I was a teenager.  He lived on Kear- we lived on Jackson Street; he lived Kearny Street.  His house I think is also a historic monu- historic--on the, the list of historic houses now.  There was Dr. Rayford [Rayford Logan], who was an historian, lived up the block from us.  So there were--I mean, there were--what was going on in Washington at that time was that middle class blacks were beginning to move out of the ghetto and to buy houses in areas where they previously had been un- unable to buy.  One of the first areas they moved was this area of Brookland and Woodridge [Washington, D.C.].  And then a neighborhood that eventually became known as the Gold Coast--Shepherd Park, which is in Northwest Washington [D.C.], began to open up.  Essentially, these were, you know, liberal Jewish families who were willing to sell to, to blacks.  And blacks with money moved to these neighborhoods.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That neighbor- where I was is in Northeast Washington.  That neighborhood come--known as the Gold Coast is in Northwest Washington; it's the other side of town.  And all--you know, it was considered to be I guess somewhat more upper crust than Brookland and Woodridge, where I lived.  But my father [Jack E. White] and mother never wanted to move over there.  I mean, my--they were satisfied with the house that we lived in, and--you know, and also, you know, my dad was a--he was against pretentiousness.  He didn't--he had a problem with that.  And he felt that a lot of the, the people who were moving over to the Gold Coast were, you know, putting on airs and so he, he--you know, he didn't--he didn't wanna--he didn't wanna be part of that.
Speaker 1: Yeah it was Ralph Bunche we were trying to think of.
Speaker 2: Ralph Bunche, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: Well Ralph Bunche's house was--is one block away from my mother's house.  It's 1510 Jackson Street; her house is 1610 Jackson Street.  And, as I say, Sterling Brown lived two or three blocks up on Kearny Street, which is one street over and two or three blocks up.  And then Dr. Rayford was there, was in Jackson for a while, and there were--and there were--there were others.  But most of the--you know, a lot of the Howard crew, they were di- they were dispersed around the city.  A lot of them--the doctors and whatnot, the one--the lawyers--the ones that had a little bit more money were probably moving more to that Gold Coast area, you know, where they--their houses were a little bit fancier, the yards were a little bit bigger; it was a little bit more prestigious.
Story_ID: 642463
Speaker 1: We always ask this question: what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: The sights and sounds and smells in the neighborhood [Brookland, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Hm, that's an interesting question.
Speaker 1: Well of growing up period.  So if it--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, well I'll tell you one--I'll tell you--I'll tell you one--I'll tell you one.  Actually, this is in two incarnations of this.  There was something called the Wonder Bread bakery back in those days, and there was one on Georgia Avenue, right above--a block--less than a block from Freedmen's Hospital [Howard University Hospital, Washington, D.C.].  And--well let me go back to something my father [Jack E. White] used to laugh about.  He said that when he was growing up in, in Florida, it was so boring that one of the things they'd do was--used to do was stand by the railroad track and wait for the train carrying the citrus fruit to go by so they could smell those oranges, you know.  I actually do the same thing.  I used to go waiting for him.  And I would go and stand near the, the bakery so I could smell that fresh baked bread.  I can remember it to this day.  And then when I was in high school at McKinley [McKinley Technical High School; McKinley Technology High School, Washington, D.C.], there happened to have been a Wonder Bread factory near the bus stop that I used to take to go home after school.  And we used to stand over there.  And then to leap even further ahead about this Wonder Bread thing, 'cause this is the Wonder Bread connection.  After Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed in 1968, I was at The Washington Post at that time.  And I was one of the reporters who was sent out with a photographer every night to go around and keep track of the, the riot.  The guy who was with me, a really wonderful black photographer--again, Matthew Lewis was his name.  He liked that Wonder Bread.  So on the nights when we had to get in our car--it was equipped with a radio and a police scanner so we could know where to go--we would start out by going to the Wonder Bread place, and we would each get a loaf of fresh baked Wonder Bread and a tin of butter (laughter).  As we drove around Washington [D.C.] keeping track of the riots, seeing all kinds of violent stuff, we'd be eating this butter and bread 'cause Matt just liked that Won- he just liked that Wonder Bread, and I liked it too.
Story_ID: 642464
Speaker 1: Now did the--was, was the Wonder Bread hot when you got it?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  No it was--this is, this is--we would, would time it so we would get there exactly when the Wonder Bread had just come out the oven.  So we would--yeah, it was hot and you can take it--that butter would melt right on it.  And because Wonder Bread is porous, it would soak in.  And we--I mean, you were really basically just eating butter.  But yeah--but Matt [Matthew Lewis] liked that stuff.  And we--so we rode around covering the riot eating, you know, eating butter slathered Wonder Bread for, for, for days after the, after, after the thing occurred, I mean--
Story_ID: 642465
Speaker 1: Again, I don't wanna jump ahead of the story, but--
Speaker 2: (Unclear)--yeah.  Oh, well is there another story about the, the riots?
Speaker 1: No, not about that.  It was just--thinking about your sights and sounds.  Another sight that I remember from childhood is they used to have trolley cars and streetcars we called 'em, in Washington [D.C.], when I was a small kid.  And so would later be replaced by buses, so you would see--but you could hear that clang, clang, clang.  It was on the main--the main street, Rhode Island Avenue, where we would walk up.  And then the other thing is--it's not exactly a sight or sound, but it's something I remember well from that period of time.  I had a friend named Donald Silvey [ph.], and we got bicycles.  And in those days--we were, we were eight or nine years old--you could ride anywhere.  And we rode all over Washington.  We used to like to sneak into the carnival that would come every year.  And so we would ride our bicycles all the way over to where the carnival ground was, which was quite a distance from our home.  In those days you could just leave your bike out, and nobody was gonna steal it or anything like that.  And we would try to perfect walking backwards into the--into the carnival.  Because we thought that if we walked backwards, nobody would realize that we were entering the carnival, you know.  Of course, we'd get caught and, you know, had to cough up the quarter or whatever it was, but that was, that was the idea.  There were--I mean, that Wonder Bread, though, is really the one that--it's--that's really--if I had to pick out one particular smell or odor that, that just sort of evokes a happy period of time for me back then, that would--that would--that would really be it.  It would really be it.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Any other sights and sounds, or sounds.  You said the trolley, and--
Speaker 1: The trolley--I mean--oh, yeah, well sights--another one.  There was a famous place in our neighborhood [Brookland, Washington, D.C.] called the Franciscan Monastery [Franciscan Monastery of the Holy Land in America].  And--which was--you know, it's Catholic, and it's on 14th Street in Washington.  And they had a things there called the catacombs.  You could take a tour of the monastery, and they would show you the sights and all the rest of that.  But as little kids the, the part that we--that we liked was to go to the catacomb because we thought there were--it was scary; there were ghost down there.  So we would take our girlfriends, you know, our little--you know, we were twelve, thirteen years old, whatever.  We would go to the, to the, to the monastery to see the catacombs.  But there were--as far as sounds go, I don't--I mean, other than, you know, a little bit later when we first started hearing like Little Richard and Elvis Presley.  If that's the kind of sound you're talking about, now that, that was--that was--now that was re- and, oh, and Tennessee Ernie Williams, who had a song called 'Sixteen Tons.'
Speaker 2: Oh, Ernie Ford, yeah.
Speaker 1: Ernie Ford, yeah.  Tennessee--that's it, Tennessee Ernie Ford.  He had a song called--when I was--I think I was in the sixth grade [at John Burroughs Elementary School, Washington, D.C.].  He had a song called 'Sixteen Tons,' and it was a huge hit.  And I and one of my school classmates, a guy named Samuel Butler [ph.] sang 'Sixteen Tons' in the, in the sixth grade talent show.  We put--we went to--we got shoe polish and put it on our faces, just like to simulate coal dust and all the rest of that.  And we stood on the stage and--you know, you remember the words, those, "Sixteen tons and what do you get?  Another day older and deeper in debt," and we sang that song, and we were really, really happy.  Then, of course, you know, rock and roll was making its really big debut at that time.
Speaker 2: Yeah you were about ten I guess (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And I mean, the one--the artists I remember best: Little Richard and Elvis Presley.  And I wanted to be Elvis Presley.
Story_ID: 642466
Speaker 1: My parents were--somehow or other got- had gotten the idea in their minds that I should be a, a violin player.  I did not want to play violin.  I had no interest in playing the violin.  They arranged for me to take lessons from a fella named Isador Bransky, who was a violinist with Baltimore Symphony Orchestra [sic.].  They were so dedicated to this that when Hurrica- I think it was Hurricane Hazel came, that my mother [Sara Williams White] drove through Hurricane Hazel with me to take me to my violin lesson,  because Mr. Bransky had come over from Baltimore [Maryland] and he was there.  I knocked on the door.  You know, this was at the home of a guy who was a friend of my father's, who's also--he was an adult, but he was also interested in violin.  Well they didn't hear me, or at least I chose to say they didn't hear me.  And I walked home worried--my mother was so dedicated to my taking these lessons that she drove me to hurricane--through Hurricane Hazel to get my lesson.  I was so convinced that I didn't wanna take these lessons that I walked home through Hurricane Hazel to avoid taking my lessons, carrying my violin with me.  I remember--I can remember the trees bending, and there were electric wires down and spraying all over the place.  And my mother was really quite shocked when I got home, and she immediately put me in the car (laughter) and drove me back to get my lesson 'cause she thought I should do this.  I--we--I struggled along with the violin until I was a teenager.  And I, I hated it.  I especially hated it as a younger kid because I used to have to walk past the, the Taft playground [at Taft Junior High School, Washington, D.C.] where, where my friends were playing Little League baseball.  I've had to walk past them carrying my violin case, and, you know, you could get razzed for that.  Anyway, we put up with it--I put up with this until I was a teenager.  Mr. Bransky had a paint- a daughter who was a painter.  And he--evidently, she was a pretty good painter.  And he proposed to my father [Jack E. White] that his daughter paint a portrait of myself and my brother [David White], who was also studying violin, with our violins.  And he, he went on to describe-- Bransky is a Russian immigrant.  He went on to describe how we would be in the fro- forefront with our violin.  And in the background would be the slave fiddler with--and I will never forget that she said, "With the pickaninnies dancing."  And my father said (laughter), "Pickaninny?"  Well that was the end of my violin lessons.  I never had to put up with Mr. Bransky coming to the house again 'cause my dad was so offended by his--you know, his use of that, that term that he allowed us to, to, to get off--.  So my brother and I were greatly relieved--be forever grateful to the use of that racial slur, for getting me out of something I didn't wanna do.  But to go back to--Elvis Presley, I wanted to be Elvis Presley.  I think everybody else--either Elvis Presley or [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte, one or the other.  'Cause I think Harry Belafonte was also a big deal back in that point.  And I wanted to learn guitar.  And they said once you learn violin you can learn guitar.  Well, you know, it takes forever to learn violin, so I never did get a chance to learn it, and I, I, I regret that to this day.  But I had--you know, in my mind I, I wanted to be like Elvis Presley.  I mean, he was the--he was everybody's idol.  And we used to have little parties, you know.  And, and we'd play Little Richard's 'Slippin' and Slidin' (Peepin' and Hidin')' and 'Tutti Frutti' and all that stuff.  And we'd play, we'd play Elvis Presley songs, and we would try to dance and all that kind of thing.  We were still in elementary school when all that was going on.
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That was, that was, was a big deal.
Story_ID: 642467
Speaker 1: But then you get to junior high school [Taft Junior High School, Washington, D.C.], of course.  And, you know, I was younger than, than all--almost all of my classmates because I had, I had started school one year early; I never went to, I never went to kindergarten.
Speaker 2: Now did you be- before I get to the junior high school, did, did you have any special teachers or mentors in elementary school and--
Speaker 1: I had--the, the teachers that I remember, there were two of them.  One was my teacher when I was in third grade at Mott [Lucretia Mott Elementary School, Washington, D.C.] who remained--she died just recently--who remained someone who was--she was a friend of my parents [Sara Williams White and Jack E. White], and she remained--I can't remem- recall her name.  Then when I was in fifth grade [at John Burroughs Elementary School, Washington, D.C.] I had a white teacher named Mrs. Williams [ph.] who thought the world of me and used to treat--I was her teacher's pet, and I was--she treated me a little differently than, than the other kids, and she encouraged me a lot.  She, she was the first person to make me realize that I had a, that I had a, an interest in writing.  As--I used to write these little short stories.  I think I still have some of 'em around here.  Like they would be like little O. Henry type stories or little sort of science fiction kind of stories like--you know, of people meeting mysterious and deadly ends after they run into some unknown creature somewhere and all this.  And she used allow me to read these--read these stories in, in class.
Speaker 2: So this is in grade school (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And she was very--she was very nice to me.  I had--when I was in sixth grade I had the exact opposite.  I had the roughest teacher.  You know look, I'm--I can say without boasting I'm really smart, but I've never been a good student.  My IQ is very high.  I was--(unclear) my brother [David White] and sisters [Carole White, Sarah White Gay and Marilyn White Holman], we inherited from my parents, but I never liked school, I was allergic to classroom situations from--and that--and that really came out.  The only exception to that was when Mrs. Williams--as I say, this white teacher was--had taken this interest in me.  It really came out from the sixth grade and later on.  I had a teacher in sixth grade named Mr. Hogan [ph.] who--looking back on it, I think he was probably a very good teacher, but he was really rough on me.  I was a year or two younger than most of my classmates, and this created some problems for me.  I--for example, I wanted to be in the Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America].  You had to be--I think you had to be eleven to be in the Boy Scouts, and I was like nine or--nine going on ten.  So I said I was eleven so that I could be in the Boy Scouts with my friend.  And when he found out that I had been dishonest about my age, he made a great big deal out of it.  He's the kind of guy who used to go around saying stuff like, "Place your lips upon the, the, the, orifice from which manure departs from my body," you know.  In other words, kiss my ass, you know.  And he was just rough, but, but he--you know, he was trying to get us to be--good teacher--
Story_ID: 642468
Speaker 1: My father [Jack E. White] at this point wanted me to go to St. Albans [St. Albans School], which was just--it was a private school in Washington [D.C.] which was just starting to recruit black students at that time.  And they were gonna let in one.  At least that's my understanding of it.  They were gonna let in one.  So I went up there and took these tests.  I didn't wanna go to St. Albans.  I ended up not going.  It was another guy who later went on to become a professor at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] was, was the one that they chose.  I was so relieved that they didn't have to go.  I got to junior high school at Taft [Taft Junior High School, Washington, D.C.].  And, again, it was--it was an integrated school situation.  I had tested into the, the smart group of kids.  And they--recall, that's when Sputnik [Sputnik 1] happened.  And all of a sudden they decided they were gonna give all these experimentations to try to get kids to do science and math.  So instead of following the normal school curriculum, which would have had you learning algebra I guess in tenth grade, we were taught algebra in eighth grade, and then college algebra in--well I'm, I'm not sure whether--maybe it was--yeah, maybe it normally had algebra in the seventh grade, and then you would take something else and then have college algebra when you got to high school.  But anyway, we had it when we were in junior high school.  And I had terrific teachers at, at, at, at, at Taft.  One of them was our homeroom teacher; her name was Mrs. Nicklebaum [ph.].  She remained our homeroom teacher throughout.  She was an amazing teacher.  One of the things that she did that really amazed us--you know, they used to have like a game--a basketball game between the faculty and the--and the--and the--and the--and the--and the kids team, the varsity team.  Ms. Nicklebaum stood at half court at one of those games and shot a perfect basket from--you know, and we were like--whoa!  One day she, she had learned the knack of being able to tear a telephone book in half, you know, which you do--you do it basically by tearing one page at a time.  But she would--she would start out the class by, you know, tearing this paper book in half.  We all--so nobody messed with Ms. Nicklebaum.  And she was--she was--and she loved us.  She was very engaged with us. The other--the other teacher that I had and I remember the best was George Rhodes, who was an African American who taught me mathematics.  He later went on to become a school principal--high school principal in, in Washington, and a beloved figure in Washington education.  He--a lot of people wanted him to become the school superintendent.  He never, never made it, but he, he should have.  Mr. Rhodes took a very deep interest in me.  His name is R-H-O-D-E-S, lives in McLean, Virginia.  He's actually friends with my eldest sister [Carole White] now; he's still living.  And then--the third teacher that I had was Mrs. Williams [ph.], who taught me English my senior year, and who--there was one girl in my class, a girl named Jackie Lindsey [ph.], who was so grown up compared to all the rest of us that she was like, you know, a woman among children.  She was beautiful, she was smart, she was poised, and she was mature beyond her years.  And she was our class valedictorian.  And, and, and, and, and when they used to call her the iron petticoat, because she never would, you know, let any of the--she used, used to say, "I'm looking for a man, not boys like you."  And so even the coolest guys in my high school class could never get to first base with Jackie.  I always was intimidated by Jackie.  And Mrs. Williams told me when I was a senior, she said, "You're smarter than Jackie," said, "Jackie is very glib, but it's more going on with you than there is with her, so don't be intimidated by her."  And she signed in my yearbook, "To your--thy own best self be true."  And she was always--she--again, she just died recently.  She always remained interested in me for the rest of those years.  And I--and I was--I loved Mrs. Williams.  She never gave me a decent grade (laughter).  She was always very rough on me, but she encouraged me to believe that, that it--that, that I wasn't--there wasn't--I mean, I, I knew I was good in math, but she's the one who led me to believe that I actually had a talent for writing.  And, and--
Speaker 2: So what did you--what was--now this is high school you're talking about, right?  Just before you graduated from high school?
Speaker 1: This is high school, yeah.
Speaker 2: All right, yeah.  So this is at--this not at Taft (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is McKinley, McKinley Tech [McKinley Technical High School; McKinley Technology High School, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: --but McKinley.  Okay, McKinley Tech.
Story_ID: 642469
Speaker 1: What did you have in your mind that you wanted to be in high school [McKinley Technical High School; McKinley Technology High School, Washington, D.C.], or had you--?
Speaker 2: Well the assumption with me had always been that I was going to be some kind of a scientist.  Because I had always been interested in that, and I was really good at mathematics, and I was really good at physics and all that, that--those, those kind of things.  I was--I was far and away the best kid.  Again, I can say this without bragging.  I mean, I was far and away the best kid in the school at those subjects.   And I did ex- I, I, I, I, I did extremely well on the SATs.  I, I got--I was the first black kid from my high school to be a National Merit Scholarship finalist [National Merit Scholarship Program].  I did extremely well on all of those things.  And everybody just assumed that I was going to, to do that.  I guess I, I--I guess I assumed that too.  I never really thought about it--
Speaker 1: Now was (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) until, until later.  I mean, I, I--we'll come to that, but I just--I just assumed--and my dad [Jack E. White] was a doctor, so it just seemed to sort of make sense that I would, you know, go into something along those lines.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I, I would think that your, your, your father being a doctor.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: With your father being a doctor--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in those days I know it was often felt that a doctor was the highest attainment.
Speaker 2: It was.
Speaker 1: You could--
Speaker 2: I'm--I left out one teacher and I--that I should've thought of.  And, and this is--this, this guy actually in some ways is more influential than any of those others.  His name was Lateny Gulati [ph.].  His wife was a psychiatrist who taught at Howard [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.] with my dad, named Alice Gulati [ph.]--very--she's very famous in a--you know, among black psychiatrists.  Anyway, Gulati was a guy; he was extremely handsome guy from Jamaica.  He was a lot like [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte; very good looking guy.  He was an actor, and he was our English teacher when I was in eleventh grade.  And Dr. Gulati, or Mr. Gulati, was a person who first let me know that black Americans had actually written books.  He used to come in our class and he would read like 'Native Son' [Richard Wright].  Because he was an actor, he was in the- very emotive reader.  So he'd read all the parts.  I, I remember him--you remember the, the, the scene that's early on in, in 'Native Son' where Booker [sic. Bigger Thomas] and his friend are--they're in there talking about being pilots.  And he would read all of these things; or the pool room scene that's in, in that.  He would read it, and he would have a different voice for each character and another voice for the narrator.  And it was just absolutely captivating.  And through him I learned about Richard Wright; I learned about James Baldwin; I learned about Ralph Ellison.  And I went to the library in our neighborhood, the Woodridge, Woodridge Library [District of Columbia Public Library - Woodridge Branch, Washington, D.C.], 18th [Street] and Rhode Island Avenue.  And I read every book by black authors that I could find in that library.  They weren't--they didn't--it wasn't many, but everything they had.  That's how I first knew about, as I say, Richard Wright; James Baldwin; Ralph Ellison, I read 'Invisible Man' back then.
Speaker 1: But just a second here now.  Now here you are, you know.  Your parents know these professors from Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  One of your neighbors is Sterling Brown [Sterling A. Brown].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Rayford Logan I think is (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the street, right?  So they didn't--they didn't teach (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, my father was a doctor.  Now, you know, just remember now, doctors have their area of expertise, but it's not--you know, it doesn't--it, it may not necessarily extend over into literature and all the rest of this stuff.  I mean, my father is a very proud African American person, but he--I don't remember my dad ever reading fiction, ever.  He read medical texts.  You know, and he--I mean, he would read those voraciously.  He'd come home and study every day, but he wasn't reading, you know, this kind--my mother [Sara Williams White] was a big reader, but she--I don't remember her reading those books.  Maybe she did.  I know that she did later.  But--no, it was actually through Dr. Gulati and, and Mrs. Williams [ph.] later.  You know, it was my senior year teacher that I actually got exposed to all this, and mostly through Mr. Gulati.  Because he was the--I mean, he was--you know, he was ahead of his time.  He was a, you know--black scho- black studies type of guy in high school there.
Story_ID: 642470
Speaker 1: Now you, you didn't live close to the campus, you know--
Speaker 2: No (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) when you were growing up, but, but I would have thought that maybe the family would take advantage of campus life on some level, with all the luminaries that would attend or come to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] to speak, and that sort of thing (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, my--as I say, my father [Jack E. White] was not--he was not--even though he was a professor at medical school [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.], he was sort of in it, but not of it.  He was not--he was--he didn't belong to those, you know--he, he had been a fraternity guy, and he was an Omega [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity], but he was--he did not belong to those groups like the Boule [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity] and those kinds of things where--you know, the social groups, he just wasn't in that stuff; and my mom [Sara Williams White] was not in those groups.  So we weren't really--you know, we weren't really part of all that, that black bourgeois society in Washington [D.C.].  And as I say, I--I mean, I may have known about it, but, but, but only in some vague kind of way would I have known about it.  I guess--I guess my father--well, okay--this is--this I do remember.  My father used to know a bunch of poems by Paul Laurence Dunbar.  And he used to recite those poems to us; like, we'd be on car trips, you know, he would--, "Jump back honey, jump back" ['A Negro Love Song'], you know.  He would have all those things that he had learned in high school himself.  But he was not--you know 'cause of his medical thing, he didn't keep up with it after, after that.  You know, he wasn't a big culture freak, you know; he was a doctor.
Speaker 1: What about current events?  I mean--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, you know, we were--now that--now that, yes.  We knew--we knew about news, yeah.
Speaker 1: You get a lot--
Speaker 2: And don't forget--
Speaker 1: --of papers in the household?
Speaker 2: --don't forget this was a really exciting, big period.  I mean, we're starting in 1955 with the, with the Montgomery Bus Boycott.  And, and we used to--you know, my, my, my father used to take us down to Florida to visit his mother [Emma Clark White] who was still living at that time, and his brothers and sisters.  So we had to drive through the segregated South to get down there.  And it was always a very tense experience.  I mean, he would start putting his game face on to go down there days before hand.  He--it got to the point where when, when they--when they were finally able to, he would fly my mother and my sisters [Carole White, Sara White Gay and Marilyn White Holman] down.  And my, my, my brother [David White] and I--and he would drive in the car so that my sisters and my mother would not have to be exposed to all of the humiliations and indignities that, that black traveling could experience on the road back in those days.  They'd just fly over 'em.  And we had some, some memorable experiences.  I mean, I think that on the last trip that we went on, I, I didn't have my driver's license yet; one of my friends did.  And it was just gonna be my brother--my brother, myself, this friend who would help my father drive, and my dad.  And we drove down to--we were gonna drive down to Florida.  When we got to Savannah [Georgia], we didn't have a place to stay.  We didn't know anybody in the town.  'Cause, you know, back in those days, I mean, you would either--there were a few like black hotels and motels you would go to, but most of the time you'd, you'd either--you'd stay with friends, people you knew if you were lucky enough.  But in Savannah we didn't know anybody.  So we were driving around and my father saw a black guy on the street, and he asked him, you know, "Do you know a place we could stay; I got my kids with me; I got a--," and he took us to a place.  It turned out to be kind of a hot sheets hotel.  I don't think they had had any like, you know, (laughter) regular or so overnight guest and ever--they would--they took us in, they allowed us to stay, and it was--it was memorable for us because, you know, we had never been in a place like that.  You know, we were--you know, we were teenagers.  He--that, that, that whole--that--but that whole thing, being exposed to segregation that (unclear).  It was very formative for me.  We--there was--now in Miami [Florida], we used to stay at a place called the Sir John Hotel.  You might have heard of that.  It was a black hotel, and it was very fancy.  I still remember in, in my mind being--they had a--it was sort of built around a courtyard with a big sparkling pool in the middle of it.  And I--it was very glamorous to me.  I had never been in a place like that.  And back then, the black baseball players couldn't stay with their teams, so some of them would stay--when their teams were playing in Miami, they would stay at the Sir John.  I got to meet Frank Robinson; a guy who played for the Orioles [Baltimore Orioles] named Bob Boyd, and other people.  My dad was--you know, would, would, would just go up and we'd be--and introduce himself to these people, and they were very nice to us and very glamorous for us.  The Sir John Hotel no longer exists.  It was one of those black institutions that did not survive, in part because the City of Miami built a freeway through that neighborhood, and all that--a lot of those businesses were destroyed when that occurred.  But it was a very--it was a very glamorous pla- place for us to stay.  We used to go to Paschal's [Paschal's Restaurant] in Atlanta [Georgia], which was, again, you know, another one of these places--black owned place that, that--where you could live or stay and, and you didn't have any sense that you were experiencing any kind of inferiority at all.  I mean, it was really cool to be in these places.  Only later on that you realize that, you know, that you're--that you're living in a segregated society and relegated to some kind of second class citizenship.  But, yeah, we--but we were aware of it on those trips south when we couldn't get hotel rooms, when couldn't use restrooms.  And, as I say, when my father eventually made that provision so my sisters and my mom could just fly over it, and they wouldn't have to be exposed to those, those kind of indignities.
Story_ID: 642471
Speaker 1: Civil Rights Movement was really boiling when you were in school with the--
Speaker 2: It was--the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Montgomery Bus Boycott, and--
Speaker 2: When--well, the Civil Rights Movement and, and Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy].  Kennedy was elected in 1960.  I was a tenth grade- tenth grader [at McKinley Technical High School; McKinley Technology High School, Washington, D.C.].  The speech that he made when he was inaugurated, "Ask not what your country can do for you; ask what you can--," was very exciting for us.  It's also the Cuban Missile Crisis, all of that stuff, and the Civil Rights Movement.  Now we were taught in the D.C. school system [District of Columbia Public Schools] at that time a lot of phony, bad, bogus history about, about the United States.  In 1962, I took the civics course there.  This is the Montgomery Bus Boycott had ended, but the Freedom Rides had, had occurred; the sit-in movement had occurred.  You know, things were in ferment.  I knew--vaguely I knew Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture], who was a student at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] at that time.  And I had met, you know, a few, and I was--as I said, I was getting through Dr. Gulati [Lateny Gulati (ph.)]--or Mr. Gulati I was learning about black literature.  But I had my serious class or history class--I guess it was an American history class.  We were taught the old version of Reconstruction, the one that said that Reconstruction was a--was a horror inflicted on the white South and all the rest of this.  And because, you know, you're taught these things in school, you believe that it's actually--that it's actually true.  And so I'm getting these conflicting things going on, learning about--from Mr. Gulati about the, the--and, and from reading James Baldwin, in particular, a certain notion about what the Civil Rights Movement is.  I'm worshipping Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] at this time.  I'm really worshipping the young SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] students out there who are a few years older than I am, but they are--these are the people that--and I'm thinking if I wanna be like somebody, that's--this is--this who I wanna be like.  Now, throw- way throwback, when my father [Jack E. White] was in Boston [Massachusetts] and I as a little boy--he and my mother [Sara Williams White] used to socialize with some other black couples who were completing their education up there.  One was the Cobbs, and one was a Spellman.  The Cobb son is Charlie Cobb [Charles E. Cobb, Jr.] who went into to SNCC.  He's a couple of years old than I am.  When I was a toddler, he was a two year old, and we used to play together.  The Spellmans' kid is Karen Spellman, who went into SNCC, who's a little bit older than me and Charlie from, from--so, none of us knew about this connection and that our parents had socialized together, and we had actually known each other as small children until many years later when I was reporter.  And these guys were heroic veterans of the Civil Rights Movement, but our lives had intertwined.  Essentially, all, all of our lives we had been in some kind of connection with each other and didn't know.  All of these--but, I mean, I guess the question you really raise--I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: I'm sorry.  I'm--
Speaker 2: No, go ahead.
Speaker 1: --but is Charlie Cobb's father Montague Cobb [William Montague Cobb] or is he, is he (unclear)--?
Speaker 2: No, his, his father [Charles E. Cobb, Sr.]--
Speaker 1: This is a different Cobb.
Speaker 2: --was a--was a--was a minister in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, okay.
Speaker 2: He--who died a few years--but Charlie's a brilliant writer and--who became a journalist.  He wound up--he and Ivanhoe Donaldson, that whole crew, they were--they were in Mississippi doing heroic things during that whole period of time.  And Charlie's very--Charlie and I are very good friends now, but when we found out about this, that our parents had been friends in the 1940s in Boston, we--it was just a big shock.  And then when we additionally found out that Karen had been involved, that was an even bigger shock.
Story_ID: 642472
Speaker 1: You were talking about Charlie Cobb [Charles E. Cobb, Jr.] and some of the SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] people that you (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, the, the----well, I mean, the, the Civil Rights Movement for me--as I say, I started becoming aware of it in, in, in, in, in the time when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was involved in the bu- the Montgomery Bus Boycott, I, I, I, I worshipped later the, the students who were involved in the sit-ins in, at Greensboro [North Carolina] and otherwise, and the Freedom Rides I kept track of. I was a little too young and frankly a little too timid to be personally involved in the movement.  The first time that I personally went to a, a, a civil rights event was the March on Washington in 1963.  I had just graduated from high school [McKinley Technical High School; McKinley Technology High School, Washington, D.C.], and I was getting ready to go off to college at Swarthmore [Swarthmore College, Swarthmore, Pennsylvania] that September.  And I didn't belong to any organizations or anything, but I wanted to be down there.  So I got dressed up in a suit and tie, and I--and I rode the bus and I went down.  And there was this enormous, huge crowd of people from everywhere.  And they were, you know, if you think back on it, there was a lot of fear in, in the air.  People didn't know what was gonna happen because they knew hundreds of thousands of Negroes who were gonna come to New York--to Washington, D.C. for a demonstration, there was a fear that it was gonna get out of hand and was something was gonna go wrong.  Well that didn't happen, if you know, I mean, it was a huge, very, very orderly crowd.  I was in the--I was--all I did--I didn't know anybody.  I was just walking around with my jaw dropped the whole time.  I s- I remember I saw Odetta [HistoryMaker Odetta Gordon].  She was--she was--happened to be just there playing her guitar for some people.  I saw her and I, I was just amazed that--I mean, here was somebody I--you know, it was famous persons.  I, I, I walked--I mean, but they were just Negroes from everywhere and they had signs, and then we'd march.  And then I was in the crowd when Dr. King and others gave their speeches--I couldn't understand a word.  I was so far back I couldn't hear.  And not until I, I got home and watched it on TV later did I realize, you know, what had been said when he gave the I Have a (unclear)--I Have a Dream speech, but I knew what it was.  And, and I got to tell you, I wanted so much to be a part of this, not having any real idea about what it would take.  I mean, by this time, some of the people I got to be friendly with later, like Charlie and others were already deeply involved in SNCC.
Story_ID: 642473
Speaker 1: When I got to Swarthmore [Swarthmore College, Swarthmore, Pennsylvania]--
Speaker 2: Well let's--before, before you go to Swarthmore--
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: --I just wanted to ask you, was there anything special about graduation?  Did you have any special honors--
Speaker 1: My high school graduation?
Speaker 2: --or recognition?
Speaker 1: The remarkable thing was that I graduated (laughter) because--and I graduated.  I--as I say I was a very smart kid with very bad grades.  And somehow or other I had managed to get into Swarthmore, which is a very selective school.
Speaker 2: You said your math and science grades were high, was that?
Speaker 1: My math and science--but mainly my SAT scores were off the charts.  And Swarthmore decided to take a flyer on me.  They were trying to get, you know, some black students at that time.  But I was--
Speaker 2: Did they recruit you or--did they recruit you or did they, or did you?
Speaker 1: They came and Mrs. Williams [ph.], my, my English teacher, said, "You should go to Swarthmore because it is one of the best colleges in the country."  I only applied to two colleges: Swarthmore and Williams [Williams College, Williamstown, Massachusetts].  I didn't want to go to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] because my father [Jack E. White] was on the faculty there, and I thought that I would be--you know, I did- I didn't wanna be around a place where my dad was on--where I was known.  I was junior--I--you know, I spent all my life being Jack E. White, Jr. [HistoryMaker Jack White].  And when people would meet me, they'd say, "Oh, I know your father," and, you know, you could never get away with anything.  I didn't want to go to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] because Jackie [Jackie Lindsey (ph.)] was going to--this girl I mentioned earlier, the iron petticoat, was gonna go to Radcliffe [Radcliffe College, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and I didn't wanna go up there competing with her.  In retrospect, I probably would have been better off if I had gone to either Howard or Harvard and not gone to Swarthmore.  But in, in any case, I was on my way up there.  I, I was not a good student.  I had bad study skills.  I just--I got through by just brute force, 'cause I could learn anything, and I could regurgitate it.  And, and, and if, if I was--not a popular kid, but to the extent that I was--that I had friends, it was largely based on the fact that they could come to me and I could help 'em with their math homework.  You know, I--you know, they--I could--or I could--I did tutor; I, I, I taught kids physics and, and, and college algebra and trig [trigonometry] and, and we, we learned pre-calculus and all that.  And I could t- I could teach them all that stuff, so.  I mean, the youngsters who wanted to do well in those classes befriended me because they knew I could help them.  But as far as--other than reading like everything I could get my hands on, I wasn't any good in English classes and all that.  I hated--I, I didn't do homework, you know.  I, I was--and I was kind of, if you'll permit a profanity, I was kind of an all around fuckup back in high school [McKinley Technical High School; McKinley Technology High School, Washington, D.C.].  And I didn't--you know, I just--I just--I just--I wasn't disciplined.  I didn't--I didn't--I didn't have those kind of skills.
Story_ID: 642474
Speaker 1: (Laughter) When I think back on it.  I mean, I'm--I mean, like I say, the special thing about graduation was that I actually was there (laughter)--that I, that I got through because I was--you know, I mean, I wasn't a conformist.  I couldn't fit into that kind of stuff very well.  And I was always getting into some kind of minor trouble, you know--not, not any--not any criminal trouble, but just, you know, talking back to teachers or--you know, or cutting class or, or--you know, I mean, I'd go to the classes.  Like, like, I never missed Mr.--Mr. Gulati's [Lateny Gulati (ph.)] class--never missed Mr. Gulati's class.  But somebody else's class--.  And then, oh, I'll, I'll tell you this to give you a sense what I was like.  My--two of my friends and I had been through this accelerated math program so we, we ran out of classes we could take when we got to high school [McKinley Technical High School; McKinley Technology High School, Washington, D.C.].  They didn't--they, they couldn't go beyond a certain level so we took, we took trig [trigonometry] when we were in the eleventh grade.  Normally you'd take it in senior year.  And we hated the teacher.  And trig, you know, it's just a bunch of computation.  It's a--it's a--it's a no brainer; it's just something that you have to memorize and then you go through these procedures, and you, you know, you do the sine and the cosine and tangent, and you figure out the triangle.  You do all--it's a bunch--it's, it's just boring stuff; I hated it.  And some of my buddies, so we flunked the first sem- part of the semester.  It's a one semester course.  And my teacher, it's a woman named Ms. Brown [ph.], who was an evil old battle axe, said, "This proves that you should not be in this--," you know, "you all came here with those smarty pants, and you (unclear)."  So we got mad and buckled down in the second part.  We all got straight A's in the second part, wherein we--what was especially nice was one guy I really couldn't stand; he was a senior; and he was one of those people who was one of those--you know, his parents were, were in all those groups.  And he was Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.], which I couldn't stand the Jack and Jill people--could not stand them.  Because they--back in those days it was all based on skin color and all that crap, and social status.  I couldn't stand them.  They were all--they were not my friends.  They would--they would do things like they--like my best friend then and now is a kind of dark-skinned guy named Ron Smothers [Ronald Smothers] who's a--both became journalists later.  They said, "Why you hanging around with him?"  I had a girlfriend who I thought was beautiful.  They say, "Why you hanging around with that black girl?"  You know, they--these was the kind of things that these people would actually say.  Anyway, this one particular guy who was--he was a year ahead of us.  He used to wear his little leisure (unclear) outfit, I mean that's like the junior, the junior Omegas [ph.], you know, the school with the little cli- I hated his guts.  Anyway, he was like the best, smartest senior.  And he was one of the ones who say, "Yes, you all don't belong here and not sufficiently mature to handle this mathematics--."  So I said, well, we'll see.  Well we ended up--myself, Kenny Little [ph.] and Eddie Lynch [ph.], we ended up with the highest grades in the class the second part of the semester.  But it was all really to shut those people up.  But that (unclear)--but I was like I say, I was--I wasn't--I was not a g- I was not a good student.  I was kind of defiant.  I wasn't--you know.  And all that came out later on when I got to college [Swarthmore College, Swarthmore, Pennsylvania].  I didn't--I didn't do well in school--in college at all because of--because of my attitude, and because also by this time, I had really begun to identify with the Civil Rights Movement.
Story_ID: 642475
Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-three [1963] I go off to Swarthmore [Swarthmore College, Swarthmore, Pennsylvania], very interesting school (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is right after the March on Washington.
Speaker 1: Right after the March--directly from the--right.  That was in August.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I go to school in September.  Swarthmore was a very interesting place.  Among the people who lived in my little dormitory, there was a guy named Michael Meeropol, who was the--the son of the Rosenbergs [Julius Rosenberg and Ethel Rosenberg] who'd been executed as nuclear spies.  You remember earlier?  He was there.  There I met a bunch of guys who had been involved with the--with the drafting of the Port Huron Statement that formed SDS [Students for a Democratic Society].  They were like seniors and juniors when I was a freshman.
Speaker 2: Just--just a minute to go back to Michael Meeropol.  Had, had he changed his last name to--
Speaker 1: He was adopted--
Speaker 2: --because of the--?
Speaker 1: --after his parents were--he wa- he was adopted by a guy named Meeropol [Abel Meeropol], who actually wrote 'Strange Fruit,' the Billie Holiday song.  And he--and he--but he was in my dorm; he was a senior in my dorm.  As I say, there were--there were--there was guy named Carl Wittman.  There was a guy named Paul Booth, who had been involved--who were among the founders of SDS.  They were seniors when I was a--when I was a freshman.  There were a lot of people who were sort of involved in protests and left wing politics at that time.  And that's the crowd of people--I was a very naive youngster.  I had not--at that time, I had no- I had no politics at all.  I had not read Marx [Karl Marx], I hadn't read--I knew--knew very little, I was very naive.  But I fell in with these--this group of relatively sophis- sophisticated people, you know, Booth and, and Carl in particular.
Speaker 2: This is the old left.  These are the children of the old left that really were--
Speaker 1: Well, the new left.
Speaker 2: --steeped in--yeah.
Speaker 1: They, they were descendants of the old left, far- founding the new left.  Yeah, and they were a few years older than me, and they were light years ahead.  I met--I met--I met Tom Hayden back then.  He came, you know, to Swarthmore to meet with these guys; I mean, all these people.
Story_ID: 642476
Speaker 1: And at the same time, the north- the Civil Rights Movement was inspiring civil rights movements in the North.  Swarthmore [Swarthmore College, Swarthmore, Pennsylvania] is only a couple of miles away from Chester, Pennsylvania, which is a, a big industrial town where a lot of black people had come to work in the locomotive and, and shipyards in Chester, and the paper mill in Chester; that's where Scott Paper [Scott Paper Company] was located.  And they were living in terrible circumstances.  A guy named Stanley Branche was--had, had started a civil rights movement in Chester.  And this--these, these black radicals--or these white radicals at Swarthmore, who I mentioned, they had formed a group called the Swarthmore political action committee [Swarthmore Progressive Action Committee] who were--had aligned themselves with Stanley Branche--really supportive of him.  And I fell in with them.  And in 1963, in that, that, that October the issue of the condition of the schools where the black kids were going had reached a crisis point--really awful schools--they overcrowded decrepit schools.  They--the, the, the black community in Chester had been trying to get the attention of local officials there with no luck whatsoever.  They decided that demonstrations of the sort that they--we had seen--you know, remember by now, you know, Birmingham is, is--has happened.  The children--the little girls had been killed in the--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --church bombing--
Speaker 2: 16th Street--
Speaker 1: --there.
Speaker 2: --Baptist Church [16th Street Baptist Church, Birmingham, Alabama].  That very September (unclear).
Speaker 1: That September, that's right.  Right around in this period of time, we're--so we're going to have nonviolent demonstrations in Chester around the issue of the conditions of these segregated schools.  Twelve students, including myself--I was seventeen [years old].  And a group of people led--from Chester, led by Stanley Branche, went one day, stood in the schoolhouse door--(laughter) we were like George Wallace, only we were on the opposite side--stood in the schoolhouse doors, locked arms, sang freedom songs, wouldn't let anybody in--closed that school.  And we then went to the school administration building and sat in.  And we were sixty-some people, including twelve students, were arrested and sent to--including myself--sent to, to jail in Chester.  That's when I discovered that I was not really cut out to be a civil rights protester.  I may have had the desire to be, but unlike Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture], who I later got to know fairly well--you know, Stokely could jail, man.  He'd--Stokely--you keep--you put Stokely incar- in, in, in Parchman penitentiary [Mississippi State Penitentiary, Parchman, Mississippi], and he'd be singing freedom songs throughout.  He--you know, beat him, he'd come up laughing and smiling.  I couldn't stand it.  I--we were in jail for a few days.  I'd said I--this is not something that I wanna do.  And when we came out, you know, we read the articles written in the local newspapers about us, and they had completely misrepresented our purpose and made us seem like just troublemakers.  And I got--and it began to dawn on me at that time that what you said about a demonstration, what you reported about it was in some ways as important as the demonstration itself.  Because people who hadn't been there, they didn't know.  I mean, the only way they were gonna know about what you were doing was what they read in the paper or what they see on TV.  And I decided, wait a minute, maybe I could be a reporter; maybe this is--maybe my--maybe my contribution to the movement would be to be somebody who writes about this stuff, not somebody who, who participates, but somebody who sort of through his journalism--I didn't even call it that; I just called it writing at that point--through--you know, would, would, would help shape the way people saw what was going on.
Story_ID: 642477
Speaker 1: I mean, it was as they say, completely naive, I wasn't doing well in school.  You know, I was--same patterns I had of cutting classes and misbehaving, and all the rest of that kind of stuff, getting more and more involved emotionally with the movement, and I eventually dropped out.  I dropped out of school in my sophomore year (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) How long?  Oh, the sophomore year, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, to become--I wanted to become--by this time, I had written for the, the, the student newspaper there [The Phoenix].  I was flunking all of my classes, and my father [Jack E. White] was mad as hell.  And then another aside on this was while I was in jail--or after I got out of jail, my, my dad and I talked, and he blessed me out good.  He said, "I didn't," you know, "I didn't send you up there to school to get into all this trouble.  I sent you up there to study," and blah, blah, blah, blah.  But then I found out that he was going up to the hospital [Howard University Hospital, Washington, D.C.] and telling people: "My boy's in jail."  He was proud, proud of me for having been in the movement.  So it was a (gesture)--you know.  Anyway, I, I had determined at this point that what I wanted--I really did want to be--I wanted to be a writer, and I wanted to write about this movement.  As I say, I had no idea how you would go about it and to know what, what was happening.  I wasn't doing well in school.  I wasn't going to class.  I had pretty much determined I was gonna leave.  Swarthmore [Swarthmore College, Swarthmore, Pennsylvania] is, you know, is, it--I mean, there were only a handful of black students there, some of--some of whom are still my friends to this day.  We see each other every--we have a little reunion every two years.  We just had it here in Richmond [Virginia] this past summer.  Those guys that I went to school with, they were all much more focused on what they were--you know, what they wanted.  I was kind of all over the place.  I was trying to--one of--kind of person who was trying to find himself.  They already knew.  Or maybe they were just more terrified of their parents, or whatever it was.  They, they stayed focused and they went through.  I just screwed up.  I screwed the pooch in school and, and really didn't know what I had.  But anyway, I left school and I got a job at The Washington Post.
Speaker 2: Now, now that seems--did you have any idea before you left school that you could start working at The Washington Post?
Speaker 1: I didn't know what I was gone--how I was gonna do it, but I knew I want--I knew what I wanted.  I had a pretty good idea that I wanted to be a reporter, yeah.  I wanted to be somebody who was writing about the movement.  Well, you know, it wasn't clear to me.  I was a--I was a--I was--I was in--I was a worshipper of James Baldwin, but I didn't have that kind of talent.  You know, I wasn't--I wasn't a writer of the--Baldwin's type.  But I--if I had been able to write essays like James Baldwin, that's what I would have done.  If I had been able to write novels like Ralph Ellison, that's what I would have done.  But what I'd determined what I could do was be--was to do--was to do reporting.  I didn't--as I say, I was pretty naive about it.  I, I did- didn't have a college degree.  I didn't know what--you know, I didn't know what the hell I was gonna do.  I had no idea, you know, how you, how you go about this.  So I went down to The Washington Post, and I said, you know, "I would--I wanna be a reporter."  (Laughter) And they said, "Are you kidding?"  And I said, "Well, what can I be?"  And they said, "Well you can be a copy boy."
Story_ID: 642478
Speaker 1: So that's what I became: I became a copy boy, which is essentially, you know, an office boy.  But I was there in The Washington Post newsroom, which is the most exciting place I had ever been.
Speaker 2: This is nineteen (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A bunch of different things happened.
Speaker 2: --this is '65 [1965], right?
Speaker 1: I'm sorry?
Speaker 2: This is 1965?
Speaker 1: This is early part of 1966.
Speaker 2: Okay, early '66 [1966].
Speaker 1: Took me awhile to get this job.  I was living at home with my folks [Sara Williams White and Jack E. White].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Bunch of interesting things happened during that period of time.  I--one thing was I met Robert C. Maynard, who had finished his Nieman Fellowship at Harvard [Nieman Foundation for Journalism, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and had come from the York, Pennsylvania Gazette [The Gazette and Daily] to The Washington Post.  There were a handful of black reporters at the paper at that time.  Bill Raspberry [HistoryMaker William Raspberry] was there, Leon Dash [HistoryMaker Leon DeCosta Dash]; two guys who later went on to win Pulitzers [Pulitzer Prize].  Carl Simms [ph.] was a good friend of mine, and a couple of others.  But Maynard--oh, and Jesse W. Lewis [Jesse W. Lewis, Jr.], who as the--who was probably the, the lead black local reporter.  But Bob--man, I had never met anybody like Bob.  He was the c- to me.  He was from New York City [New York, New York].  He dressed great.  He smoked (unclear) cigarettes.  He had this New York accent, and he was just cool.  And on top of everything, for reasons that I didn't get at the time, he liked me; he took an interest in me from the--from the moment--.  I mean, I'll never forget I was sit- by this time, I had--I had worked myself up to be--a desk job.  I was a news desk assistant for the state desk at The Washington Post, which meant that I answered the phones, took messages, you know, helped them with clerical duties of various kinds, and was--oh, and was volunteering to cover stories in the evening that the regular reporters couldn't get around to.  Like I would go out--I, I still remember these acronyms.  I would cover meetings of the WSSC, which is the Washington Suburban Sanitary Commission; or the Washington-National Capital Park and Planning Commission [Maryland-National Capital Park and Planning Commission]; or school boards, and all this kind of stuff.  So I was going out almost every night and, and phoning these stories back in, and trying to learn on my own how to be a reporter.  So Bob, as I say, he meets me, and just immediately kind of scooped me up.  I don't why.  I don't know why.  And he kind of scooped me up, and he started doing things like, you know, going over my little stories and wri- you know, and showing me how to write 'em and stuff.  So it got to the point where one of the things I did--I'd, I'd answer the phone and people would be calling at about, you know, obituaries for family members.  And what I was supposed to do was just take the--you know, their name and telephone number and so on, name of the deceased person, and then give it to the obituary writer.  But what I started doing instead was I started doing an interview and calling the funeral home and hospital or, you know, (unclear) you needed a document of the stuff, and then writing the whole obituary myself.  And then I would give it to the--the obituary writer was--almost always the youngest reporter on the staff.  And it would already be done.  Well, you know, they weren't crazy.  They weren't--they didn't mind my, my doing this work.  I wasn't supposed to be doing it, but, you know, but I was learning how to do this.  And Bob would, you know, critique my little obits and help me with all that stuff.  He, he like--as I say, he would--he just started mentoring me at that time.  He--I guess he must have been thirty, and I was probably twenty-one or twenty-two [years old].
Story_ID: 642479
Speaker 1: I'm a long way now from my goal, right, of wanting to become a reporter.  But I started being able to do little stories.  Like the first--my first byline at The Washington Post was--it was--[HistoryMaker] Marion Barry at the time was heading--he had, had come to Washington [D.C.] to head the SNCC office there--Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee.  Well by this time, he and a guy named Rufus "Catfish" Mayfield [Rufus Mayfield] were running a poverty--anti-poverty organization called operation Pride [Pride, Incorporated].  And a kid had been killed by the police under bad circumstances.  And Rufus and, and Marion held a demonstration on the steps of the district building.  And The Post let me go down there and cover this story.  And I wrote a little like seven or eight paragraph story about the demonstration, it ran in the--ran in the paper; and they put my name on it: by Jack White, Jr. [HistoryMaker Jack White], Washington Post staff writer, even though I was a--just a copy boy.  Man (laughter)--oh, boy, nothing like it.  My dad [Jack E. White], you know, he's mad at me now 'cause I've dropped out of school [Swarthmore College, Swarthmore, Pennsylvania] and god knows what, you know.  But then my name starts appearing in the paper, you know.  His attitude starts to change.  I mean, you know, maybe this is not so bad.  Anyway, I'm just rolling along like this until July, 1967 when the person then known as the most notorious black militant in the United States, chairman of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee, H. Rap Brown [Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin], is going to go make a speech in Cambridge, Maryland, which had had a long history of racial turmoil.  And I talked The Post into letting me go over there and cover Rap's speech.  I got on--I--it, it--I was twenty-one years old.  I had on one suit--I had a, I had one suit.  I had this blue cord [corduroy] suit that I had just bought for my birthday, which was on June 30th, you know.  You know, what those things are like.  And a blue shirt and a blue bowtie, and it was this sort of monochromatic look, which I--which in my mind was hip at that point.  I must have looked ridiculous.  But anyway, I had this blue cord suit.  And I'm thinking I'm just gonna go over there and cover this speech, and I'm gonna do what I always do: I'm gonna phone back in and they're gonna write a little story about it, and then I'm gonna come home.  Well I get over there and Rap gives his speech.  You know, violence is America's cherry pie; le- you know, fuck Lyndon Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson]; I'm gonna shoot Lady Bird Johnson, blah, blah, blah.  You know, he's up on a, a hood of a car giving this speech, and he's haranguing folk and it's, it's going off.  And then after the speech, somehow or other he's walking up a street, and a nervous policeman fired off a shot at him.  One of the pellets br- grazed his head.  And then I--it's, it's not entirely cla- clear about the sequence of events.  But somehow or another a riot broke out.  A school--an elementary school there was burned to the ground.  The National Guard was sent in by then-governor Spiro T. Agnew [Spiro Agnew].  Rap went on the lam.  He subsequently became a fugitive and, and one, one of America's most wanted criminals hunted by the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation].  I ended up staying in Cambridge for three or four days, just wearing my same little blue cord suit.
Story_ID: 642480
Speaker 1: When I finally got back to Washington [D.C.]--my, by this time, these stories that I had helped report on had run on the front page of the paper for three, three days and running with my byline on them.  I get back to the paper, and I'm going to work in my--you know, my news desk job.  And a guy named Ben Gilbert, who was like a deputy managing editor sort of intercepts me on my way in.  He says, "White," you know, "come in here."  And he--this--he was a tall guy with a very kind of forbidding demeanor.  I was a little scared of him.  So he sits me down; he looks at me sternly.  He says--he says, "White,"   he says, "I guess we have no choice but to promote you to reporter."  And that big grin grins out--breaks on his face, and he reaches and he shakes my hand, congratulates me, and then he leads me out of his office.  And it, it--it's facing a newsroom.  And all these reporters out there, Dave Broder, all these big gun reporters.  And he says--he's got his arm around me, and he says, "Say hello to the newest member of our reporting staff, [HistoryMaker] Jack White."  And all these guys start applauding.  I--oh, man, I just--I'm so overwhelmed, you know.  Bob [Robert C. Maynard] had a tremendous amount to do with that because he had, you know, he had encouraged me; he had helped me.  It's--he actually had--my, my, my girlfriend--he had actually had us over to his house.  And you know, he kind of acted like a kind of a big brother to me.  And he, as I say, he was the coolest guy that I ever knew, and he was--he was a reporter.  I had--he was writing--he would--he had a voice.  I don't know if you've ever read any of his stuff.  He had a--he had the closest journalistic voice to the voice of James Baldwin of anybody who was writing back in those days.  And he was writing these pieces in The Post [The Washington Post] about the black condition that were just--to this day, I don't know anybody who can match that stuff.  And I, I was just oh--I was just overwhelmed by this.  I--and now I'm finally here--I'm a reporter; what I'm gonna do?  So I really didn't know what I was doing.  I was--they, they made me--I was a police reporter.  You know, go--at night.  That was the, like the beginning job.  You go down to 300 Indiana Avenue in Washington.
Story_ID: 642481
Speaker 1: Yeah, I had the, the, the good luck as a young reporter to have been there at the start of two of the major events of what they used to call the long hot summer.  One was at riot in Cambridge [Maryland] that I mentioned.  And the second was the, the one that broke out in Washington, D.C. after Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed in 1968.  My first reporting job at The Post [The Washington Post] was as a police reporter.  And that meant that you did one of three things: you either were at the police headquarters at--on Indiana Avenue in Washington; or you were in the office making what we used to call county checks, which is basically calling around to all of the police departments in the ar- in the, in the, in the area to find out if they had any police news; or The Post had a fleet of cars that had police radios and two way radios in it.  And everybody was assuming because riots by this time had broken out in many cities across the country--Watts [Los Angeles, California], Detroit [Michigan], Newark [New Jersey], Cambridge--that sooner or later something would happen in Washington.  What we did not know was that it was gonna happen after Dr. King died.  If you recall, Dr. King was in Memphis [Tennessee] at that time with the sanitation workers, and he was also in the process of organizing the Poor People's Campaign, was supposed to take place in Washington that summer.  I came in the office and I was told there seemed to be an awful lot of police out on Connecticut Avenue, go out and find out why they're there.  So I went out.  This was on April 4, 1968, about 5:30 or so in the afternoon.  So I went out there and I found out the reason is that President Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] was supposed to be making a speech someplace on Connecticut Avenue, and that these police are really just part of his routine security.  But while I was there, word came that Dr. King had been shot in Memphis.  And they said, "Go to 14th [Street] and U Street." That's where the Washington headquarters of Dr. King's Poor People's Campaign was located.  It was in what had once been I think a drugstore.  It was like a storefront building.  There are all these desks in there.  When I got there, Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture], who I knew slightly, was on the telephone to Memphis.  And I came in and I could hear his confronta- his conver- conversation.  He was dressed in the--you know, the SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] uniform, you know, the fatigues and blue jeans that the SNCC workers used to wear (unclear).  And I heard him say--he was talking to someone in Memphis, and I heard him say something like, "Is he still alive?  What--you know, how is he?  What's going on?"  Then I heard him say, "Oh no, oh no."  He--and I guess he'd just gotten word that he had--was thought to be dead.  Then he slammed down the phone, and he walked up 14th Street to where the SNCC headquarters was up--was a couple of blocks up the street.  And he didn't even seem to notice that I was there.  I think he was--it was almost like he was transported someplace else.  So he went in and he had--there were several people who worked with SNCC in the office.  And, and Stokely and I could hear them arguing.  He wanted to get the merchants on 14th Street to shut down their businesses as a sign of respect to Dr. King.  Some of the other people in the office wanted to be more cautious, because they knew the police were watching and, you know, they didn't want--you know, they didn't want SNCC to be seen as causing trouble.  And finally he jumped up and said, "That's it we're gonna--all I'm asking to do is shut down out of respect."  And he started going down the street.  I fell in right behind him.  I was as close to him as I am to you.  We went down 14th Street, and he would go into the various businesses like chicken shacks, and records stores, and whatever--little hairdresser and whatever, and said, "Close down.  Dr. King has been killed; close down."  And they did.  By the time we reached the corner of 14th and U, he had attracted a crowd of people who were following; and they were mostly young people.  We turned and went up U Street where a couple of movie theaters, hardware stores, and all these places--he was doing the same thing there, asking 'em to shut down.  When we came to the first movie theater, one of the youngsters, you know, had these big bags of popcorn?  Went behind the concession stand and got one of these big bags of popcorn.  And he came out and he broke it open, and people started eating popcorn.  And what had been a kind of a solemn kind of a thing--started that, that complexion of the--it started to change.  A little bit later somebody broke a window in the hardware store that was either next door or a block or a store or two away from the movie theater was this happened.  And we suddenly realized that things were gonna get out of hand.
Story_ID: 642482
Speaker 1: And then--again, I mean, there were--another reporter, Ron Smothers [Ronald Smothers], you know, my friend, and then Holly West [ph.], who was also with the paper [The Washington Post]--Smothers had--guys had come down there.  So we're sort of taking turns watching this and then phoning--you know, back in those days, you used to phone in to the desk.  It's the days before cell phones, you went to--with payphones, so you'd never leave the office without a, you know, pocket full of dimes to make phone calls.  So I'm running, you know, to make calls and then coming back and, you know, we're, we're, we're basically playing tag team while we're watching this event unfold.  Somehow or another, Stokely [Stokely Carmichael; Kwame Ture] comes out.  He's got a pistol--big pistol, which I guess looked like a .357 Magnum; who knows, a great big pistol.  And he's waving it over his head like this (gesture), and he's telling people go home.  And it's not clear whether he's saying go home and get off the streets, or go home and get guns, or go home and do something.  But he is saying go home.  And then he disappears; he gets in his car, and he's gone.  And what had started out as people--a group of people walking down the street collectively coming behind him, suddenly turns into a bunch of people breaking windows, you know, going in stores, getting stuff, looting.  Start of the Washington riot.  I had seen two of these events.  I don't know too many other people who were there right at the beginning of two of these conflagrations.  I wish I had--when I look back on it, I wish I had been more experienced at the time, because I'm really just basically taking it all in.  But I, I--you know, I didn't--and it was very chaotic.  It was very confusing.  It's hard to know all of what all happened.  I mean, I, I have--I have memories.  I've talked this over with, with Walter Fauntroy [HistoryMaker Reverend Walter Fauntroy], of Stokely at one point, crossing--going down 14th Street, crossing U Street, being confronted by Fauntroy, who was--you know, who was King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] representative in Washington [D.C.].  And Walter, who is a little, short guy, and Stokely, you know, who was a tall, broad shouldered guy, and Walter's grabbing Stokely and trying to get Stokely to stop leading this group.  And, you know, Stokely's just kind of, you know, trying to jerk away from him and, and, and get back to doing what he was doing.  But it's--a lot of it is just a blur.  I mean, it's a tremendous amount of activity was happening.
Story_ID: 642483
Speaker 1: Anyway, that was the start.  The next day, Washington [D.C.] went to hell.  Troops were eventually called in, paratroopers--real troops, not the National Guard.  There were--there were machine gun nests set up around the U.S. Capitol going around the White House.  There was rioting that came very, very close to the White House.  Many areas in the city were burned.  The incident that I told you about, about me and Matt Lewis [Matthew Lewis] riding around in Washington with this Wonder Bread, this is during the period of time we were doing it.  There were--Bob Maynard [Robert C. Maynard] was, was the lead reporter on all this [for The Washington Post].  He was da- doing incredible eyewitness reports of the violence and havoc that had taken--that had occurred all across the city.  It lasted for several days.  It was--it was unbelievable what had happened.  People who were flying into Washington that day told me that they could see a pillar of smoke rising from the city from, you know, fifty or sixty miles away in their airplanes.  I mean, it was--it was an enormous conflagration.  And (shakes head) you know, you just never thought that you'd see troops in Washington.  Now, I'm glad they came, and I'm glad they were the real troops and not, not National Guardsmen, because these guys were calm.  And when they show up, nobody was gonna challenge 'em.  Nobody was gonna mess with 'em.  A lot of them were black.  They didn't get excited.  When they heard--they knew the difference between a gunshot and a backfiring car, so they weren't just gonna be blasting off, you know, haphazardly, the way the National Guard had done in, in Michigan and, and, and, and, and New Jersey.  It was a good thing.  They, they, they calmed the city down.  It was a good thing that they were there.  But this horror show that happened to me--and this is my--essentially my hometown.  I ne- I never thought I would live to see the day I would see tanks rolling down Rhode Island Avenue, but I did.  And--
Speaker 2: So the activity was basically concentrated around U Street and 16th [Street] (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It started at--it started at 14th [Street] and U.  The main--there were si- there, there--most of the violence and burning occurred in that area; it was around 7th Street and Flor- which is also Georgia Avenue, going up toward Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  All of that--much of that area was destroyed and took thirty or forty years before it was rebuilt.  Thousands of people were forced to relocated and moved out of that area because of the destruction.  It was nothing left--no, no grocery stores, and lots of housing had been burned, all kinds of stuff.  It was just--it's really, really awful at the end.  I mean, but most of it would, would have been located in those inner city neighborhoods around 14th and U Street, going up to 7th.  It was also a lot of--a lot of violence and burning in Anacostia, in Southeast and Southwest Washington.  And all--every sort of ghetto community in D.C. was damaged.  I mean, down there where the thing started at 14th and U, the only business that was left untouched was Ben's Chili Bowl [Washington, D.C.], which--
Speaker 2: Famous Ben's Chili Bowl.
Speaker 1: --is still in, in business; very famous place now.  But Ben's Chili Bowl escapes the riot unscathed, because even rioters have to eat--have to eat something.  So Ben's Chili Bowl was not touched, but every--but virtually every other bu- every other business in that area was looted and, and, and/or burned.  And all those businesses folded up.  They all moved out of there.
Speaker 2: Were these mostly white businesses or?
Speaker 1: Most of them would have been white owned businesses.  I mean, there were, you know--I mean, not exclusively, but they were mostly white owned businesses. And they, they were--there--a lot of--a lot of 'em would have been sort of, you know, clothing stores selling overpriced ghetto fashions and, and, and, and, you know, cut rate furniture and all those kinds of places, you know, easy credit; pay, pay, pay one dollar for the rest of your life, you know, those kind of places.  And, and, and, in fact, there were efforts made to try to show that there was some kind of a--of a pattern to the rioting that the, the--that, that, that, that somebody had deliberately targeted stores that were seen as being exploiters of black folk.  But I don't think anybody ever conclusively demonstrated--I think it was just random.  I think that they just--people just went after whatever was, was available.  I don't know that there was any organized revolutionary activity really during the war, even though--during the riot, even though I think people attempted to make--they made claims like that, I never--personally I never believed that that was any of that.
Story_ID: 642484
Speaker 1: You know, you had--you know a lot of people had this kind of romantic vision that we were on the verge of some kind of black revolution in this country at that time.  Well, in retrospect, nah, no, that's not true.  We just had a lot of talk about it.  And we had a lot of anger, had a lot of violence.  And a lot of trouble happened, but there was never--it was never a serious--I mean, there may have been in some of those counties in the South where I later ended up going to report.  There were et- there were things going on there that were tantamount to the revolution in the sense that you had people taking political control of districts where they had always been oppressed.  But that's not the same thing as this sort of, you know, revolution that these--the--that--you know, some of the young big talkers would make you think was occurring.  I mean, the rhetoric was (laughter)--the rhetoric was off the wall in those days, but the reality of it was so different.  You know, I mean, they--look, black power had become the fashion.  Black is beautiful had started to become the fashion at this time.  People were wearing Afros, wearing dashikis.  They were talking about--you know, the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party] were around, so, you know, the, the idea that, that violence was gonna be the great equalizer was, was out in the air.  All of these things were happening.  But when you look back on it, the truth of the matter is it really didn't matter; it didn't amount to a hill of beans, in terms of really threatening the stability in the United States.  You can cause trouble, but you couldn't really shake the foundations of the thing.
Story_ID: 642485
Speaker 1: I had not long after this, a personal situation that had got in the way of my career for a while.  I had fallen in love.  And the girl [Barbara Caines White]--I wanted to get married.  She wanted to get married.  Her parents was skeptical of me, but she somehow convinced them at that period of time that they should, you know, accept me as their future son in law.  And as I said, I was a big fuckup in those days.  My reaction to it was such that I just quit my job and that was it.  I just wanted to be with, you know, with her.  And it took me awhile to get back on track again.
Speaker 2: So did, did you quit the job at The Post?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: You just--?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I don't--you know, thinking back, I'm, I'm--look, here at twenty-two years old, you're a reporter on The Washington Post (unclear) (laughter).  And not only that, you're a reporter and everybody thinks it's so promising and, you know, that you're--that you're gonna be able to do great things.  You've got Bob Maynard [Robert C. Maynard] as your mentor.  You got all of things going--what are you doing?  You know, well you're twenty-two, you're in love (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What was the--what was the necessity of quitting a job, if you're getting ready to get married?
Speaker 1: I wanted to be with her.
Speaker 2: It seems like you would--
Speaker 1: I didn't wanna be--
Speaker 2: --you would--
Speaker 1: --in Washington [D.C.]; I wanna be--she was in somewhere (unclear).
Speaker 2: Oh, she was somewhere else.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So you had--you--
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.  I didn't wanna be in Washington; I wanted--you know, so.  Anyway, so I ended up, though--here's how stupid the whole thing is.  I ended up--I couldn't find--get another journalism job right away, so I ended up taking a job with a--with a consulting firm called TransCentury [TransCentury Corporation].  Now the way that I first knew about TransCentury was--remember I mentioned that all these buildings had been burned down and stuff.  It was one block on, on 7th Street or Georgia Ave- I guess it was on 7th Street.  And there was one building standing.  And it turned out--everything else had been burned down.  It turned out this was TransCentury.  So I went and did a little story about why is this building still standing?  It turned out this was a group that had been founded by all of these former Peace Corps volunteers.  They wanted to do, you know, work--anti-poverty work and whatnot.  And they had let the rioters store their stuff in the--in their building.  So (laughter) people didn't--you know, they didn't have anything worth stealing in there, but they'll let people keep their, you know, stuff they had looted from elsewhere in the building, you know, TV sets and all that kind of stuff.  So they didn't wanna burn it down.  But anyway, I--but it made it sound like they were connected with the community, but actually they were just you know letting people stash their (laughter) stolen goods in there.  Anyway, I went to work for them.  And they, they had a contract with the--what was then called the Department of HEW [U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare] to try to improve community health services in these low income areas.  And all, all the people working there were like ex-Peace Corps volunteers and stuff, and I became part of this group.  And we went--we went out to Fresno, California for a few months--made complete fools of ourselves, trying to encoura- you know, trying to--'cause we weren't from Fresno, we didn't--you know, I mean, in a sense, be homegrown.  Anyway, we go (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So you're trying to organize people out there or (unclear)?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, organize people, but you really couldn't--we really couldn't do it.  I mean, it was a white guy who was a nice guy.  But he was the head of our team.  He had been a Peace Corps volunteer in South America.  He spoke good Spanish, and there were a lot of Hispanic people around there.  But he wasn't gonna be able to motivate anybody to--you know, to do anything, and neither was I.  But I fell in with a guy named Les Kimber, who was trying to start a black newspaper in west Fresno.  He called it the Fresno--west Fresno Advocate [sic. The California Advocate].  And Les and I remained close for the next thirty years.  I got more out of writing for Les' paper than I did working with the TransCentury group.  And I began--and I was rekindled and reminded that what I really needed to do was, you know, get back to journalism.  That was what I was supposed to do (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now--
Story_ID: 642486
Speaker 1: You quit the job to--at the, at The Post [The Washington Post]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in order to get married or, or, or--?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: You quit the job at The Post in order to get married.  Did you get married?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you marry the per-
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, her name is Barbara Caines [Barbara Caines White].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we got married.  We had a bunch of kids.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We're not married anymore (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So was she out in California with you (unclear)?
Speaker 2: No, she was in Newark.  We--she was in--she was--she--her--she's from Newark, New Jersey.  She remained in Newark.  I was originally gonna try to be in Newark with her, or we're gonna be in New York [New York], but I couldn't find work there so I, I took this job with TransCentury [TransCentury Corporation].  And that's why I say how crazy it is, 'cause I ended up not being able to be with her until for a while anyway.  So anyway, and Les, Les [Les Kimber]--I helped Les create this newspaper [The California Advocate].  Now I'm trying to figure out how to get back to the East Coast, how to get back into journalism, how to get back with this woman I wanna marry, and all of these things.  And something called the Frederick Douglass fellowship program [Frederick Douglass Global Fellowship] was created here in Richmond, Virginia.  It was started by a guy named Ray Boone [Raymond H. Boone], who was at the time the editor of the Richmond Afro-American newspaper [Afro-American Newspapers], black owned newspaper.  And a guy named Frank Adams who was a white guy who was I guess had been an ex-newspaper man, but who had sort of become a human rights activist.  And they were gonna take a dozen young black kids and train us how to be a reporter.  So I said well there's my ticket, you know.  And I, I came back here.  This was in the summer of 1969.  One of the, one of the--and we were connected with, you know, with the Richmond Afro.  So it was part of what we're doing in writing these stories.  I remember I was here when they landed on the moon the first time.  And one of the stories I had to do was: what is the reaction in the black community?  So I went to this pool hall on 2nd Street, which at the time was like the main drag in Jackson Ward, which is the main black community here in Rich- in Richmond.  And the guys--I said, "Well what do you think of landing on the moon?"  He said, "Mad; ain't nobody land on the moon.  You know, that's, that's just some guys in the TV studio putting that on."  I said--he said, "You know, you, you Negroes, you--that's what s- you Negroes will believe anything white people tell you; they tell you some white man landed on the moon and you, you believed them."  I said, "Well the Russians, you know, they've got radar; if they didn't really land on the moon, wouldn't they be able to tell?"  He said, "The Russians are white too; they in on it."  So I came back and I wrote this story about, you know, skepticism about that.
Story_ID: 642487
Speaker 1: But also during that time, I'm still trying to figure out I mean how to get me a real job so I can get married to Barbara [White's first wife, Barbara Caines White].  And I cannot remember the name of this group.  But there was a--it was a group of people affiliated I think with the Urban Coalition in New York [New York Urban Coalition].  And they were--you remember the, the Kerner Commission [National Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders] had come out in 1968 with this report saying that, you know, you needed to increase the numbers of black journalists, so I think this was the Urban Co- it was either the Urban Coalition or the Urban League had started this group in New York [New York].  And they were recruiting blacks who wanted to be journalists.  And I went up there and I took the test, and--but, you know, I--you know, by this time I'd had all that Washington Post [The Washington Post] experience and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So you already (unclear).
Speaker 1: --you know, and I said I can do this stuff, right.  So I wrote this thing, and they, they were (gesture)--and there's a job they had that I really wanted.  'Cause remember all this is in my mind that I really wanna get back south.  I really wanna cover the Civil Rights Movement.  I really wanna get married, and I really wanna do real journalism; I wanna do all these things.  It was an--it was a new group in Nashville, Tennessee, it was called the Race Relations Information Center.  It had grown out of something called the Southern Education Reporting Service, f- supported by the Ford Foundation [New York, New York].  The job of SERS was to keep track of school desegregation in all of the southern areas.  It was an extremely confident, capable organization that had an amazing reputation; some very, very fine journalists had worked there.  But by 1969, the Ford Foundation was no longer interested in backing them.  So they had come up with a new proposal to create something called a Race Relations Information Center, which essentially was gonna broaden the mission of SERS, and cover race relations in this entire spectrum in the South.  I thought that's for me.  There were four--there was one--an executive director, his name was Robert Campbell [Robert F. Campbell, Jr.].  There were four staff writers.  I became the youngest one.  The others were a guy named Jim Leeson [James Turner Leeson Jr.], who had been at SERS; a guy named John Edgerton, who went on to become one of the best writers and historians of southern history and culture--best on the Civil Rights Movement, and is still a very dear friend of mine; a guy named--black guy named Bernard Garnett, who came from Ebony and Jet, who was the--who, who was a protege of [HistoryMaker] Simeon Booker; and myself.  And, man, the next two and a half years we tore it up.  We did brilliant journalism.  I covered everything I wanted to cover and mostly in the South.  I went to Mississippi.  I went to Alabama.  I went--I covered [HistoryMaker] Charles Evers' run for governor.  I covered the murder of the campaign manager of a--of a SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] veteran named John Buffington who was running for mayor in this small town called West Point, Mississippi.  I covered the, the, the strike by sanitation workers in Jackson [Mississippi].  I went everywhere.  I went to California to cover the Panthers [Black Panther Party].  I went--I just--I mean I--and I wrote well.
Story_ID: 642488
Speaker 1: We could--at that time, we could write long form pieces.  'Cause we had--we started a publication called the Race Relations Reporter, came out every two weeks.  I've got some around here I'll, I'll show you later.  We did everything.  Bernie was good--Bernie Garnett [Bernard Garnett] was good.  He wrote about John Cashin [HistoryMaker Dr. John Cashin].  I remember one, one brilliant story about John Cashin, who was the main black civil rights leader in Alabama at that time.  We just--we did everything.  And then Barbara [White's first wife, Barbara Caines White] was pregnant.  We'd been down there a couple of years.  The funding for the, the Race Relations Information Center [Nashville, Tennessee] was, was mostly from the Ford Foundation [New York, New York].  It was get- getting iffy, and I figured I needed a stable job 'cause I was getting ready to become a dad.  And back in those days, back in the early '70s [1970s], the annual conventions of the Urban League and the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and other black organizations were big journalistic deals.  You'd go to the NAACP conventions, and The New York Times would have four reporters there.  They'd have Charlayne Hunter [HistoryMaker Charlayne Hunter-Gault]--that's before she married Ron [HistoryMaker Ronald T. Gault]--Charlayne Hunter; Earl Caldwell; Tom Johnson, who was the big--the big gun; Gerald Fraser [C. Gerald Fraser]; sometimes Rudy Johnson [Rudolph Johnson].  They'd have four or five reporters there.  Everyone of 'em was writing a story every day.  Now, you know, they have those conventions and nobody shows up; no journalists come.  But back in those days they were all there.  Maynard [Robert C. Maynard] would come; [HistoryMaker] Francis Ward from the L.A. Times [Los Angeles Times]; [HistoryMaker] Les Payne from Newsday; [HistoryMaker] Vernon Jarrett from the Chicago Sun-Times.  All of the--I met--that's where I met all of these people.  And I also met--one year, though, the, the Time magazine--or Time Incorporated [Time Inc.] always had its relationship with the National Urban League.  And I met at one of those conventions--I m- Urban League convention--I met a guy named William Trent, who was a black guy who had at one time headed the United Negro College Fund [UNCF].  A guy named Linen [James A. Linen III], who was a big executive at Time Incorporated, was the chairman of the board at the Urban League at that time.  And Bill Trent recruited me to come to Time.  I had this pregnant wife.  I needed a real--I needed--I figured I needed real stability--you know, this, for this family I was about to have.  And Bill Trent said (unclear), you know, come to work at Time, and I did.  In 1972, my son was born February 1st in 1972.  And I went to work at Time the first week of April, 1972.
Story_ID: 642489
Speaker 1: Just to go back a little bit, in 1970, Earl Caldwell, who later became one of my, my very best friends, was a reporter at The New York Times, who had--he had been the only reporter to--who was present at the Lorraine Motel [Memphis, Tennessee] when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed.  And he subsequently was sent out by The Times to San Francisco [California] to cover the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party].  And Richard Nixon's [President Richard Milhous Nixon] justice department [U.S. Department of Justice] decided that they wanted Earl to inform on the Panthers for them.  They were really going after the Panthers, who were seen as a, a serious threat to stability.  And they thought--they--you know, J. Ed Hoover [J. Edgar Hoover] and all that crowd thought that the Panthers really could get Negroes up to--to rise up.  Well Earl refused.  He said that his sources had to remain confidential.  He said he could not testify in front of a grand jury because that would undermine his relationship with these sources--these news sources.  These people that were reporting, they wouldn't trust him because they would think he was informing on 'em.  That summer in 1970, a meeting was held in Jefferson City, Missouri.  It was attended by a very large percentage of all the black journalists who were at that time working for any white controlled publication.  And the idea was that we were coming together to support Earl Caldwell and his resistance of the attempts to turn him into a spy.  There were seventy-five or eighty black journalists at that meeting.  There was a large contingent led by [HistoryMaker] Les Payne from Newsday; Home- all of the--all of The New York Times guys; [HistoryMaker] Francis Ward from the L.A. Times [Los Angeles Times]; lots of TV and print journalists from all over the country.  And they were--there were so few of us doing this stuff at that time that you actually could know or know of almost everybody in the business.  So getting seventy-five of us into one place at that time was, was--you know, if you'd dropped a bomb on that--on that, you know, you would have killed off a very large percentage of the--of the black journalistic community in the country working for white, white press at that time.  And we formed in that--in that group something called the National Association of Black Media Workers, which was the forerunner to what later became the National Association of Black Journalists.  There was a very--it was a very emotional meeting for a lot of reasons.  One was, you know, the black reporters, they were all frustrated at that time.  We were--we were really kind of--you know, we were pioneers in an--in an industry that historically had been extremely segregated.  We were not really trusted I don't think by our white editors, and we were fighting to get freedom to tell this story the way that, you know, we thought it needed to be told.
Story_ID: 642490
Speaker 1: Some funny things happened out there.  Like, Claude Lewis, who was in--I think he was with the Philadelphia Bulletin then--he might have been The Inquirer [The Philadelphia Inquirer].  But Claude was a very prominent journalist at that time.  Somehow or other everybody was supposed to stay in the, in the dorm at the Lincoln University--it's a black school [HBCU] in Jefferson City [Missouri].  They got one look at that dorm and everybody headed to the Holiday Inn.  And somebody got the, the penthouse suite in there.  I think maybe it was Earl [Earl Caldwell].  And that became party central.  While--so where we, we're having these serious wrenching meetings about journalistic issues and how do we cover the black community and all this stuff, and then everybody's getting drunk and hanging out at Earl's place.  So Claude--he's wearing this--his SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] stuff, you know, 'cause we used to wear the you know blue jeans and, and (unclear).  And, oh, we had stopped to get this enormous watermelon.  (Laughter) And he's bringing this watermelon into the, the Holiday Inn there in Jefferson City, and that's like the mo- the ultimate cliche, right?  A black guy in dungarees carrying a watermelon into this f- into this white hotel.  (Laughter) I remember everybody got a big laugh out of that.  There were all kinds of emotional breakdowns.  Like, of--one, one of the--one of the kids who had a white wife got upset because people started saying, you know, if you're married--if you like white people, you're not really a true black person.  And he got upset and started breaking chairs.  And then somebody--I guess it started when one of--one of the guys had brought his white wife actually into the meeting, and one of the women there said, "You know, excuse me, but, you know, are you black or are you white?"  And this started the whole thing where this guy is breaking chairs.  And then there was a fellow named George Foster.  He worked for CBS.  He was a really sweet guy.  He was--George, though, was--he was the darkest human being I think I've ever known.  So one of his friends jumped up and said, you know, "You can be black and be married and (unclear) a white woman, like my friend George Foster here."  And he pointed to George.  I, I thought George was going to melt under his--under his chair.  I mean, he was so mortified this.  And there were actually people talking about, oh, my god, you know; I may have to leave my wife because of all of these con- I mean, it was really--all this stuff was going on.  Because this is the--like this is the late--this is the late '60s [1960s], early '70 [1970].  All of the emotional stuff that was happening, and it seemed like it all just came out at that meeting.  But nevertheless, we somehow still managed to form this group [National Association of Black Media Workers].
Story_ID: 642491
Speaker 1: And Earl [Earl Caldwell] and I started to get to be friends, and he was gonna be going to Mississippi.  The Times [The New York Times] was working on some big project about the Civil Rights Movement, or the blacks in the South or something.  And I went down to Mississippi.  It was my second time in Mississippi.  And I met with him, and he and I traveled around together.  I was working for the Race Relations Reporter.  He was working for The Times.  We--and we, we bonded, and we, we covered a lot of stuff, inclu- for the next few weeks we were all over the place.  We got kicked out of hotels in Memphis [Tennessee], and chased by the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] in western Tennessee. And a bunch of stuff happened to us that we--that we still talk about.  But that was--you know, it from the start of my relationship with Earl.  And then, of course, his case ultimately went to the Supreme Court [United States v. Caldwell, 1972], and the court found that he did not have a right to protect his sources.  But the reaction was that in all the states across the country, the, the state legislatures passed shield laws.  So you'd have state level protection for journalists being able to refuse to name their sources in these--.  We don't have a--you don't have a federal protection for it, but you do have it on the state level.  So in that sense--in that sense, you know, he, he won his case.  And it's one of the big showdowns between, between journalists and the, the press.  That happened all in the same context of the Pentagon Papers and all of those--and Watergate a little bit later and all the rest of them; big deal.
Story_ID: 642492
Speaker 1: That's the kind of experience that I had had covering the movement and all of these kind of things.  I go to Time in '72 [1972], what do they do with me?  They made me the junior writer in what they called the modern living section, which was about fashion, cooking; all the most trivial stuff in the world.  I mean, I had--you know, I saw myself as being--and I was--a reporter who would cut his eye teeth covering the Civil Rights Movement, or the tail end of it.  So what am I doing?  I'm writing about all of the stuff I didn't know anything about and didn't care anything about.  On the other hand, I'd wrote a few things pretty well.  I remember I--they had--they had had--I wasn't the first black person to be a writer at Time.  There were two other guys who were there.  And, in fact, there was--well when I--the first office I was in, I not- I noticed every day for my first week or so there, the people would walk by and they'd say, "Hey, Bryan, how you doing?" "Hey, Bryan, how are you?"  Well what I found out later was it was another light-skinned guy named Bryan Mason [ph.] whose last day on the job had been like Friday.  And my first day was Monday, and they put me in the same office that, that Bryan had been in.  So people see another--I mean, we have vague resemblance to each other.  People seeing me, they thought I was Bryan and just kept speaking to me.  I mean, so it's like, you know, they all look alike thing.  But this was like--you know, it was bizarre.  I didn't know who this was.  But there were two other black guys writing, and one was a guy named Jim Randall [ph.].  He is the nephew of Dudley Randall, the great black poet.  And the other guy was a guy named Sam Washington [ph.] who had--was from Chicago [Illinois].  Neither one of them was doing well.  Time was a very, very difficult place for a black journalist to succeed in those days.  There were a few black reporters out in the bureaus.  There were--a guy that I knew well named Paul Hathaway in the Washington bureau [Washington, D.C.].  There were--Joe Boyce [HistoryMaker Joseph N. Boyce], who I later became very good friends with in the Chicago bureau [Chicago, Illinois], and another black fellow in the Chicago bureau.  Wally Terry [Wallace Terry], who was I think the first black correspondent in the history of Time, had left.  He had already been--he had been in the Washington bureau for Time and had also gone to Vietnam [Vietnam War].  He was in the process of, of putting together the book that later became 'Bloods' ['Bloods: An Oral History of the Vietnam War by Black Veterans'] at that time.  But Wally had come and gone; he was teaching at, at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  By strange coincidence, I'm currently (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Bloods' was the book on the Vietnam War, just to--just to reference it, just a little bit.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry?
Speaker 2: It's the book on black soldiers in the Vietnam War?
Speaker 1: Yeah, black, black--yes, it's a black about black soldiers in Vietnam--very at- tremendous book.  By a strange coincidence, Wally was married to a woman named Janice, Janice Terry [Janice Jessup Terry], who is the wife of my current--a sister of my current wife, Gayle Jessup's [Gayle Jessup White].  So Wally and I, we were--you had both--both of the Jessup girls married Time correspondents.  And if Wally was--if Wally were still living, he and I would be brothers in law.
Story_ID: 642493
Speaker 1: I got to Time and I, I did--and I, I had to write that crap for a long while.  I mean, and I was--I--you know, I, I--Timestyle at--Time in those days was not written in normal English.  It was written in the, the famous style called Time-ese that was once parodied in The New Yorker, "Backwards ran the sentence until reeled the mind" ['Time, Fortune, Life, Luce,' Wolcott Gibbs].  You know, it was a very uncharacteristic language that I had to learn.  I was lucky that I had a couple of editors who were nice to me--my first editors.  A guy named Leon Gerald [ph.], who was my first editor, who was very good to me, who be- actually became good friends with my dad [Jack E. White].  And a woman named Ruth Bryant [ph.], she was the first woman senior editor at Time, who was also encouraging to me.  Eventually it got to the point, though, where I was able to get away from that trivia, and I went to the, the business section, where I was writing--again, I didn't know anything about the economy or business, but, but it was more substantial fare than what I had been doing, so it was more satisfying to me.  But I was always scheming to try to figure out how am I gonna get to be what I really wanted to be: a reporter.  Back in those days, Time split those functions.  You had people who did nothing but write.  And you had people who did nothing but report and write these long things called files, which they would turn over to the writers.  And the writers would then rewrite them into Time-ese and put them in the magazine.  Well I wanted to be a reporter.  My chance finally came in 1974 when I proposed a cover story on the black middle class.  And it was accepted as an idea, and I was asked to go out and help report it, which I did.  My work was--that was considered by them to be so--there were now--it was some funny lines.  Just to give you an idea of how, how off the wall Time magazine was in those days.  We were writing this story about the black middle class, right?  And there's a line that appears--you could find it in this story that appeared in 1974.  It said, "The black middle class is a pale reflection of its white counterpart," (laughter).  Nobody caught that.
Speaker 2: That is good.
Speaker 1: You know.
Speaker 2: That is good.  That's--
Speaker 1: They, you know, they, they just--they were--they were--they were so high and they were so arrogant back in those days.  You know, they were--another famous story then--when the Attica riot occurred [at Attica Correctional Facility, Attica, New York], they, they wrote a cover story about it.  And they said, you know, what--they said that to buck up their courage, the prisoners passed anonymous poems, crude but touching in their would be heroic style.  And the poem that they quoted was 'If We Must Die,' (laughter) one of the most famous poems to come out of the Harlem Renaissance, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Claude McKay.  Right.  Claude McKay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Claude McKay, and they're saying--
Speaker 2: Used by Churchill [Winston Churchill], you know.
Speaker 1: Yes by Churchill.  And they're saying--they described this as, "Crude but touching in its would be heroic style."  That's how arrogant--
Speaker 2: Its "would be" (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and high handed those people were.
Speaker 2: --"heroic style."  That's--
Speaker 1: You know, so.
Story_ID: 642494
Speaker 1: But anyway, I get--but I got--I was--I was given the opportunity to transfer from what they call the edit side to become a correspondent in what was then known as the Time Life News Service in the Atlanta bureau.  And I could not wait.  I went to--I went to Atlanta [Georgia]--this would have been summer of 1974 to the Atlanta bureau.  Maynard Jackson was in his first term as mayor--was a very exciting time, so the ripples of the Civil Rights Movement were still being felt all across the South.  It wasn't like it is now.  You still had--most of Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] lieutenants--prominent lieutenants were still alive and p- doing things.  Ralph Abernathy, for example, was still around at that time.  Andy Young [HistoryMaker Andrew Young], [HistoryMaker] Julian Bond and, and [HistoryMaker] John Lewis from SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] were in town.  Vernon Jordan [HistoryMaker Vernon E. Jordan, Jr.] had, had just left--had had given up the VEP [Voter Education Project] and was running the Urban League [National Urban League] by this point.  But I knew him.  So Atlanta was a very exciting place to be.  Everybody lived in Cascade Heights [Atlanta, Georgia], which was sort of like the, the neighborhood where the--where most of the black middle class was.  A lot of that is dispersed now, and people have moved out to the suburbs, but--I mean, my neighbors included Maynard Jackson, who was the mayor, who was--had just been--you know, had just been elected maybe a year before I got to--before I got there.  And I had a roaring good time.  It was--it was when I was in my late twenties.  I was working at Time magazine, which meant I had--back in those days, that was one of the most important publications in the world, which meant essentially I could get in to see anybody.  I'd call 'em up and say I'm from Time magazine, and people would return your calls.  I mean, they would--they paid attention.  Jimmy Carter [James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] was governor, and that was exciting.  Because he was the New South governor and, you know, he was--now a footnote here.  There was a guy who had been governor of Virginia named Linwood Holton before Jimmy Carter became governor who I think actually should have gotten the kind of recognition that Carter ended up getting, because I think Linwood Holton actually was a more courageous and, and, and groundbreaking politician than Jimmy Carter was.
Speaker 2: Now did Holton defeat Lester Maddox or what?
Speaker 1: No, he was in Virginia.  He was not--different state.
Speaker 2: I thought he was in Virginia.
Speaker 1: He was here, but (unclear) he was governor of Virginia.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: And he--you know, for all--Virginia was the leader, along with Mississippi and Alabama--the leader in resistance.  They used to call it massive resistance here.  They closed down public schools rather than integrate 'em in this state.
Speaker 2: The whole state, the whole (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was--this was the mean, not--rotten, you know.  They used to say, if I'm--you know, it's more in North Carolina.  I used hear pe- North Carolinians say that we live in a--in a slough of humility between two mountains of conceit, meaning Virginia and South Carolina.  In Vir- in South Carolina you had those crazy ass rednecks, you know, like Strom Thurmond.  And then in Virginia you had these patrician races, like, like the Byrds who were--but they were as mean as Mississippi here.  Anyway, Linwood Holton got elected governor, declared an end of massive resistance, put his little children in public schools in Richmond, Virginia with black children, and changed everything.  He is the father in law of Tim Kaine, who just got elected senator here--former governor here.  He never got the kind of (unclear) that Jimmy Carter got when he went--when he came into Georgia--hung Martin Luther King's picture in the state capitol [Georgia State Capitol, Atlanta, Georgia], stopped segregating--you know, started bringing in Andy Young as his main advisor, and all the rest of this.
Story_ID: 642495
Speaker 1: Anyway, it was a very exciting period of time, and I, I did--I did every kind of doggone story you can think of.  Man, I was all over the place.  And I also was able to--because I had been a writer in New York [New York], I was able to do something that few Time correspondents were able to do.  You recall I mentioned that back in those days, we used to split the journalistic function: you had correspondents who just reported, and writers who just wrote.  Well because I had been a writer, I said well let me do something, we call it writing the space, which meant that instead of writing these long files that somebody could rewrite in New York, I was actually gonna go out and report stories and write them myself for publication--on a--almost unheard of.  But I did it.  You know, little colored, colored Jack [HistoryMaker Jack White], you know, because he's done this.  And I did a whole--I was one of the pioneers of this writing this space stuff that, that happened at the time.  And that, that changed the way that they--that they produced the magazine.  I was very good.  I wrote all kinds of stuff.  I did--I mean, I can't even remember all--everything from, you know, invasions of fire ants in Alabama to--
Speaker 2: I read that.
Speaker 1: --persistence of segregation academies in, in, in, in--all across the South to the Joan Little case in my hometown, Washington, North Carolina, where there--she was the woman who was accused of stabbing a jailer in that little town.
Speaker 2: Famous song about her by Sweet Honey in the Rock--they wrote the song about--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --Joan Little ['Joanne Little'], yeah.
Speaker 1: And she became famous.  She had to stand trial there when she was captured.  She was acquitted.  You know, the--she--the guy had forced a sex act on her, and she had killed him with an ice pick.  But she did it because she was being abused, and she was found innocent.  I covered politics.  I covered--I mean just about everything.  I mean, it was--it was--it was a wonderful two and a half year experience.
Story_ID: 642496
Speaker 1: I applied for a Nieman Fellowship at Harvard [Nieman Foundation for Journalism, Cambridge, Massachusetts] 'cause I was feeling my lack of, of formal education a little bit at that time.  My friend Bob--friend and mentor, Bob Maynard [Robert C. Maynard], was on the selection board that year.  I didn't know it.  When I talked to him, I said, "I'd like to do this," and he--, "and would you write a recommendation for me?"  And he said, "Well would you rather that I write a recogni- recommendation and recuse myself from the selection committee, or would you rather for I--me to be on the committee?"  (Laughter) I said, "I would rather for you to be on the committee."  I had Austin Scott, who was a prominent reporter for the AP [Associated Press] at that time, was a--also a friend.  Austin wrote my recommendations for me.  I got--I got the Nieman.  And by this time, I'd also been told that, that, that I should start thinking that--that sooner or later I was gonna go to Africa for the magazine.  The chief of correspondents Murray Gart [Murray J. Gart] had sort of handed to me that he thought that might be something that was in--you know, in my future.
Speaker 2: Now, now had NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] been officially formed before you went to (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) NABJ was formed while I was in Africa.  I was not here--I was not here.  The other organiza- there were--there were a bunch of, of black journal- local black journalists organizations had been--had, had jumped up.  There was something in New York [New York] called 'Black Perspective' ['Black Perspectives on the News'].  There were--like at most major cities where there were--were--where there were sort of a--sort of a, a group of certain size of black journalists, they had, they were trying to form something.  The--this National Association of Black Media Workers had kind of run its course; it didn't--that didn't last very long.  But people wanted--they wanted there to be an organization.  They wanted us to have a voice of some kind.  Because everybody, no matter where they were, we're all experiencing the same thing--all experiencing in the same thing.  And journalism is, is, is all about perspective and how your (unclear)--it's not just about gathering the facts.  It's about how you add up the facts and what you make of 'em.  We believed--and were--most of the black journalists at that time had been brought in to cover the black community.  This is why we were hired, why we got promoted.  We felt, collectively I think, then that this was a--that we had--that we had to be in some ways the voice and the interpreters of the black community over and against an ignorant, callous, and sometimes racist media.  You would have thought we were in a kind of a war.  That's when I first started to get in--in a (unclear) kind of way, my, my own conception that what my job at the--at Time was in a way kind of an extension of the Civil Rights Movement.  It, it was part of the--and I stopped thinking of the Civil Rights Movement as a thing in itself, but to me it did--that became part of a much longer and larger thing.  The black liberation struggle, which had started the day that the first blacks set foot on this continent and was going on.  This was just one phase in it.  And that my job at Time was to try to im- open up--I mean, you gotta remember at that time there were very few sort of national media in print.  Time was a worldwide media.  It was very important.  If you put somebody on the cover--like we put Jimmy Carter [James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] on the cover.  He later became president.  A lot of people thought that him getting on the cover of Time had a lot to do with him getting to be president.  I started feeling my job is to enlarge this fear in which black journalists can write like black journalists and un- you know, consciously, without any kind of apology about these racial matters in this very important magazine.  And that started to become my mission.  And that got refined when I was--when I was a Nieman Fellow, I got--you know, I had a chance to meet black professors at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] who helped me think this process through, like [HistoryMaker] Martin Kilson and all them (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Who--okay.
Speaker 1: And Orlando Patterson.  I, I, I grew--I grew up a little bit, you know, during that period of time.  And I started getting more of a self conscious notion of--that I was a--I wasn't just having fun, but I was--in a way, it's looping back to my original ideas about, you know, I wanted to be a reporter because I wanted to help tell that story of the Civil Rights Movement.  This is--but this was--this was more specific.  This was how I was gonna make my contribution, was my opening up that space.  And essentially, that's what I devoted the rest of my career at Time doing.  And I did everything--I did a lot of other stuff besides cover the black community.  But I always saw it as paying dues so that I could get back to doing what I wanted to do, which was tell that story of, of, of black Americans.
Story_ID: 642497
Speaker 1: So anyway, I was at--I was at, at Harvard [Nieman Foundation for Journalism, Cambridge, Massachusetts] for that year.  Barbara Reynolds [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Barbara Reynolds], who is Jesse Jackson's [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] biographer, was my Nieman classmate.  One of my sons was born, was born while I was there.  I studied African American politics and, and African history and politics to prepare myself for this idea that I was gonna be going to Africa.  It took a while before it did, but I di- I did get there.  I, I--when I finished my Nieman Fellowship, I stayed in the Boston bureau [Boston, Massachusetts] for a couple of years.  And then I--oh, in a year--I guess a year and a half.  I came back to New York [New York] as a writer in the world section, which covered international affairs.  And then in the end of nineteen seventy--that would have been '78 [1978]--at the end--and again, that was part of the grooming process for me.  They wanted to increase my understanding of international affairs.  And then at the end of 1979 I was transferred to the Nairobi bureau to be Time's Africa bureau chief.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I had responsibility for all of Africa, from south of the Sahara down to the--what was then called the frontline station.  Recall that the fight against apartheid was happening at that time.
Speaker 2: Now that's a lot of territory.
Speaker 1: A lot of territory.
Speaker 2: That's a lot of territory to cover (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was just me.  I had a bunch of part-time correspondents spread out all over the--all over the continent.  But I had forty-four countries.  I never did get to all of them.
Speaker 2: Was Nairobi [Kenya] chosen because of its stability or what?
Speaker 1: Well, yeah.  I mean, at one time--it was chosen for a number of reasons.  At one time, Time had had a bureau in West Africa.  It had been located in various places in West Africa, and usually in Nigeria.  It had a bureau in East Africa which was in Nairobi, which was--Nairobi was the best place for communications and, and it was a stable country.  And it had a bureau someplace in, in southern Africa, usually in Johannesburg [South Africa].  By the time I got there, the West Africa bureau had been--was shuttered.  There was no longer a West African bureau.  The bureau in Nairobi had been there for long, long time.  But it was--by the time I--as I say, there was one--there was a guy named Eric Robins who was a retired Time correspondent--still around.  But there was only one active full-time correspondent for all those forty-four countries, which was me.  And, again, I had a picnic; it was great.  I had forty-four countries.
Story_ID: 642498
Speaker 1: The biggest story in Africa when I arrived was the looming independence, and the black--looming black control of the country, then known as Rho- Rhodesia, on its way to becoming Zimbabwe; that was one.  Another big story was in the Horn of Africa: the crisis between Somalia and Ethiopia, which had produced extraordinary instability in that area and a huge refugee problem.  In Central Africa, East Central Africa, the fall of Idi Amin and what was happening in Uganda; in West Africa, the emergence of, of Nigeria as a--as a--as a--as an important oil producing country and, and, and the most populous country in Africa and a--and, and, and, and a potential--it was thought at that time, a potential African superpower.  And I got a little piece of all of those stories.  I went to--I was in--I was in Zimbabwe when the election was held that, that brought Mugabe [Robert Mugabe] to power, along with Bill McWhirter [William McWhirter], who was the Time correspondent in Johannesburg [South Africa], who was the primary--I was just there helping out.  I wrote stories about how they--the, the rebel armies led by Mugabe and a fellow named Joshua Nkomo were being brought together with the--with the white army of Rhodesia to form the first Zimbabwe army and other things.  I wrote--in Somalia, I wrote about the Ogaden desert, which is a region--belongs legally--but belongs to Ethiopia--that Somalia claimed was actually part of its territory where they had just fought a bitter war about a year before I got there--that and the huge refugee crisis in, in, in Somalia.  I wrote lots of stories in Uganda because Idi Amin had been kicked out, was tremendous instability there.  It's, it's some--actually, some fairly amusing things.  Like, one of the first presidents who, who--they had a series of governments.  One of which was led by a guy named Godfrey Binaisa.  He was a roly poly little lawyer who had spent most of the Amin years working in New York [New York].  And he brought a--after Amin fell, somehow somebody convinced him to come back to Uganda and become the president.  Well I mean, poor Godfrey, he didn't have a clue (laughter) about what it would take to be a president of a country like that.  And his, his chief advisor was some guy he knew from New York--had been like a carpet dealer--you know, a cut rate carpet dealer in New York.  And they're, they're trying to run this country, and they're making a mess of it.  He eventually got--he got overthrown and, and--
Speaker 2: Did he stay alive?  Was he able to get--?
Speaker 1: I think that he, he may have died--he came back to New York, he may have died a couple of years ago.  I think The New York Times ran a--saying, you know, Godfrey, he's a lawyer, former president of Uganda (laughter).  You know, I mean, he--poor guy, I really felt sorry for him 'cause he had no business being there.
Story_ID: 642499
Speaker 1: Also in 1980 was the year that the--Liberia underwent its revolution.  Liberia was just a country founded originally by, by freed slaves from the United States who had gone and sort of created a mock democracy in, in, in, in which they were the elite, and the--and native born Africans were on the bottom.  That government was overthrown by a fellow named Sa- Samuel Kanyon Doe [Samuel Doe], Sergeant Doe, and a group of other--what they would call--what they called country people, meaning distinguished them from the Americo-Liberians who were at the top--overthrew in a bloody coup the Americo-Liberian revolutionary.  And my friend Leon Dash [HistoryMaker Leon DeCosta Dash] at The Washington Post and I, and some other reporters were the first one- first journalists to reach, reach Liberia after that, that coup occurred.
Speaker 2: Was there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And we were witnesses when they hauled the previous government ministers down to the beach, latched them to telephone poles and shot them down in front of the TV cameras all over the world, and was a horrible event that, that, that--you know, that ushered in two or three decades of instability in Liberia.  It's, it's only now, in, in 2013, you know, has stability been restored under the current government of, er- of a woman, Ellen Johnson Sirleaf--or Sirleaf Johnson.
Speaker 2: It's Johnson Sirleaf, yeah.
Speaker 1: She, she was a--she tried--she was a World Bank official at that time.  She tried to help Sergeant Doe, was illiterate, you know, and in over his head, and a brutal thug, who--you know, he's every bit as bad for Liberia as the Americo--Americo-Liberian elite that he overthrew.  Interesting country though.  We used to go there because it was so much--it was like going to the United States.  I had spent all that time in the Deep South.  And Liberia reminded me of like Mississippi in a funhouse mirror.  It was--I mean, the, the currency was--was old, used American dollars.  Their flag was like the American flag, but just with one star on it--star on it, instead of fifty.  Their--they drove around in Chevys [Chevrolet] there.  The, the national police wore uniforms that looked like, you know, a state trooper.  The city cops wore uniforms that looked like New York State.  They had post off- postboxes and post mailboxes that looked like ones here.  It was--and they spoke in, you know, kind of thick sort of accents that were vaguely reminiscent of some other accents I had heard in Mississippi like that.  It was very--a very weird place to go.  On the other hand, we could get real peanut butter there, which is something new.  You know, I mean, Africans don't eat peanut butter in the same way that, you know, Americans do.  You could get real ice cream, real hamburger.  It was a lot of, you know, contact between--cultural con- cultural correspondence between Liberians and--a lot of whom had actually not only had that historical tie but had studied in the United States and traveled back and forth.  So it was--it was good to be there.  It was almost like going home in a way, but--you know, paying a visit home, but, but in this funhouse mirror kind of way.  And also, the place was crazy because Doe was nuts, and the country was just reeling from one crisis--and I wrote a lot of stories in Liberia because of that.
Story_ID: 642500
Speaker 1: And I did a lot of time--spent a lot of time in Nigeria because it was emerging as a more--very important country, and I wanted to understand it.  The first time I, the first time I went to Nigeria is in 1978.  It was before I had been--was assigned.  And you, you, you may have heard, Nigeria is a very difficult country to, to function in, especially if you don't know anything.  And, and they also were, were hostile to journalists--foreign journalists at that time.  So Vice President Mondale [Walter Mondale] was supposed to be making a visit, you know.  I went to their embassy in Washington [D.C.], and I applied for a visa.  And they kept my pa- and my trip--I was gonna go first to Nairobi [Kenya] and then go over to Lagos [Nigeria].  My trip--my plane was coming and I had to go.  So I went--you know, they had my passport for a couple of weeks, and I hadn't heard anything.  So I went and I asked the council lawyer, you know--and he said, "Oh, I'll fix you right up."  And he stamped something, and then he gave me my passport.  And being naive, I thought I had a visa.  So I went to Nairobi; I spent a few days in Nairobi.  And I was, you know, walking around--my first time in Africa, and I'm seeing people.  And I'm thinking, god, these people look like everybody I know back home; that guy looks like Uncle Willie [ph.]; and that looks like Uncle Arn- and that looks like my friend Charles Harris [ph.]--wait a minute!  That is Charles Harris.  He was--he was on his first trip, and we ran into each other right in the--at a prominent meeting place in Nairobi they called the Thorn Tree [Thorn Tree Cafe], which is a cafe there.  It was both of our first trip.  Then we sat around and drank a beer and talked about how wonderful Africa was.  And I get on this airplane, and I fly out to Lagos.  And I get off, and I go up and I hand my passport to this burly official.  He (gesture), and they grab me, and they put me in a room for about fifteen minutes, and then they put me back on the airplane.  I said, "What's going on, what's going--?"  They say, "You don't have a proper visa; you may not enter Nigeria."  And I had to fly all the way back to the United States.  Because planes didn't stop; it was going--coming all the way back here, right?  It was Pan Am flight [Pan American World Airways].  So I'm really embarrassed, and I don't know what am I gonna tell Murray Gart [Murray J. Gart], who's chief of correspondents, you know, who had sent me to Africa and, blah, blah, blah.  I'm really--and who's a tough guy and, you know.  So I called Murray, and Murray reads me the riot act and all the rest.  And he says, "Call up--ambassador in Washington and find out what's going--."  So I called the state department [U.S. Department of State], I get them to call the ambassador.  And the ambassador is very apologetic; they don't want an incident.  The, the vice president to the United States is (unclear), I don't want any trouble.  They get my passport.  And I get it back one day later, and it's got a visa in there.  And it's a letter from the ambassador ex- you know, who extend all courtesies.  So I fly back to Lagos.  This is about three or four days later.  I get off the plane; I'm walking up.  And this same guy--I swear to god--is back there.  And I walk up to him, you know.  And he said--he says, "Didn't I tell you you're not--you know, you're not welcome in Nigeria?"  I said, "Please, sir, look."  So he looks at my passport, he reads the doc- .  So he looks at me, he looks at--and then he--big smile--he says, "Welcome to Nigeria!" (Laughter) And he shakes my hand, and I went--
Story_ID: 642501
Speaker 1: Okay, now I'm in Nigeria, but I'm like four or five days late.  So I, I, I've got to get to my hotel.  They have like the worst traffic there.  You know, you get--getting from the airport to, to Lagos [Nigeria] proper is--can take hours.  And you're stuck in this traffic jam, and people are like selling everything.  You know, they're selling fishing reels, and toilet seats, and meat on a stick, and peanuts, and newspapers--every dog- it's like a traveling carnival.  'Cause you're gonna be stuck, and these people are--they're very entrepreneurial; they gone be selling you stuff.  And I'm like (gesture), you know--I get to the hotel.  And naturally, I'm four or five days late.  They didn't--they'd never heard of me.  I said I have to stay someplace.  And they said, "Well, we will put you--we'll find a closet," literally, and they put me in a closet.
Speaker 2: In somebody else's room or something?   Or, or--
Speaker 1: No (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) off from (unclear)--
Speaker 1: I'm telling you, no, no.  I mean, these are Nigerians, man, they (laughter) you know, they will screw with you.  So they put me in this closet.  And I sw- I wept.  I was so frustrated, I wept.  The next morning, I woke up and I said, before I--I'm through, I'm going to have learned how to get done anything I wanted to get done in this country.  I'll just fast forward to my last reporting trip on the--before I--I went back one other time but--before I came back to the states.  This is when Pope John Paul [Saint Pope John Paul II] came to Nigeria in 1982.  When his plane landed, they brought a plane load of foreign correspondents.  They all came to the hotel to get rooms.  You know, who they had to go through to get their rooms?  Me.  In that two day--in that period of time, I had figured Nigeria out.  I had made all kinds of friends.  I had a girlfriend.  I was married, but I had a girlfriend there who was the daughter of a former foreign minister of Nigeria, a guy who had refused to let Henry Kissinger visit Nigeria.  He was on the International Olympic Committee.  He just died a year or two ago--Henry Adefope.  His daughter Folake [Adefolake Adefope-Nedd], who was my girlfriend, and she was my navigator through all this stuff.  And I knew how to function in Nigeria by that time.  So these guys wanted to get rooms.  I had to take 'em to the guy who was controlling all the rooms; helped 'em get their--got 'em all these fancy foreign correspondents set up so they had rooms, and all the rest of that.  That's the difference between 1978 and 1982.
Story_ID: 642502
Speaker 1: Leon [HistoryMaker Leon DeCosta Dash] and I traveled all over the place.  We covered, we--again, 'cause you don't wanna be by yourself in those circum- in situation where there'd been a coup or conflict.  'Cause you want somebody to watch your back in all those times.  So we--he was my--we had known each other before from The Post [The Washington Post].  We traveled together for several years, and were--we're still, you know, tight buddies and friends.  We covered--the Liberia crew, we covered all kinds of stuff in Nigeria, including a horrible--and it's sort of foreshadowing some of the, the trouble between Muslims and Christians that's, that's happening, and Islamist groups allied without Al-Qaeda that's happening in northern Nigeria now.  We covered an uprising in Kano, northern Nigeria, in which ten thousand people were killed, in 1981.
Speaker 2: These are--these are the Muslim--Muslims killing Christians?
Speaker 1: What?
Speaker 2: Muslims killing Chris- Christians or?
Speaker 1: It started out as Muslims killing Christians.  It ended up with the armed forces being brought in to suppress the violence, and they basically shot everybody.  The Nigerian Armed Forces are not known for their tenderness toward people who were not doing what they're supposed to do.  In fact, well, again, I remember one of the things I saw was at a soccer (unclear) field there, they had--were shoes lined up.  This is where the people who had been brought and kneeled and shot; they left their shoes lined up as a very graphic reminder to everybody else who was inclined to cause any trouble, that you're, you're not going to cause any trouble.  Or if you do cause some trouble, you won't be causing any trouble for very long.  I mean, everything is very--a lot of stuff is very elemental in, in, in Africa at that time.  It was not--I mean, you could have--in Nigeria in particular.  Because it's such a big, heavily populated country, you could one day be meeting with some extremely sophisticated, you know, Oxford [University of Oxford, Oxford, England] educated intellectual, or somebody like Wole Soyinka, who I got to know a little bit--and having this very high brow conversation.  And the next day, as I say, you could be someplace where they had lined their shoes up, because the--because the, the authorities had killed these folks.  They were--when the pope [Saint Pope John Paul II] came in '82 [1982]--again, it was, this dissidence was also evident there--he gave a sermon in Enugu, which is in eastern--most Catholic part of the country, eastern Nigeria.  Two million people came; biggest crowd of people I've ever seen.  We had to drive for a half an hour to get, you know, past that.  Well they had Nigerian policemen mounted on horses.  The pope, the prince of peace is you know, on this mountain--this artificial mountain, you know, delivering the Christian me- Catholic message of peace and love.  The Nigerian policemen are whipping the crowd to keep them in line while all of this is going on.  I mean, it's not--it's, it's--you got this--you know, you got these two things happening.  You've got this great tradition of civil liberties in Nigeria on the one hand.  On the other hand, you know, you have had a series--up until recently, you had a series of brutal military dictatorships keeping everybody in line.  So on my last trip there in 1993, I went to cover a, a, a, a, a human rights demonstration, and they sent in the (unclear) squad.  This is police whose insignia is a, a nightstick with wings on the shoulder.  They sent them in with tear gas.  And they put so much of it down, it was reportedly at least one child there--a baby there--it was--died, you know, as a result of inhaling teargas, so--
Story_ID: 642503
Speaker 1: It's very rough places.  You see enormous beauty.  You can see--or like Ugandans, you, Uga- individually, Ugandans that I got to know--and I got to be friendly with many of them--were some of the loveliest, gentlest people you could meet.  And then they'd get in groups, man, and they'd start killing each other like mad.  You know, you, you, you, you could have--you could have something like an Idi Amin in the Uganda--even though you had these beautiful, wonderful, gentle, loving, nicest folk you could ever wanna be around.  They could be transformed instantly into somebody who was killing a next door neighbor, you know.  It's very--you know, just human nature.  And you could see in Africa the whole array of human behavior, from the very coarsest and worst, to the noblest and best, sometimes all in one day.  I mean, I, I--you know, I, I mean, I--as a journalist, you know, for a magazine like Time, you're basically, you're covering disasters of one kind or another, whether they be a coup, wars, refugee crises, famines--I covered famines in East Africa.  You know, so you're always being exposed to like the worst things that can happen to people 'cause that's what the Western press at that time was interested in; those were the only stories.  But, you know, there--but there's another side of it of enormous beauty.  I mean, I love--I love Africa.  I love Nigeria, even though it's a crazy, chaotic kind of place.  I, I can't think of any place--I can't think of any place where I've had--I don't even--the word--fun is not the word; a connection with, with people; and, and just a feeling that these are--these are people I want to know, and I want to be--I want to--I want to understand them.
Story_ID: 642504
Speaker 1: Can you talk about the, the African journalists that you met there?
Speaker 2: Well I did--I did know--it's been a long time.  I can--I could tell you about some of them.  One of my best friends is a guy--is a Nigerian journalist named John Chiaman [ph.].  I met John in Zimbabwe.  He and another Nigerian journalist named Nick Fadugba had been sent by--John was sent by Nigerian TV.  He was a TV correspondent at that time.  And Nick was sent by a publication called AFRICA magazine, which at that time was, was being published--had been sent to cover things.  We--so Earl [Earl Caldwell], Earl--oh, and Earl was--I forgot Earl was, was in--was in Zimbabwe at that time too.  Earl and I had rekindled our relationship from--you know, from Mississippi and all the rest of that.  And we were--and we were covering stuff in Zimbabwe.  And we got to know Nick and John, and John and I became great friends.  When I went to--he was like--he was kind of like the, the, the, the Mike Wallace of, of Nigeria at that time; he was a very prominent, very excellent reporter.  He speaks about six languages--some European, some African--extremely well educated--smart.  And there's nothing--there is nothing in this world smarter than a smart Nigerian.  I mean, that--you--I mean, you have really got--you know--that's why they were able to develop such amazing criminal schemes to get going.  Anyway, John and I became very good friends. I got to know his, his family, his, his, his two daughters he had with his first wife, his daughter he has with his second wife.  We remained friends all these years.  He was--he was a guy who practiced journalism in a way that a Western journalist would practice: with independence, probing, all the rest of it.  But he subsequently be- became a correspondent for Reuters in Nigeria.  And then he--he's retired now, you know.  And he ended his--he wound up his career in South Africa for them.  In--I knew a bunch of Kenyan journalists whose names I--the only one I remember was Hilary Ng'weno who published a weekly--a magazine called The Weekly Review--it was an independent publication.  But I knew--I knew a lot of Nig- of Kenyan--a lot of Kenyan journalists.  They had a hard time because the--you know, we have this notion of press freedom.  And ostensibly, press freedom exists in all these African countries, but the truth of the matter is, there is--there is the word and there is a reality, and it ain't necessarily the same thing.  Those guys had to frequently thread the line.  Hilary, who was also a novelist, has written a bunch of really--he, he goes by an African name now, Ngugi wa Thiong'o I believe he was called (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, Ngugi wa Thiong'o.
Speaker 2: His name back then was--
Speaker 1: He changed it--oh.
Speaker 2: --Hilary Ng'weno.  And he published this magazine.
Speaker 1: That's the same as Ngugi wa Thiong'o?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's the same guy.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause I thought he was James Ngugi.
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: What--was he James Ngugi at one time?
Speaker 2: He was name- yeah, his name is Ngugi.  Yeah, I, I may be mispronouncing his name.
Speaker 1: No, no, it's--
Speaker 2: It's, it's the same guy though.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he, he was a courageous, independent journalist.  He wrote honestly about corruption in the Kenyan government, which was rife at that time.  I always made a habit--I never wrote anything about Kenya unless I had to, because I did not want to--I mean, that's where I lived; that's where my family was; my kids were in school there.  I didn't wanna do anything that was going to possibly get me a relationship with the government, 'cause I was a guest there.  I wanted a place where I could come back and live--you know, and live reasonably stable life.
Story_ID: 642505
Speaker 1: Did African journalists give you stories that they couldn't write themselves, or, or--
Speaker 2: Not in--
Speaker 1: --you know?
Speaker 2: --not in--not in Kenya.
Speaker 1: Not Kenya, okay.
Speaker 2: N- no I mean, John [John Chiaman (ph.)] would help in, in Nigeria and things like that.  But, no, I didn't have that kind of relationship with them where they would do that.  And Time wasn't--you may--maybe the AP [Associated Press] or somebody else might have been able to do stuff like that.  But a lot of countries I was going to I didn't--you know, I would--I mean, I was--it was helicopter journalism.  You know, you would--you got forty-four countries to cover.  You're not gonna be spending a whole lot of time in a bunch of 'em.  You're just gonna be hopping in, and doing something quick and hopping out.  And so you're not gonna form the kind of relationships that, you know, that you need to.  It was--it was almost impossible to do good journalism in, in those circumstances.
Speaker 1: Now I'm, I'm just think- thinking that the--other than broad stories, you wouldn't be able to get to--
Speaker 2: No, you're doing crises.
Speaker 1: Detail.
Speaker 2: You're doing crises.  You're gonna--you know, if there's a coup in some place, you're gonna go in there; you're gonna write the story about the coup, if, if they're interested in it.  They may not even be interested in New York [New York]--they may not want it.  I mean, the, the--one of the last stories I did there--and the one was that, that, that I--well actually there were two that were the same way, that sort of convinced me it's time to come home because it wasn't gonna work.  One was in Uganda.  This would have been in 1982, when they were having an election to, to bring in a new government.  And at that time, the Tanzanian army was in--was--it was--was, was still in, in--
Speaker 1: Uganda?
Speaker 2: --in Uganda.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And there was also a Ugandan army [Uganda National Liberation Army], which was under the control of a--of a guy who had been an aide to the former dictator, Milton Obote.  It was--he was the one that Amin [Idi Amin] had overthrown.  Anyway, they had the election.  And I--myself and a bunch of other guys, we had an office downtown where we--telexes and stuff.  We were writing our stories, and basically we're saying is that the government had--oh, had tossed out the ele- the, the, the election had been won by one guy.  The government had tossed that result out and was gonna impose Milton Obote back on the country again.  And that night the Ugandan army, to underline the fact that they were doing it, shot the city up.  We were mach- in a building with--machine gunned.  After the shooting died down--it was a kind of across the courtyard from where the U.S. embassy was--and figured we'd be safer in the embassy, if we could--one of the guys with us was a U- the U.S.--what do you call, broadcast--the American equivalent to, to the BBC [British Broadcasting Corporation]?
Speaker 1: Voice of America (unclear)
Speaker 2: Voice of America correspondent--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --was with--was one of the guys who was with us.  He called over to the embassy, and, and there was one person and they said, "Well you can come in; you can't come in the embassy, but I'll let you stay in the lobby."  So we had to go across this courtyard, and everybody was scared as hell.  Because we didn't--I mean, they'd just machine gunned that building.  It's not normal for that.  And you had to climb over a wall.  You're gonna be silhouetted, and you're--you know, you didn't know what was going on we--to get to the U.S. embassy.  We went over there and was--they had air conditioning on.  You're right on the, the, the, the equator, but it was like freezing in there.  There was nothing to get anybody warm.  So one guy, a photographer, wrapped himself up in the American flag there.  We there that night--very scary night.  Anyway, I, I found my story and they didn't run it, because they said, "We don't have space for the story."  And I said, I said, "You know, we've been all through this, and I mean--."  And they said, "Well can you update it for next week?"  I said, "Jesus," you know.
Story_ID: 642506
Speaker 1: And the other story was--this happened in the Gambia.  There was--during Prince Charles's wedding to Princess Diana, the president of Gambia [Dawda Jawara] was in London [England] with his first wife [Augusta Mahoney Jawara]--he had, he was Muslim, he had more than one wife--for their wedding.  And while he was out of the country, a guy named Sanyang--Kukoi--Kukoi Sanyang led a coup d'etat.  And all kinds of stuff happened as a result.  There were--Gambia has these beautiful beaches.  The city was--Banjul [Gambia] was full of tourists from Scandinavia and all these places, so lots of white people in town.  The, the conspirators opened the jails and allowed the prisoners who were in jail to get out because they said, we want you to join the--you know, the revolution.  So the prisoners immediately started doing what criminals do: they started robbing people in the street.  So the conspirators and the--and the Gambian police who were on their side were trying to corral these prisoners, and get them to back their fighting.  Meanwhile, the Senegalese army--because Senegal is very troubled by what's going on here, it's instability (unclear), they decide that they gonna put the coup down.  And Senegalese army is one of the most proficient armies in Africa at that time.  They had been with the--with the--with the French in, in, in, in Algeria and then Vietnam, and elsewhere.  They were the serious (unclear).  Leon [HistoryMaker Leon DeCosta Dash]--I'll never forget, Leon and I, we were standing with some other reporters.  You have--to get to Banjul you have to take a ferry across this river.  We're standing there trying to get the ferry, and we're watching these planes drop helicopters--or drop paratroopers--onto Banjul.  By the time we got there, they had--we later calculated--it killed 1 percent of the population of the city.  Again, it's the brutality of--the ruthlessness of use of force in African countries that's really quite amazing at times.  But they were--'cause when they landed, they were killing conspirators, prisoners; anybody who looked like they might cause trouble.  And they--you know, I mean, the fighting was over by the time we got there.
Story_ID: 642507
Speaker 1: So you got all this chaos and violence going on with the Senegalese army, the, the, the conspirators, their allies, and the police, the freed criminals.  Meanwhile, the conspirators had taken the, the president's second wife [Chilel N'Jie Jawara] hostage.  And she was being held with her family in a hospital.  The British government said, "We will assist."  So they sent down two or three commandos from this special air service, which is like, like their Green Berets [U.S. Army Special Forces Command].  And they staged a dramatic rescue of the president's wife--second wife and her kids from the hospital--get her out without a hair on her head being scratched, right?  So, there's the story--president [Dawda Jawara], country, princess of Di- Princess Diana and Prince Charles [Charles, Prince of Wales], coup d'etat, paratroopers dropping in, 1 percent of the population being freed, second wife freed by British commandos.  Hey!  Man, that's about twelve stories there, right?  I go back and file this stuff, and I get hear from them: "No space; can you update next week?"  I said forget about it.  This is too frustrating.  I mean, I'm going around, I'm doing this work, I'm getting these great stories, I can't get 'em in the magazine [Time].  I decided I would come home, back to the states.
Story_ID: 642508
Speaker 1: I came back and I went into the New York bureau [New York, New York].  This would have been in mid-1982.  I came back, I went into the New York bureau for Time; and I started gearing up to cover--be one of the correspondents that's gonna cover the presidential election that was looming in 1984.  We did not know at that time that Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] was going to run, but eventually, in the sort of mid--in 1983, it became clear that he was making noises that he was gonna run.  And they sent me out to do a story on Jesse Jackson.  It ended up being a cover story on what had--I think it must have surprised Jackson as much as it s- as much as it surprised everybody else.  And what had become a real movement, a grassroots, black political movement on a country where--it wasn't so much him pushing black folks to get him to run as it was black folks pushing him to run.  He--everywhere he would go enormous crowds of black folks would come and would have that chant: "Run, Jesse, run; run, Jesse, run; run, Jesse, run; run, Jesse, run."  And it started getting good to him.  Then we do this cover story about him ['Seeking Votes and Clout']--it was written by Walter Isaacson, who later did the biography of Steve Jobs ['Steve Jobs'] and Einstein ['Einstein: His Life and Universe'], and, and, and Ben Franklin ['Benjamin Franklin: An American Life'], now head of the Aspen Institute [Washington, D.C.]; you know, very prominent.  It was so laudatory, I couldn't believe it myself.  When Jesse read it, I think--he, in fact, he told me he couldn't believe it himself that they hadn't--he kept--he says as they were reading, they kept waiting to see the negative part, and there was no negative part.  And I think it was one of the things that actually convinced him that he ought to just go ahead and make a real run for it.  And he eventually did in November of that year.  And I ended up being on his campaign for the first several months of his campaign.  Now there were a couple of interesting things that happened during that period.
Speaker 2: Now, now this is November '83 [1983]?
Speaker 1: This is November of eighty--the--yeah, he announced in November of '83 [1983].
Speaker 2: Okay, now--
Speaker 1: But the cover story we did on it came out before he announced.  The cover story came out in either August or September of '83 [1983].
Speaker 2: Okay.  But prior to that I guess Harold Washington won in Chicago [Illinois], right?
Speaker 1: I'm sorry?
Speaker 2: Harold Washington won in Chicago--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --earlier that year?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And then, I don't know, like Wilson Goode [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. W. Wilson Goode, Sr.], was--was he before Harold or after?  I forget (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, he's after Harold.
Speaker 2: After, okay.
Speaker 1: He's after Harold.  I, I--
Speaker 2: In Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: And Wilson Goode--I hate that you put Wilson Goode and Harold Washington in the same sentence.  It's like night and day, good and bad, dumb and stupid, you know.  I mean, I--Harold Washington was the real deal.  Wilson Goode is the most overrated turkey that ever occupied a major city hall--just, just dreadful, dreadful.  Anyway, though, Jesse's--he, he announced in '83 [1983], November.
Story_ID: 642509
Speaker 1: And this is one of the interesting things that happened.  I went with one other black journalist, whose name I don't wanna call, with Jesse [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] the day after his announcement down to Tuskegee Institute [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], where he was gonna make a speech.  And we're with him in a van going from the airport to Tuskegee with one of his aides named Lamont Godwin.  And Jesse starts talking about Hymie and Hymietown.  And the other black journalist and I are both, one hand shocked.  Not by his use of the language so much as by the fact that he was talking that way in front of us.  It wasn't clear to either of us what we could do with this.  Because it seemed like this was an off the record kind of circumstance.  We--but anyway, we talked about it.  And the other guy who knew Jesse better than I did said that Jesse would call him and use this same kind of language with him in conversation on the telephone.  So we're trying to figure out what he--you know, he had all this--it was really ambiguous.  Jesse would say things like, "Take your black off," or "Take your reporter's hat off and put your black hat on," which I translated to mean "I wanna talk off the record."  And I had--you know, I'm like every other reporter.  I knew what off the record was.  I knew what on background was.  I knew what--but I had--you know.  And I'm assuming that this is the same as off the record; meaning, I can't report this.  And if I agree to it, I'm kind of honor--you know, honor bound.  And then Jackson, he would use--he would call black people niggers and gay people queer, and Hispanics spics and all that stuff in these off the record conversations.  I always figured it was part of the okie doke with him--that he was trying to make us feel like, you know, sort of--to--sort of seduce us by making us feel like you--I'm gonna let you in on a secret.  I'm gone talk candidly with you 'cause you a brother and I'm a brother, and we're gonna talk that way.  Well, you know, myself, [HistoryMaker] George Curry, [HistoryMaker] Jay Harris from the--from the USA Today, all--we were pros; we aren't gonna be conned by that BS.  And we were--if we we're doing that, we're just letting Je- Jesse do the okie doke.  Now some of the white guys, for reasons that--whatever reasons they had, they're not gonna pay attention necessarily what we're talking about, and they're our bosses, you know.  Like, I remember with that first cover story ['Seeking Votes and Clout,' Walter Isaacson], I wrote--I had to write a little thing about--before they were gonna put me in the publisher's note in the front.  And I wrote a little thing about this conversation I had had about Jesse when he is giving you the little story about how he grew up in a triangle of love down there in, in Greenville [South Carolina].  And, and a tear came to his eyes at strategic moments.  So I wrote I looked into his eye and I saw that.  And I said, "And I saw his true soul:" colon, "the soul of a demagogue," period.  So they put it in the publisher's letter.  They said, "I saw--I looked in his eyes, I saw his true soul," but they didn't say anything about the demagogue, so people thought I was--you know, they write this laudatory thing, they're thinking that I'm believing that Jesse's all--is all that.  Well I knew Jesse.  I knew he's a con artist, a womanizer, and a bull shitter, but I still admire him.  But I'm not taken in by him in any way.  Anyway, well we're trying to figure what we're supposed to do with this stuff, and we're--you know, a lot of the other guys had heard it too.  We're all saying wait a minute; well, you know, what are--how do we handle this?  'Cause we don't wanna--we've got our journalistic responsibilities to uphold, but we're, if we're gonna cut Jesse the same deal we would cut with any white politician.  If a white politician says to me, I wanna tell--wanna tell you something off the record and I agree to it, then I'm duty bound to follow that.
Story_ID: 642510
Speaker 1: Anyway, we go off to Syria to get the naval pilot, Lieutenant Robert Goodman [Bobby Goodman], who had been shot down over Syria, was being held by the Assad government at that time.  And Jackson--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Jesse [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson], Jesse had said, "I'll go free 'em."
Speaker 2: Now this is an African American pilot, right?  This is an African American pilot, right?
Speaker 1: Yes, a black pilot.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It didn't mat- but his race was not--the, the point was that he was a--an American, and Jesse saw an opportunity to play a big humanitarian role.  And we go to Syria, and in his party, among others, is Louis Farrakhan [HistoryMaker Minister Louis Farrakhan], the leader of the Nation of Islam.  And Jesse pleads for the release on humanitarian grounds of, of the flyer.  He's getting nowhere.  But at a meeting with religious leaders in Syria, they asked Louis Farrakhan, who, as you know, is an ex-calypso singer, to sing the call to prayer.  And Farrakhan, beautiful voice, sings the call to prayer so beautifully that these ministers are moved.  And they intercede with the Assad government on Jackson's behalf to get in the--he gets to go see Assad [Hafez al-Assad] personally, (unclear).  Anyway, we're all in a hotel, and the night before--and this is--we were there--we arrived there the day after Christmas.  And we're there through Christmas, through New Year's Eve.  And we're--and this point, you know, Jesse is--he's like being real open with all the journalists.  And we're--I'm up there with another black reporter, and Jesse and his factotum, and we're all playing bid whist, which is something a Bap- Baptist minister's not supposed to do.  But we're all playing bid whist.  And me and this other black reporter, we're just whipping Jesse and his factotum every which way, and laughing at 'em and making fun.  So he deals, and at some point he (gesture) sticks it--you know how you do when you play bid whist; you j- you stick a card to your head.  And he sticks a card to his head, and he says, "I done dealt myself a Boston," which he did; a Boston means you run all the tricks.  And I swear to god, this really actually happened this way.  As--almost as soon as that hand was finished, the telephone rang, and it was somebody from Assad's people saying, "We're gonna release Lieutenant Goodman tomorrow," which is exactly what happened.  They let him go home.  We got on an airplane.  Ronald Reagan was president [President Ronald Wilson Reagan].  He sent--they sent a military plane to pick us up in Syria, fly us to Germany--a military base in Germany, where Air Force One was waiting for us.  I interviewed Jesse on the air--on Air Force One.  I interviewed Farrakhan on Air Force One, and Farrakhan said to me: "If you had told me that I would ever be flying on Air Force One, I would have said you have been smoking LSD."  I said, "Well, sir, you don't smoke LSD."  He said, "Well I don't know what you do with LSD, but you would have been--you would have--I would have thought you were taking it if you had told me I would be here."  They had--then we all went to Washington [D.C.], up to the White House.  Reagan was there.  He welcomed everybody home.  Jesse was flying high.
Story_ID: 642511
Speaker 1: The New Hampshire primary's getting ready to happen, he's going up in the polls, and then the story comes out.  And down in paragraph forty-three, it said, "In private conversations," story comes out in The Washington Post, "in private conversation, Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] refers to Jews as Hymie; and the City of New York [New York] as Hymietown."  Uh-oh, he's an anti-Semite; look out now.  Turns out that this is--story's been written by a white Washington Post reporter, Rich Atkinson [sic. Rick Atkinson], who went with us to Syria.  But he's not the--he's not the one that reported it.  It was given to him by [HistoryMaker] Milton Coleman, a black reporter, and later very prominent editor at The Post, who says that he heard Jesse use this language in a private conversation at an airport in Washington [D.C.].  I don't know whether he did or didn't.  I wasn't there.  I don't know a thing about it.  All I know is that he was the source; they put it in the story; story broke out; it got on the front page of a whole bunch of papers all over town.  All of a sudden Jackson's campaign, which had been flying high, all of a sudden now it's heading for a crash landing.  All he can do is worry about this Hymie business.  Well Jack [HistoryMaker Jack White] is in a little position too, because about a month prior to this, still not sure about how to handle this.  We used to publish at Time a little in house memo.  It was confidential, shared with the editors.  I wrote an item for that memo in which I described Jackson's use of the term Hymie and Hymietown, and some other unpleasant aspects of his personality, to let my editors know that I, you know, hear this stuff.  'Cause frequently what would happen would be, you know, they'd read something in there and say, oh, this might make a story.  And they'd get back to you and, you know, you'd work out a proposal and you'd have something.  I never heard a word from 'em, but I knew I was on the record with my editors.  So even though everybody else is running around (unclear)--you know, they're writing about did he or didn't he.  If my editors remember that I wrote this thing a month and a half before this is all broken out, they could say, you know, well White knows, so.
Story_ID: 642512
Speaker 1: Went back to Chicago [Illinois] in the midst of this crisis.  It was right on the eve of the, of Saviours' Day of the Nation of Islam.  We go--and Jackson's [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] gonna speak there.  Farrakhan [HistoryMaker Minister Louis Farrakhan], who had, had--Farrakhan had changed the Nation of Islam's position on electoral politics and wanted the Muslims who had previous been told don't register to vote, don't take part in, in politics in any way, register to vote; vote for Jackson.  So Jackson--Jesse's gonna be there, and it's gonna be at the ar- armory [General Richard L. Jones Armory] in Chicago.  And it's a big deal--I mean, thousands of members of the Nation of Islam there.  So we go to Jesse's house and there are all these ministers in there that are with him.  And they're--he's gonna give the black reporters dinner at his house: "Come on in the house and have dinner, Jackie [Jacqueline Brown Jackson] will," his wife, "will cook."  And before dinner he and all his ministers they go into his living room and they're praying, and I could hear them.  And they weren't praying for guidance or God's gathering, they were praying, "Smite our enemies."  I'm--whoa!  So the normal cook is--it's Sunday, the normal cook is not there.  So Jackie, who can't cook, is gonna make dinner.  And she's cooking these pork chops in there.  One--the guy--it's a guy named Bruce Talamon, he, again, he's a black photographer; he usually shoots movies, you know, he's a still, still guy on a movie set.  But he was, like a lot of us, moved by the Jackson campaign.  And he had--and persuaded Time to let him--to cover (unclear).  He had been a vegetarian for like five years, but he was hungry.  So Jackie brings out these pork chops, and you would have needed a battle axe to cut into 'em; they were terrible.  And Bruce is gonna have his first taste of meat (laughter) in five years, and this is what he (unclear).  He got physically ill.  Jesse says to us before we leave, he says, "I sure hope they don't have a pork detector up there at the--at the--at the Nation of Islam, because we'll be in trouble."  So we go in, and this is the night that Farrakhan gave this big speech essentially warning Jews that if you take any kind of action against Jackson, Allah is gonna fall on you.  It was a--you know, very--it was a speech that people reacted to in a very vi- negative way.  And then they introduced Jesse, and the first words out of his mouth is he says, you know, "I, I considered becoming--joining the Nation of Islam," and he said, "but then I found out assalamualaikum: no ham and no bacon."  (Laughter)  He said, "I better stay a Baptist."  And he gives his speech.  And after it's over, I say to one of his mat- his ministers--minister advisors--I say, you know, "How's he gonna handle this Hymie thing?"  'Cause a lot of us know that he actually uses this language.  And this minister--black minister--a very prominent black minister--says, "I'm gonna tell him to lie.  He can't admit that and have--you know, and remain politically viable."  And I--I couldn't believe it.  I, I, I just couldn't believe it.  I thought he would--you know, he was gonna give me some duck and dodging answer, but he said, "I'm gone tell him to lie."  So that night we were at the Hyde Park Hilton in Chicago.  I, I was drinking with some of the other journalists we were talking about.  I said I made up my mind.  The next day we got on the campaign plane.  He had one white minister with 'em, a guy named Mendelsohn [Jack Mendelsohn].  And I went to Mendelsohn and I said, "Listen, I just wanna tell you, this is a message for Reverend Jackson: I know that he uses these terms.  I've heard 'em myself.  I'm on record with my editors.  If he keeps up this ducking and dodging thing, I'm just gonna have to write a story saying that, you know, these are the times when I've heard him say it, and it's no doubt he has, you know," I said, "so he's got to--," you know.  Now, I don't know--to this day, I don't know.  I've never discussed it with Jackson, and I don't know whether Mendelsohn carried that message back to him.  I don't know if he did, if that had any, any part in what Jackson (unclear) do, but--and then he--they immediately went into a huddle when we get back to New Hampshire.  And a couple of days later he goes to, to a synagogue there, and he gives this speech where he admits having done this.  And he says, you know, "God is not finished with me yet," and, "my grape became a raisin," a lot of some of the same stuff he said in this big speech in the--at the convention there [1984 Democratic National Convention, San Francisco, California].  And in a way it was one of his finest moments, but in other ways it was this admission that--you know, that he had--that he had--that he had done something that people found so offensive.
Story_ID: 642513
Speaker 1: I don't believe that Jesse Jackson's [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] an anti-Semite.  I believe that he uses these terms because he was thinking that this was gonna be hip and appealing to--you know, to, to, to, to, to us.  I mean, the way--he was patronizing to us.  It's, it's not that he's an anti-Semite, it's that he's a patronizing asshole.  I don't which is worse, you know.  I mean, I--his son [HistoryMaker Jesse Jackson, Jr.] right now is in deep, deep trouble.  We saw--we saw things--he, he was just a teenager back then.  We saw things then that I'm not surprised at all that he got into with, into this kind of difficulty because he was--you know, he had his father as his role model.  I mean--you know, who, who thought no rules applied to him.  He thought--he always thought--whatever situation he was in, he could talk himself out of it.  Many years later--again, there's this story--this is a little out of order, but I wanna tell this story this way.  Many years later, I--when, when Bill Clinton was president [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton], he asked the historian [HistoryMaker] John Hope Franklin to start this national conversation about race.  So Jesse was gonna have John Hope Franklin as his guest at this meeting with, with people from his organization [Operation PUSH; Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois].  And he invited a few journalists to come out, and I was one of them, to see John Hope Franklin.  And at the meeting, a woman Karin Stanford, who was his new Washington bureau person, was at that meeting.  I meet--met her there for the first time.  She was smart.  I was--I was--had--was covering black Americans at that point.  I began to befriend her as a news source.  And one night we went to dinner at B. Smith's in Union Station in Washington [D.C.].  When we're coming out from the dinner--you know, it's a big open atrium they have there.  We see--and they have some restaurants in the middle.  And I said, "Oh, there's Jack- there's Jesse's wife; let's go over and say hi."  And I noticed that Karin, who had been walking right next to me, wasn't right next to me anymore.  She was behind one of the pillars in there.  And I'm looking around the corner.  So I was like what, what is going on?  She said, "Mrs. Jackson [Jacqueline Brown Jackson] doesn't like me.  They think that something's going on between me and, and, and Jesse and, and--."  I said, "Well, is there?"  She said, "No, no, that's--."  Anyway, the (unclear) is in my head, so I go over and I say hello to Jackie.  And by the--and then by now, Karin is gone some way, and we rendezvous on some other part of the stadium, and it's--station and, you know.  And we--and we, we keep talking; we remain f- we get to be fairly good friends and, and she's still a news source for me.  And then, awhile later, one of my college buddies from Swarthmore [Swarthmore College, Swarthmore, Pennsylvania] was in town, and we were supposed to have dinner.  And she calls and says, "I got something important I need to tell you."  I said, "Well I'm having friend--dinner with my buddy; let me see."  And he's a white guy, but he--you know.  I said, well she's a pretty girl; he'll like, he'll like Karin.  And so the three of us go and we have dinner at Georgia Brown's there in Washington, K Street I think.  And when he gets up to go to the restroom, she says, "I'm pregnant!"  And she's just glowing.  And she's really happy because she was a cancer survivor, and she didn't think she would--could get, get pregnant.  And she had been very worried about it.  And I went like, "Well, who--really?  That's wonderful; who's the father?" You know, and--she's--she didn't wanna tell me who the father is and all the rest of the stuff.  So as time goes by, I'm becoming more and more convinced.  Because things are happening.  She's moving out of her apartment into this house--this newly refurbished house in a--in a part of town near the col- better part of town.  It's a nice house.  And where is she getting this money from and all this?  And I'm becoming more and more convinced that this is Jesse's baby.  So I just flat out ask her, and she denies it.
Story_ID: 642514
Speaker 1: Then she calls me and asked me if I know any lawyers who can help her pursue a pa- a, a paternity case, because the father of this--of this expectant child is, is--does not wanna--she's afraid he's not gonna wanna pay up.  So I give her the name of this--now I'm really getting suspicious.  And the baby gets born, and she invites me to come over to her house to see the baby.  Her friends are there.  And I look at the baby. The baby's just a newborn.  But I look at that baby.  I said, "You know, Karin, that baby looks just like Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson]."  (Laughter) And she says, "No, no, it's not."  She--and she's got this scheme.  She got some old boyfriend who loves her so much that he's going to move from Los Angeles [California], where she's from, to Washington [D.C.] to marry her and be a father to this child, even though he's not the actual father of the child.  This is--I'm like (laughter) you know what the hell is going on?  And then--so we start looking, you know, trying to investigate this 'cause I'm convinced that this is--this--and I started hearing stories about them carrying on, and I'm believing this now.  This is--but we can't get the birth certificate.  In Washington it's not a public record; you have to be a member of the family--can't get it.  I know that we are not gonna publish it [in Time].  I take what I have and I give it to [HistoryMaker] Clarence Page of the Chicago Tribune.  Clarence looks into it, he runs into the same roadblock that I do.  He tells his boss, the Washington bureau chief, Jim Warren [James Warren], for the Tribune, they start looking.  We're all looking at this.  We were all running into the same road block.  We all believe that there's something here.  Everybody drops it until some period later when the National Enquirer comes out with a big story, with photographs: "Jackson's love child."  And there's pictures of Karin Stanford and, and, and Jesse Jackson together.  Now, one--just--this was just after Christmas when this story came out.  I hadn't heard from Karin (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So what, what, what year is this?  This is like--
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: This is in the--I'm trying to think of what year it was.  I can't remember what--
Speaker 1: I'm trying to remember.  I was a columnist by this time, so it's the late--it's in the late '90s [1990s].
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's what I'm thinking.
Speaker 1: She's living in California.  She had moved to California, had bought D.L. Hughley's old house--the comedian D.L. Hughley's old house, and she had had one no show job arranged for her by Bill Clinton's [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton]--Ron--Ron Burkle I think is his name.  It's a big--a billionaire out there who used to be a big Democratic fundraiser.  And she's gotta--has had one no show job from him and all the rest of this.  And the--but I've dropped the whole thing.
Story_ID: 642515
Speaker 1: I haven't talked to her in a long time, I get a postcard--a Christmas card from her.  And it's a picture of her and her daughter, Ashley [Ashley Jackson], sitting in front of this Christmas tree.  And the kid is cute, and she's there.  So--and there--like maybe a month later the story breaks in the National Enquirer.  I'm thinking--well first of all, I'm gonna write about it, but I'm also thinking limber things.  One of which is, where is the National Enquirer gonna get these pictures of Karin [Karin Stanford] and Jesse [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] together except from Karin?  Right?  (Laughter) I mean--so I write this story, and I'm one of the few people who actually knows Karin.  And I get a little interview with her, and I have little quotes from her in the--at the--at the end of the--end of the story.  And I, I give Jesse hell, and I basically say it's time for him to just go away and just dis- disappear--enough already, you know--hypocrite.  So all these things.  And he, he actually announced that he was gonna take a little hiatus, if you recall, but he--it only lasted one day.  He was scheming on how to get back in the same day that he had--that he announced it.  He--he's really--he really is a slippery character.  Anyway, I write the story, you know.  And I know all this stuff from, you know, our previous attempts to get the story.  It's a very knowledgeable story.  Other reporters are calling me up trying to get Karin's telephone number.  I won't give it to 'em.  I say, "I will pass your number on to her.  If she wants to call you, she can call you, but I'm not giving you her number."  Then, a few years after that--again, I was out of--and stay out of touch with her.  I get a call from her, and she wants me to write a story about what a bad father Jesse is.  And I say, "Karin, are you sure you want me to do that?  Because if he's a bad father now, what kind of father you think he's gonna be after you embarrass him with a story about what a bad father he is?  You're probably better off, you know.  I will, if you decide that you really wanna go through with this, I will do it, but otherwise, you know--but I think you ought to think about this."  And she eventually decided she didn't want--she didn't wanna do it.  And as one aside issue--I mean, that was--I was (unclear) about--thinking about that because there had been a time when, when Time correspondents used to give stories to other publications because our magazine wouldn't do 'em until they appeared someplace else, and this was a case of that.  I was hoping that the Tribune [Chicago Tribune] could break that story, but they were not able to--they were not able to break it any more than I was until, until the National Enquirer--Enquirer, with help I'm sure from, from Karin herself, you know, broke that--broke that story.  I just, just recently got a--we're face--I'm Facebook friends with her too.  And I just recently got it.  She was just in Washington [D.C.].  She--if I'd been there, I guess I would have gotten together with her.  I think--I think the kid's a teenager now.  I hope she's well--I hope she's doing well.  Karin's teaching again.  And I don't know what kind of relationship she has with Jesse, but you can see--I mean, my, my view of it, you can see what kind of person he is by the situation his son [HistoryMaker Jesse Jackson, Jr.] has just gone through here, and is on his way to prison for essentially being weak minded and, you know, spending $750,000 on junk.  I mean, it's--why he would throw away a--an amazingly promising future--I mean, at one time people thought he could be a mayor of Chicago [Illinois] or, or, or a U.S. senator, but no more.
Story_ID: 642516
Speaker 1: We were just talking about di- different aspects of the Jackson campaign and segued in some other Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] stories.  But in summer of 1984, at the Democratic National Convention [San Francisco, California]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --he delivered this speech that electrified the nation, right?
Speaker 2: Right.  Yeah, he--by this time, I mean, he, he has gone through the primaries.  He's obviously not gonna win the nomination, but he does get an opportunity to speak, and that's when he does deliver one of the best speeches he's ever given, at that time.  And he's gonna go from--go on from there to work his tail off to help Mondale [Walter Mondale] try to get elected.
Speaker 1: And I think that you wrote in--about the voter registration campaigns--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that were going on all over the--
Speaker 2: Well, no, they did--he--this is where I will give him credit--credit for one thing.  There's nobody--there's nobody who registers and turns out black voters the way Jesse did during those campaigns and--up until--including the, the campaign in the year 2000 that--between Gore [Al Gore] and the second George Bush [George Walker Bush].  And that's what he did.  He left after the--after the convention where he delivered that, that speech to a, a national audience, he essentially threw himself into the work of turning out the, the, the--turning out the black vote.  I mean, for all the problems that I have and all the criticism I have with Jackson, I'm an, an unadulterated admirer of the work that he has done to build the black political power in this country, whether it be--whether it be registering voters, turning 'em out for his campaign on behalf of others.  He also is responsible for a black--through--breakthrough for black journalists.  Prior to the 1984 campaign, there were hardly any black reporters involved in covering major league politics in this country; one of the, the last areas of segregation in, in the media.  We were brought initially, a bunch of us, to cover Jackson 'cause they thought, well, blacks will cover black candidate.  Some of us--quite a few of us--went on after Jackson's campaign ended to cover Mondale and the regular campaign--and then went on--.  I, I did--for example, [HistoryMaker] Milton Coleman was out and quite a few of the rest of us.  So Jesse is--if it hadn't been for Jesse, we would not have gotten a ch- a chance to show our skills as politer--political reporters.  That later--that later enabled us to, to, to, to, to break out of this little ghetto that we had been in.  So I--as I say, I'm an admirer of Jackson's in--you know, for all of those things, regardless of his failings as a human being.  As a public figure and as a person that contributed to the Civil Rights Movement and the black liberation struggle, I have nothing but admiration for him there.  I think he would have gotten more accomplished if he had been a, a more grounded person.  But he--but despite all that, he got a lot done, and we owe him a lot.  He's a historic figure.  And, and, and I'm glad that I had an opportunity to bene- to, to, to watch him do it and also to benefit from, from, from what he did.
Story_ID: 642517
Speaker 1: When the cam- '84 [1984] campaign was over, I became Chicago bureau chief for Time; I was promoted and went to Chicago [Illinois].  At the time when I arrived there, we had--it was a big bureau.  We had seven correspondents in addition to myself stationed in the bureau.  And we had responsibilities for everything from Ohio west to North Dakota, South Dakota, and down to Oklahoma.  South to Oklahoma was my territory (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now was this the first time you were promoted to bureau chief?
Speaker 1: No, I'd been bureau chief in, in, in Nairobi [Kenya] as well.
Speaker 2: In Nair- yeah, right (unclear).
Speaker 1: Yeah, but that was a one man bureau.  But this is where I actually had a bunch of people working under my supervision in Chicago.
Speaker 2: One thing I, I guess I should--can we go back to '83 [1983] for one second--second?
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: There's one other thing, there's a--that's the twentieth anniversary March on Washington.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: You wrote about that.  You were actually there (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, we was there, Joe Boyce [HistoryMaker Joseph N. Boyce] and I covered that, yeah.  That to me--when I think back on it, that wasn't really very important I don't--I mean, it was a--it was a ceremonial affair more so than--
Speaker 2: Political.
Speaker 1: It's, it's not like the Million Man March or, or the original March on Washington, which were, you know, huge events.  This, this was, you know, a bunch of people came down, made speeches.  They marked--they marked the occasion and that was it, but it doesn't--I--my guess is that, that most of the people who were there don't even remember that they were--that they were there.
Speaker 2: Now, now, okay then.  So, so 1984 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But that was--but that did--that did happen, yeah.
Speaker 2: So Chicago bureau chief at Time, Harold Washington's the mayor of Chicago.
Speaker 1: Harold Washington was in his first term--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and running for reelection.  He--I guess--I think Harold was--I think he was elected in 1983.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: So by the time I got there, this is like the beginning of 1985, so he'd been in office for a year and a half, and I'm--you know, he's preparing to run for ele- he--he was--he was--he's getting ready to run for reelection while I'm there.  And I got to know him a little bit, not well.  His--one of his press guys was a guy who I think--I think you guys have done, named [HistoryMaker] Monroe Anderson, who later went to work for Newsweek and some--and some TV stations.  And I did two or three stories on, on Harold.  I liked Harold a lot.
Speaker 2: Talking about like [HistoryMaker] Grayson Mitchell, [HistoryMaker] Francis Ward; they were--
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: Grayson Mitchell was press sec- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Grayson Mitchell was--I guess Grayson was his--yeah, I guess when I first got to Chicago I think--maybe Grayson had just stopped being--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --his press secretary then.  I think Grayson had gone on to public relations--
Speaker 2: And there's a white fellow too--
Speaker 1: --at that time.
Speaker 2: --that was--
Speaker 1: Yeah, there was--yeah, the--I think it was--
Speaker 2: I can't think of his name right now.
Speaker 1: Monroe was in there at some point.
Speaker 2: Alton, Alton Miller?
Speaker 1: Grayson was in there at some point.  And--
Speaker 2: Alton Miller--
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's him.  Yeah, I think he was--I think that was the guy who was there.  Again, this is a--this is in 1985.  And my memory--some of my memories about this are a little vague.  Oh, but anyway, the, the contrast--this is also the period of time, though, that the MOVE incident occurred in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  And the contrast between Harold Washington and Wilson Goode [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. W. Wilson Goode, Sr.] that--probably at that time the two most prominent black mayors in the country.  It was--couldn't have been greater.  I mean, Wilson Goode was a boob.  Harold Washington was a genius.  And Wilson Goode's handling of the--of the situation in MOVE was a tot- was a total disaster.
Story_ID: 642518
Speaker 1: Okay, kind of walk, walk us through real- briefly what, what it was about.  What was MOVE about?
Speaker 2: Okay, MOVE was this group of--they were black--it's hard to describe, they were almost like a cult of people.  They believed in a--it's kind of a back to nature, kind of naturalistic living.  And they had--they had set up shop in a--in a building--in a--in a building, a house, in a black neighborhood in, in, in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] where, where, where they were serious nuisances to the community.  They had--they had sou- speakers set up where they were blasting out, you know, their, their dogma.  They, they, they evidently was a rat and roach infested place, and neighbors had been complaining about it.  And police finally decided to move on them.  By the time that they did, those people were entrenched and had fortified that house and still made (unclear).  And the police commissioner who mu- and the city manager, who was a retired army general--and these must have been two of the lowest IQ public officials ever in the history of the United States--decided that it would make sense to drop an incendiary bomb on this house, and set it on fire with the notion that this would get these people who were in the house to come out.  Well that's what they did.  And they set the house on fire, and they killed a whole bunch of people in the house.  And they set the whole neighborhood on fire.  And I think something like sixty houses burned and were destroyed.  I was in Chicago [Illinois] at the time, but I went to Philadelphia to help the report.  And I had an interview with Goode [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. W. Wilson Goode, Sr.], and I've never in my life--I mean, now he may have been in a bit of shock because of this horrible incident that had occurred, but I never in my life saw a major elected official as inarticulate and as, as out of control there.  It really kind of underscored a number of things to me.  One was that in all of these cities, the key priority for a black mayor--the thing they had to do more than anything else is get control of the police in these communities.  He had--did not have a black police commissioner.  He had this guy who was a holdover from the old Rizzo [Frank Rizzo] regime--was his police commissioner [Gregore Sambor].  He got bad advice from these people.  Two is that you've got to exercise some, some common sense.  Why would you think it would make sense to set a building that had--was full of women and children, as well as, as men, to set it on fire to get these--why wouldn't you just wait 'em out?  You been letting 'em sit up there for a couple of years, you know, creating a public nuisance.  What's a few more days?  But they did this; they burned those houses.  They ended up having to rebuild those neighbor- that neighborhood.  They buil- rebuilt it with shoddy construction.  That was very solid kind of brick townhouses.  A lot of them were in bad condition, but they could have been renovated.  Burned to the ground--uninhabitable.  They replaced it with shoddy construction.  Goode, who at one time, people were seriously saying he could be a vice presidential candidate for the Democrats, is lost to history.  Nobody remembers him at all now--thank god.  And when I contrast him to Harold Washington, who was a shrewd, thoughtful, thinking person who actually enjoyed the practice of governing and practice of politics, I think it's too bad.  I love Philadelphia.  I went to school right outside of Philadelphia--college right outside of Philadelphia [Swarthmore College, Swarthmore, Pennsylvania].  I love it.  It's too bad that Philadelphia couldn't have had the advantage of having somebody as, as smart as Harold Washington in--instead of somebody as, as, as, as destructive as, as Wilson Goode (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear).
Story_ID: 642519
Speaker 1: Anyway, I ended up--I, I only stayed in Chicago [Illinois] for about two years, because I was promoted again, and I was made deputy chief of correspondents for the magazine [Time].  That meant that I was in charge of a network of fifty-one correspondents who at that time were stationed in seventeen bureaus across the United States.
Speaker 2: Now here's, here's an article I wanted to ask you about--
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: --that I guess it was written when you were in Chicago called 'Redefining the American Dilemma.'
Speaker 1: 'Redefining--'?
Speaker 2: 'The American Dilemma.'  You remember that?
Speaker 1: Oh, wait a minute.  Was that some story we did?
Speaker 2: It's--no, it's, it's an article by you on race relations in the United States, 'Redefining the American Dilemma,' and where you interviewed Julius--William Julius Wilson.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: --[HistoryMaker] Robert Woodson (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, yeah, well I did--I did start--I mean, that's a--those are just some stories.  I only--you know, I did lots of stories.  I don't remember every single one of 'em.  But I remember William Julius Wilson had written a book called 'The Declining Significance of Race' ['The Declining Significance of Race: Blacks and Changing American Institutions'], which was roundly criticized by a lot of black activists who I don't think ever read the book because of its title.  I mean, 'cause they wanted it--their argument was race and racism is important as it ever is--and they thought that he was arguing it was not.  That's not what his argument was.  His argument was that the black--that what black America has--to over simplify--had divided into two groups.  There was a group--there was a middle class group of African Americans who were progressing financially and moving up the professional ladder and so forth.  And then there was a group of, of, of African Americans who were not so fortunate.  What he--what he was arguing was that the--for the black middle class, that their life chances were now more determined by the fact that they were middle class than they were simply by the fact that they were black.  Whereas for the lower group, or the less fortunate group, their life chances re- continued to be defined by race and their lower class status.  The title is--William Julius was a brilliant thinker.  He can write, and he has always had bad titles for his books.  And that book had a bad title.  Anyway, he wrote--he wrote--the story you're referring to I don't remember--he--'cause he wrote three or four of these.  It's another one in a series.  And it's, it's a brilliant explanation of the effects of class stratification in the black community and what the--and what the impact of, of that is going to be.  I wrote other stories about him as well.  I wrote about when the--when welfare reform was being adopted, he was one of the--one of the big critics of welfare reform.  And he had written a book called 'When Work Disappears' ['When Work Disappears: The World of the New Urban Poor'].  I guess his--I guess his titles actually improve in little bits over the years.  I liked him and I thought--and I thought his work really sort of helped illuminate and explain some of--some of what had happened, especially to poor urban blacks whose situation continued to get worse and worse and worse through the '90s [1990s] and, and up until now.  And, and a large part of it has to do with the impacts of what, what Wilson calls concentrated poverty, which is when everybody is stuck--everybody is in an area is poor.  Nobody has a job.  There's lots and lots of problems of all sorts.  Nobody, nobody has good schools and all the rest of it.  And these effects compound each other, and they make--they make it worse (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 642520
Speaker 1: Two other articles during this period I guess, between '85 [1985] and '86 [1986], there's one about black on black violence, and there's another one (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, we did.
Speaker 1: --called--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we did that.  I think, yeah--
Speaker 1: --called--
Speaker 2: --we did one on black on black violence.
Speaker 1: --Two Native Son- I mean, 'Today's Native Sons'--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --was another article (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was one I--yeah, we did that one, yeah, yep.  That was a--there was a story--that was a story based on the truly terrifying rate--terrifying rate of homicide in the black community and of young black men killing each other.  That's a story that, that got the New York City Police Department mad at me because we--one of the things that we said in there was that the police department and the media tend to write off the deaths of young black men at the hands of each other, which I think is indisputably true.  And--but they nevertheless objected to that and tried to act like they took, took that seriously.  I don't think that--I don't think to this day that they do.  And I know that the newspapers still don't cover the deaths of young--the murders of young black men with the same rigor and--that they do deaths of white people in comparable circumstances.  So we--yeah, we did do that story.  It was meant to be a, a cover story.  Time--Time didn't have the nerve to, to make a cover story out of it; they wouldn't do it.  But that--yeah, again--but that's an example to me of what the kind of difference that, that black journalists can make at these white publications, is by trying to shine a light on, on issues that might be missed or not--you know, not played up properly by, by, by whites.  On the other hand, you know, you run into criticism from blacks who are saying you're, you're, you're doing stuff that puts us in a bad light.  You can't--you cannot allow that to deter you from reporting about its--I mean, the truth of the matter is the homicide rate of young black men killing other black men is, is something that all of us need to be concerned about.  And you're not gonna--you're not going to--you're not gonna cure that problem by not looking at it.  It's, it's, it's, it's--and it's, it's still a major issue.
Story_ID: 642521
Speaker 1: You wrote (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What was the other--what was the other story?
Speaker 1: There's a--well, now, 'Today's Bigger Thomases' [ph.].
Speaker 2: 'Today's--'?
Speaker 1: 'Today's Bigger Thomas' I think.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Thom- Or 'Thomases,' yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well--I mean, see he killed a young white woman [Mary Dalton], but, but I mean, the point was--is that he was--he was a young man forced by his circumstances into violence.  And I, I think that's the case with a lot of these kids.  The problem actually got worse after we wrote about it.  Because this is--this is--I forgot what year we did that story, but this is before--
Speaker 1: I think it was '86 [1986]--'86 [1986].
Speaker 2: Yeah, this is before the, the real outbreaks of gang drive bys and all that; it really got worse and worse and worse, you know, after that period.  There's another story that we did back in that time I--that I, I, I kind of remember off hand.  You remember when the, the subway shooter Bernhard Goetz shot those kids on the--well we did a story about--we did stories about him as well.  I always thought he was a punk and a coward, and that--and that--but he--but the phenomenon was never less interesting.  And it was a serious--and it did raise a serious issue, though, about violence prone young black men.  And this is something I wrote about many, many--on many different occasions during the time that I was, was, you know, a correspondent for Time.  I think the last one--I don't remember exactly what the--what set this off, but I wrote that all black people--it's not just cops who do racial profiling, but black people do racial profiling.  And that if you--in those days, if you were walking down the street and you saw a bunch of young black men standing on a corner, you might well cross to the other side of the street because you were afraid that, that they might be up to no good.  Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] himself said that he was walking down the street near his home in Washington [D.C.], and he heard steps coming behind him.  And he looked around and he was relieved that it was a white person and not a black person coming up behind him because he was afraid it if had of been a black person, he would get mugged.  So we all live with these cliches and these stereotypes about, you know, what, what, what might happen to us at the hands of a young black male.  It's--again, this is a persistent issue.  There's a guy named Elijah Anderson.  He was a--I think he's at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] now--who was a--he's a sociologist who's written about this.  And he and--he and William Julius Wilson were two of the, the scholars that I used to, you know, try--whose work I used to try to promote in my columns because I thought that they were helping illuminate the problems in the center--the inner city (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, during the same period of time there's one called 'The Ghetto: From Bad to Worse' basically.  (Unclear)--
Speaker 2: Okay, now--I don't think we--I don't think I reported that one.  I think that--I think that--I think that was one that I--that I had suggested.  It may be, I don't remember the title.  But yeah--but that was--but this--but this--this is--
Speaker 1: It was like a re- a twenty year retrospective on the--on the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, I didn't do that one.  That was done by a--that was done by another black correspondent named Tom McCarroll [ph.], but it was my idea.  And I wanted--I wanted that story.  I think that was twenty years after the Kerner Commission's report came out, which founded--you know, America was--one of its key finding was America was becoming two societies: one black, one white, separate, but unequal.  And they--I think he--I think that story was done in Newark [New Jersey].  It was about the, the deterioration and the conditions in the inner city of Newark.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't anybody can--I don't think anybody can dispute the fact that things had gotten worse over that period of time.  And one of the reasons it happened is--going back to William Julius Wilson--is because people who could--who could get out were like immigrants; they got out.  And the people they left behind were those who b- you know, those with the les- the least resources, the least ability to, to address their circumstances in a constructive way.  And so you get this compounding of the effects of poverty going on.  And it get--and, and it gets worse and worse and worse and worse.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We're still dealing with this.  I mean, it's one of my disappointments that Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] hasn't addressed this in any straightforward way.  Because it's a national problem.  It's not a black issue.
Story_ID: 642522
Speaker 1: Now tell us about being the deputy chief of correspondents.
Speaker 2: Well that was a job--I held that job for roughly a year.  It, it, it was a--it was a job that had become less important than it had been at one time when I got there.  We had a--essentially my--what my job was to do was to coordinate with the bureau chiefs in these offices spread around the country to make sure that on the one hand that we were getting good story suggestions from them.  I also had an administrative role in the sense that, that--for example, we had to get a--we--when, when we needed a new bureau chief in a ci- you know, in, in one office or another, I would be the one who would try to go out and, and come up with a suggestion about who would be the appropriate person to fill in those jobs.  I helped to supervise the correspondents who were covering the campaign, and to make sure we were getting the right people on the right, right candidate.  It was an interesting job, but it wasn't--but it was mainly an administrative job.  It wasn't really--it wasn't really journalism; it wasn't really what I do.  So I got the chance to become a senior editor in 1988, after a year of that, in the nation section, which covers national affairs.  And that's--that was more my bent.  I mean, there had never been a black senior editor at Time.  I was--so I was the first to, to, to do that.  I was the deputy nation editor.  The nation editor was a fellow named Terry Zintl, Z-I-N-T-L--Robert T. Zintl, known as Terry.
Speaker 1: So in '88 [1988] your, your title was--you were senior ed- you, you were--
Speaker 2: I was, I was a senior editor and deputy, deputy--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --deputy senior editor of the nation section.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Which as I say, covered national affairs.  And so essentially, I mean, I, I got to edit stories, think of stories.  I mean, it was a lot of--it's hard work being a senior editor at Time in those days because you have--every, every story that goes into Time back in those days--you might have a story in the magazine ends up only being like, say, you know, 750 words.  But you might have correspondent files from five or six correspondents for that story, plus whatever research material that ori- that was, was produced, plus whatever the writer who was pulling those files together brings to it on his own.  And you've got to be familiar with all that stuff.  Then you got to edit that story, and it's got to fit the format and the style of Time magazine.  It's a lot of work.  And at those days we used to take it very seriously, and we used to think that it was like--it was brain surgery.  I mean, you know, it was not unusual to work sixty hour weeks during that time.  And I was Terry's deputy.  He was--edited the big stories.  I would edit the secondary stories and whatever I came up with.  But we worked well together.  We became--we became buddies.  He eventually became--was promoted to bureau chief in Rome [Italy] and left, left New York [New York], and I took over as editor of the nation section.  I think this would have been--it was the year before--I guess it would have been 1991.  Clinton [William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] ran in '92 [1992], right?
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess it would have been the end of 1991 I became the--and I, I was a--I had--and my boss was the managing editor; his name was Henry Muller, and he was trying to revamp Time magazine.  He was trying to get Time away from being essentially a summary of the week's news and our commentary on it, and to becoming a different kind of a magazine.  And he, he was a very, very, very smart guy, but, but, but to some extent, he didn't really know what he wanted.  And so he was kind of hard to work for because he, he knew what he didn't want, but he didn't know what he wanted.  And so--but I, I--but on the other hand, I was given a lot of freedom and I--and I did some--I did some cover stories that I'm proud of to this day.
Story_ID: 642523
Speaker 1: Probably the, the two that, that I--that I remember the best are--let's see, the very first one I did was on guns in America ['Armed America'].  This was when there, there had been a shooting in a school.  And now, you know, this stuff is, is like--almost like an everyday occurrence, but it was rare then; it was shocking.  And we did a cover story on, on, on guns in America, essentially trying to make the case for--that we needed to control assault weapons and the rest of it.  This is way before Columbine [Columbine High School, Columbine, Colorado] and Newtown [Sandy Hook Elementary School, Newtown, Connecticut] and all the rest of it.  Then--but the two--the two stories that I--the two cover stories I'm most proud of--one is called the browning of America ['America's Changing Colors'], and this is on how Hispanics, blacks and Asians collectively will soon outnumber white Americans in this country.  And that there will be no single racial ethnic majority population, and the effects that that will have.  We were way ahead of many, many people in journalism in recognizing--we put this on the cover.  The story was written by Ben Henry [William A. Henry III], who was a Pulitzer Prize winner with--had come to Time from The Boston Globe.  I'm very proud of that.  I was also proud of a story that we did--a cover story we did on New York City, which essentially may- may- Dinkins--Dave Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins] was the mayor at that time.  We had a--we had--this was one of the best stories that we ever did.  It was pulled together beautifully.  It didn't have my byline on it, but I actually rewrote it.  I actually wrote it.  One of the--one of the things that a senior editor has to do at Time--sometimes is--when a story comes in and it's not up to snuff, the editor ends up writing it themselves; they don't get a byline, but they do the work.  And I did quite a few of those.  I, I wrote that one.  I wrote one on Nelson Mandela's first visit to New York [New York]--New York City, which is one I, I, I, I, I, I really enjoyed that one.  That was--in the first few paragraphs of that story, I invoked--what's his name--Joseph Campbell; that he was a hero in the Joseph Campbell sense, that he was like Jesus because people wanted to touch the hem of his garment, that he was like Tom Sawyer, listening to his own--you know, being eulogized at his own funeral.  And he was hiding up--he could hear all these praises being heaped on him.  It was really a good story.  And--
Speaker 2: 'The Hero with a Thousand Faces.'
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: 'Hero with a Thousand Faces' is the Campbell (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  Well he was--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, we had all, all that.  In the first few paragraphs of that story, we had all these things just to put him in--to put--to put Mandela, this heroic figure, who's still one of the most amazing people that I've ever heard of.  I'll never forget the day we were watching him on TV walk out at--walk out of Robben Island [South Africa]--walk up that road to freedom--just an amazing (unclear) thing.  I never met the man--I really wish I had.  But anyway, you know, we did all that.  We did another cover story on the--on the black middle class--did all kinds of pol- you know, you had to do lots of politics because it was an election year coming up.  But the ones I remember were the--where the--the Mandela--the New York City and the--and the--and the, the browning of America; those were the--those were the memorable ones.
Story_ID: 642524
Speaker 1: Then right in the middle of that, in 1992, ABC News came knocking--Peter Jennings--the late Peter Jennings now--and Paul Friedman, who was the executive producer of Peter Jennings' nightly news program ['World News Tonight with Peter Jennings'].  And ABC was at that point--I think they were embroiled in some kind of half ass scheme to try to prove that they were such a great news organization that they could attract prominent journalists from print to come over.  I mean, they--you know, TV news I think had some kind of a inferiority complex.  So they had hired a woman named--oh, god, what is her name--Linda Mathews from the Los Angeles Times to be their foreign senior producer.  They were gonna hire me.  Well, I won't go--I won't go through the whole thing.  I'll just say that the second day I was on the job I realized that I had made a mistake.  Because I am by nature a reporter.  I am not by nature a person who can just sit at a desk.  Even when I was an editor, I was--you know, I was writing stories on occasion; I was reporting stories on occasion; I was--and I was doing editing all--you know, all the time.  I couldn't just sit at a desk like those people.  Like, they would all get up and go to lunch at the same time.  When a correspondent would call in, everybody would pick up the telephone.  We'd all listen to the correspondent at the same time.  It was not me.  I, I couldn't do it.  I lasted I think six months.  And was mag- was nice enough to come with--to take me back.  I mean, I liked Peter well enough.  He was smart.  He liked--but he, like many white people in America, and like many whites in the media, had an extremely exalted opinion of himself.  There was an occasion when, when they were talking to me about it.  And he interviewed me.  He asked me--he said, "How do you feel knowing that, that, you know, one of the reasons we're after you is because you were black--wanted you to come here?"  And I said, "Well two things," and I said, "One is it's been my experience that, that black journalists, because of the race prejudice, have always had to be at least as good and usually better than the people who they were competing with in order to be judged equal.  And the other thing is how would you feel knowing that, you know, you have your job because you're tall and Canadian?"  And he got a laugh, you know, nervously, but it was a good comeback.  I mean, I didn't say to him: "'Cause after all, you know, you're not even a high school graduate; how in the hell are you gonna be qualified to have this job that you have?"  Anyway, I came back and I, I mentioned this conversation to somebody at Time.  Next thing I know, it ends up in New York Magazine.
Speaker 2: Uh-oh.
Speaker 1: And so when I get--go to work at--you know, Peter comes in and says, you know, "One thing you've gotta learn in TV is you don't--you know, you don't go around telling, telling tales about your--," you know your--.  We were--we were--here's an example: we were on--we went--we did this show in San Jose, California once.  And we flew out there on the corporate plane.  So everybody's asleep and, and, and, and got these sheets--these sheets on.  We land the plane and everybody takes the sheets--and I said, "What are we at, a Ku Klux Klan [KKK] meeting?"  Everybody laughed; thought it was funny.  Well coming back--Peter likes hot sau- liked hot sauce.  And he had--there's a big Vietnamese community in, in, in, in, in San Jose.  So he had gone in the Vietnamese neighborhood and collected all these different kinds of hot sauce.  And we're on the plane, and he's giving people, you know, bites of the hot sauce on this spoon.  And then when he comes to me, though, he hesitated before--and I said, "That's okay; I don't wanna any," you know.  I mean, this is 1993, you know (laughter).  I mean, unbelievable.
Story_ID: 642525
Speaker 1: I mean, one of the reasons I didn't like television was that a lot of people were, were very dishonest.  I mean, they--some of the most colossal liars in the media are--can be found on TV.  An example is a woman there who befriended me and took me to lunch, who worked with [HistoryMaker] Carole Simpson.  I knew Carole, so I said, "What do you--what do you think of Carole?"  She says, "Oh, Carole Simpson--Carole Simpson she's the most able correspondent, the best anchor we've ever had.  I love working with her."  Only to find out from Carole a little while later, that woman been trying to get her fired (laughter), you know, they were bitter enemies.  But she's gonna tell me this lie, you know, to try to mislead me about her relationship with her.  And I mean, that--I just found there was a whole lot of that kind of--that kind of stuff going on.  There was less of it at Time than, than, than there.  I mean, you know, you, you, you know, you always have some degree of, of politicking and backbiting, but it was much more of it in television than there was at Time.  And I, I, I, I didn't like it.  Anyway, I lasted less than a year--maybe eight months or so.  And I--Time was kind enough to have me come back.  I did not wanna be an editor anymore.  I wanted to be--go back to my original calling of being a reporter and writer, and I did.  I went into the New York bureau.  I became a senior correspondent.
Story_ID: 642526
Speaker 1: I asked about the O.J. trial [People of the State of California v. Orenthal James Simpson, 1995].  Well it turned--I knew Johnnie Cochran; I had known Johnnie Cochran for a long time.  His wife, Dale Mason [Dale Mason Cochran], was like a big sister to my second wife, Cassandra Clayton, so we knew them socially.  And I also knew him.  I had--I was aware of his work as a lawyer in Los Angeles [California] suing the, the LAPD [Los Angeles Police Department] for police brutality cases.  We had been on a couple of vacations with, with the Cochrans in, in Jamaica and New York, and other places.  So when he handled the--he settled the Michael Jackson case.  Remember Michael Jackson was accused of molesting this, this boy.  I went out to L.A. and I interviewed Johnnie about this settlement, and we got some details that nobody had.  And then O.J. [O.J. Simpson] was accused in a murder, and he hired that prominent lawyer from L.A., I can't remember his name--white guy [Robert Shapiro].
Speaker 2: The Kardashian [Robert Kardashian], wasn't it?
Speaker 1: No, it wasn't--no, Kardashian was never--was, was, was--his friend.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: No, this was his te- the main lawyer.  He was a round faced guy.  Johnnie wasn't on the case.  We all went with Congressman Julian Dixon, who was Johnnie's very best friend in the world.  We all went down to Jamaica for a vacation together.  I think they were considering bringing Johnnie into the case at that time, but he was not on the case.  And we all talked about it.  One of the things we talked about was that I was already convinced that, that the LAPD were lying about the case--that, that detective Mark Fuhrman had a story about finding the glove.  It just didn't make any sense at all.  So we, we talked about that and some other aspects of the case.  And then Johnnie--we came back from that vacation, and Johnnie decided to join the defense.  And he became the, the chief--eventually became the chief lawyer.  I actually was in Washington [D.C.] while the case was going on, but I watched it on TV every day.  I didn't talk to him about--I guess we talked, but we didn't talk about the case because he was on the case at that time, and he, you know, was not really able to, to, to, to discuss it until after the case went to the jury.  I went out to L.A. and I, I interviewed him before the verdict, and then we all--he had to give a speech in Cleveland [Ohio].  And Johnnie, Dale and I flew from L.A. to Cleveland, and interviewed him aboard the plane.  I got an amazing interview from him about all kinds of aspects of the case, including how--what he really thought about Chris Darden [Christopher Darden], the black prosecutor--all kinds of stuff that ended up in that story.  And then I believe I went from there--no, wait a minute; hold on I'm getting the chronology mixed up here.  I wrote a column.  I'm--I had started my column [Dividing Line] in 1995.  I wrote a column about, about the verdict in that case.  And essentially, one of the things that I argued was that, that people who are accusing the, the, the defense of playing the race card were being really ridiculous, because this was a case that dripped from race from the very beginning, and you--well you couldn't separate it out.  And anytime a black man is accused of murdering a white woman and a white guy with a knife, it's gonna be a case--it's just gonna drip with race.  There's nothing you can do about it.  It's gonna drip with race because Mark Fuhrman was a liar.  It was gonna drip with race because the LAPD had a history of, of racist treatment of black people and had a hi- was gonna drip with race because Johnnie Cochran had a history of suing the LAPD for that.  It was gonna drip with race because the LAPD had a history also of concocting cases and framing people.  And my conclusion was that in this case, they had set out to frame a guilty man.  I believe that O.J. had killed his wife [Nicole Brown Simpson].  I believe that he killed that young man Brown [sic. Ron Goldman].  But I also think that the LAPD framed him.
Story_ID: 642527
Speaker 1: They went over the wall without a warrant.  I think that Fuhrman [Mark Fuhrman] planted that glove.  He took that glove from the scene and planted it behind--.  His story about the fact that he went back up there with- without his gun drawn.  They were supposedly in search of a dangerous, desperate murder suspect, and he's gonna walk up a dark, narrow, confined space without his gun drawn?  Give me a break.  He went up there and he put the glove there, and he said, "Oh, I found this here."  He's a lying SOB.  I believe that they took the blood that they got from O.J., and they contaminated the clothing that they took from his home that night.  On the other hand, I believe O.J. did it, and I think he got away with it (laughter), you know.  If they had done their--if they had done their work--.  Now what had happened is the LAPD [Los Angeles Police Department] had been--and Marcia Clark and Darden [Christopher Darden] had been used to convicting all these poor sons of bitches who got dragged up there and got--had been framed in some cases by the LAPD, but who had--did not have the resources that O.J. had to hire the legal dream team that he had, led by Cochran [Johnnie Cochran] and joined by all these other smart lawyers that dismantled that case.  One of the other things I've said in that column [Dividing Line] was when they--you know, you, you may remember that, that, that the jury, which took a very short period of time to find him innocent--just a matter of an hour I think, something like that, said, who better to find him innocent?  They had had to listen to all this crap for all these months.  They knew whether they thought he was guilty or not.  And it wasn't based just on race.  It was based on the fact the prosecution did not have a case.  Once, once O.J. Simpson was--it was--once the main accuser of O.J. Simpson was found to have lied about using the N word--that was the end of the case.  He was a liar.  Now, I also wrote in the beginning of that story that O.J. had morphed racially--that he had started out the case as sort of white people's favorite Negro.  You remember--and I--and I--and I think I even called him a modern day Stepin Fetchit in them stupid movies he was in, and all the rest of that.  But he had morphed into--but, but the--during the course of the trial he had become black again because of his mistreatment at the hands of the--of the police, and the fact that Fuhrman had said all this stuff.  And Cochran's--you know, Cochran--Johnnie did some stuff I didn't like.  Johnnie had dragged in the, the Nation of Islam as his bodyguards for a minute, there.  I thought--you know, that's--you really don't need this.  That's un- that's over the top.  You don't have to do that.  But he were right for him--it was right for him to be found--to be found not guilty because the prosecution had not proved their case beyond a reasonable doubt.  And it was right for those people on the jury to, to reach that verdict.  If they had reached it in five minutes, they would have been right.  If they had reached it in any time during the time during the trial, they would have been right because the LAPD blew that case.  And Marcia Clark and Chris Darden were incompetent.  So between--you know, they've been sending all these guys off to San Quentin [San Quentin State Prison, San Quentin, California] all these years basically 'cause they didn't have good lawyers.  That's really what--what really what happened.  I mean, Johnnie, Johnnie disappointed me.  Because I thought that after the O.J. case [People of the State of California v. Orenthal James Simpson, 1995], that what he would do--well he, he actually wanted me to write his book.  And I wrote the proposal that he eventually used to get that book.  But the, the publisher had somebody else in mind to write the book, and they did not want me to do it.  They, they hired a guy, a black guy, who turned in a draft that they rejected, and it was turned over to a white fellow named Rutten [Tim Rutten], who ended up writing the eventual accepted manuscript ['Journey to Justice'].  But I was--Johnnie was--Johnnie had wanted me to be it--to do it, and I would have loved to have done that book.  It would have been a very different book than what you--what have ended--what you ended up with.  But he disappointed me.  I had thought that he was gonna use the prominence that he had received there to try to clean up justice in Los Angeles [California] and in California.  Instead, he went out and founded that ambulance chasing law firm [Cochran, Cherry, Givens, and Smith; The Cochran Firm, Los Angeles, California] that, that he headed up until--you know, up until he died.  And he basically just got--and he went on TV.  And he basically just got rich.  And even though I loved him all that time, and, and, and I still love his wife [Dale Mason Cochran] when I--on those rare occasions when I see her now, it was a disappointment to me that he did not follow through on, you know, what he--his (unclear) promise that he had gathered around himself by, by, by defending O.J.  I mean, that was a terribly divisive case, and it's, it's, it's, it's, it's hard to--it, it may--it really did make clear as if--as if we needed any reminding of the divide and the gap between black Americans and white Americans, and their perception of what really happens in this country.
Story_ID: 642528
Speaker 1: I wrote a lot about police misconduct.  I wrote about the Diallo [Amadou Diallo] trial.  He was a kid who was, was sho- he was shot forty-one times and killed by the law--by the--and they--those people got off because of an incompetent prosecution.  Again, they, they was--the, the--they, they were not guilty of murder, but they certainly were guilty of something.  And they should have been--they should have been punished.  He was an unarmed young man who maybe weighed 120 pounds, and they shot him forty-one times (unclear) for reaching for his wallet.  Now you can't tell me that everybody deserves to walk on a case--on a case like that.  That's just--that's--I mean, that just--that just doesn't happen.
Speaker 2: And the Abner Louima case was around the same--
Speaker 1: What?
Speaker 2: The Abner Louima was about the same time.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Abner Louima, I wrote about that case as well.  I mean, that was in--the Abner Louima case is in some ways--I can't--I don't remember which--I guess the Louima case came before the Diallo case, I guess.
Speaker 2: I think so.
Speaker 1: But that was another one in which you--where you had this egregious case of police misconduct.  And one of the--one of the things that really, really annoys me about white America is we do it all the time.  Some horrific racial incident like this will occur, and whites will say, "Yeah, we gotta take action; have to fix this, have to fix this," and everybody forgets about it.  And six months later another horrific incident occurs, and you go through the same process over and over again.  There is no--there is no learning curve.  So we never really--never really--we never really address, we never really solve the lingering racial problems we had because we never really confront them, and we never really stick to 'em long enough to reach any kind of conclusions.  I mean, the Louima case should have led to huge reforms in the police department [New York City Police Department], but it didn't.  That--the, the, the, the Diallo case should have led to huge reforms, but it didn't, you know.  And I mean, I'll, I'll never forget that trial 'cause I was sitting right near Diallo's mother [Kadiatou Diallo] during the testimony in that case.  And she's an immensely dignified woman.  And just to have to sit there and watch her listen to this crap they were trying to say about her son.  'Cause they were trying to suggest that he might have done something that might have justified his slaughter, which is appalling to me.  That's also where I first started becoming friends with Al Sharpton [HistoryMaker Reverend Al Sharpton].  Yeah, he was--he and his group [National Action Network] were up there protesting that.  I mean, he--see, Sharpton is a guy--again, he's--he's a guy that I have very ambivalent feelings about because I think what he did with the Tawana Brawley case is just unconscionable.  He--you know, that was--they turned the whole--the whole State of New York upside down for a long period of time on, on what essentially was proven by a black journalist, [HistoryMaker] Les Payne of Newsday to be a bogus case.  And to this day, Al won't admit that they--that, that he made a mistake there.  To this day, he's still dug in on it.  I admire him, and I like the way that he's, he's tried to, you know, use his influence to support Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] and so on.  But Tawana Brawley, I, I, I, I just don't see eye to eye on that one, you know.
Story_ID: 642529
Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-eight [1998], you wrote about Ward Connerly and Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes.  Yeah, I called him a clown.  Ward Connerly, who, at that time, was--and I guess still is--was crusading these attempts to outlaw--he's a black guy who was a big friend of Ronald Reagan's [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] who got on the board of regents for the--to the--for the state university of California [Regents of the University of California] and who decided that it would be a wonderful thing for a black to run around the United States and try to get rid of affirmative action.  Now, he had a great deal of success in that.  I think they passed--they--one of the referendums that he was behind passed in California.  I think they've had a couple of other places.  But I think he's one of the worst cynics in the world.  He, he would claim that Martin Luther King would be marching with him, which is absolute hogwash.  He, he, he fo- announced his organization, that I recall, on Martin Luther King's holiday [Martin Luther King Jr. Day], trying to associate King with o- with, with, with, with, with, with policies that King would have been absolutely against.  And he's--you know, he got mad at me because I--because I called him a clown and, and, and tried to make--and tried to mock him.  I wish I had mocked him more effectively so that he would have gone away sooner.
Story_ID: 642530
Speaker 1: Also, the other thing I did, speaking of mocking, I, I, I introduced a character, Buckwheat, into my columns.  And as I started writing satire, in addition to straight news columns, the first--the first one of these was there was a controversy in Oakland, California because the school system [Oakland Unified School District] was trying to figure out how to incorporate what was called Ebonics, black English, into the--into the curriculum.  So instead of writing a straight up column about it, I, I invented a place called the Home for Retired Racial Stereotypes where Buckwheat, the Kingfish, Tonto, Frito Bandito, Uncle Ben, Aunt Jemima, and all those other people--the Post It Man [ph.], and all those other people were--and Charlie Chan were living.  So I called up--I called up Buckwheat to ask him what he thought of Ebonics, and he--naturally he spoke in ungrammatical English, you know, "Here I is," and he basically said he and the Kingfish, who also speaks in a crazy language, basically said that this whole thing is a farce and that--you know, that, that, that, that the school system in Oakland was being run by people who didn't speak English themselves.  And if you actually read some of the documents they were putting out explaining, they were saying this is a genetically based ca- you know, said, well why (laughter), you know, what is this?  It was--it was nothing of the sort.  It was all a load of crap.  And I ended up--the column--this first one, by Buckwheat saying to Kingfish, you know, "Listen," he says, "you know, there are a lot of, of African words in, in, in, in, in--that we use in, in America now, in black English and, and standard English," then he says, "like banjo."  And, and Kingfish says, "Yeah, like the one that this whole controversy reminds me of, which is mumbo jumbo."  And that's where we ended it.  And I--so I kept bringing the Kingfi- I kept bringing Buckfish--Buckwheat back, and I elaborated.  I, I created a white organization called STUPID, which stood for the Society for Turning up Phony Issues and Diversions.  And I would say that STUPID is going around, getting black people to do idiotic things to make 'em look ridiculous.  For example, there was a controversy in Washington, D.C. where these black employees got angry because a white supervisor he used the word niggardly, and he actually used it in a proper sense.  And these people got all mad.  So I had Buckwheat come sailing out of the Home for Retired Racial Stereotypes in Washington to work behind the scenes to kill this out.  Because I said otherwise, if we don't stop this now, every time there's a nip in the air, or a chink in somebody's armor, we could have a race riot, you know.  So he straightens this out, and that--but it had actual quotations from some of the idiotic things that people were saying in that time, as well as some of the real things that people like [HistoryMaker] Julian Bond were saying that like essentially, you know, stop being angry and get a dictionary and find out, you know, what this word means.  It's a legitimate word.  It's not related to the N word.  It's nothing of the sort.  I had another one.  One of my favorite Buckwheats was about the Confederate flag flying over the State of South Carolina, and they, they, you know, Buckwheat and, and Kingfish and Charlie Chan and, and Frito Bandito spent a lot of time analyzing how idiotic all this is.  But then they end--it ends up with somebody saying to somebody else, "You know, yeah, you know--," I think we end up on the point about reparations.  And somebody says, "Well look if you ever get reparations, they're gonna pay you guys--all you fools off in Confederate d- Confederate dollars; you know, it's not gonna be worth anything."  And that's how we ended it.  So I, I mean, those, those--I, I, I had fun with those.  I got--I usually had--I sometimes had the character speaking in dialect, but I think I explained in the first one that said, we only use that dialect when we're in character.  The rest of the time we speak, you know, stan- we speak the same kind of standard English that our mothers and daddies told us to speak at home.  But occasionally, I would, you know, I'd f- .  I've kept up--I've kept up Buckwheat since, since I retired.  I use--I use Buckwheat in some of my writing for The Root online [theroot.com] now.  In fact, I just had him talking about Djang- the movie 'Django' ['Django Unchained'] a few weeks ago here.  The column was good, though.  I wrote the column for--from 1995 until I retired in 2001, and it was called Dividing Line.  And it was the first--I was the first African American columnist in--at any news weekly in the--in the country, which would--you know, Time, Newsweek or US News [US News and World Report].  And, you know, it was fun.
Story_ID: 642531
Speaker 1: You retired in 2001.
Speaker 2: I--in 2001; this was after Time Warner [Time Warner, Inc.] merged with AOL [America Online, Inc.; AOL, Inc.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I knew that the, the, the good times for journalism at Time Incorporated [Time Inc.] were on their way out.  In fact, I and almost all of the people who were my age--I was fifty-five [years old] at the time--who were my age and who had been at the magazine for some years, accepted the buyout and left because we knew it was--well we knew what AOL was gonna do, and they--and they did it.  It took 'em awhile to do it.  They were--they were going to, they were going to gut journalism, and they did not want anybody who had a, a, a sort of memory about the way we had done things there to do it.  Now I'm so dumb that when the day it was announced that there had been a merger, I thought Time Warner had taken over AOL.  It wasn't until I turned on the television, and I saw Jerry what's his name [Gerald Levin], who was the, the chairman of Time Warner, had then come out with a--with no tie on, which was the--you know, the garb of the Internet types at that time that I re- oh, my god, it's the other way around: AOL is taking over Time Warner.  And, you know, like I say, we knew that it was up--it wasn't--it wasn't gonna be good.  It was not gonna be good, and it wasn't (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear) how, how big AOL was then compared to now (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Well they bought--AOL bought--AOL bought Time Warner with, with inflated Internet dollars.  This is--this is when they had--the Internet bubble was at its height.  And Time had been looking for some kind of a partner for some period of time 'cause they were trying to get in on all of that.  They and, you know--those--I mean, those guys, they, they--the--you know, the company started out with Time magazine and it--and it built itself up into this huge entertainment conglomerate with HBO [Home Box Office] and Time Warner Cable and all these magazines and all this stuff.  It was a big sprawling company, and nobody knew how to operate it at that point.  But the magazine had--the magazine had remained pretty consistently--pretty consistent over that period of time.  I knew it was gonna change though when they came 'cause they didn't--they, they were--they were playing a different game.
Story_ID: 642532
Speaker 1: So what did you do from 2001 to 2008 when you started writing for (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Two thousand one [2001] to 2008?
Speaker 1: Yeah, when you started writing for The Root [theroot.com].
Speaker 2: Well let's see--
Speaker 1: Did you start writing for The Root?
Speaker 2: Well let's see, the first job I had, I tau- I went to--oh, I should--I had a contract with Time from two thou- from the time I retired for about a year and a half I was--I was contributing columns on a freelance basis; I was no longer a staff writer.  Then I got a job at Hampton University [Hampton, Virginia] as--I was what they called an endowed professional.  And I came--so I taught at Hampton for two years.  I taught journalism courses at Hampton, and that was fun.  And then moved here in 2006.  Let's see--wait a minute--I--I guess I--I guess I taught at Hampton from 2004 to 2006.  And then I taught here from 2006 to 2007 at D.C. U [University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.].  Then I was just a freelance writer.  I was a freelance writer in all of two--I wrote--I wrote for The Root.  I wrote for the Af- the Baltimore Afro [Baltimore Afro-American; Afro-American Newspapers] and some other people on the--during the campaign year, 2007-2008.  I had--I was pretty busy during journalism during that period of time.
Story_ID: 642533
Speaker 1: As a freelancer writing about the election, did you have the kind of resources you needed to keep up with the campaign?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't do--I wasn't traveling with the--with the campaign.  In fact, one of the things I don't like about being a freelancer in, in, in--especially in a place like Richmond [Virginia] where you're a little bit off the beaten path--is that you do not have firsthand contact with sources the way you have when you're working--.  And I mean, I was--at Time, you know, I could just get on an airplane and go anyplace that I needed to go.  I could pick up the phone and pretty much get anybody that I wanted to talk to to call me back.  As a freelancer you--you know, you're, you're--and a lot of times you're dependent upon secondhand information that you're gaining.  And so you have--one of the skills you have to have had is figure out which Internet news sources that you're gonna trust, you know, and which ones you're gonna--you're gonna ignore.  'Cause a lot of what you're writing about--and so I ended up doing much more commentary than reporting.  I mean, I wasn't--I wasn't--I wasn't trying to--I couldn't break stories that way obviously.  But what I could try to do is see what they--what they added up to.  I had--I wrote a lot of stuff for The Root [theroot.com] on the campaign.  On Obama's campaign, which I'll, I'll be honest, I never thought I would live to see the day when a black man would be elected president of the United States.  I thought that the best Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] would do is--would, would be to get on the ticket with Hillary Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton] and that he'd get to be vice president that way.  I never expected him to actually win the doggone thing.
Speaker 1: What (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And when he did--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --I was, and remain to this day, just utterly flabbergasted by this.  I mean, when, when we went to vote for--well in 2008--our polling place is at a church around the corner here--my wife [Gayle Jessup White] put on a pair of her late father's eyeglasses so, as she put it, she could vote--she--he could see her voting for the black man through her--you know, through her eyes.  It was--that was symbolic to her like that.  It was--it's just breathtaking.  I wrote a--I wrote a story for The Root about what his election meant.  That--it's just that--it's just that I can't stop singing.  I'm singing 'America the Beautiful.'  I'm singing 'The Star Spangled Banner.'  I'm singing every freedom song, because it was just so colossally moving to me to see this--to see this barrier broken.  And then for him to actually be a brother, and to be married to that astounding black woman.  I mean--you know with so many of these guys they get up there, and they got some namby pamby washed out looking either white or, or near white--he's got Michelle [Michelle Obama].  I mean--he brought his mother to the White House [Washington, D.C.]--mother in law [Marian Shields Robinson] to the White House--all of these things.  I mean, it just--it just--it's just breathtaking to me what this means for this country.  I can't--I can't express it, and I've, I've written about it over and over again.  And as I say the best I could do was just say, "I just can't stop singing."  Oh, and I did say this.  Maybe, just maybe this is the start of us being able to heal that twoness that W.E.B. Du Bois wrote about when he's talking about, "One ever feels his twoness," you know, when a black, an American, torn between, you know, two, two warring selves, held together only by the dogged strength of our own body.  I said maybe, maybe we could stop doing that.  Maybe we can be just one thing now.  Maybe we can just be American and black without that being a, a tension.  Now as it turns out, it's probably over--I was--I think I was over--overly optimistic about that.  And I think the race issue and this--problems of racial identification are just as persistent now as they used to be.  But that was my hope on the day that he was sworn in, or the day that he was elected, that this would mean--that finally would mean that, that, that white Americans--even though a majority of them did not vote for him, enough of them had voted for him that maybe we were at the point where we could start dealing with some of this stuff, and put some this behind.  I never thought we should become a post-racial society.  I never wanted people to give up their racial identities or their heritage or their culture, or any of that thing.  I did hope that we would move toward becoming a post-racist society, and that we would start to address these problems of inequality and discrimination more forthrightly.  You know, that's yet to be.
Story_ID: 642534
Speaker 1: The second Obama election, did you think that he was going to win the second time?
Speaker 2: The only time I had the slightest doubt that he would win was after the first debate with Romney [Mitt Romney] because I thought he had messed up so badly there that it would change the dynamic of the election.  I never thought--Romney disappointed me too, because I had origin- I had written and I had hoped that of all of that terrible crew of Republican candidates that, that Romney would become the nominee, and this is why.  I wanted--I thought one of the--one of the problems I had with Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] in the first term was I didn't think he fought hard enough to get some of the stuff done that he wanted to get done.  I thought he compromised too much.  I didn't think he got fired up enough.  I didn't think he was partisan enough.  I wanted him--and I think it's generally better for the United States if we have a really serious debate during--candidates about how we're gonna address these problems.  I didn't want him to run against a fool like Santorum [Rick Santorum] or, or, or, or, or Michele, Michele Bachmann, and win in a landslide without breaking a sweat; I wanted him to have to work for it.  And I thought of all the candidates that the, the Republicans presented that the only one who, who would represent that kind of challenge to him would be Romney.  I was disappointed in Romney because Romney turned out to be such a turkey.  He--he is--he is--he may be the worst presidential candidate that I've ever seen in my life, next to Michael Dukakis.  And maybe there's something about Massachusetts politicians because the three most recent presidential candidates who have come from there have all been turkeys.  I mean, Kerry [John Kerry] was a turkey too.  It was disappointing to me that Romney did not have better ideas.  It was disappointing to me that Romney was such a stuffed shirt.  It was disappointing to me that Romney would allow himself to be dragged around by the Tea Party, and they would keep repeating that same stale nonsense on policies that Republicans put forward.  I thought he could make a case for a kind of creative capitalism that Obama would have to answer, and in the course of it, we could really ha- we could really come up with realistic ways of addressing the problems that the country's facing.  Because it's clear we're in a very serious mess.  The people who're concerned about the size of the deficit and the national debt have got a point.  We've got to address that.  The people who are saying we also have to do more to stimulate this economy and put people back to work, and we have to address some of these problems of, of, of reforming the healthcare system and so on, they too have a point.  How do you put that together?  Well we don't--we don't have a good answer now because we didn't have a good debate bet- in, in the campaign.  Obama never really had--he never really had to come forth with it--with, with, with, with, you know, with the passion and the thought that I hoped he would come up with.  And Rom- becau- and he didn't because Romney failed to deliver, and it's a shame.  And I hope the next time around we get a more evenly divided bal- I mean, I'm a liberal, unabashed--I'm a Democrat.  I want liberals and Democrats to win.  But I want 'em to have to fight for it, and I want 'em to have to defend it, and I want 'em to be--if you've got skin in the game, if you have to fight for something, you're much more likely to try to actually carry it through once you--once you get there.
Story_ID: 642535
Speaker 1: Having said all that, I think Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], at least in the initial part of his second term, is a chastened, and I think more aggressive, and I hope more effective, president.  I'm a little bit concerned--the day we're talking now--this is the day before he's gonna meet with congressional leaders to try to do something about the so called sequester.  I don't know why we're dealing with this artificial, nonsense crisis on the last day before it goes into effect.  I don't know why we're, we're doing that.  I don't know why--I don't know why Obama did not do more in his first term to defame the Tea Party, which I think is the source of the--the main source of the dysfunctionality of the American political system right now and which is--I also take as a throwback to the mobs that surrounded George Wallace and all--and all the rest of those bad actors back in the past--just same people just, you know, with a new name and doing the same stuff.  Sarah Palin is the direct descendant of George Wallace, if you ask me.  I don't know why he didn't do more to confront them more when they were taking control of the debate over healthcare.  I don't know why he didn't do more to confront them when they were taking control over the debate about what we do about the budget.  And now, you know, we're kind of paying the price for his, his, his good heartedness and his attempts to compromise and be bipartisan in the first--in the first--in--during his first term.  I don't think you can ever make a mistake by being too partisan, if, if you're president, if you're facing a--an engrained partisan opposition.  If you're facing a cooperative, decent--you know--I mean, we've gotta--if you think back to the way politics used to be practiced in this country, when you actually could build consensus between Republicans and Democrats over important national issues even though they might have some big disagreements, they, they knew it was important to fix things.  That's not what you have now.  You got a situation now where a whole lot of Republicans actually think that dragging the country over this sequester is actually a good thing for them.  I don't see how, but that's what they think.  A lot of them thought it was good for us to get into this--get into this mess.  I don't see how, but that's what they think.  You know, I'm--look, I'm no fool.  I'm not naive.  I don't--I don't think Obama walks on water, but I think he's got the better part of this argument.  And--but I'm--but I'm also embarrassed that we--I'm embarrassed for us as a country.  I mean, I, I was supposed to write something about it this week.  I haven't pulled it together because I'm not quite sure what the approach I wanna take.  One of the possibilities was that--was that--I was gonna actually have the, the Home for Retired Racial Stereotypes folks practicing up sleeping in hammocks, studying their bad Spanglish, Spanish and wearing sombreros and all that because they are now living in a banana republic.  'Cause that's what the United States is starting to look like here.  I mean, this is--you got a totally dysfunctional government.  Now the other thing that people forget about Obama is the previous eight years this country was ruled ov- was run over by prob- what I think is probably the worst presidential administration we've had in long, long time--the most irresponsible, dishonest people who turned the, the, the good economic situation they had when, when Bush [President George Walker Bush] took office--remember we had a surplus; we were paying down the national debt--and who even before 9/11 [September 11, 2001], had turned--put it on a course to where we're gonna be where we ended up now.  And then after 9/11, not only screwed up the Afghanistan war but started us on a bogus war in, in, in, in Iraq [Iraq War].  They lied about not only the weapons [weapon of mass destruction], they also lied about--they said that this war is gonna be paid for with Iraqi oil revenues.  Remember Cheney [Dick Cheney] said that?  Ended up costing us a trillion dollars.  All those lives--those kids killed--and tens and tens of thousands of them maimed physically and psychologically, including the sons of two of my closest friends who came back from Iraq and Afghanistan totally fucked up.  And they may never be right.  They may never get right.  That's the price we pay for having elected Cheney and Bush.
Story_ID: 642536
Speaker 1: Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] is in some respects like the black may- first black mayor of Newark [Kenneth A. Gibson]: he comes in, he's expected to clean up horrible mess, and he doesn't really have the resources to do it, and he faces a tremendous, engrained, dug in opposition that believes in all kinds of hogwash.  They believe he was born in Kenya.  They believe he's a Socialist.  They believe he's a Muslim; most of all they believe he's black, and that to them means that he's not to be respected, he's not to be thought of as anything as, as--thought of as legitimate; and he's to be opposed--just because he's for it, we're against it.  And that's why, you know, this, this, this backlash--And I, I attribute a substantial portion of the--of the opposition he run into to sheer, flat out racism, which is still a problem in the United States.  And yesterday, February 27th, 2013, an argument in the [U.S.] Supreme Court over whether Section 5 of the Voting Rights Act [Voting Rights Act of 1965] is still needed.  Section 5 of the Voting Rights Act essentially requires jurisdictions that have a long track record of discriminating against non-white people--voters--to get approval from the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice] for--if they can change their election laws.  Well I live in Virginia.  Just in the last month alone in Virginia they've tried to do the following things: they tried to create a situation where they offered blacks a new majority black state senate seat in exchange for rigging the election in every other district so that, that we'd end up having permanent control by conservative Republicans in the state senate here [Senate of Virginia]; and also tried to change the way they'd vote--they award the electoral vote in this state so that instead of it being given out now on the basis of the state (unclear) vote, which Obama won, they wanna set it up on congressional districts.  If their scheme had been in place, even though Obama won this state by one and a half--by some huge margin--I think--four percentage points I think--he would have ended up with less electoral votes than Romney [Mitt Romney] got.  That's from their sneak- this is--and you--somebody is telling me--and they're actually saying it in the court yesterday, "Oh, things have changed; we don't need--we don't need these kind of protections anymore."  Get--I'm sorry; give me a break.  You cannot trust people.  Now it--as it happens, they can say, "Well, we're not against them because they're black; we're against them because they're Democrats."  Well, you know, 95 percent of black people who, who have a partisan affiliation are Democrats.  You can't separate that from them.  If you're discriminating against, against them as Democrats, I don't know how you draw the--I don't know how you draw the line between those two.  And that's exactly what they've been doing.  And all this kind--and these kind of shenanigans are taking place in states all across the country, these attempts to change the electoral vote system, and this funky kind of redistricting stuff, in addition to all of the voter ID laws and all the rest of it aimed at voter suppression.  And somebody's telling me we don't--that, that we don't need the protection of the Voting Rights Act?  I'm sorry; I think that's very naive.  And I'm afraid, though, that what's gonna happen is that with the--with the--with the cooperation of our only black Supreme Court justice, Clarence Thomas, that, you know, that, that, that, that's--that, that, that, that law is gonna be thrown out.  And I--and it means that we're gonna have a much--won't be impossible, but it's gonna be much more difficult for us to defend ourselves from these kind of shenanigans and is, is--in, in, in the future.  It's a bad, bad thing we're looking at now.
Story_ID: 642537
Speaker 1: What's your journalistic philosophy?
Speaker 2: My journalistic philosophy?  That's complicated.  I, I believe that it is possible for a journalist to be fair, thorough, and accurate, and also to write from a distinct ethnic point of view.  I think one of the things that's happened in the United States in the Kerner Commission [National Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders] that I talked about earlier references, I think we've always had an implicit white point of view that was called neutrality or objectivity, but it really wasn't.  It was just--that's the way white people see things that's--that's subjective.  You, or a black person, you say the things the way black people--or you're not objective.  So, therefore, you can't be a journalist 'cause you're not objective.  Well that's hogwash.  I think you can be--what I taught my--I teach my journalism students that, don't try to be objective because it's impossible.  Only God can be that.  But what you can be is fair, by which I mean that you can describe and summarize a person's position in such a way that that person would agree that it's an accurate reflection of what they think.  You can be accurate, which means you've gotten you facts straight.  You can be thorough, which means you're leaving no stone unturned.  And you can be finally self aware, which means you have looked into yourself to see who you are and how being who you are influences what it is that you're writing and the way in which you're implementing those other--those other standards; I call it facts, you know.  It's not objective; it's a difference between that--between objective and being these things.  And this is what I--this is what I, I, I try to instill in those students.  And it's one of the--it's the way I've tried to--I mean, I never boiled it down to an acronym like that until I became a teacher.  But those were the sort of the ways in which.  Now, the other thing--aspect of it is I set out consciously at Time, especially when I got that column [Dividing Line], to write from a self-conscious, black point of view, not the black point of view 'cause all--we're--you know, every black person has their own way of being black and their own viewpoint, but as a black American--as a black person, this is my way into the world.  And my experience as a black person shapes the way I evaluate every doggone thing else that I see.  And I didn't wanna deny that; I didn't wanna pretend that that doesn't exist and that that doesn't influence my thinking process about, about things.
Story_ID: 642538
Speaker 1: Finally, the other thing, though, is a journalist really does have to be independent.  You know, Jesse--to give you a concrete example.  Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] thought we were supposed to be on his side; we were supposed to write favorably about 'em, and we were supposed to hide unfavorable things about him.  Well I never believed that.  My compact, if I had one, is with the person who's reading what I write; it's not with the person that I'm writing about.  It's with the person--the per- person I'm ultimately writing this for is somebody out--who's out there picking up the magazine or reading it on the Internet and say, "This is what I thought."  It's not about the people who are in the story.  It's about the person who's consuming and what they think about it.  So if I owe allegiance to anybody, it's to that person.  It's not to Jesse or any of his counterparts.  It sometimes can get difficult.  I mean, Cornel West is a friend of mine--not a close friend but a--but a good friend, and we have been for a number of years.  I'm embarrassed by what--the way he's been conducting himself with [HistoryMaker] Tavis Smiley these last few years.  I thought he--I think he's lost his mind.  And I've had to write critically about him and Tavis, another, another friend of mine.  Sometimes it get rough because these people are--if you forget--if you forget that your allegiance is to the reader and think it's to the people you're writing about, you might start pulling your punches, you know.  It's, it's, it's (simultaneous) --
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah so what, what is it that Cornel West is doing that you--
Speaker 1: Well they've been running around what I think making outrageous demands that the president address some kind of black agenda that they've cooked up.  I mean, I, I think in Tavis' case it's personal.  I think that he--I think that he believes that he ought to be the, the Booker T. Washington or W.E.B. Du Bois of our time instead of just a media personality.  I think Cornel, who is a really, really smart guy, but who has a--has a--has a--has a, a, a, a, a tendency toward celebrity that I think is, is, is not good, and who hasn't written anything serious in a long, long, long while, you know, that he's kind of--that he's kind of lost his mind.  I, I, I, I think it's a shame what's happened to, to Cornel.  Because he's, he's really one of our best minds and one of our great moral thinkers at one time.  But it's been a long while since he's been--since he's lived up to that--to that kind of--that kind of a standard.  That--but they've been running around the country essentially dogging Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] for not being black enough, and for saying really crazy things about--you know, that--I mean, Cornel has said that Obama is not black enough because he wasn't descended from African Americans--things, things of that nature that don't make any sense.  It sounds almost as crazy as some of the stuff that right wingers say about him.  I mean, it's not--it's not really terribly different from saying he's a Kenyan, you know, to, to, to suggest all those things.  Now Obama is not an African American in the sense that he's not a descendant of an American slave, but he is--ain't nobody gone be married to Michelle Obama and not be a stone cold brother.  That just--that, that, that just ain't happening.  His credent- as far as I'm concerned, his credentials as one of us is established by her existence and the fact that he chose to be one of us.  You know, he didn't have to; he chose to be one of us.
Story_ID: 642539
Speaker 1: When you look back at everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy as a journalist?
Speaker 2: Well, I would say this: it's not what I hoped it would be.  I hoped that when I left Time for example, that I would have created a space big enough that another black journalist could have stepped in and picked up where I left off, and exceeded it.  That didn't happen.  If I do have a positive aspect of it, it is that I did break some stories, I did do some good, and I entertained some folks.  The Buckwheat stuff was entertaining to them and--as well as being insightful.  I got some--I got some--I got some good work done in Africa and the United States about, about (unclear).  I was always--I was always honest, always honest; was never in anybody's pocket.  I never flinched away from telling a story because I thought it might reflect badly on anybody.  If it was--if I thought it was true and important, I tried to tell it.  Mainly, though, to tell you to truth, despite all that highfaluting stuff about, you know, creating spaces for black people, which is--which is--I take seriously--mainly, I just had a hell of a lot of good times; I had fun.  I got to go places and see things and talk to people I never would have gone to, seen, or talked to if I hadn't been a journalist.  I was this pretty shy kind of kid.  I got to be a--because I had to--you put a notebook and a pen in my hand, I'll go up to anybody and ask 'em anything.  And that was--that was the best part about being a journalist.  You could--you could--you had a license to question.  You had a, a, a, a, a license to be belligerent in, in the cause of telling the truth.  And that is really what I try to do.  I try to never, ever, ever back off because somebody didn't like it, you know.  And, and, in fact, if they didn't like it (laughter), I liked it all the better.  I--my--that--my biggest regret, though--I--I'll end on this point--my biggest, though, is that Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] didn't come along a few years sooner.  I mean, I spent all those years covering black politicians all around the country, waiting for somebody to make that breakthrough, you know.  Soon as I--seemed like as soon as I'd had on--hung, hung up my spurs (laughter) along comes Obama.  We got--and we got the black president that I always--you know, I always thought--I never thought I would live to see.  There he is and I've--and I, I wasn't there to, to cover it firsthand.  I real- I really wish I had that.  I really wish--that's--that's my only re- that's my only real regret over that--over that period.
Story_ID: 642540
Speaker 1: You have children, right?
Speaker 2: I have children, yeah.
Speaker 1: Tell us--
Speaker 2: I have four children.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My oldest son is Kyle [ph.].  He lives in Hagerstown, Maryland.  He is a network administrator for the [U.S.] Department of Justice.  He's married to a beautiful, wonderful woman named Katrina [ph.].  They have five children--all girls, two sets of twins--all smart.  And they're all named--all of the their names--everybody in the family's names starts with K, so it's Kyle, Katrina, the oldest girl is Kyla [ph.], who'll be thirteen in December.  Then there's Kenna [ph.] and Kalen [ph.], who will be eleven this year.  And then there are the six year olds, Kara [ph.] and Kasey [ph.], who are reading like made.  They're wonderful kid- wonderful kids.  My second son is George [George White].  He is a software engineer in Cambridge, Maryla- Cambridge, Massachusetts.  He is married.  His wife is named Karen Stevens.  They have one little girl named Zoe [ph.], also six, is also reading like mad now.  I'm very proud of them.  My son James [ph.] is, is--lives in New York City [New York, New York].  He's a musician.  Can't make a living as a musician so he's works as a manager in the Apple store on 5th, 5th Avenue [Apple Store Fifth Avenue, New York, New York], and then plays his gigs by night.  He's not--he's single.  And then I have a daughter, Kristen [ph.], my youngest, who is a student studying business at Bennett College in, in North Carolina [Greensboro, North Carolina].  That's the--that's the four of 'em.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, now, you say your father [Jack E. White] passed, passed in '88 [1988].
Speaker 2: I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: Your father passed in '88 [1988], right?
Speaker 2: My father died in '88 [1988].
Speaker 1: And, and is your mother [Sara Williams White] still alive?
Speaker 2: My mother's still living.  She turns--my mother will turn eighty-eight next week on March 8th, next week.  I'll be--I'll be there in Washington [D.C.] to eat Chinese food with her.  She likes Chinese food so we're having Chinese dinner on, on her eighty-eighth birthday.  She lives by herself in Washington.  She's still, still driving much to my chagrin.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay--
Speaker 2: And then--let's see--I've got--well we talked about my brothers and sisters I guess already.  And then I have a stepson with my wife--she's--he's the son of my wife, Gayle Jessup White, his name is Charles Franklin [ph.].  He is a junior at MIT in Massachusetts [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], studying computer science and electrical engineering.  He will not be home for spring break this year because he's going to New Orleans [Louisiana] to work with, building rehab housing or something down there.  He's--he'll be twenty-one this year, so he's--everybody's, everybody's growing up.  We're empty nesters here in Richmond [Virginia] and, you know, having a--having, having, having a good time with no kids--no kids around.  It's great.
Story_ID: 642541
Speaker 1: Now is there anything I haven't asked you about that we need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: I don't--man, have we've been talking so--I think we've covered--we've, we've, we've talked about things I had forgotten all about.  I had forgotten up--for example, that smell of that Wonder Bread.  I had forgotten all about that.  We've talked--we've--I think we've covered it--we--I mean, there's a--there's, there's always more, but we've, we've covered it pretty good.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, my last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Oh, oh I would like to be remembered as being--the journalism doesn't even come into it.  I would like to be remembered as being a great grandfather, a good dad, and a--and a--and, and--and a--and a--and a decent husband for, for, for, for, for Gayle [Gayle Jessup White], but mostly, as a great grandfather.  I'm trying to make up for being away from home when I was doing my journalism when my, when my children were growing up.  I missed a lot of their lives 'cause I was away on assignment a lot of the time.  I try to--I'm trying to make up for that by lavishing tremendous amount of love on my grandchildren, spoiling them just profoundly rotten.  I mean, rotten to the point that they--that they smell, they stench--they have stench because I spoil them so much.  But that's what--I mean, I wanna be--I'd like to be remembered as being a good man.  And if, if I did some good journalism in the process, you know, that's nice.  But I don't--I don't think anybody's gonna remember those stories.  I mean, the truth is, you know, we--they used to print--they, they print newspapers on newsprint, which is used to line birdcages and wrap up, you know, the kitty litter.  I mean, nobody remembers that stuff.  But what the--what they--what they do remember is the--you know, what kind of--what kind--you know, the impact you have on the people who are closest to you, and that's, that's--I know it's bit cliche.  But the truth of the matter of that is--that's what's most important to me, especially now I'm getting older.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Oh, listen, thank you.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 642542
Speaker 1: This is a, a composite of cover stories that I edited when I was in the nation section at Time magazine.  The, the first one off on the left is the first one that I did.  It was a story about guns in America, 'Armed America,' it was the occasion after a school shooting.  I think that was in 1987 [sic. 1989].  The ones that I'm proudest of would include one down on the bottom, which is a cover story in New York City [New York, New York] that employed--it was just a real good story really--just really well done.  We used every technique we had from polling to splendid photojournalism to really good writing and reporting to produce that.  And the other one was called 'America's Changing Colors,' which is here (gesture), which is a story about how the growth of non-whites was soon gonna make America a country in which there was no particular ethnic majority.  And that story was way ahead of its time.
Speaker 2: This is a silly--this is a silly photograph of me hanging out of a bus at the airport in I think Lagos, Nigeria in about 1981 when I was a foreign correspondent for Time in Africa.
Speaker 1: This is me talking with Lieutenant Robert Goodman [Bobby Goodman], who was a United States Army--or, sorry, United States Navy pilot that Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] freed from captivity in Syria in, in early part of 1984.  We were on board an American military plane flying back to the United States.
Speaker 2: This is a rather--here's and me in need of a haircut, interviewing Jesse Jackson on his campaign plane during the nine- his 1984 presidential campaign.
Speaker 1: This is me, John Mashek [John W. Mashek], Norma Quarles and Bob Boyd [Robert Boyd] when we were panel- panelists on the 1984 vice presidential debate between George H.W. Bush [George Herbert Walker Bush] and--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Is it Dukakis [Michael Dukakis]?
Speaker 1: --Geraldine Ferraro, who was the Democratic vice presidential nominee, and that's in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: This is--this is me and Margaret Warner, now of public broadcasting ['PBS NewsHour'], then of Newsweek having a laugh aboard Walter Mondale's campaign in the 1984 presidential campaign, which we both covered.
Speaker 1: This is me and the--and the--and the--and the bureau chiefs and chief of correspondents of Time magazine at a meeting in New York.  I guess this was probably in the late 1980s.
Speaker 2: This is--this is one of my favorites.  This is me watching [HistoryMaker] Gordon Parks pose at Reverend Jesse Jackson for a photograph that ran in the magazine in 1983.  This picture was taken in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: This me in what was then called Zimbabwe, Rhodesia in--the day before Robert Mugabe's election as the first prime minister of independent Rhodesia--or independent Zimbabwe.  I'm there with another journalist, Peter Hawthorne, who's to my right.  We're at a camp where troops from the British Commonwealth [Commonwealth of Nations] were training the Zimbabwe rebel armies to try to make them a, a, a standardized military force.
Speaker 2: This is me with Jesse Jackson.  To my right is Earl Caldwell then of the New York Daily News.  And the two little kids just to my left are two of my sons, James [ph.] and George [George White].  We're with Jackson during his 1984 presidential campaign.
Speaker 1: Oh, this is I think an AP [Associated Press] photo of the panel at the--at the vice presidential debate in nine- 1984.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) This is me in 1967 in the loud striped jacket, looking over the shoulder of H. Rap Brown [Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin] who is getting ready to stand trial for allegedly inciting a riot in Cambridge, Maryland.
Speaker 1: This myself and a New York Times [The New York Times] reporter, Gregory Jaynes in 1981 or so, arranging an interview with the emir of Kano [Ado Bayero]--that's a city in northern Nigeria.  And this is his palace, which is made entirely of mud; huge building.
Speaker 2: This is me and [HistoryMaker] Jay Harris, then of USA Today, standing in front of the statue of Booker T. Washington [Lifting the Veil of Ignorance], pulling the cloak of ignorance off the head of a freed slave at Tuskegee Institute [Tuskegee University] in Alabama [Tuskegee, Alabama].  I've always said that he was--looked to me like he was pulling the cloak of ignorance over the head of the freed slave (gesture).  But it's the other way around.  That was in 19--1981 or--no, 19--1983.
