Story_ID: 551619
Speaker 1: All right.  My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Well, that would be Lewis, L-E-W-I-S, Waites [HistoryMaker Luigi Waites].
Speaker 1: Okay, W-A-I-T-E-S (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) T-E-S.  But may, maybe the generation that's living now and what's gone by, know me by Luigi.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, how did you get the name Luigi?
Speaker 2: I give it to myself, which is--it, it took a long time to search, to research it and figure out what sounds good.  And once I decided--I remember working somewhere, asking a bunch of Italian fellows I worked with, how do you say Lewis in, in Italian.  And they said, "Luigi."  And I said, "Yeah, I like that, yeah, I like that."  And so, I said, "Okay, everybody call me Luigi."  And they said, "What!"  And I said, "Lewis, Lewis, Lewis," like I was a scared of it and, and then gradually it grew on, and grew on, and grew on.  And, and once I changed my identification to Luigi, my life seemed to have changed.
Speaker 1: So like you took control of your--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it kind of, kind of that I, I would guess that, that would be what I would say, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Seven, ten, twenty-seven [July 10, 1927], Omaha, Nebraska, Douglas County.  And my mother [Ione Lewis Kelley] says, and I guess she would know, I was born at home.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Now?  I don't know what it is now (laughter).  I can't say that I'm retired because you have to have a job to retire from and I've never really had--I've done some of everything but I'm basically known as a musician and a teacher.
Speaker 1: And, primarily, a percussionist I believe.
Speaker 2: Yeah, in that area, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. All right.
Speaker 2: I have done some writing and arranging and stuff, but that kind of all--but everybody does that so it's not a big deal.
Speaker 1: I guess it'd be safe to say too that in general you're an artist really in a lot of ways.
Speaker 2: In a sense I guess that could be, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause you do some visual art too?
Speaker 2: That's only something--well, yes, that's something that's come about long time coming through the past but I never knew it.  So, it's always something that's been there but visual art has always been something that I kind of dabbled with but not really good at it, but
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so, sir, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Oh, seven, seven something--10/07/07.  So that'd be October 7, 2007 (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yes, sir, okay.  And, and where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: In my apartment, 1319 Leavenworth, Omaha, Nebraska.
Story_ID: 551620
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask of everyone.  And they only require a short answer (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Okay.
Speaker 1: And the first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: I'm gonna have to say, no, because my tastes change constantly.  What I, what I like this now, no.  We'll keep it at no, I don't--I like a variety of things.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: No, same thing it changes from time to time.  I think, if anything, red, red, bright red is a color that I, I'm not basic--I wouldn't like to wear.  But, basically, almost anything.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: No, I really don't.  I like all of them.  I mean, different things for different places.  I like the fall for the fall back when there was a fall.  I like the winter for some of its things and dislike it for other things, spring.  So, no, I really don't, I just kind of meld with what's happening and accept it for what it is.
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I don't ever go on vacation.  There's a lot of places I maybe would like to go, but I haven't been so I don't know.  I don't have a favorite destination.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: If I do, I'm not aware of it.
Story_ID: 551621
Speaker 1: Well, I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Sylvester Waites] side of the family but we'll start with your mother's side (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Ooo!  Best thing I can do on that was, is Ione Lewis [Ione Lewis Kelley] was her maiden name.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's I-O--
Speaker 2: I-O-N-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Lewis?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: L-E-W-I-S?
Speaker 2: Yes.  That was the maiden name that I know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I think 1900, October.
Speaker 1: October 1900?
Speaker 2: Twelfth, I think it is.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and I might be off a day or two or something on that.
Speaker 1: And, where was she born?
Speaker 2: Ooo, Chicago [Illinois], I think but I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, well, what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side, I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nothing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Absolutely nothing.
Speaker 1: So you're not sure where they came from or--
Speaker 2: Chicago is all I know on my mother's side.  And we never really talked, never really talked about it a lot.  And, if there was talk about it, it was at a time that I don't remember.
Speaker 1: So, there are no stories passed down about--nobody could remember Reconstruction or the Civil War or slavery (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not that I know of.  The only thing I remember my mom talking about was the--in--maybe in--that stuck with me is the fact they come to Omaha [Nebraska] during that riot they had--when--the lynching that they had.
Speaker 1: Oh, 1919?
Speaker 2: Nineteen thirteen [1913].
Speaker 1: Nineteen thirteen [1913]?  Are you talking about the one in--
Speaker 2: In Omaha.
Speaker 1: Omaha?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Nineteen nineteen [1919], nineteen.
Speaker 2: No, it was 1913, she said.
Speaker 1: Oh, there was a riot in 1913 too?
Speaker 2: Yes, they lynched a black man.
Speaker 1: Okay, now I know the one--well, we were just down to--well, it's, it's supposed to be and it's written as 1919.
Speaker 2: Well, then it was 1919.  I, I, oh, '13 [1913] was the tornado I think.  Now, I'm not really sure about it now 'cause it's so--there's so--too many things going on.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause there was a riot in Chicago in 1919 as well in the late summer or early fall.  I believe--well, I'm not sure exactly what time of year.
Speaker 2: Well, if, you, you, if you got facts on it that the riot here in Omaha where they lynched a guy, if that was 19--
Speaker 1: That's where they lynched Will Brown (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, then that's the one.
Speaker 1: Riddled his body with bullets and burnt it up right in front of the courthouse, right?
Speaker 2: Right.  That's when she said they come to Omaha.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So they were there, she saw that or she, she was around here when that was going on?
Speaker 2: It had happened already.
Speaker 1: It had just happened?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So people were talking about it.
Speaker 2: Yes, it was very, very--.
Speaker 1: So she--if she left Chicago for Omaha and got here right after that, she was leaving one bad situation coming into another I guess (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I guess so but I, I--
Speaker 1: Yeah, the Chicago riot, there were scores of people injured and killed in Chicago in a similar race riot.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and then this one here that's, that's something.  So, now
Speaker 2: I always thought it was 1913 she said she'd come here because that was the year it was supposed to be the big tornado.
Speaker 1: Well, maybe she came in 1913 and you know was here for the--and saw (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Maybe I'm confusing the two things together.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  But, I'll, I'll show you during the break the other information about 19--yeah, all right.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Oh, I don't doubt what you're saying.  I'm doubting what I'm saying.
Story_ID: 551622
Speaker 1: Did she talk about why her family came to Omaha [Nebraska] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.  If she did, I don't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did she have any relatives who worked for the railroad?
Speaker 2: Not that I know of.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, did your mother [Ione Lewis Kelley] ever talk about growing up or any of the--going to school and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she graduated from Central High School [Omaha High School; Omaha Central High School, Omaha, Nebraska] here.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, what did she do for a living?
Speaker 2: Same thing that probably most black people did at that time, she was a, a--done housework and, and was a seamstress and mainly housework.  You know, working in--I guess they called it working in private family in those days.
Speaker 1: Okay, day work and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Yeah, day work, yeah.  But that was a big thing in, in those days.
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: Now, we have Merry Maids.
Speaker 1: Merry what?
Speaker 2: Merry Maids.
Speaker 1: Oh, really, that's some sort of--
Speaker 2: Oh, that's not a term that you're familiar with.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: In this area, they have Merry Maids that go around to places and clean the houses and clean apartments, buildings and things like that, it's an organization.
Speaker 1: Okay, business organized around (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it's a big money making organization.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, now, can you--are there any other information about your mother's family?  Now, did you know your grandparents?
Speaker 2: No.  I have--we discovered--I don't remember my grandmother [Effie Galloway] at all, 'cause my mother said she died when I was five.  And I have--we've rediscovered a couple pictures of her and that's the only thing that I've got.
Story_ID: 551623
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your father's [Sylvester Waites] side of the family then.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: I--no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause I--no, no association there.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you didn't know, you didn't know him?
Speaker 2: I know the name that's on the birth certificate but I, I, I--and I got to know him later years and I actually begin to think exactly what my mother [Ione Lewis Kelley] thought of him.  But he brought that on himself.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you don't wanna give his name or anything?
Speaker 2: Nah.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you know anything about his side of the family or anything?
Speaker 2: No, I knew they was from Ardmore, Oklahoma and that's all I know.
Speaker 1: Now this is the second time I've heard Ardmore, Oklahoma today.
Speaker 2: What, maybe seen, yeah, migration, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, Ardmore, Oklahoma.  And, now anything else 'em that they--
Speaker 2: Nah, not about him.
Speaker 1: Was there a story that your mother told about how they met?
Speaker 2: Oh, there was lots of stories and none of 'em was very good.  I, I imagine the meeting was good else I wouldn't have been here, you know, but other than that there's been nothing favorable.  And, and through the years of what I've learned I prefer not to have any association.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: None.
Speaker 1: None?
Speaker 2: None.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're an only child?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: And, so your household consisted of you and your mother, I guess (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yep, most the time.
Speaker 1: All right.  Do you--well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My mother, my mother was married and I don't remember the names, but my mother was married several times.  And, one thing I guess I've learned to respect that she just didn't live with somebody.  If they wasn't gonna marry her, then they, then they wasn't gonna be no time spent, you know.  So, that happened.  And I, I think I respect that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you had, you had several stepfathers?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  None who I could really remember, they--it was a case of like I was an invisible person.  They didn't abuse me, but they really didn't do anything with me.
Speaker 1: They didn't relate to you as a son (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not really.  There's nothing that sticks in my mind.
Speaker 1: That's interesting that, you know, since you being the only child and a boy too, you know, that none of those men would take any interest in--
Speaker 2: Well, if they did, I don't remember it.  Them going out of the way of doing anything, except there was one that--him, I, I think I liked and he was, he was really good but I, I think his major problem was he was a weekend drunk.  He--on the weekends he'd get--but I don't ever remember him and my mother ever fighting, never, never, ever.  So, I don't think he was abusive, he just had that drinking habit and--but when he was sober, he was a nice guy.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so a lot of the others were abusive guys?
Speaker 2: No, I--'cause I don't remember outside of verbal arguments, I don't remember any, any physical violence.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And I think, if there had of been, I probably would have remembered that.  It's something about that, would maybe make it stick, you know.  So, I can't really remember any physical violence.  Though there was always gonna be a, you know, verbal arguments (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now were there any other people around, or men or women that were like mentors to you, or--
Speaker 2: Well, I, I have acquired a lots of aunts and uncles like Aunt So and So and Uncle So and So, who weren't really relatives but they--I've always said, and maybe it's because of my upbringing, that family is not blood.  Family has to come from being and doing.  Just the fact that you're blood relation does not make you family.  And I really believe that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, there were people that were friends of your, your--
Speaker 2: Of my mom's--they were, they were my aunts and my uncles, yeah.  And they were very supportive.
Story_ID: 551624
Speaker 1: Now, when you think about your mother [Ione Lewis Kelley] and her talents and abilities and personality, and some of the other people you've met along the way who tried to help and influence you, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I don't know because the thing is that there's nobody that I know of in, in relation that--and my mother's talking about that ever did any music or anything at all.  My mother did not sing in church and she went to church, but didn't sing in church.  And we couldn't find any relatives that we know that was musically inclined, so this musical thing that I've got and, and the art thing that I've got, I have no idea where it come from, I have no idea.
Story_ID: 551625
Speaker 1: Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Can we come back to that question, while I, while I think about it.  I will think about it right now, but can we talk about something else and come back to that?  'Cause I'm trying to think (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, can you, can you describe--now, did you live in one place most of your life or did you move around a lot?
Speaker 2: She--we moved some but not a lot, so it was, it was nothing for us [Waites and his mother, Ione Lewis Kelley] to live maybe a year or more in a place and then maybe have to move, not a lot of moving.
Speaker 1: Okay, but about how many times do you think you moved when you were coming up?
Speaker 2: That I, I really, I have no idea (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It would be a lot of--it would be that many that you wouldn't remember?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think we moved that much 'cause I recently had thought about maybe all the places we lived here in Omaha [Nebraska], you know.  And I can just almost go back to all the spots that we lived in and there aren't that many.  So I'd say in up to maybe seventeen or eighteen years old that maybe, maybe, maybe be ten places roughly.
Speaker 1: That's pretty good moving now, you know, from--well, I don't know what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, maybe it is.
Speaker 1: I don't know what the standard is here but that, that's pretty--that's a lot of moving I would say.
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't think it was a lot 'cause I guess I was associating that with friends of my other--friends that I, you know, I had, they seemed to move a little more than we did, you know.  So, maybe that's why I say that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think for most people that's a long--that's a lot of moving.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, that I won't question.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now the time that you were being raised though, you know, yeah, the Depression [Great Depression] was going on and all of that so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The Depression.
Speaker 1: --a lot of people--
Speaker 2: Depression is a word that when you're young and you're, you're little, it's like maybe the segregation and all like that--when you're young, you don't really know that 'cause your parents more or less shield you from that.  You know there's places you can't go, times are hard and that thing--this much I remember, that as a kid growing up, I never, ever wore tennis shoes.  Back in those days, it was a sign of being quote--we say the word poor, but I don't believe in poor.  But we didn't have any money, money was hard to come by.  And I never wore tennis shoes.  And not until I got to be thirty years old or more then I started wearing tennis shoes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was in the day and age when tennis shoes was the thing, you know, like it is now.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so you lived in a number of different places but you lived always on the north side?
Speaker 2: Yes, never, never here in Omaha, never, never south of, of, of basically Grant Street.  Anywhere from Grant Street to Wirt Street, 'cause that was the predominant black area anyhow.
Speaker 1: Okay, so typically what kind of place would you all live in?
Speaker 2: Apartments.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There was a couple places that we had houses at different times during her marriage, we had houses but most, most of the time it was apartments.
Story_ID: 551626
Speaker 1: Tell me, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, in those days, it was the smell of the packinghouses in South Omaha [Omaha, Nebraska], and I think there was always that feeling--I'm not sure about this but I think there was always that feeling, if you lived in Omaha, North Omaha [Omaha, Nebraska], you were a little better on the ladder than if you lived in South Omaha.  And I don't think that was really true but that I think that was the general consensus and I could be totally wrong.
Speaker 1: Was this for black people or--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: I guess being near the packing plant, if it smelled bad--
Speaker 2: Well, you could smell it over here if the wind was blowing that way.  There was definitely that.  I remember the phrase of (unclear) enough, I do remember the phrase that when the packinghouse is fill--my parents and the adults would say, "Oh, ol' lady Armour's got her dress up today."  I had no idea then what that meant, had no idea.  I know now, but at that time I had no idea what that meant.  But I knew that smell.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, yeah.  So, the meatpacking plant was a major--
Speaker 2: Was a big thing at that time.  In fact, that was really a big thing up until roughly the--maybe late '40s [1940s], early '50s [1950s].  And that started deteriorating at that time.
Speaker 1: Now, is meatpacking a big deal now in Omaha [Nebraska]?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think so, but I'm not involved in that so I really don't know but I don't think so.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know they must pack meat.  I know the meatpacking industry in Chicago [Illinois] is finished, it doesn't happen anymore (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, well I think it's more, I, I think our state it's (unclear) so or maybe I think like in Lexington [Nebraska] and Norfolk [Nebraska] and places like that it's, it, there's--they do that now but I--don't quote me on that.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  What other sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: I don't know, really.  I think there were just normal things and I don't think I associated it with anything in particular. I don't think (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What did you have a real quiet neighborhood?  Is it, you know, is the neighborhood that you lived in those days like this neighborhood is right now?
Speaker 2: No, and the mainly the neighborhood that I lived in was definitely I could say that I grew up at 24th [Street] and Lake Street.  In that circumference of area, not exactly 24th--there was a couple time that we lived almost at 24th and Lake but in that area and roughly two, three mile circumference around there, that is where I basically lived.  We never seemed to move out of that area.
Story_ID: 551627
Speaker 1: Now, do you remember, well, I'm just thinking was music significant when you were coming along?
Speaker 2: Yes, my mother [Ione Lewis Kelley] was--I found out much later my mother was an excellent dancer, ballroom dancer.  Maybe they didn't call it dancing but it was the dancing then there and I--
Speaker 1: Okay, the big band type dancing that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that, that kind of thing.  And she--I understand that she was really superb at that.  So, she was very popular in--when it come to dancing.
Speaker 1: So did you play a lot of music around the house or was the radio on a lot, or did you have--
Speaker 2: Radio, radio was on not very much, Victrola, because it was Victrola in those days before it got to be the record players, you know.  Record players come on later years in my life.
Speaker 1: So, Victrola was playing a lot.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And, did, did most people in the neighborhood [in Omaha, Nebraska] have a radio then when you were coming along?
Speaker 2: I think most people had radios in those days.  I'm not sure, you know, that's a good question you're asking me and something that I never thought of and really don't know the answer to.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the year when your family got one?
Speaker 2: I thought we always had one.
Speaker 1: Did you, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: This stepfather that I was mentioning, the one that I remember in particular, he was very good at repairing things.  He could take--well, to me that's the way it seemed.  He could take a radio apart, put it back together, have parts left over and it would work.  He was that good.  At least I thought he was anyhow.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: You know, a child's vision of something isn't the same thing as an adult's vision of the same thing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, just like with us adults one of us could see something and someone else that's standing right next to it could see it, and we'd see it almost two different things.
Story_ID: 551628
Speaker 1: How would you describe your personality as a, as a little kid growing up in North Omaha [Omaha, Nebraska]?
Speaker 2: Probably (laughter), probably bad but probably not as bad as most kids.  I stayed out of--I, I got into enough trouble that my mother [Ione Lewis Kelley] would, would finally resort to--I'd get a whipping or something like that, sometime a punishment.  But it seemed like I remember vaguely that I'd be good--I'd break the, I'd break that, that last straw on the camel's back--would always come about just before Christmas.  I'd, I'd do that last thing.  Well, you've done it now.  But maybe that happened to everybody, you know, I don't know.  So, I, I never got arrested or anything like that, 'course they didn't too much of that.  I think I, I'm looking at what happens now and taking it from a lot of things that I see and do, in, in our area, in the basically black area, kids didn't get into that much trouble that they had to go to jail.  And, or maybe they did and I just didn't know about it.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, you really weren't familiar with a lot of people being arrested or harassed by the police?
Speaker 2: Not really, not really.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you have any pets?
Speaker 2: Always had a dog, always had a cat, had fish, yeah.  Dogs, main, mainly dogs and cats.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  I, I wondered being raised by yourself, did you, did you get lonely?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did but I guess, I guess that's part of what, what or how I exist today that I have a good imagination that create, create a lot of thoughts.
Speaker 1: Okay, now when did you first become interested in playing music yourself?
Speaker 2: Well, I think I remember getting us drums, just a single drum, and
Speaker 1: What, snare drum or what (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, a snare drum.  And then that was around--I was around twelve, roughly, I think.  And, I remember I had a choice--one time my mother, my mother worked and--'cause kids didn't have jobs in those days.  Well, maybe we'd--I delivered groceries.  I know I digress a little bit but I delivered groceries.  'Cause I never had a bicycle and I delivered groceries with a wagon.  And they said, "Well, you do a good job but it takes you too long," (laughter), so, but I had a choice of getting a drum I think for my twelfth birthday or a bicycle, and I opted to take the drum.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, why, I don't know.
Story_ID: 551629
Speaker 1: You got this drum at age twelve but you weren't inspired by a movie, you didn't see Gene Krupa in a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nah, I listened--now what I, what I, I listened to the radio and remember we're here in Mid- in Midwest and we didn't get the things that other people in other places got, you know, like Detroit [Michigan], Chicago [Illinois] and New York [New York], you know, all those kind of things.  So, I don't know what they got but one of the things that I learn--that I listened to that I really liked and it was a great inspiration for me was the 'Grand Ole Opry.'
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The 'Grand Ole Opry,' that used to come on and I, I, I remember that as clear as it happening today, listening to that and, and, and setting up my mother's [Ione Lewis Kelley] pots and pans and beating it out on it so I think that, that's what inspired her to want to give me a drum.  I think that's what led into it, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause a bicycle is, I mean, most kids want a bike, they like to ride around (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I know, so I'm an oddball, you know (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, so 'Grand Ole Opry'?
Speaker 2: 'Grand Ole Opry.'
Speaker 1: Yeah, now that was a popular show out of Nashville [Tennessee] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, out of Nashville.
Speaker 1: And I have to ask you this question, did you know about DeFord Bailey?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you know who I'm talking about?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.
Speaker 1: All right, well, he was a black harmonica player.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: He had like a disfigured back; he was real short.
Speaker 2: No, I didn't because--
Speaker 1: Played the harmonica but he was a featured star on the show, but they didn't let, they didn't let people know he was black.
Speaker 2: Oh, that's why.
Speaker 1: His name was DeFord Bailey.
Speaker 2: Oh, 'cause the only black person I knew that come out of, out of Nashville up until later years was a guitar player and I can't think of his name.
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Charley Pride?
Speaker 2: Charley Pride, yeah, I worked with him once here in Omaha [Nebraska].
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, but this was back in the days when you were a little (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, when I was little, that was a long time before that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, DeFord Bailey was--
Speaker 2: Nah, I never knew that.
Speaker 1: I saw a special on TV about it and they were talking about it.
Speaker 2: I never knew it.
Speaker 1: And they showed his, his daughter was on there and talking about him.  They showed old pictures and--yeah, but I had--but a lot of people didn't know he was black so they didn't think about him being black.
Speaker 2: Wow!  That's news to me.  Zoom!  Something new in my book today.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, at any rate--but I just wondered.  That was a kind of a question.
Story_ID: 551630
Speaker 1: So 'Grand Ole Opry,' now, did they, did they play any black music on the radio in those days?
Speaker 2: Yes they did but I didn't hear it, I didn't hear it.
Speaker 1: Your mother [Ione Lewis Kelley] wouldn't--
Speaker 2: No, she didn't restrict me from, from, from what I was listening to, but I didn't listen to it.  But I listened to the radio so much that, that was in the days of when soap operas was the big thing on radio.  And they were fifteen minute shows.  And there's a couple that went on to television and it's been on, but I can't remember.  But I remember the old time shows, 'Fibber McGee and Molly,' 'One Man's Family,' and of course, the 'Grand Ole Opry.'  I was always looking for music programs and they used to have a program come on, 'Lower Basin Street' ['Chamber Music Society of Lower Basin Street'], and I always thought that was something else but they never played anything on there that, that, that excited me.  It was horrible.  And--
Speaker 1: What'd they play, that Dixieland jazz?
Speaker 2: Nah, not even--it was--I guess you would say the pseudo-jazz (unclear) maybe the Paul Whiteman type of thing, you know, they, they said Paul Whiteman was supposed to be the king of jazz, you know.  And he never played any jazz, you know, but that was the, you know, the, the way it was presented in those days.
Story_ID: 551631
Speaker 1: But 'Grand Ole Opry'--and I know now why I liked 'Grand Ole' because they had that beat, that, that and, and that grew into Bob Willis and the Country Playboys [sic. Bob Wills and His Texas Playboys], which I found out about later.  They was swing band and they was good.  They was (unclear) but I remember that time I started listening and talking to the older fellows and they kept talking about Count Basie and Duke Ellington.  And I hated Duke Ellington, ah, I couldn't stand.  But Basie I liked, I liked Basie.
Speaker 2: Now, why did you dislike Duke Ellington?
Speaker 1: Well, he just didn't play the kind of things that I liked.  And it wasn't until later years that he acquired a drummer named Louis Bellson [Louie Bellson], whom I got to know personally, and after Louis started playing in the band, I started liking Ellington and then I started going back and listening to--oh, I can't think of the drummer's name.  Oh, damn it.  That's my problem now a days I can't think of names when I need 'em.  The drummer, Sonny Greer.  Then I started listening to though--you have to go back and listen.  And then I said, my god, what did I miss and all.  And then I began to appreciate it, but I didn't start out that way.
Speaker 2: Well, initially, I guess what you're saying is that you liked the heavy beat, you liked the--
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was that beat.
Speaker 2: Something exciting.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was that, that nice solid beat.
Speaker 2: So you say maybe the Duke was too smooth or mellow or something?
Speaker 1: I didn't hear it then like it, like, like it really was.  It was there but I just didn't hear it.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  So--
Speaker 1: Basie was a, was a little more into that type of feel, you know, and I could hear it.  You had to like in Duke's band it's like you need to be a little more intellectual to, to appreciate it.  And I guess I grew up 'cause, man, I sure--you couldn't give me anything better than Duke.  Not that I don't like the Basie thing and all the other stuff that goes with it and all the modern stuff they have, but Duke is still my number one man now.  But it took time.  You know, I think, I think the thing is that in anything you have to acquire a taste for it, like maybe whiskey or wine, clothes, whatever it is.  You have to--you just don't jump into it.
Speaker 2: You take a little sample first (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, you have to get a little bit and you have to get--'cause I remember back in the days when I drank it took me five years to become a scotch drinker, 'cause I hated scotch, hated it.  And it took me five years and gradually I become a scotch drinker.  And, wow, that was great after I learned about it.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So I think the same thing applies to my, to my music.
Story_ID: 551632
Speaker 1: Tell me about--what grade school did you go to initially?
Speaker 2: Lake School [Omaha, Nebraska].
Speaker 1: Okay. And you--that's the grade school you graduated from?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But did you go to other grade schools too?
Speaker 2: Howard Kennedy [Howard Kennedy Elementary School, Omaha, Nebraska] and that was it.
Speaker 1: Okay just two (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, and Lothrop [Lothrop Elementary School; Lothrop Science and Technology Magnet Center, Omaha, Nebraska].  Those were the only schools, grade schools I went to, because my mother [Ione Lewis Kelley] kept us in that--in the area of those three schools, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, so how did you like school initially?
Speaker 2: I hated school.  I really didn't like it at all.  There were some things I liked about it but not, not too much.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, what were the things you liked about it?
Speaker 2: I don't really know.  I don't think I can hit on any one thing.  I liked history, I knew that but that's what they called it in that day.  I don't know what they call it now.
Speaker 1: Social studies, I guess.
Speaker 2: So it could be, yeah, but that, that I liked.  I liked doing that.  Wasn't very good at math or arithmetic they called it then.  And I'm a horrible speller, I've worked at it but (laughter) I don't think it's helped too much though.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you ever warm up to school?
Speaker 2: Do what?
Speaker 1: Did you ever warm up to it, did it ever, you know?  You said you initially hated it so did it get better (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, ma- maybe hate is too strong.  I shouldn't use that word hate; I just disliked school let's eliminate that word hate.  That's a word that should be--two words that really should be thought about when you use them, that's hate and love.  You really should think about 'em before you use 'em.  There are other words that will lead you to them but hate is really strong and love is really strong.  And we throw the word love around a whole lot and not really get into the depth of meaning of it.
Speaker 1: Well, did you love anything about the school?
Speaker 2: Not really, not, not really.  But I didn't just really dislike it so I just didn't like school.
Speaker 1: So, generally negative, it wasn't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, you do it because you have to--
Speaker 1: Okay. So you weren't like a--
Speaker 2: --you do it because you have to, yeah.
Speaker 1: Were there any, any teachers or mentors in grade school that popped along that really tried to help you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, there was a music teacher in, in, in the eighth grade that, that, that turned me around.  And, and I hated and I, I, I now I'm using that word again.  I strongly disliked music classes in, in grade school, because in grade school there was no band in those days it was only singing.  And I didn't like singing.  And I know now why I didn't like singing 'cause they sang nothing but Stephen Foster songs.
Speaker 1: Stephen Foster songs?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, basically, those are the ones that I remember.  And you know the words to most Stephen Foster's song.
Speaker 1: Those sentimental plantation ditties.
Speaker 2: Sentimental planation songs, that's right.  And, and being in an area where we didn't have segregated school, we were segregated because of housing.  People, black people lived in one area, white people lived in the--another area so that's it.  But we all went to the same school, so we weren't segregated as far as that is concerned.
Speaker 1: So were your teachers mainly white?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, at that time.
Speaker 1: And here they are leading you all in plantation songs.
Speaker 2: Well, that was the song.  Stephen Foster songs were amongst the great songs that they loved to sing.  Oh, 'My Old Kentucky Home' and all those, and maybe there was others but I didn't pay any attention and I didn't like 'em.
Story_ID: 551633
Speaker 1: But we had, what was equivalent to, show and tell in the eighth grade 'cause schools then--elementary school went to eighth grade and graduated and then you went to high school at that point.  And, and I was into drums at that time and I was playing.  And so you brought your stuff--show and tell, that's what it is.  And I brought my beat up set of drums, which was really good, because at that time nobody unless they had a lot of money had a real decent instrument, you know.
Speaker 2: Now, wait a minute now.  Let's go back a little bit.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Now, when you were twelve you received the one snare drum.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And I suppose some sticks to play it with, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Now, by the time you're thirteen in the eighth grade, here you bring a set of drums.  Now, how did you get your set of drums?
Speaker 1: We--my, my stepfather then got me a bass drum, a regular marching bass drum, and he made me a high hat out of two pipe tins and an ironing cord and a music stand.  And, boy, I was going, I was whacking away at--I thought I was great.  "Bring it to school."  My music teacher said, "Bring it to school, yeah."  I brought it to school, nobody else played but me.  I set my drums up in school and every boy in school sat down to my drums and played better than I did.  And I was devastated.  And I'll never forget this, I was standing at the window there and if she'd a touched me, I'd a flooded the school with tears.  I would a flooded--and she told me something that I've told my students ever since and made them listen to and believe.  She says, "Now, you go back up there and play and remember there's always gonna be somebody better than you and there's gonna be somebody worse than you.  But the better you get, the fewer there are that's better than you, and the more that there are worse. Now you get back up there and play 'cause you can do this."  And she made be believe in that.  And that turned me around.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's a good story.
Speaker 1: Well, it actually happened.
Story_ID: 551634
Speaker 1: So you continued to play and practice? When you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, and then, and then the war [World War II, WWII] was, and then by then the war was on.  And so, we, we had a little kid band and it, it was, it was mixed because we had some, some, some of my--and I'm still good friends with, with a couple of people now that, that, that played with us, Italian kids.  And, Joe Genovesi and Charlie Genovesi, they, they played and we, we grew up together and played together.  And we had a little kid band, which they called garage bands now, but--and we played the latest little things that happened, that we heard other bands playing.  And, by the time I got to high school [Omaha Central High School, Omaha, Nebraska], I was working in every club or had worked in almost every club that had black music in it.  And, in those days, black musicians were in all the clubs.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, this--be- between grade school and high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, by the time I got to high school.
Speaker 1: You were actually playing your, your drum set in clubs?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I got to be good enough to do that.
Speaker 1: And were you playing with the Genovesi brothers?
Speaker 2: Nah, nah.  I was playing with the older guys and I thought I was great, I thought I was the end until I--finally it dawned upon me all the good people, all the good musicians had been drafted so they had to take me 'cause I was the best of what was left.
Speaker 1: Now, how did you, how did you practice?  Did you listen to music on the radio or something and try to play along or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, listen to music on the radio and listen to records and things like that.  I had--I remember having a stack of records at least two or three feet high that I hadn't even heard because I didn't have a machine to play it on.  And, and--but, then when I got a machine to play it on, wow!  And I'll never forget the day that I played these records and been listening to 'em for quite a while, and all of a sudden I heard the bass.  I had never heard the bass on these records before.  It was there, but it just didn't (unclear) 'cause I'm listening to the drums and all that, and all of a sudden I heard this boom, boom, boom, boom.  What's that?  Well, that's the bass, you know.  And all, that's part of growing I guess, you know.  And, and then when I get to high school, they--oh sorry about that, that's her phone--so when I get to high school, I'm already working in the clubs.
Story_ID: 551635
Speaker 1: Just go back a little bit here. Let's not jump too fast but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All right, I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: --how, how did you get your first, your first gig in, in--what happened?  Must've been a dramatic moment.
Speaker 2: The local musicians Basie--there were some local--Basie Givens and some other people, Basie especially was a great person to--he come to, he come to my mother [Ione Lewis Kelley] and said, "I hear Junior [HistoryMaker Luigi Waites] can play some drums and I need a drummer, you know."  So he took me to--and I'll never forget the first job I played with him.  We played for homecoming dance in--now I had been playing with other people, you know, the kid band and done some things like that and before that.  And he says--so we played the homecoming dance for Nebraska in Lincoln [University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska].  I'd never played for that many people in my life before.
Speaker 1: So you're thirteen years old and--
Speaker 2: Well, about fourteen then 'cause we're moving on.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, all right, yeah.
Speaker 2: And, at that point, he asked me, "Do you know how to play a waltz?"  I said, "A what?"  "You know how to play a waltz?"  "What's a waltz?"  "Ah, hell, it goes one, two, three, one, two, three.  Always hit one."  And that was my first introduction to that and this man taught me everything that I think I--that all the beginning thing.  Because I would ask him questions and he would always answer my question.  He'd get a little disturbed that I didn't remember the answer but no matter what he would always answer my question.  I had asked him, how do you do this, things that didn't pertain to drums just to music.  And I'd ask him questions about it and he'd answer and the next night we'd go somewhere and--"Hey, how do you do that?"  That same question again, he'd tell me say, "Man, I told you last night," or "I told you last week."  But he would always answer the question.  And I think that was one of the strong points of me learning how to teach eventually, is to always answer those questions.
Speaker 1: Now, what was this man's name again?
Speaker 2: Elmer Givens, Elmer Givens.
Speaker 1: Elmer Givens.  That's G-I-V-E, V-E-N-S (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I guess you would say he was definitely one of my mentors, or was the mentor.
Story_ID: 551636
Speaker 1: What was the name of the high school you attended?
Speaker 2: Central High School [Omaha Central High School, Omaha, Nebraska] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, Central High School.
Speaker 2: --the same high school my mother [Ione Lewis Kelley] graduated from.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so you're in the band, were you in the high school band (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yep, I was in the band.  Couldn't read a note if it was as big as this house.  And by that time I was beginning to say, maybe I need to learn how to do some of these things.  And they told me at Central High School they didn't teach beginners.  I think I said something to the, to the point of, "Well, if you can't teach me what's the sense in me going to school," you know.  That's what I wanna learn, so I quit, I quit.  I probably--well, in those days, we weren't--no one, black or white, you weren't as disrespectful as some people are today, you know.  But, I think I told--probably told 'em where they could put their school in a nice way.  'Cause I wouldn't dare say it any other way, you know.  And so I quit school for a whole year.  And, at that time--and, and, you know, those things happened.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what did you do for that year?  Did you find a job or something?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I tried to, tried to get a job and, and played, was doing lots of playing though.  'Cause at that time when I was going to high school, we lived at 20th [Street] and Lake Street and Central High School was straight down 20th Street at Dodge [Street].  So the streetcar, 'cause there were streetcars then.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're getting paid enough from gigs to--
Speaker 2: I took a cab to school every day.  I could afford it.
Speaker 1: Well, you must have been pretty good.
Speaker 2: No, I was available.  I thought I was good, you're right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well you were good to, to make money--
Speaker 2: I thought I was good but there was also the reason there was nobody else available that was as good as I was and the one thing that helped me, I was dependable.
Speaker 1: Now, by this time, did any--were you still playing your like homemade drum set?
Speaker 2: No, I got a, a, a little better piece together thing.  And then, finally, my mother worked hard at a laundry and, and borrowed money from her boss and got me a set of drums.  And she worked in order to make that happen for me.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're a lucky young man at that age with--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I realize now, but I didn't then.  I don't think anybody does at the time those things happen, realize how lucky they are or how fortunate they are, but I really--I realize now.  I wouldn't be here now doing what I'm doing if it hadn't been for those sacrifices, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, was it--okay, so about what time was it that you decided to take on the name of Luigi [HistoryMaker Luigi Waites]?  Was that--
Speaker 2: Oh, that was years, years, years (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Years later?
Speaker 2: --oh, lots of years later.
Speaker 1: Okay, we'll leave that alone then.
Speaker 2: Yeah, lots of years later.
Speaker 1: Now, did you--well, you went back to high school, right?
Speaker 2: Yep.  I went to Tech then where all my friends were going to school then.
Speaker 1: Was it called Omaha Tech?
Speaker 2: Omaha Tech High School [Technical High School, Omaha, Nebraska].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think couple of my--I think three of my kids graduated from there eventually.
Speaker 1: Omaha Tech, can you remember the year?
Speaker 2: No.  I, I, I, that, that's hazy in my mind.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, now, now we're moving between thirteen, fourteen, we were moving now from fifteen to sixteen up in that area of time.
Speaker 1: Okay, so I'm thinking was this about 1933 or so or--
Speaker 2: No, we're, we're approaching--'cause remember there's a war [World War II, WWII].
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, you're right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, we're, we're approaching about '43 [1943], '44 [1944] now.
Speaker 1: Yeah, '43 [1943], '44 [1944]. Yeah I'm skipping ten years for some reason.
Speaker 2: Well, give me ten years, I can use it.  All right.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Yeah.  Forgive my math.
Speaker 2: That's all right.
Story_ID: 551637
Speaker 1: So, the war [World War II, WWII] starts in '41 [1941], yeah? That's--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I remember being in school when that happened and the--all the things, the, the hoop--all the--what do you call it?  All the hype that went on, you know, then.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so they really--I know they really hyped it even now you can hear the December 7th, 1941 (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, well, we, we drew pictures of, of war and things and they had, you know, everybody tried to enlist and, and little did I know about the segregation of the services [U.S. Armed Forces] and all that kind of stuff.  We just assumed that, you know, because that's the way it was, you know what I mean.  We, we didn't think it was horrible.
Speaker 1: Did you know the services were segregated before you went in?
Speaker 2: No, I was the last, incidental, now we might be jumping ahead I don't know, not too far ahead.  But I was the last of the draftees in Omaha [Nebraska], I was in that last bunch of draftees got.  And in that group of people that was drafted, I was the only one that passed.  And then I went to Fort Leonard Wood [Missouri] and then into Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, we'll freeze right there and we'll get back to that (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah okay, all right.
Story_ID: 551638
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're, you're at Omaha Tech [Technical High School, Omaha, Nebraska], is Omaha Tech better than Central [Omaha Central High School, Omaha, Nebraska]?
Speaker 2: Well, I thought it was.  It really--in the-what I know now is it--you learn; you can learn anywhere but you have to learn.  But we assume that people are gonna learn--and I, I went through a lots of this in, in during the years of teaching and that is, if kids come to you and think, well, teach me, you're the teacher, nah, you have got to learn.  You got to take it in.  I can only put it there for you, it's like food.  You can only put it there, you got to eat it, you got to chew it, you know.  And that's what we have to do with education.  And anything else that we get involved in, you know.  And that's--but I thought Tech was the answer for me.
Speaker 1: Okay, so was their approach different because they--you said at the other school they wouldn't teach you.
Speaker 2: Nah, they, they put me in the band right away and I, I acknowledged that I couldn't read or all of that, "So oh, that's all right, we'll teach you."  And before, before the year was out I was in the senior band.  They just kept moving me up because my--I had the ability of hearing and could do.  But anytime they brought in totally new music that I had never heard, I couldn't do.  I had to hear it first.  And that's when I found out that they were shucking me.  They was moving me along. "Oh, we'll move him along, he can play, he can play, you know."  I wasn't learning.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you could play?
Speaker 2: I could play.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, so that's a--were there a lot of room for adlibbing in band in high school?
Speaker 2: Not really.  There is some and in the type of music we played then, 'cause we didn't play the popular music of the day, where there were certain things that we played mostly marches and stuff like that and classical music and kind of--.  It took a long time before it got to where you could play what you hear on the radio or now a days what you see on there you could do that in school.  It took a long time to, to get it to that level.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So you played mostly marches and classical (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, stuff you didn't really like, you know, but you did it, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you get a chance to go to all the football games and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: A few, but I didn't stay in school 'cause soon after that, I--soon after that I, I got disgusted and quit and then the draft come along eventually, and I got taken away and that was it.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what made you quit the second time?
Speaker 2: Second time, 'cause I wasn't learning anything.  I wanted to learn but I didn't realize how much effort I needed to put in.  So I put the blame on everybody else like normal thing to do.
Speaker 1: Well, how were you doing in your regular, I mean, your academic courses (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't even really know.  I don't even really remember.
Speaker 1: But you didn't feel like you were really getting--
Speaker 2: Nah, I don't think I was getting anywhere.  And, and I, I, I say now in hindsight that it was my fault.
Story_ID: 551639
Speaker 1: --Men and one sister of our family, of Waites' that come from there.  And I, I didn't meet them, I did meet my aunt when she died.  She come to Omaha [Nebraska] once and my mother [Ione Lewis Kelley] got to know her and I've got to know her, and then she died in California.  And my mother made me go out there because they thought, because they was from Oklahoma there was money involved and you know what I mean, that kind of thing.  And there wasn't--there was at one time but Aunt Dimples [ph.] had partied it all away (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  Dropped out of Omaha Technical High School [Technical High School, Omaha, Nebraska], and you were still doing gigs around town and everything?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: The war is brewing and the draft is going, and they finally draft you?
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: And, and, as you were saying earlier, you passed, you were in the last group.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and the, the, the things that I remember was that the group that I went, went, finally went down with--well, first of all I had to say--yeah, I went down and there was all big, husky and I'm little, you know, like this.  And, and I was the one that everybody expected there right away.  There was something wrong with everyone of 'em, and I was the only one that passed.  Then they sent me back--this was the hell year, this was the hell year.  They sent me back and at that--in those days, you had twenty-one days to clear up your affairs and be--and then be--and go, go in the [U.S. military] service.  It took them one year before they got to me.  And the reason why I say that was a hell year, nobody, even the people I was trying to play with, nobody would hire me on a regular basis because they said, "Well, you're gonna be gone."  And I spent a whole year at, at, at doing that going to the mailbox every day, waiting to get your notice.  It didn't come.  No mail on Saturdays and Sundays in those days, so therefore Friday, you didn't get it, well, I can't until Monday.  And Monday morning, no.  One whole year.
Speaker 2: Okay, so that's a pretty lean year too (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And that was hell.  It's a wonder, it's a wonder that I, I think if I'd been living in today's world I'd become an alcoholic or a drug addict.  But, fortunately, those things weren't--alcohol was available but drugs weren't available not like now.
Speaker 2: Okay so--
Speaker 1: And I think if that had happened now, I'd definitely would have been a drug addict or something.  Why?  'Cause you had nothing else to do.
Speaker 2: See, now you were drafted in what, '44 [1944] or '43 [1943]?  'Cause the war was ended, ended at '45 [1945], so did you go in--did you serve any time in World War II [WWII].
Speaker 1: Yes, I serve a year in 'bout six months.  I think I went in in '46 [1946] and come out in '47 [1947].
Speaker 2: Oh, so the war was over when you got, got in?
Speaker 1: Officially, yeah, but I, I was still part of the draft.
Speaker 2: Okay, so this--we may be talking about 1945 with you being drafted I guess.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I, I know this that I--but I did not know it until years after it was over that I was, after basic training, I was sent to California and I was amongst the very first desegregated units that they were experimenting with throughout the country.  And I didn't--but, see, I didn't know that at that time, you know.
Speaker 2: So they were thinking about--
Speaker 1: That's when Truman [President Harry S. Truman] had, had, had say, hey, we got break this stuff up.  So they started doing it in different places you know what I mean.
Speaker 2: So, did you have a--your, your outfit was segregated?
Speaker 1: Yes, it was.  After I got out of basic training.
Speaker 2: I mean, integrated, was it integrated or segregated?
Speaker 1: It was integrated after I got out of basic training.  But it was segregated when I was in, in--in fact, I saw my first black officer in--when I was in, in basic training.  A lieutenant come by and all, all our non-coms [non-commissioned officer] were black but all our officers were white.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But, you just assumed that's the way it was, you didn't realize it was supposed to be different.  You hear these things but you don't realize, you know.
Story_ID: 551640
Speaker 1: You said you were stationed in California?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, and then did you ever leave the states?  Did you send you out?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay so you were there--
Speaker 2: My, my, my common joke is I went from the ocean to--I went from, from ocean to--no, I went from the shore to shore and didn't see either ocean.  I was stationed in, in Virginia and stationed in California, but I really did see the ocean but (unclear).
Speaker 1: So, what, what, what place in California were you?
Speaker 2: I think it was a place called Camp Stoneman [Pittsburg, California] at that time but it's long been gone, you know what I mean.  But I--
Speaker 1: Okay, so how long did you serve in the service there?
Speaker 2: About a year and six months.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you have a chance to play music in the service?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and this was what--this is where it changed my life.  It actually changed my--'cause I went in and after I come out of basic training, okay, what do you wanna do, what can--I play music.  And I'll never forget, I can never forget they give me a line of music to read and give me at that time, two--they said, "Drummers deal with rudiments."  And they said, "Play two rudiments."  And they give me my choice, and they said, "Read this line of music."  And I couldn't do either.  If someone had a told me which rudiment to play and they say it goes like this, da, da, da.  I'd a, I'd a wiped 'em out.  And, if I'd a heard this music first, I'd a wiped it out.  But I couldn't.  And as a result, they put me--and I, I never forget that they said, "Well, we'll send him over here and let him dig ditches."  And everybody at that time was sent, if you was gonna be a musician, you would get training in everything.  And they had what they call a band training unit.  They give you eight weeks of band training, and then put you in a band somewhere.  And, and I begged them, I actually got on my hands and knees and begged them to send me to school for one week and, if I didn't make it, then throw me out.  And they wouldn't give me that chance.  And I said from that day on, and I've lived up to it to this point, I will never in my life ever beg for anything.  I will ask, but I will never beg for anything.  And I think I can do that, if somebody even put a gun at my head and said we're gonna shoot you if you don't beg, I would say, please don't kill me.  But I wouldn't beg.
Speaker 1: Okay so--
Speaker 2: And that changed my life.
Speaker 1: I'm thinking perhaps if you'd a played something that you already knew and played it like you could, they probably would have let you in (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, they wouldn't do it that way then.
Speaker 1: So, you couldn't--so, so how did you wind up playing?
Speaker 2: Well, they sent me to a, to a company to train some kind of thing in California and all we did was basically clean up the barracks and, you know, and jobs like that.  But we put a band together, the guys that were there--the kids that were there we played in a band and it was a mixed band, black and white, you know.  And, we, we did that and it, it kept growing, you know, and then I come back home.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did--so you didn't get a chance to officially play for the [U.S.] Army?
Speaker 2: Nah, nah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, okay, just played in a pickup band?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: There was a lots of that around, you know.
Story_ID: 551641
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is--back home 1947?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what, what happened when you got back?
Speaker 2: When I got back home then I stayed here for a while, then I went back to California with some, with, with some adopted relatives.  And from there, I went from there to Chicago [Illinois] to go to, to school on the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944], 'cause I was determined to learn then.  'Cause after this, this, this, after this fiasco had hit me, I said, I'm gonna learn how to read, I'm gonna learn to do all these things, you know.  And so then I went from California and went to Chicago to go to school and that, and then, then, and I stayed in school for two semesters.  I had enough money on the bill to do that.  And then I had to come home 'cause my mother [Ione Lewis Kelley] had got sick for the first time in her life and was in the hospital.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you went to the Midwest Conservatory of Music [sic.]?
Speaker 2: Midwestern Conservatory of Music.
Speaker 1: Right. In Chicago.
Speaker 2: In Chicago.  Great place.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so did you learn how to read some music there?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I learned some there.  I was--I learned--started learning the basic things that I, I already knew but I just didn't know how, how they looked on paper and how to relate to 'em read.  But after I learned it on paper, well, hey, I know how it goes, I know how that goes.  I, I knew this already but I didn't know how it looked on paper.
Story_ID: 551642
Speaker 1: So your mother [Ione Lewis Kelley] was sick and you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I come home--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I come home then, and--'cause first time that she had ever been in the hospital.  'Cause she, she wasn't in the hospital with me, so it was the first time she come.  And then I stayed around, it wasn't long after that I got married then.
Speaker 1: Okay, now how did you meet your wife [Eva Little Waites]?
Speaker 2: Running around with the--in this area and you after women and you, you see one and you keep--and you get a favorable nod and you think that's the one and, and the next thing you know, you're hooked.
Speaker 1: Now, were you, were you trying to get married?
Speaker 2: No, I really wasn't.  But I can thank my mother for that, bless her heart.  My mother was at the height--at that point in my life, my mother would say, "I guess I will never see any of my grandkids--what's the matter with you, how come you're not married, all your friends are married."  So you begin to feel guilty, you know.  And, you're not guilty but mothers have a way of making you feel that way.  So then I began to think--so then me and this girl, her mother, said, "Well get married."  So I said, "Mama, I wanna get married."  You know what my mother said?  "What are you getting married for, you're too young, you got your life ahead of you," (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, lot of contradictory desires going on (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There was a lot of that, there was a lot--
Story_ID: 551643
Speaker 1: That, that same thing happened back in the years when I was, when I was just playing music, you know, and couldn't go into places 'cause say, "He's not young, he's, he's too young to come into, in here and play.  He's got to be a certain age, you know."  My mother [Ione Lewis Kelley] would say, "Well, I'll sit with him," and she would sit there with me all night long while I played, you know, they could do that then.  They can't do that now, but you could do that then and I'd--and all that would happen and everybody'd say, "Oh, great, you're good," you know, like that.  And we'd get home and my mother would say, "Well, that's great but you ought to really learn to do something of value."  Now, that was that double standard but I realize now what she was trying to instill in me.  She didn't realize that music could be of value and, and you could learn to do this and you--like kids today that I teach, I tell 'em one thing.  Yeah, it's gonna be rough doing--if you're gonna do music alone, you know, but if you learn everything, everything you can possibly learn about music and do it all, you could maybe make it work.  Because what they do to us musicians and artists they--even today they do this, they'll say, "Well, that's great but don't you think you ought to learn to be a plumber and get something in case your music fails."  They do not tell lawyers, "Hey, you should learn to do something else in case you don't pass the bar."  They don't tell doctors that, why do they tell us musicians that?  So, I constantly reinforce that with kids and say, "Hey, you can do that, but, you got to work your butt off and you gotta learn everything.  Things you like, things you don't like but if you learn it all, you don't have to learn something else."  But nobody told me that.  They did, but the way they told it to me, it didn't register that way.  But they didn't tell me that, 'cause the old guys that I used to work with used to tell me, "Son, you need to complete your formal training, you need to complete your formal training."  They were saying that, but it was in a different way, so.
Story_ID: 551644
Speaker 1: So, okay, so you got married--now, you're still--when you got married you were still about twenty, twenty-one, weren't you?
Speaker 2: No, I was--I think I was about twenty-five then 'cause I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were you, okay, so lot of years have passed since we--let's see, we got you out of the [U.S.] Army.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, by the time you got out of the Army was in '47 [1947] you were, you would have been only twenty then I guess.  'Cause you're born in '27 [1927], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was born in '27 [1927].
Speaker 1: Yeah, you'd only be, yeah, you'd only be twenty years old, so that's, that's--you--well, so it's five years later you met your wife [Eva Little Waites]?
Speaker 2: Well, somewhere in there now where I, I--I'm old.  I don't remember.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, well that's, all right so, well, any rate so after you got married what did you, what did you do?
Speaker 2: We started having kids.  We didn't listen like we should have.  People telling us, no, don't do that, don't do that now.  Have kids and so and then next thing you know, you, you keep moving on, you know, and then eventually it come, come to the point of, to the point of where I finally--I did some of every kind of work you could imagine.  Dig ditches, pave streets, I worked at a steel mill for one week and that's all I could--I couldn't take it, I couldn't do it.  That bending and then my back wouldn't, wouldn't let me do it.  I'd have to squat down and I worked there one week, and I said, it gotta be--and then the job of, of the bank opened up.  And I got it and that was probably the best job.  That was starting the basic so called social revolution that was happening in this country at that time.  'Cause we worked at the bank and--see, before that, no musician worked, that worked anywhere could tell their employer--'cause every, every musician that played at that time had a daytime job, every musician had one unless you was one of the big boys and, and up on top.  But every musician had a daytime job and you did music on the sideline, you know.  Even though it was important to you, but you had to have that daytime job.  First place, you couldn't, you couldn't get a loan, you couldn't get a house, you couldn't get nothing unless you had--you know, all you do play music.  You could be playing music seven nights a week and making lots of money, that's not good enough.  Well, I work at, I work at digging ditches over here.  Oh, yeah, that's good, you know.  So, we went through that.  And the bank was the first place that said a person could work, especially black people, could work and say that you played music too, you know what I mean.  And, but what we did at the bank, bank clerks and (unclear) and but we had to wear white shirts and ties and, you know, look like that.  And, if somebody puked in the corner, you was the one that had to go clean that up, you know, and you wasn't above that.  We done all that, but it was a lot better than digging ditches.  It was a hell of a lot better than digging ditches.  So, it grew from that.
Speaker 1: So, what was the name of the bank?
Speaker 2: Omaha National Bank [First National Bank of Omaha, Omaha, Nebraska].
Speaker 1: Omaha National Bank (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was the biggest bank in town at that time.
Speaker 1: So, about what year is this?
Speaker 2: We're talking about--'cause I got married in '50 [1950] and that must have been in about '55 [1955].
Story_ID: 551645
Speaker 1: So I guess as musicians go, were you tempted to do a lot of travel?  But I guess you couldn't if you have (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You couldn't travel 'cause you had the daytime job.  You know what made musicians acceptable in the United States if you didn't play--if you wasn't a symphony musician?  Rock and roll.  When rock and roll come along and they, and they started making so much money and going to the banks and everything.  Say, "Well, I got fifty thousand dollars there," well, oh, yeah, "We'll, we'll deal with you."  And that started making music legitimate.  You could, you could say you was a musician then because of that amount of money that was being brought in by rock and roll music.
Speaker 1: Okay, so with the bank job and the job--your gigs at night, were you doing pretty well?
Speaker 2: Nah.  It was rough, because we wasn't really making--I wasn't really making that much at the bank [Omaha National Bank; First National Bank of Omaha, Omaha, Nebraska] and it wasn't making that much at night but two together, it, it helped.  It did help.
Speaker 1: All right, so did you--were you tempted to hit the road and was, was there more money on the road than in town?
Speaker 2: Basically, no, because I'm reading now--I'm reading back at that same kind of maybe time or maybe a little bit later than that, I, I was reading in [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones' book where they was making with Lionel Hampton's band, making eighteen dollars a day.  But the glamour that go with that, whoa, man, you--I'd, I'd, I'd have given up all that just to do that, you know.  But that's the kind of money they was making.  It wasn't there.
Speaker 1: Well, about how much would you make a night in those days?
Speaker 2: Oh, you was doing good if you make, twenty, twenty-five dollars a night, you know.  No, maybe ten, fifteen [dollars].  I don't think it was as much as twenty-five dollars at that time.  It's a little hazy in my mind.
Speaker 1: About how many nights would you work?
Speaker 2: Well, by the time I got to the bank and, and was doing this, I was working, I was working five days a week at the bank, teaching six days a week at a music store, working six and seven nights a week playing music.  And still we wasn't making enough money to, to make just normal things.
Story_ID: 551646
Speaker 1: Now, were you playing at places on 24th Street basically or?
Speaker 2: No, all over town--
Speaker 1: All over town?
Speaker 2: --all over town.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was, was amongst the, the group of people that was starting to break out and to work with a few more white groups and they--'cause back in those days up to that point, the only black and white musicians got together was maybe at a jam session in the black neighborhood or something like that or on a higher level.  If you ever--well, looking at television you can see some of the problems that some of the big boys had.  Like--I remember--okay, I can bring it down quicker than that.  I remember in that same timespan, Ella Fitzgerald come here and playing right, right down here, right down here, big club.  She couldn't stay at the Blackstone Hotel [Blackstone Center, Omaha, Nebraska], and that was one of the big--she was top star and she couldn't stay there then.  Then we had all those kind of problems, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, but you played in a lot of the places that they were--okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, like I was--well, we was mentioning (unclear) a little bit like I could go in a place and fine, walk in the front door.  "Oh, hi, Luigi [HistoryMaker Luigi Waites], how are you," or whoever I was, you know.  And, and, but, if you come in the next day and just to sit down and have a drink or maybe bring your wife or your girlfriend with you, he wouldn't even let you in the door.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It made, made those--there was a lot of clubs that we played at, that we worked at where we played there and we were the attraction, and friends come into visit you.  And these were naturally white friends 'cause the black friends wasn't coming in, so these were white friends.  They didn't even want you to sit down with them then, you, you stand up and talk to 'em.  "And, hi, Bill, how you doing, I'm glad to see ya, yeah yeah yeah."  To go sit down though, you don't do that.
Speaker 1: They were enforcing a strict code of de facto segregation here in Omaha [Nebraska] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There's, there's a lot of unwritten, lot of unwritten codes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In fact, in fact, I remember at the time there was in the country, there was two locals.  There was a black local and a white musicians local.  And they finally decided to merge and that was a hell of a thing, getting that together.  But, here in Omaha, and I'm sure it happened other places, there was in the black local maybe there was seven bands available.  In the white locals there might have been twenty bands available.  Well, there's an unwritten code amongst the club owners in this city, the white local would go to them and say, if you hire any of the black bands, you can't use none of our white bands.  But, it was an unwritten code.  We worked in a club here and, and what you had to do is--so we got the job, and the leader then had to kick back--say, like you making five hundred dollars total a week for the band.  Well, you only made four hundred 'cause you had to kick back a hundred dollars to the manager in order to have that job.  But that was still more money than you was making anywhere else.
Story_ID: 551647
Speaker 1: Okay, well, I'll never forget this, Cliff Dudley, Cliff Dudley, it's a name that, to be remembered, Cliff Dudley.  He taught me values.  He's another one that taught me values.  We went into this club and we played, we played, and he took the money that we was supposed to kick back to the manager and he set it aside.  We worked there for almost a year.  The manager died and nobody knew this transaction was going in.  Cliff could of taken that money and just gone south with it, not said anything to anybody, but he didn't.  He brought it back to the band and said, "Hey, the manager died, we got nobody to give this money, here's your share."  He taught me a value just by doing that.  And he taught me a lots of other things too.
Speaker 2: Well, was Cliff Dudley the--was the leader of the band that you were in (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.  But I, I always wanna give, give him credit for, for doing that, you know what I mean.
Speaker 2: What was the name of his band, of the band?
Speaker 1: Cliff Dudley.
Speaker 2: Cliff Dudley band. Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  But, but it's, it's--and it's, it's a thing that I, I talk to, to a lot of of my students about.  Those kind of things happening, some of them don't understand that, you know what I mean.  Like, I got a, I got a student that, that's out there in the world.  I got several students that's out there doing big things.  I mean really big things, and, and, I, I talk to him about this all the time.  And, 'course I--when I made my European tour, he was big in Europe and I mentioned his name and they say, "Oh, you're Victor's [Victor Lewis], you're Victor's teacher, wow," you know what I mean.  It was like that kind of thing, you know.  So actually I was riding on his name more so than, you know--'cause I had never been anywhere, you know.
Story_ID: 551648
Speaker 1: Let me ask you if by this time, had you developed a--I guess a recognizable style of play and, and what was that style?
Speaker 2: I can't describe it but it must have been, 'cause it was--I was, I was, well respected by then.  By this time, I had, I had, I had a, I had done clinics for two drum companies and, and also the, the--I was the first person, I was the first person in Omaha [Nebraska] to, to be hired by a major music store as a teacher.  All the other teachers, all the other people, black people, that had worked at music stores in Omaha rented studio space and that's how they, they recommended you, you know.  In other words, like, you're--Bill's your name, right?
Speaker 1: No, Larry [Larry Crowe].
Speaker 2: Larry, you're Larry.  Okay, Larry's music store here, okay.  And I go to you and you rent me space and then you say from the music store, oh, yeah, we have Luigi [HistoryMaker Luigi Waites] teaching here, blah, blah.  Well, when I went to work at Swoboda's [Swoboda Music Center, Omaha, Nebraska] (unclear), he was the first person to put me--first major music store to put a black person on the payroll, which meant I was there, not just renting space.  So, as a result, that's how I got with the drum company and then I got calls from Kansas City [Missouri], Des Moines [Iowa], and even Denver [Colorado].
Speaker 1: So, that's how you got with the drum company, I mean, what do you mean?
Speaker 2: Well, at those--they still do--now, they don't so much more--the only really big people now but they had local people and going around in local areas promoting their, their equipment, you know, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so was it Ludwig [Ludwig Drums] or somebody like that or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I would--I was with Slingerland [Slingerland Drum Company], I was with--I mean, not Gretsch [sic. Gretsch Company] but Sonor and then Trixer [Simmons Drums].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Humorous story on the side, Sonor, which was top, which is a topline drum company, give me a complete set of drums with symbols and everything.  Give 'em to me.  The Ludwig representative for this--that's a competitive company, come to me and said, "Luigi, we, we'd like for you to endorse Ludwig drums.  You give us your Sonor drums and we'll give you a set of Ludwig's at cost."  "Ah, yeah, let me get back to you on that, you know."  (Laughter) But, I mean, that kind of thing goes on, as if I'm gonna fall for it.
Story_ID: 551649
Speaker 1: I was asking you about your technique I think (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --before we cut, and so, so what is your--and you, you shared with me during the break after we ate a piece of pie that you actually met Elvin Jones--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and he even taught you some licks, some drum licks at Camp Lee, Virginia [Fort Lee, Virginia], right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, he did, yes, yeah, yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: So tell us about that experience, how did you meet him and?
Speaker 2: Well, I was in, I was in--had just finished basic training and they put us in a holding company in Virginia at that time, right after I got out of basic training.  And they had a bunch of us recruits, as they called us, and then old soldiers, people that they were getting rid of, and Elvin was going out and I was going in.  And I had no idea of who he was at that time.  And he had the lower bunk and I had the upper bunk, and everybody there--'cause, see, I was the only one out, at that time, I was the only one from the North.  And it seemed like there was a great prejudice against people from the North.  And here I'm amongst all blacks.  And it was a great prejudice.  "Oh, you're from the North."  I had three strikes against me.  I was a recruit, I was from the North, and I was a musician.  And seemed like every black non-com [non-commissioned officer] there and everybody else was against that.  I got all, every crappy detail and everything.  But, anyhow, there was Elvin and so Elvin would sit and talk with me every day.  And say, "Hey, you do this, that and--nah, you don't do it that, try this, do it this way."  He opened up my mind to thinking, you know, and that kind of thing.  And I spent six months with him.  And then come back home, didn't think any more about it and about five, ten years later Elvin started becoming prominent in the world, you know.  'Cause, at that time, everybody there at, at the camp was--the joke was, they say, "Where are you from?"  And I said, "I'm from Nebraska."  "You from Knee-bras-kee?"  I said, "Well, yeah, you know.  And, where you from?"  And this was the answer I'd get, "I's from New York [New York]."  I said, "Right, yeah, right, yeah, you know."  And Elvin just said to me, "I got a brother that plays a little music."  That's all he ever said.  And come to be Hank Jones.  Oh, my god, you know.  And I hadn't even heard about Thad [Thad Jones] at that time, you know.  And, well, that, that's basically--so I met fifty years later in, in Nashville [Nashville], I run across Elvin again and so I asked him if he remembered Camp Lee, Virginia and stuff like that.  And this was the first time we had seen each other in fifty years.  And he said to me, "I know you, you from Omaha [Nebraska]."  But he didn't know my name, but he knew who I was and where I was from.  And don't you think that didn't make my day because it did.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I would say so.  Now, can you remember--well, you can't remember exactly what he taught you I guess or showed you, but
Speaker 2: Well, no.  What, what he taught me was a concept, it wasn't an individual thing.  We use individual things (unclear) but it's a concept.  In other words, like you say, you open the door with you right hand.  Okay, now open the door with your left hand.  Now put both hands together and open the door.  You don't confine it to one, just one hand alone.  And that was the concept.  Here's a piece of music, you approach it this way and then you approach it this way--that's the same piece of--and the same piece of music and once you start approaching it these different ways, it changes.  But the music doesn't change.  But it changes the concept of it.  Like, I think you and I was talking about earlier--I think I was saying--oh, shit what was I saying now, ah, something I said to you.  One of the normal things that I say to everybody I got--I'm at a loss right now.  I'll think of it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, but they--it, it's, it's how you--oh, it's how you do something.  This is the right way to do it, and that's what I--that Elvin taught me.  The right way is the way that you do it and it works, it's not--most people that say, well, it's the right way.  Meaning, if you doing it the way I know it, then that's right.  If you're not doing it the way I know it, then it's wrong.  And Elvin taught me to open up my mind.
Story_ID: 551650
Speaker 1: There are many stories like--I don't know if you heard the story of the man who played the bass for the--for Motown [Motown Records], James Jamerson, he learned--he taught himself how to play with one finger hooked like this.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And it's wrong, you know, but he didn't know it was wrong until he got to be the best bass player in, you know.
Speaker 2: Then, then you go and tell him that's wrong.  (Laughter) Yeah, that, that's the concept that I'm talking about.
Speaker 1: But I guess if he had known he couldn't do it that way, he wouldn't a done it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but look what he did.  If he didn't learn it the other way, would he have accomplished as much?  Nobody knows, nobody knows the answer.
Speaker 1: That seems to be a theme through--I know through black life anyway.  And probably through the lives of other people too (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that don't get formal instruction with a lot of things is that you take what you can do and you give it your all--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and you make it work.  And often times it surpasses the result that anybody would have suspected, you know, expected.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, like say--and like I said talked to--I met Roy Haynes when he was a young man.  And he come through here with, with Sarah Vaughn.  And, at that time, I had just got two bass drums because of Louie Bellson, and actually 'cause I know--see, I was the first person in this immediate area to use two bass drums.  When I say this immediate area that means west of Chicago [Illinois], east of Denver [Colorado], and north of Kansas City [Missouri].  That wide a area, I was the first person to do that.  And I had these two bass drums and all set up, and I thought I was bad.  Roy Haynes come in and says, "Can I use your drums?  Our drums--my drums didn't come in.  My god, I haven't seen two bass drums."  And he set down and played so much it made me almost wanna quit.  Just like that.  And I thought I was creating something, you know, great.
Speaker 1: So he was, he was really, yeah, Roy Haynes is a legend.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, but he was a legend then. He was good then, you know.
Speaker 1: Now, what about Max Roach, did you ever get a chance to--?
Speaker 2: Yes, I met Max.  Max was a--I saw Max first time when I went to school [Midwestern Conservatory of Music] in Chicago.  That's when him and Dizz [Dizzy Gillespie] were just starting the bebop era.  And I went into a club on--it was on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois], that's all I remember now.  I don't know what the name of the club--a friend of mine took me there and Max and Dizz were there.  And I sat there in awe, and I really didn't know what they hell he was doing but I sat there in awe and just all night long, just awe.  And about thirty years later I met him on tour and mentioned that to him because he didn't remember that 'cause I didn't say anything to him.  But he knew about a couple of my students at that time who were running around in the world doing things.  I said, "Do you know So and So?"  "Yeah, I know him."  I said, "Well, he's a victim of mine."  "Oh, yeah," and then we, you know, we got a conversation going, yeah.
Story_ID: 551651
Speaker 1: Basically how long did you work at the bank [Omaha National Bank; First National Bank of Omaha, Omaha, Nebraska] and, and do gigs in the evening?
Speaker 2: Worked at the bank, roughly, fourteen, fifteen years.  And then after I, after I quit the bank then I, I just--no more daytime jobs.
Speaker 1: So this was like 1964 or something when you finally--
Speaker 2: No, '64 [1964], that was in, that was in--still in the height of at the bank.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, so when did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Cause at the bank I was doing the bank five days a week, working six and seven nights a week playing music, and teaching six days a week.  And at the same time is when I started a drum corps on top of that.  And out of that drum corps come two, three of my better students now that, that we created here.  'Cause it was the first, it was the first one here that I, I started doing--I, at the time, I built this drum corps, I didn't really know what I was doing.  I just knew what I wanted to do and it got to be a thing that here and all over the country now, you see these black marching groups especially that do the drums and dance stuff.  That all started with me here.  It all started here.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what was the name of your drum corps?
Speaker 2: The Contemporaries.
Speaker 1: Okay, The Contemporaries.  How modern.  (Laughter) The Contemporaries and they--okay, so they, they, they were a drum and bugle corps or just drum corps (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, it's a drum--it was before its time because it was a drum and I, I knew how to teach drums.  And, and I come out of da rump da rump da dump, you know, regular march--old time marching group.  And, and so we used bell lyres, we had to use bell lyres like this.  Now they have regular mallets and stuff but we used it like that because I knew I could teach a kid how to play that.  I couldn't teach a kid how to play a bugle, so we used that for a melodic line, you know.  And we was using at that time, this was '64 [1964].  No, it was earlier than that, we was using as our marching theme 'Peter Gunn' ['Peter Gunn Theme'].
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, that, that would have been circa 1962, '61 [1961], '62 [1962] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right, yeah, yeah.  We was using 'Peter Gunn' and Ahmad Jamal's thing.
Speaker 1: (Humming 'Peter Gunn' theme song).
Speaker 2: What is it?  I can't think of the tune, Ahmad Jamal. I know he had the love thing for 'Spartacus' he did (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'Poinciana' was a, was a favorite.  And those were--and that and 'Anchors Aweigh' was, was our staple at that time.  And we're going into communities playing, can you imagine, 'Anchors Aweigh,' da, da, da, da da da, like that.  That's where everybody's head--my group was coming in with a drum like that vroompta, vrompta, vrompta brompta brompta da da.  The thing like that and I--'course I knew these two things would mix but nobody else had done anything like that.  So, what I realized that I had changed--and I didn't know it at the time.  And this is another one of those things, I had changed the way people marched and the style of marching, and the style of playing music.  But I didn't know that, that's what I was creating.  Had no idea.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, you were doing this then before the bands at Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] or Grambling [Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana] or Florida A and M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida] or--is that what you're saying?
Speaker 1: Probably, probably just before one of those 'cause I had no idea what they was doing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They started to emerge on television about the same time.  I remember Florida A and M, you know, was the first of those bands I saw on television with the marching fast time and--
Speaker 1: Well, see, we only thirty people, and they, they've got two hundred fifty people and that makes a big difference, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so, so, so what you were doing as a predecessor to or the early, or the early wave of what we see in the movie 'Drumline.'
Speaker 1: Yes, it, it really was.  Right, oh, way, way ahead of--yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.  That, that's a vile thing of what we was doing.  And a lots of kids that grew up in my group and stuff like that looked at that and said, oh, man, we was doing that a long time ago, you know what I mean.  And the kids that see it now, say, "Ooo, look at that," you know.  But, but it's hard to say to somebody, "Oh, been there and done that."  Yeah, yeah, sure, yeah.  And so I don't, you know.
Speaker 2: Okay, so that's, that's something.
Story_ID: 551652
Speaker 1: So The Contemporaries.  Now, are they still op- okay (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nah.  But it's, it's, it's been carried on because--did you talk to [HistoryMaker] Phyllis Hicks, she carried on my thing.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what she does with her--
Speaker 2: I started it before they did.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and what does she call hers again?
Speaker 2: The, the Stepping Saints, yeah.  And, see, hers was sponsored by a church.  Mine, mine, as far as I know of up to date was an only, only kind of thing, youth group of that kind that was sponsored by an individual.  And that was me and I was poor as hell.  My youth group, as good as it was, costs two marriages and I don't know how much money.  And lots of other things that, that go into building things like that.  Because it was a direct cause of two marriages, I know, breaking up because we were devoting too much time and money to that.  And the wives said--mine [Eva Little Waites] was one of 'em.  Wives said, "Well, what about us over here, you, you can't do that over here."  But I knew that was right, it wasn't I was trying to take something away from something.
Speaker 1: You seemed to be awful busy though.  You had like--the way you described it, you had a day job, night job (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was talking to my daughter just this morning about that and, you know what, well, I told her I figured out now the problem was the marriage wasn't working so I was staying busy, staying as busy as I could.  But I didn't know that at that time why I was doing all that.  But that was what--not only that, I was even drinking a little heavier than I should have been.  But it--I don't know whether it--what it did but it got me to here.
Speaker 1: Well, it made a contribution to the lives of a lot of people it seemed like eventually (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, it helped.  One of those things, yeah.
Story_ID: 551653
Speaker 1: So you worked at the bank [Omaha National Bank; First National Bank of Omaha, Omaha, Nebraska] and did the two jobs up until what date would you say?
Speaker 2: Oh, 'til about '70 [1970].
Speaker 1: Okay, so 1970 you kind a--you went--
Speaker 2: And then, then I started going on the road.  Then I really went on the road then.  I was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is that about the time that your, your marriage [to Eva Little Waites] broke up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was after, yeah.  Then, then, then, then I went on the road.  I was doing school tours and what that consist of school tours was, basically, you go to three different schools a day, five days a week.  And when I say three different schools, I'm talking about three different schools in three different cities, five days a week.  And then do an hour show at each school.  And I, and I did that for approximately three years.
Speaker 1: Okay, was there a agency in town that sponsored that?
Speaker 2: There was an agency in the area, there was an agency like a North Dakota agency took care of North and South Dakota, Minnesota, part of Nebraska, and, and Montana.  And then there was a mid- a southern out of Kansas City that took care of Kansas City, Missouri, Oklahoma and all around in there.  And then there was one out on the East Coast that, that's how I got to Virginia and doing that thing.  And there's one on the West Coast.  In total of all I done approximately thirty-eight states.
Speaker 1: Thirty-eight states of school shows?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, what, what would a school show consist of?
Speaker 2: Okay, you got one hour to go in and, and it's, it's called--I don't know whether you in--when you was in school, did you have assemblies?
Speaker 1: Yes sir.
Speaker 2: And did you have a, an, an idiot come in that's gonna address the assembly for an hour and then leave and then you're supposed to have learned something?
Speaker 1: Yes, but after the principal left then somebody usually came on (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Well, I was that idiot that went into all these schools and did these things.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was that idiot that--and here, here is, here is the catch on it.  If the principal approved it, you can better believe the assistant principal didn't like it.  Then you, then you had the music department, because I was billed as a jazz musician, the music department didn't want nothing to do with me.  "Oh, this is a jazz guy, he don't know nothing."  Then you had the English department, "What's that got to do with our class?"  And then we have the, the social studies class, you know.  And then you have then the sports class, what's a sports class?
Speaker 1: Physical education.
Speaker 2: Physical education, "Oh, man, this ain't a basketball player, we don't want it."  And then you, and then after you got all those people that really don't like what you're doing, especially what I was doing, then you, then you have the kindergarteners and second grader, first and second grader.  All you have to do is fall down on the stage and they love it.  Yeah, (screams), they scream.  Then you got third and fourth and fifth graders who were kind a cool and they just say, well, yeah, maybe that's all right.  Then you have the seventh and eighth graders, that who are so hip that they can't--and they're growing like mad, they can't go back to what they was, and the seniors won't let 'em go nowhere else and their parents won't.  So they're frustrated as hell.  And then you have the seniors on top of all of that who say, "We're the kings of the roost," and everything and you got one hour to wipe out all these people.  One hour.
Speaker 1: Quite a, quite a job.
Speaker 2: And, I didn't realize this but in a--as we're looking at reports on it, 90 percent of the places I went, excellent program, excellent, superb, excellent, superb.
Speaker 1: So you were highly evaluated everywhere you went (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I was.  But I didn't realize that and I'm realizing more now after looking at these things, 'cause when you guys come along I had to dig out all this stuff you know what I mean.  To say, well, maybe they want this, maybe they want this--
Speaker 1: So what would you do, like teach the different percussion instruments and, and what the parts--?
Speaker 2: I did, well, what, what I did I was, I was only one person and I had all sorts of percussion instruments and the stuff like that.  And I had to meld this all together in the show, and naturally they had to be teaching in there, had to be entertainment in there so you wind it all up together and like this, and like that, and by the time you're gone, "Oh, I learned something, wow."  But they didn't know that they learned something at that--they had a good time.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So you did that for a few years, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And that I would not wanna do again believe me.  Not knowing what I know now, but it was an excellent ground for me to do.  Especially, at that time of my life where after I'd come out of a broken marriage and all these problems.  It was somewhere to vent my energy.
Story_ID: 551654
Speaker 1: So what did you focus on after, after, after those school shows?
Speaker 2: I come back home here and teach here, and, and doing things.  Like, I was the first person in Omaha [Nebraska] to do jazz music in the public school as an assembly.  Also, I was the first person to, to, to teach a class of jazz at Creighton [Creighton University, Omaha, Nebraska].  Oh, what else?  Oh, I'd have to look at my resume now to figure out what else have I done.  But there's a whole list of things that, that I, that I've done, that I, I really did not know that I was the first to do it or that type, type of thing, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, that's something that you would think lot of schools would want was somebody teaching jazz or teaching any, you know, some of the other forms of music.
Speaker 2: Well, one of, one of the problems was that what I was doing was good and also it--wait a minute in '96 [1996], '96 [1996], I was voted through the Nebraska Arts Council [Omaha, Nebraska], Artist of the Year for the state.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what do you suppose that they--what did you do, do you think--was, was it based on your accumulation of contribution over many, many years (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At that time, I was part of the touring program and I went to almost every city in Nebraska and did a program, and, and, I was there like a, a whole week for all of these things.  And, and then when the evaluations come back in then they, they vote on it, you know what I mean, that kind of thing.  Well, who's the best in that?  Well, Luigi [HistoryMaker Luigi Waites].  Oh, well, hey.  So for one year I, I won.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: I was Muhammad Ali for one year (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) That's great, but you--every year you're making some kind of contribution to the--music education.
Speaker 2: I try, I try hard because my firm belief is how is anybody--my problem was in growing up the music that I wanted to play and the things I wanted to do, there was nobody around really to show you.  They, they--maybe a few things they'd say, nah, that's not the way to do it.  And really what got me start doing was listening to the big boys like Louie Bellson and Buddy Rich and the one thing how fantastic they are.  Well, between them and the kids that are going to do it, there's a great gap.  I figured I could fill that spot in between.  If they could reach me then they'd have hopes of reaching up there.  But jumping from here up to there ain't gonna happen.
Story_ID: 551655
Speaker 1: Now those two guys you just mentioned, Louie Bellson and Buddy Rich--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Buddy Rich has been considered by some to be one of, one of the greatest drummers to ever play too and Bellson as well (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: But, how did you--I know you, you mentioned Bellson a few times, how did you meet Louie Bellson?
Speaker 2: I, well, I've always admired his style.  It was the two bass drums that got me first.  Then I always--and say--then I went to a show when he was married to Pearl.
Speaker 1: Pearl Bailey, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, when he was married to Pearl Bailey they, they brought a show through Omaha [Nebraska].  And, and I had been teaching out of his book.  And so I went backstage hopefully to get him just to autograph the book, and there was two mistakes in the book.  And I found out they was printer's mistakes I wanted to ask about.  I went backstage and this man took an hour and a half to talk to me and they kept telling him, "Hey, Louie, come on here the bus is ready to go."  He said, "You wait a minute I'll be there in a minute."  This man spent an hour and a half with me explaining things and talking to me.  So then after that when he was somewhere and I was somewhere, I mentioned to him, he said, "Oh, yeah, you got a name like mine, you're a, yeah, you're a Luigi [HistoryMaker Luigi Waites], yeah."  So, he, he got to know me.  That's how I met him.  A wonderful guy, believe me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What about Buddy Rich?
Speaker 2: I only met him once and it was, it was here in Omaha.  Everything that I've practically done has been here in Omaha.  It's, now, there's been a few things that's been away but most of them--we had a, what we called a jazz society which I was a part of.  And, and we brought his band in for a, a thing.  And I'll never forget the saxophone player, Bob Mintzer, stayed over an extra day because we had a jam session available.  And he said, "Man, I haven't had a chance to do this in a long time."  And so that's how I got--but the, the meeting with Rich was very short and quick.  Oh, how you going?
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about somebody else now.  This is one of the jazz legends of Omaha, everybody talks about him.  Preston Love, right.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Well, now did you know him and--
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.
Speaker 1: Okay, what can you tell us about him?
Speaker 2: We didn't associate very much.  He was like a generation or so above me and like he--everything I did, "Well, I been here and done this," you know what I mean.  And, there was lot that we did not agree upon.  And it wasn't the result that we didn't agree upon, it was the method to get there that we didn't agree upon.  But, it wasn't, it wasn't that I didn't have respect for him as an individual but the way he went about doing things I didn't agree with.  And, hell, I, I don't see why we're not entitled to do that, you know.  You, you can like somebody and disagree with 'em, you know.  But it's a lot of people don't believe in that, you know, "If you don't agree with me then we can't get along."
Speaker 1: Yeah, I've just heard his name, I don't, I don't know a lot about him except I just he's, he was a, he's a legend in jazz here in the city (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, what did he play?
Speaker 2: Saxophone.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And so you just--you'd rather just say you just didn't get along.
Speaker 2: Well, if you can't say something good about somebody, don't say anything.
Story_ID: 551656
Speaker 1: Now, did you ever hear of a place called the M&M lounge [M&M, Omaha, Nebraska]?
Speaker 2: M&M?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the M&M was right across the street from the Blue Room [McGill's Blue Room, Omaha, Nebraska].  M&M never had music, M&M was a place for waiters and, and porters and that kind of thing, 'cause the railroad was big in those days, you know.  And those were the people hanged there, but, oh, across the street from the M&M was the Blue Room where all the music hung out.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's where the live music was then?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: At M&M you have maybe, what, juke boxes or something?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that type of thing.  They--there was that class thing again.  Waiters and porters, I mean, 'cause the money they was making or something like that, felt they was a little better than the musicians.  Kind of.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: They--hey, there's always been that class thing amongst all nations, everywhere.  There's been that, that class thing in the black thing.  If you don't believe it, look at India, look at, look at America, all this thing.  There's always the upper class and the lower class.  And it depends upon who thinks they, they are and thinks they aren't.
Story_ID: 551657
Speaker 1: We were talking about different distinctions in the community [in Omaha, Nebraska] and, and you were telling me about some of the distinctions amongst black people.  The north and south thing and you, and you were telling me about color distinction as well (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Yeah.
Speaker 1: So what's the, what's the--
Speaker 2: Well, there was always--that, that, that, all that stemmed back from, from history from Creoles.  The reason why they come about in, in Creoles where it started that because at the time that the Creoles were--Creoles were originally of French descent.  You either immediately French descent or offsprings of that.  When, when they made that division in the South of where Creoles were equal as blacks were, that meant the, the, the educated people were then put in, in, in line and were in the same area with the uneducated, which generally were the blacks.  And that's what made the difference.
Speaker 1: Now, you were telling a specific story though from your family.  You said that somebody was, was married to someone that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, my, my father [Sylvester Waites], whom I don't mention, after he left my mother [Ione Lewis Kelley], married a lady [Luellian Waites] who was light and they belonged to a church, and they put a sack on the door.  If you're darker than this sack, don't come in.
Speaker 1: On the door of the church?
Speaker 2: Yeah, this is the story that I've heard (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) With a sign? Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, I don't know how true this is.
Speaker 1: Now, you never saw anything like that when you were coming up (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, I did not see this.  I did not see this, but this was--but if that sack wasn't there, it was there mentally.  So maybe that's what they was referring to.  And my, and my father, who was as dark as I am, didn't fit in there very well.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is one of these cultural crippling things that have (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But look at the same thing in India, the different--the caste system that they have there.  They don't talk about that but it's still there, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's got a color basis too.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So, we'd had this everywhere.  Look at Europe for ages and ages and ages and ages, if you was a baker, you were a baker all your life.  Your son was a baker, your grandson was a baker, he could not be something else, you know, or that type of thing.
Story_ID: 551658
Speaker 1: Okay, stratification (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and being locked in and that sort of thing.  Now, did you think that the music world helped to break down some of those barriers?
Speaker 2: I think in the music world, we, we, we surpassed all of that with the exception of one thing.  Promoters, it's, it's, it's--I don't think that there was a tremendous--that tremendous amount of difference between black and white musicians until they got to the point of where the promoters realized, well, they, they could promote this white musician and they can't promote this, so that made the difference.  So, therefore, the people that could be promoted then didn't wanna associate with the ones that couldn't be promoted, not promoted.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: It don't make money, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so therefore in a sense then that's why, say, a Buddy Rich would be more world famous than a Elvin Jones.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.  And it's not amongst the people that are producing the art, it's the people that are buying the art.  And the reason why all of that is about it's not because of either one of those two people, it's the people that are selling them, that makes the money.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, we often hear the story of, of white artists in the '50s [1950s] covering the songs of black artist (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yep, but it's the promoter, it's not the artist.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's not Pat Boone's fault (laughter).
Speaker 2: Not really, I don't think so.  Now there might be maybe in later times after people are aware of what's going on but, generally, no.  I think music is the first profession that fought all of that.  I think musicians got together much quicker than doctors, lawyers--look at the problems they had in sports.  How long it took them to, to break down those barriers, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so, so, color, class difference or color stratification in the black community didn't really work in music, did it?  'Cause if it--or did it?  Was that an issue in black music?
Speaker 2: As far as I think, know of, it wasn't, it wasn't an issue.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's the other people that made the issues not the musicians.
Story_ID: 551659
Speaker 1: So just following right along from the--so, 1996 you're the Nebraska Arts Council [Omaha, Nebraska], Artist of the Year.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Now, did they--was there--what did they do?  Did they give you a--
Speaker 2: They give me a plaque, they--I got a plaque hanging in there.  I don't know whether you saw my wall or not in there.  There's all kinds of awards and stuff.  That's one of the problems, I got a wall full of awards and like that and I don't have a dime.  They don't put--the kind of things that I get awards for, they don't put money with it.  They give you an award.  I got two plaques in there from two different years saying, this is Luigi Waites Day in the city.  I got a key to the city, ain't no money goes with that.
Speaker 1: Well that's--those are some honors though; those are some honors.
Speaker 2: I'm not--hey, I'm not--I really am not trying to belittle the honors, but the other people that you have to deal with, the banker, the, the, the, the phone company and stuff like that, (unclear) say, "Mr. Waites [HistoryMaker Luigi Waites], can you pay your bill today?"  "No, but I have an award from--," plunk!  There goes your phone.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) So they're not impressed by the accolades of the city fathers of, of Omaha [Nebraska]?
Speaker 2: Nah, nah, nah, by any city.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you received awards from other cities too, so quite a few awards (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Story_ID: 551660
Speaker 1: In terms of your art, do you have a favorite piece that you play, a favorite song or a favorite--?
Speaker 2: No, I don't have a favorite of, hardly of anything 'cause my mind and my attitude changes so much.  This, this, this might be my favorite today, tomorrow, I don't know why, this might be my favorite.  Next day--in, in that same day, this may become my favorite.  It doesn't mean I don't like this but I like this a little more at this point of time.  And then all of sudden I like this.  That doesn't mean that I don't dislike any of these, but there is a time that you--like you say, the favorite, the kids ask me that constantly during, during all the school things and that.  "What's your favorite color, what's your favorite music?"  It depends on what day it is, where I'm at that it is.  I know there are people that like certain things all the time, certain way.  That's not me.  And I think, I think I do two things in that sense.  I play music and cook that same way, and I, I think I do art that same way too.  On any certain day that I'm playing, it's gonna be good.  Then on other days, it's gonna be lousy.  It's not because you want it to be but that's the way it comes out.
Story_ID: 551661
Speaker 1: You play a variety of percussion instruments now and I see that when we came up the hallway, for instance, there were lots of different things that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well all you saw was--
Speaker 1: --photos of you with playing the conga for instance.  You got--I seen bongos, xylophones--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --all kinds of--all manners of things.  What, what--how did you, you know, branch off into all these other different kinds of percussions?
Speaker 2: I, I don't know, just, just a need to learn it.  Hey, I wanna learn how to do that.  Well, you say you play congas, why?
Speaker 1: Well, I like them (laughter). I always wanted to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That, that's my answer, 'cause I like it.
Speaker 1: And somebody gave me access to a drum at one point that's the thing, you know, it's the access that made the difference.  If I didn't have it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That, that also makes a big difference, yeah.  But I, I, I don't, I know people that talk to me from time to time get very upset with me 'cause I don't come up with a specific answer.  And my problem with that is I say, 90 percent of the time when you're asking that question, you have a specific answer in mind and if I don't touch on it, then I've blown it.  As an example you say, for instance, I walk in the club and say, and say, maybe I been playing, maybe been playing fifteen minutes, you know.  Well, how long you been playing?  Fifteen minutes, that's an honest answer to that question.  They wanna hear, well, I started July 10th on such and such a year, at such and such a time.  That, that's not the answer.  They ask me how long have you been playing?  Fifteen minutes.  And they don't assume--they say too many times that I don't give, I don't give a good, I don't give right answers.  You can't get a straight answer out of me.  And every answer I give is a straight answer if you realize what I've said in relation to what you've asked.
Speaker 1: Okay, you're having fun with this (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, what's wrong--who said, who said you supposed to be mad in the world all the time.
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right.
Story_ID: 551662
Speaker 1: Well, we always ask this question.
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: Oh, man, I--'cause whatever I say in the few seconds, now, whatever I say by tonight it probably may change, you understand that.  And tomorrow I may have a different opinion of what I think is needed.  I, I don't want anything for the black community, I want really something for all mankind to, to work together at a better time and, and, and a better situation.  We're not always gonna agree, there's always gonna be disagreements, there's always gonna be likes and dislikes, but I think better unity amongst mankind.  And I'm not sitting here saying that because we're on tape and doing it like that.  I really believe that.  I don't think it should be a black thing or a white thing, or a red thing or a green thing.  I think we all should work together to try to make everything better for all of us.  'Cause first of all, we're all in this together.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you don't, you don't think in terms of what the concerns of the black community are, you think more globally?
Speaker 2: Yes, I'm thinking as a, as the picture as a whole, not in pinpoint.  Not, true enough, that pinpointed things have to come together better before the whole can.  I understand that, but how are they gonna come together I don't know.  But it's never gonna be a time that we're all gonna agree or we're gonna get along or something, so it's always gonna be that rub unfortunately.
Story_ID: 551663
Speaker 1: Tell me this, when you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any specific thing that you would do differently if you could do it again, or any major thing?
Speaker 2: I know you ain't gonna believe this but I would like to say, if I could, if you could go back and do any of it, which is an improbability, impossibility and unlikely, I would just--I think I'd like to do everything the same.  For the simple reason 'cause if I'd done something better than what I did, maybe that's too much, maybe that would push it the other way.  And, if I do something less than what I did, maybe that's not enough.  So I'd just like to be sincere about everything I do and hope to hell it works.
Story_ID: 551664
Speaker 1: Likewise, when you look back at everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Having lived this long (laughter).  And I really mean that.  I'm never--I'm not gonna say I never would've dreamed I'd be eighty years old.  I don't think I've ever thought of it that way as being this.  I'm just happy to know that I've lived this long and I'm very surprised I've lived longer than a lot of people that I know.  And I'm very disappointed that there's a whole lot of people that aren't with us today that are way younger than I am.  But then what I have to realize is that whether I like it or not, there's a time and a place for all of us and none of us knew, know when that's gonna come to an end.  And if we did, we'd be God, and heaven help us if any one of us was God.
Story_ID: 551665
Speaker 1: Tell us something about your family?  You have a number of children.
Speaker 2: I got six kids.  They're all idiots and they're dumb as hell but I love 'em all.  And I wouldn't trade one of 'em for any- I wouldn't want--I don't run around saying--there's Janice [Janice Waites], the oldest one.  How old is she?  I don't know.  Then there's (Unclear), she's the second oldest.
Speaker 1: Her name is (Unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Her name is really--hey, you wanna help out here?  Can she help out?
Speaker 1: Well, you know, maybe from a distance here.  We can't put her on camera but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Come here and, and help me out.  There's Janice, how old is Janice?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Janice is fifty-eight.  And so we can make it to his eighty-first birthday, we better put Laura [Laura Waites], who we call (Unclear), in there.  She's next.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: You have to say it 'cause you're on the mic, she's not.
Speaker 2: Okay, there's Janice who's fifty-eight, then there's Laura, who we called--I've always called (Unclear), and how old is she?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  She's fifty-six.
Speaker 2: And Laura's fifty-six, and then there's Chellie, whose real name is Eileen [Eileen Waites], and how old is she?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Fifty-five.
Speaker 2: Eileen is fifty-five.  And then there's Gerry [Gerald Waites].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah, we can get away with that.
Speaker 2: All right, how old is Gerry?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Fifty-three.
Speaker 2: Gerry is fifty-three.  And then there's Leslie [Leslie Waites], who's standing right here behind me with a baseball bat.  How old is Leslie?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Fifty.
Speaker 2: Fifty, and then there's the youngest one, David [David Waites], who's around forty-nine.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: I mean I need that help; I don't remember this.
Speaker 1: And you have some grandchildren and some great-grandchildren?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't remember none--now, now you have to get her on--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  You have eight grandchildren.
Speaker 1: Eight grandchildren.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Ranging in age from forty to twenty-six.
Speaker 1: Ranging from age from forty to twenty-six.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And ten great-grandchildren.
Speaker 1: Ten great-grandchildren.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Ranging in age from sixteen or seventeen to four months.
Speaker 1: Seventeen years old to four months.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Great-grandchildren.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, that's it.  No names on the grandkids.
Speaker 1: Now, don't run away yet, there may be more.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So I just wanted, you know, just ask you about your family and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I love my family but I just--I don't have these facts and figures.
Speaker 2: So, you're no longer married or--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Not married right now, okay.  So this is your family as we speak today.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: And always will be whether I agree with them or not, you know.  I, I, I'd like to add I think you heard me say earlier, you don't always have to agree with somebody to like somebody.  I, I don't believe in that.
Story_ID: 551666
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Ione Lewis Kelley] live to see you become successful as a musician and--
Speaker 2: My mother died when she was eighty-eight.  How long has grandma been dead?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Nineteen years.
Speaker 2: Nineteen years.  So she saw some of this.
Speaker 1: She saw some of the recognition?
Speaker 2: Some of it, yeah.  I wish she could have been around to see more of it but--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --that would been nice.
Speaker 1: And was she pretty much satisfied that she did the right thing in buying you a drum set?
Speaker 2: Probably not.  Quick story I have to tell you.  One time we played a concert my band and I, and I, I decided that we're gonna dedicate this whole concert to our parents.  And then we got our parents to show up and I had practiced really diligently for about six months on piano.  I never played piano except at home.  My mother had never saw me play piano, you know, just dabble around little bit, but I worked at this thing, had it down pat.  I played a piano thing and I dedicated it to my mother, after the program--the audience was nice to me.  They give me a standing ovation, they probably didn't mean it but they was nice and give me all that.  My mother walked up to me and said, "That's not bad, your shoes are un-shined, and if you practiced maybe you might be good."  But that's the way mothers are.  But I know she meant love in that.  I, I do, but, boy, that, that's the way it went.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, now is, is there anything I have not asked you that we need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I'm serious, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Well, is there some story we've missed, some--
Speaker 2: Look, when you leave here today, I'll just--there's gonna be a one hundred twenty things I'll say, oh, I should a told him.  Or, he should've known about that and that guy that was sitting back there in the back he didn't do nothing but I should've talked to him a little more.  There's gonna be--always gonna be something that we forgot, that we didn't do.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, something's gonna probably come out with the photos.
Story_ID: 551667
Speaker 1: This is what we always ask at the end it's similar to legacy but a little bit different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's a very good question.  And, there's a program, I can't think of the name--they interview actors, and that's the last question they ask them.  If there, if there was a God and you went to heaven, what would you want him to say, you know, and I, I've sat and listened to that and then I don't know, I really--I hope they say something nice--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --that's all I can say.  'Cause other than that, I don't know and I have thought about that.
Speaker 1: All right, well, thank you sir, for sharing with us, really this has been of value.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 551668
Speaker 1: --Sixty [1960] and '65 [1965].
Speaker 2: (MATTHEW HICKEY):  Okay, and where were you?
Speaker 1: At the Omaha National Bank [First National Bank of Omaha, Omaha, Nebraska].
Speaker 2: That's when you were employed by them?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Oh, you know how it is.  I, I may not look big but I stayed at a, at a--what the hell, what, but what motel is that you're supposed to say.  An outdoor concert.
Speaker 1: (MATTHEW HICKEY):  Okay, any idea when?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Your hair was black, let's see.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This was a promotional picture for the school tour.
Speaker 2: Me at first art opening.  That had to been July '04 [2004] here.
Speaker 1: (MATTHEW HICKEY):  Okay, tell us again.
Speaker 2: My mother.
Speaker 1: Can you give us her name?
Speaker 2: Ione Lewis [Ione Lewis Kelley] at that time.  No, it wasn't Lewis I don't know what it was at that time.  But, and have no idea what year that was.
Speaker 1: (MATTHEW HICKEY):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Promotional photo for arts council [Nebraska Arts Council, Omaha, Nebraska].  Say, say '75 [1975] for the hell of it.
Speaker 1: (MATTHEW HICKEY):  (Laughter) Okay, next one.
Speaker 2: My mother and my stepfather, Grant Wallace [ph.].  And I, I don't know the year.
Speaker 1: Hell, I don't know what year that was, when I went in the service.
Speaker 2: That's you in the [U.S.] Army, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, in the Army right after basic training.
Speaker 2: (MATTHEW HICKEY):  Okay, next one.
Speaker 1: But I have no idea what year right now.
Speaker 2: My, my--you ready?
Speaker 1: (MATTHEW HICKEY):  Yes.
Speaker 2: My grandmother and grandfather--have no idea where or what year.
Speaker 1: Those are your mother's parents?
Speaker 2: I can't see.
Speaker 1: You know who this is or no?
Speaker 2: No, I, I--please.
Speaker 1: I don't know what year that was though.  Oh, wait a minute, wait a minute, wait a minute, '58 [1958].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: At the bank.
Speaker 2: Oh, wait a minute I gotta turn this around so.
Speaker 1: (MATTHEW HICKEY):  Okay, can you tell us again?
Speaker 2: My grandmother.
Speaker 1: (MATTHEW HICKEY):  Okay, what's her name?
Speaker 2: I--the only name I know ever remember her by would be Effie Galloway.
Speaker 1: Bank.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  You know, that's why you got too much problem out your youngest child, that's David [David Waites].  We always said, David look like Mama but I take that back (laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Sir, was there a year on that?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  But near the gates of heaven, okay.  Please take that one.  I've got (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sitting on the car.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  My grandmother was a seamstress and she was a beauty.  She was a sharp lady--
Speaker 1: All, all--three of those--two of those people are still alive and they're doctors now, yeah.  They was gonna be doctors then.  I, I was the odd one in that bunch.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  So you were hanging around with bad people.
Speaker 1: You said it was you, I thought it was Marcel Marceau (laughter).
Speaker 2: Oh, yes sir (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: I thought that was a nice, neat photo.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  You're an, you're an artist.
Speaker 2: (MATTHEW HICKEY):  Okay, where are you in this picture?
Speaker 1: This was at the bank, but it was a passageway that went from the bank to the drive-in and we had to go through this underground tunnel and, and, everything fell off the cart.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  I, I, I went down there one time in my life--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And the tea room with my grandmother, which, you know, this is the early '60s [1960s] unheard of and then also we went to dad's job--
