Story_ID: 16013
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer for the HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please.
Speaker 2: My name is Noel Don Wycliff, last name is spelled W-Y-C-L-I-F-F.  I go by my middle name, Don.
Speaker 1: Okay, is there any reason why you go by Don instead of Noel?
Speaker 2: My mother gave me the name Noel, and promptly started calling me Don (laughter).  And everybody has followed suit, including me, ever since.
Speaker 1: Okay, can you give us your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was born December 17th, 1946 in Liberty, Texas.  It's a town about forty miles Northeast of Houston [Texas].
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a journalist and the Public Editor at the Chicago Tribune.
Speaker 1: And what is today's date?  Today's date is March 17, 2003.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry, I--  And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 1: We're in the offices of the HistoryMakers at 1900 S. Michigan Avenue in Chicago, Illinois.
Story_ID: 16014
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five People Magazine-ish type questions that I am always compelled to ask people.  And the first one is--and they just require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: The first one is, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Spaghetti and meat sauce.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Not really, no.  I like to go different places all the time and see new things.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: One from my grandpa, who used to say, "I might can do it."  He always thought positively.
Speaker 1: Cautious optimism.
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly.
Story_ID: 16015
Speaker 1: Okay, well, tell me what you know about your family origin, you know, and what your family's doing way back.  Now, how far can you go back with your family, not your (unclear), but how far can you go back, you know, can you back to the 19th Century or what?  Oh, yeah, yeah.  I mean I knew, I knew both of--I knew all of my grandparents on both sides, my parent--my mother's side and my father's side.  They all spring from Louisiana, you know, and ultimately, from much farther away than that.  But my mother's parents both came from the same town in Louisiana, Saint--St. Martinsville.  And my, my father's father--well, actually, he was born in Louisiana, but they moved to Texas shortly after he was born.  And he comes from a place right around Lafayette.  I can't remember the name right off the top of my head.  And then my grandmother on my father's side was born and raised in Texas, in Dayton, Texas where our family calls home.  I only knew one of my great grandparents.  That would have been on my father's side, his father's father, Sylvester Wycliff.  And I never knew him except when he was a real old man, and almost ninety, I think at the time.  And we used to go every time we--you know, every few weeks, we'd go over and see him.  We called him Big Papa and he was this little, wizened old man sitting in a chair.  I understand when he was young and in his prime, he was a pretty strong guy.  He was a blacksmith and very active and a pretty shrewd guy too.
Story_ID: 16016
Speaker 1: Now, did he have any stories or anybody else in your family have any stories or songs or traditions that they passed down to you from, you know, a long time.  Well, there were all kinds of stories about the family's background and everything.  Again, my great grandfather, Sylvester--Big Poppa, one thing I'd read, one thing I heard him say, he, he gave an interview back during the WPA days to a WPA [Works Projects Administration- A Depression-era government agency which put the unemployed to work on public projects] interviewer and talked about his own origins.  And he said, he was born a free black man in Louisiana and -- why can't I remember the name of the town?  And Verdenville, Louisiana.  And his father he said was an Indian and usually spoke some Indian language.  And his mother, I don't remember what he said about his mother, but he said, I was born a free black man.  And he grew up in Louisiana.  They lived there until late 1800's and then he was always looking to find better conditions.  And I guess at that time, the Klan [Ku Klux Klan] was real bad and everything.  So he went off with a group of people in search of something better.  They went down to Mexico for a while, found things no better there economic wise.  And so they were back to Louisiana, and they passed through Liberty, Texas, and liked the look of the place; found out that there was land available.  And so he bought a batch of land.  I guess he had made some money, and bought a batch of land and settled there.  And that's how our fam--his side of the family to be in that area.
Speaker 2: Now, he was in his nineties when you were -- how old were you when he died?
Speaker 1: Well, he died on New Year's Eve, 1959.  So I would have been thirteen, fourteen years old and, you know, he would have been just about ninety, maybe in his nineties.  I can't remember exactly.  So he was born about 1870 or in the 1860's or so, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so he was born right after the Civil War --
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --shortly thereafter.  Exactly.
Speaker 1: So when he was, I guess, experimenting in Mexico, it may have been the 1890's, do you think?  Yeah, yeah, in the 1890's.  And the right at, right around 1900, they showed up in Texas.
Story_ID: 16017
Speaker 1: And then on my grandmother's side, my, my father's mother, she was born and raised in Dayton, Texas.  And we've got this picture--actually, I've got it here.  I don't know how I managed to snatch it away from all my brothers and sisters, but it's one of those old, I think it's called a tintype or something.  And, of this woman, a black woman whose name I've got written down somewhere, Lit, or Leeanna or something like that, Day.  She -- and it was from that name, Day, that the town of Dayton got its name.  So was the town founded by a black woman?  Apparently, it was.  Not, not by a black woman, but her--I guess her husband was named Day.  And it was after him that--anyway, she's the, she's an ancestor, great, great or something like that of my grandmother on that side.  And--  That's interesting.  I, I know that one of the other people we interviewed, Dr. Jacob Caruthers' great-grandfather founded Pelham, Texas. And that's, I think around the same area, right?  East Texas, and near Houston, yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 16018
Speaker 1: So are there, are there, to your knowledge, quite a few black towns--I mean towns that have an origin of being founded by blacks?
Speaker 2: Yeah, in that part of Texas, there are a good many, yeah, yeah.  And on my mother's side, the knowledge is a lot less--is a lot more sparse because after--well, no, I can't we, we lost touch with Louisiana because a lot of our aunts and uncles still live there, and we used to go see them once in a while when I was kid.  But I didn't, I never got to know them real well.  They'd come and visit us wherever we were living.  And--but, you know, when you're a little child, you're not attuned to those stories as much as you'd like to be later on when you think, oh, I think I heard uncle O'Neal tell about that one time.  But your memory wasn't, you know sharp enough.  But, so there are those, those stories.  The, the most interesting of the stories, and I remember the day Big Papa told us about this, was our family name.  He, he was born Sylvester Paul.  And, and we didn't know anything about this.  And one day we had gone over for our obligatory visit with the old man.  And he said, "Did I ever tell you about changing my name?"  "Boing," this hit everybody (laughter).  And, well, no.  And, so he started to tell us how he decided one day to change his name to Wycliff.  How he decided, why he decided?  Nobody knows.  I, I don't remember now what he, what explanation he gave.  I just remember the astonishment my parents felt at the time, and my grandpa too.  I don't think he was aware.  They didn't know?  No, this was a big shock to all of us.  And he changed it to W-I-C-K-L-I-F-F.  And that's the name most of the family still possesses.  What happened later on was he was a blacksmith, and my grandpa, who was his oldest son also was a blacksmith.  And they were running shops, one manning one little town and then the other in the other town.  And each of them had the same first initial, S. Wickliff.  And so stuff kept getting mixed up when deliveries were made from here and there.  So my grandpa changed the spelling of his name to W-Y-C-L-I-F-F, like the bible translator.  And every once in a while I run into somebody who says, "You're not related to--" not a chance, not a chance.  Not related to that guy, no.
Story_ID: 16019
Speaker 1: Okay, that's interesting.  But you don't know where the name from or anything like that?
Speaker 2: I imagine if I asked my father, he could tell me again.  He has to remind me every time, but -- cause, you know, he was a full-grown adult then, and I was--
Speaker 1: It's an unusual name that takes a certain amount of artfulness to come up with, you know, you would think, you know --
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: -- a color like brown or green.  Something you could say, oh, yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: But that's the way he was, I mean he named his sons -- well, one was named Timothy, but he named two of them Socrates and Plato because he had this old white guy as a friend, and the guy told him about Socrates and Plato so he named two of his sons (laughter) after these philosophers.  And, you know, that's how he was.
Story_ID: 16020
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, well, any other stories from your great grandfather or anybody else about what the family was doing in, you know, those days?
Speaker 2: I can't think of anything else.  I mean the old man, Big Papa, he, he apparently was very shrewd in business and, and did well money wise.  He donated a lot of land.  The land for the church in, in this little town called Aimes, where, I guess if there is Wycliff family fountainhead, that's it.  That's where he settled.  The land for the Catholic church and the school and everything there, he donated.  And donated the land for the cemetery and everything else.  So he was a big landholder in that area.  So all those little are close by, Dayton--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and Liberty, they're all in the same (unclear) (simultaneous) --
Speaker 1: Yeah, they're all in the same, right along Highway, U.S. Highway 90 there in East Texas.
Speaker 2: And you had relatives in all--
Speaker 1: All of them, yeah.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) Louisiana?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 16021
Speaker 1: Okay, well, any other stories about the founders of Dayton [Texas]?  Not really.  I mean I, I don't know those stories real well.  I just know that, you know, we've got this picture of this woman, and she's identified as one, as the most ancient of the, the relatives on that side of the family.  And that's about all I know.  There's one other personality, who was -- she's not a relative as such.  Her name was, her, her name was Annie Colbert, C-O-L-B-E-R-T.  And the name--the, the black school in Dayton was named after her.  She came to the city from Houston, I think it was, as a teacher in the, in the--around 1900.  And she adopted one of my aunts who was motherless at the time.  And so Ms. Annie was this larger-than-life figure in our house all the time, even though I had never met her.  She died before I was born.  And she's kind of, she's kind of a patron saint for a lot of black folks in the town of Dayton because she brought education to Dayton for black people, when before her, people went ignorant or they learned what they could along the way.  She's parts of a group of, I guess, unsung heroes of (unclear) (simultaneous)  Exactly, exactly.  Cause I know the other towns have similar name (unclear).  Lou Palmer's father started the Palmer Institute in Norfolk, Virginia.
Speaker 2: He's like a hero up there.  There are other people, you know, (unclear).  You hear about these stories.  Maybe one day, maybe HistoryMakers can collect all these names of school founders --  Right, yeah.  -- that meant so much to these small communities.  You know, it was only this year, in fact, that I put two and two together and realized that this guy Julius Rosenwald here in Chicago, who was a big philanthropist and a Sears Roebuck -- something big in that company, Chairman or whatever, the school in Dayton that Ms. Annie founded was partially funded by, by his philanthropy.  I, you know, it never would have occurred to me that, that black education in Dayton owed anything to somebody in Chicago.  What are they -- Carnegie Libraries or --  Yeah, exactly.  Anna T. Genes Education Funds, supervisors and all that, a lot of history.  Yeah.
Story_ID: 16022
Speaker 1: Tell me about your parents.  Give me the name of your mother and spell that for us.  Sure.  My mother Emily, E-M-I-L-Y, and her maiden name is Broussard, B-R-O-U-S-S-A-R-D.  She was the second oldest of nine -- of ten children in her family.
Speaker 2: Now, when was she born and where--she was born Dayton, right?
Speaker 1: She was born in Dayton [Texas] in 1922.  Jan--June fifteenth.  And she had one older brother, Grant, after whom my younger son is named.  And I guess Grant fell ill very early in his life.  He lived till he was, you know, in his early 'twenties, but died and never was very healthy or anything.  Another--the youngest child in the family was a boy named, Richard.  He died in infancy, but the eight others all survived to adulthood and actually, two or three of them are still living, apart from Mother.  And her parents were named, Ezilda was her mother.
Speaker 2: How do you spell that?
Speaker 1: E-Z-I-L-D-A or D-I-A.  I've seen it spelled both way and--but it's pronounced Ezilda.  And her father was named Napoleon, spelled the usual way, but everybody called him Paul.  And I knew, I knew both of them, Ma--we called Ezilda, we called her Mama.  That's what Mother always called her and so we kids always called her Mama.  And I knew her only vaguely.  She died when I was pretty young.  And, and then Papa, Napoleon--Paul, died when I was--I think it was 1954, I was six and a half, almost seven years old.  It was the same--he died the same summer we moved away from Dayton [Texas] to Kentucky.  And that's another whole story by itself, but, so I have pretty good memories of him.  I remember he lived down the road from us and used to walk over and every evening have dinner.  And he would listen to the, to Gabriel Heater on the radio, reporting the news.  And at the end, he always say, "Oh, things are not good," you know (laughter).  And I always assoc- I always associated reading, I mean hearing the news with this trembling, quavering voice and a sense of foreboding (laughter) cause that was how Papa always reacted.  But he--I guess he had a pretty hard way to go in his life.  He, he moved to Texas around the turn of the century.  And he had either shortly before or shortly after arriving in Texas, he--so it was either in Louisiana or Texas, he spent a year in prison.  And I'm never sure what for.  Mother always says they said he told he--they accused him of wanting to make his living like a white man, sitting down. He had opened a business --
Speaker 2: (Unclear)  --
Speaker 1: (laughter) He had opened a business, a cleaner shop, tailor shop, and his business go burned down, and he went off to prison for a year.  What did he--why was he, what happened?
Speaker 2: I, I've never gotten an exhaustive story.  Of course, this happened before she was born, so she's getting it second hand, I'm sure.  He opened one of the first businesses where a black person was not doing hard labor--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And it was--
Speaker 2: And it was resented and, and so--
Speaker 1: Because it's presumed that the white community burned it up.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Or somebody in the white community.
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: May have come on the heel of his reaction to that?
Speaker 1: Exactly.  Ah, it happened in Louisiana because it was as a result of that, that he came to Texas, looking for some place relatively free.  And he came to Dayton.  There was a settlement of people from his part of Louisiana in Dayton at one end of town, at the North end of town.  We called it the French settlement cause there were lots of folks who spoke French.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) it's the turn of the century.
Speaker 1: Oh, very definitely, yeah, yeah
Story_ID: 16023
Speaker 1: And so he settled there.  And at some point, he had this real affection for my, my grandmother.  And so he went back to Louisiana, got her and they came.  I think they got married and came back and started a family; also started the, a business.  I guess he had this business thing, you know, and Mother says they used to sell ice cream and, and little candy treats and what not.  And she says, before the Depression hit, they were doing pretty well.  After the Depression hit, boom, everything went.  But she talks about some friend hers who always laughs with her.  He says, "I courted my wife at your parents' little store," or whatever (laughter), you know.
Speaker 2: In those days, they were called confectionaries.  Exactly, yeah.  (simultaneous) sold ice cream and cookie and stuff.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and, so that's what I know of my grandparents on that side.  Mother was, as I said, the second oldest of two--second oldest of ten.  And she used to--I, I guess, you know, when she was, got to be about ten years old, it was the custom to try to find work.  And she went to work for, for--she would do domestic work for, for white ladies around town.  Her mother would take in washing and ironing and what not.  And, you know, they naturally would ask, can one of your daughters do thus and so.  She was very fortunate in that she became employed by this woman named Ms. Jamison.  I've always heard her refer to Ms. Jamison, who I guess was, was childless herself and really had an affection for Mother and wanted to, she wanted Mother to go to Prairie View A&M [University].  She just had that aspiration for her.  And I think mother didn't want to go there.  She ended up going very briefly, to Huston-Tillotson [College] in Austin [Texas].  And by then, she and my dad were an item, you know, and she didn't want to be separated from him and what not.  So she dropped out after a short time, and came back to, to Dayton.  But apparently, Ms--Ms. Jamison was, you know, willing to pay for her to go to college and everything.  She was lucky to even be in a situation where --  She was extremely lucky.
Speaker 2: -- going out at that age to work on her own, there are a lot of tragic stories --
Speaker 1: Oh, yes.
Speaker 2: -- about a black woman going out.  She was a girl actually at the time she went out.  Yeah, yeah.  She was extremely lucky.  Yeah, and I, I -- you know, I often wonder how they survived because mother talks about after their business went under Papa, he, he just got whatever work he could, you know.  He was kind of a handyman.  And it sounded like, you know, they, they depended a lot on the kindness of strangers.  And, then, of course, as her brothers got older, and I guess they got jobs and what not, but nobody made a lot of money, and they survived somehow.
Story_ID: 16024
Speaker 1: Did they own any land to speak of?
Speaker 2: Just where their house was located, yeah.
Speaker 1: So they didn't really grow a lot of food around there or anything?
Speaker 2: No, no. Now, my other grandparents, they had considerable land and, you know.  My--again, this is my paternal grandparents. My grandpa, Socrates, he was--well, everybody called him Sprig, he was a blacksmith.  So, you know, he had his own business that way, and he, he was a farmer as well.  He, he'd plant corn, all kinds of stuff.  In fact, during summer times when I was a kid, we'd always go back to Dayton for the summer and I'm sure it must have been a, a financial sacrifice on his part, but, you know, he'd let us take his tractor and trailer and harvest the watermelons.  And we'd go up and down the roads selling the watermelons and what not.  Otherwise, he'd a had that income, and-- but, you know, he did that for us.  And he did one thing or another.  He had a tractor.  So he'd mow, mow fields and trade that service for the hay that he'd get for his cattle and that sort of thing.  So he did okay.  And my grandmother on my father's side, Ida, she was a school teacher.  She, she taught in the black school, in--the Colbert Elementary School.  And I can't remember what grade she taught.  I think it was third. And, and she did that until 19-- about 1954 when we moved away and she fell ill.  And, you know, that was, that was her living.  I remember she had not had a college degree and had to go--and at some point they made that a requirement.  And so she somehow got her degree from Paul Quinn Coll--
Speaker 1: University in --
Speaker 2: It's an AME School in Texas (unclear).  Yeah, in Waco.  And all I can remember was the day we went for the ceremony and looking out the window of the car, all these people in these caps and gowns and stuff.  You know how you have these little snapshots in your head from when you were a kid?  That's one of them. (laughter).
Story_ID: 16025
Speaker 1: All right, tell us about your father.  You didn't get a chance to name him and spell his name.
Speaker 2: Sure, his name is Wilbert, W-I-L-B-E-R-T, Wycliff, W-Y-C-L-I-F-F.  And he's now eighty-four.  He was an only child.  Actually, yeah, he was an only child in, in his family although I, I learned when my grandfather died that he had two other children, somewhere else (laughter).  These things you discover, you know, only, along the way.
Speaker 1: He was raised as an only child in his immediate family?
Speaker 2: Exactly, yeah.  And--well he was, he had a pretty--as, as black folks go in that part of Texas, he had a pretty privileged upbringing.  He was in a household with two working parents, a good--a reasonably good income and everything.  And he always--he tells me, they always had great expectations of me, and I guess he was kind of a sickly kid too for a long time.  But he spent some key years of his growing up, about three years I think it was in Washington, D.C. with, with his aunt, my, one of my grandmother's sisters.  She, she's the one who was raised by Ms. Annie Colbert, the teacher.  And she had gone on and, and gotten married, a very brief marriage.  And then she moved to Washington.  And then she decided to--
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, I can hear you (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sorry. And, and she moved to Washington [D.C.], started working for the Bureau of Engraving and Printing, where they make the money.  And so I guess it was around 1930, his last years or so in junior high school, that he went to Washington to live with Aunt Willie for however long.  And he tells stories about, you know, being at [President Franklin D.] Roosevelt's inauguration and stuff like that and having a good time and, and visiting--I mean Washington was I guess this, this center of black culture and what not.  And he talks about going, being able to go to the theaters and see these famous musicians and what not.  It's fascinating for me to hear him talk about that.  But then the Depression hit, and I guess aunt Willie -- even the government in those days, they, they started putting people on partial shifts.  And so she got cut back and couldn't afford to have him there any longer.  So he went back to Dayton [Texas] to live with his parents again.  And he graduated from high school there in the mid or late '30's [1930s], I think it was.  And he went to college, his first year at Prairie View A&M [College , Prairie View, Texas].  Now, he was born in 19--  He was born in 1918, October 30th, 1918.  And, and he went to Prairie View [A&M College], and it was a disaster for him.  He had no discipline, no anything he says, and he flunked out after a year, and at that point was knocking about, doing various jobs.  He drove the school bus in town for the black kids, which is how he met and wooed my mother by giving her a ride when he wasn't really supposed to (laughter).  And, and then he went traveling a bit, and he became a Pinkerton agent or something on, riding trains and what not. Did all kinds of stuff, and finally joined the Army.  When he was about to be drafted, he joined the Army, and the War [World War II] had broken out and what not.
Story_ID: 16026
Speaker 1: 1940, '41 [1941]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.  Actually, he had joined and I guess was on the verge of getting out.  I think they had some deal where you could be in for a year. And then the war broke out and they kept him in.  And he said, somebody asked, one of his commanders asked, does anybody here know how to type, one day.  And he said, well, I, I do a little bit.  Well, you're now the company clerk.  And all these little things happened.  One thing led to another, and he ended up in OCS [Officer Candidate School] to become an officer.  Actually, that was after the War [World War II], but during the War, he was in the, which was it, the 92nd Division.  There were two black divisions.  One went to the Pacific, one went to Europe.  He was in the one that went to Europe, I think it was the 92nd Division.  And he was in Italy, and he did some fighting there and what not.  And came back, and he tells me about the day he and my mother went shopping in Houston.  And here he's this soldier fresh out of the  War [World War II] and in his spiffy uniform and everything.  And she goes into the store--they had gotten married right after War--the War broke, before he went overseas.  And she went into the store and wanted to try on a hat and couldn't.  And, and he talks about how angry that made him, you know.  But, anyway, he--after being discharged from the Army, he took a batch of different jobs, while using his GI benefit to win, to get a college degree at Texas Southern University.  This time he was a more disciplined, serious student and, and he got his degree in Industrial Education.  I guess it was in '52 [1952], and while he was working at that, and while kids were coming.  There were four or five of us by '52 [1952].  You know, he was working as a mechanic at the Southern Pacific [Railroad] and one thing and another.  And after he got his degree, he looked for a teaching job.  And he started teaching at a high school in Beaumont, Texas.  And I can't remember the name of the high school, but he was, he was living in Beaumont by himself and would commute at the end of the week back to Dayton [Texas].  It was about a fifty mile drive, but he wasn't making enough money to be able to afford a place there.  And so that was a, that was one thing he didn't like.  And Mother didn't like being separated from him and all that.  And he talked about how, you know, his students, his kids, everything was hand-me-down's from the white schools, the equipment they used, the books and everything.  And that made him angrier and angrier.  So it was 1954, I think it was, 1954, he decided to take a civil service exam and took one for the post office and one for a job as a teacher in prisons, the federal prisons.  And he said, you know, "Whichever one of these comes through for me first, I'm gonna take it."  And he was offered, was offered a job at the federal prison on Ashland, Kentucky.  And so he accepted the job.  My mother says, he, he--the school year in Beaumont [Texas] ended in May, and he drove home, she packed him up, and he drove off right away to Ashland [Kentucky].  And he was gonna go and see whether he agreed with the job and the job agreed with him.  And, and it did, you know.  The thing took.  He was the first black employee at the prison there.  He said, his supervisor, when he walked, he said, he must have looked at that resume very carefully or that job application very carefully.  And he must have missed the Texas State University for Negroes [now known as Texas Southern University, Houston Texas] at the end because he was evidently surprised.  But, but he said, he and the man became very good friends.  And the man went to bat for him often, a Mr. Walter Graybeal (ph.) became a good friend.  And he said, "I could always tell when Walt came back from a meeting where, where I was discussed because he'd be red and angry." But, you know, he said, " I, I think he basically sacrificed his career standing behind me."  And so, after the summer there, he saw that the job was gonna take.  He was making a lot more money than he had made as a teacher.
Story_ID: 16027
Speaker 1: And so he came back to Dayton [Texas] to get us.  We packed up the household and that August, moved to, moved to Ashland, Kentucky.  And that was, that was the big turning point in all our lives I think.  I, I sit and talk with my brothers and sisters and my parents.  And we all recognize that our lives were never the same after that.  For one thing, it, it inserted us into a different kind of racial world.  It was still very much segregated, in some respects even worse.  I mean we could at least sit in the balcony in the theaters in Houst--in, in Dayton, but, in the theater.  But we couldn't even go in the downtown theaters in Ashland.  But there was a Catholic school there, and we were Catholics.  And the pastor made sure that, that we were admitted to the school.  And he got up in church on the Sunday before we arrived, and they tell us he said, "We're gonna have Colored children in our school for the first time this year." This is an old Irish-Catholic pastor.  And he said, and if anybody doesn't treat them properly, they'll have me to deal with.  And everybody did right.  And that made all the difference.  The school, the public schools there were still segregated.  And the black school, Booker T. Washington, was in pretty bad shape.  And part of my dad's ambition when we left Dayton [Texas], was to find better education for his kids.  That was always a big deal with him, to get as much education as you can and get as good an education as you can.  And I think those nuns who taught us in those days were really good.  They did a good job.
Story_ID: 16028
Speaker 1: I want to ask you about, reflect back on, during the time when you were a small child.  And can you tell us about some of the sights and sounds and the smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, we were in the country.  And there's some--the biggest person in my life in those days was my grandpa, Sprig [Socrates] Wycliff. He was a blacksmith.  And I remember being at his shop.  It was a big, red, tin-roof building in downtown Dayton [Texas], such as downtown was.  And it was right next to the railroad tracks.  And he'd always have a coal fire going in the forge, bright orange.  And, and I'd go down there and be with him for a day.  And we'd walk down the street to Remkey's (phonetic) Supermarket at lunchtime and buy some lunch meat and, and bread and eat sandwiches.  And then he'd buy a carton of Lady Borden ice cream.  And we'd sit and eat it together.  And that just--nothing tastes as good today as those moments--as that food in those moments with my grandpa.  Another thing, and I tell this to my kids all the time, you cannot find a watermelon nowadays that smells like the watermelons we had then and that tastes like the watermelons we had then.  They don't, they don't have any sweetness to them.  They don't have that fragrance.  Boy, it smelled so good, you could just, I mean it'd make your mouth water.  And in those days, these are the treats we'd, we'd try to get.  In those days, there were lots more kinds of soda pop, Nehi grape and all that stuff.  And red soda water.  And--everything was sharper and more fragrant, it seemed.  Maybe that's just the illusion of a child, but, but I really do believe it.  And there were some products you couldn't get anywhere else, like for the longest time, after we moved away from Dayton, I never saw Frito's [referring to Frito-Lay?] any place except there.  It was a Southern product; same thing with Dr. Pepper [carbonated beverage].  All over now, but in those days, it was only in Texas and that area.  And so--
Speaker 1: I think you're right (unclear) Southern --
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, there were these regional differences.  We used to have-- Grandpa raised sheep and what not, and he'd slaughter a sheep and, and have it barbequed.  And barbequing was barbequing.  Then we got to Kentucky and barbeque was something that showed up on your plate at school, but there was no, there was no process that went into it.  And so it didn't, it didn't seem the same as, as, you know, when you saw the throat of the lamb cut and then slaughtering going on and all that stuff.  It was, it was all antiseptic. (pause)  One thing people don't do anymore is put mothballs in things.  You asked about smells.  I remember the smell of mothballs because you had to do that.  And I remember the smell of, of pine, pine was everywhere down there.  And it was so nice.  It was so nice.  Country life was just--country life was full of smells and sounds and stuff.  Hearing--on summer days when it's real hot, and you're out there in the, in the woods, you hear all those crickets.  And boy it's, it's loud enough to--it's really loud.  And you don't hear that, you don't hear that in the city in the same way.  Those are some of them, some of the things.
Story_ID: 16029
Speaker 1: Now, when you were a little guy, what did you like to do?  What was your favorite activity?
Speaker 2: Oh, boy.  Usually, riding bicycles was a big then, even when we had just dirt roads, you know, riding bicycles was a big thing.  But--and this is something, I don't know whether people even think about anymore, but there were these, there were these bushes that grew--Westerns were a big thing, Western movies and what not.  And you always wanted to imitate being a cowboy.  And so we'd, we'd cut these bushes and trim all the stuff off 'em so they just had a little tassel at the end, and we'd ride like, and call it a stick horse (laughter).  This was a stick horse, and, you know, we'd go galloping along the road with our stick horse between our legs (laughter).
Speaker 1: Was it --exciting to grow up and know you are actually in Texas where cowboys were in those days 'cause, the rest of us had to fantasize (simultaneous) somebody in the East, you know, about being in Texas--
Speaker 2: We just thought the whole world was like this!
Speaker 1: Yeah, but playing stick horses and also in the woods, you could go and-- there were always vines.  And at my grandpa's place, there was always a, there was a big gully and you could walk along and find somewhere, hung from some tree, a vine, cut the vine loose.  And then swing across the gully with it.  And, as I think about it, we could have seriously hurt ourselves.  I mean at, at its height, we must have been thirty feet off the ground.  And if something had gone wrong, you know, we'd a hurt ourselves seriously.
Speaker 2: Were you swinging on some kind of natural vine--
Speaker 1: A natural vine, yeah.  But, boy, it was fun (laughter).  It was fun, and--
Speaker 2: Was there water below you?
Speaker 1: No, usually, at that time of year, it was dry, but sometimes there would be water.
Speaker 2: If you had dropped off in there, you'd a--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, we'd a been seriously hurt.  But, hey, we didn't have any sense.  And then as we got older, you know, there was work to be done.  So I'd go down for summers when I was, from about ten--age ten on, I'd spend summers there.  And my Grandpa would, has, he--in my late teens, we'd actually divide up the work so that, for example, if somebody came and wanted some plow points sharpened or something else.  And he had hay to get in, either, more often than not, I would go downtown to his shop and, and do the work with the, with the, the blacksmith work, which I enjoyed.  I felt that was a real honor to be given, entrusted that, that responsibility.
Story_ID: 16030
Speaker 1: So you could sharpen the blades and--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: You had a kit actually you could take with you and sharpen the blades?  No, no, it was a matter of--the way he did it.  It was a matter of, of starting the fire, putting the, putting the piece of metal in there; put it on an anvil, beat it out so that it was, it was thin.  And then the last step would have been to grind it to a, to an edge.  But I mean, we hadn't at that point reached the throw away society that we are now.  So it was, people who, who had this equipment wanted it to last.  And, and they'd bring it to him because he wouldn't, he wouldn't just grind it away.  He'd preserve it and do it well.  And his motto used to, "I'll fix it or I'll fix it so nobody else can fix it," (laughter).  And that'd tickle me to death, but he was good at what he did, my grandpa was.  And so during summer, you know, I'd help him with the blacksmithing.  I'd cut fields with the tractor and what now, and we'd have this hay rake and, and rake it all up into bales.  Yeah, there was always something to do.  And sometimes I thought, how does this old man keep going cause he was, he was getting up there.  But he was a hard working man, and made me the same I guess.
Story_ID: 16031
Speaker 1: Now, you talked about the radio news, but did you get many newspapers down that way, and did you remember reading a paper at all when you were coming up?
Speaker 2: You know, that's interesting because we moved away from Texas before newspapers were part of my universe.  And we moved--when we moved to Kentucky, we, there was a newspaper there called the Ashland Daily Independent, and we always got it.  That's where I first started reading the newspaper.  And, you know, mostly what I read was the comics; later on, sports and what not.  How old were about that time?  I was seven when we moved there.  You were just starting reading.  Exactly, yeah, in fact, my mother tells the story about my--me listening to my older brother reading a book.  And I, I said, "I'm six years, and I can't even read." (laughter).  She laughs about that.  And so, yeah, I was just starting when we moved there.  And, the Ashland Daily Independent, was a part of our lives.
Speaker 1: Was there very much news about the black community in the Ashland Daily Independent?
Speaker 2: Well, if there was, I wouldn't a known, but I doubt it.  I kind of doubt it.
Story_ID: 16032
Speaker 1: Now, Ashland, Kentucky, where is that in relationship to, I mean (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's about, it's in Northeastern Kentucky, right where Ohio, West Virginia and Kentucky all come together in this one little area there, near Huntington, West Virginia and about a hundred miles down the river from Cincinnati, right on the Ohio River.
Speaker 1: Is it near Marietta?
Speaker 2: Not, not real close, but not far either. And in those days, it was, you know, a pretty good industrial town. There was Armco Steel, which had a big plant there.  And the Ashland Oil and Refining Company, an, an oil company. But now, all of those are gone.  And I'm not sure how Ashland survives now.  In fact, I was just back there for the first time last fall.  And I'm not sure what the, what the thing is now.  But we had a, a--the first--my, my dad had, before we moved there, he had gone and rented a house.  And my dad in those days, was kind of a light-skinned black man.  And the guy rented him this house so he figured, no problem.  We got there and started unloading the furniture, and the man comes up and says, no, you can't stay here.  The neighbors are up in arms.  And so the next day my parents had to go out and find another place to live.  They did, and we moved into a house on Central Avenue in Ashland.  And we lived there for, oh, three, four years, and then -- renting, and then they bought a house on another street, Hilton Avenue in Ashland.  And we moved there, and I, I went back last fall and found that that house is completely gone now.  I don't know what's happened to it.  But it, it was an interesting situation because both, in both cases, they're kind of lower, middle-class areas, and most of our immediate neighbors were black.  But not very far away were white neighborhoods, sometimes half the block was white and half was black.  So it was an interesting kind of racial dynamic.  And, you know, we'd spend our days going, in my case, I'd get up in the morning, put on a baseball mitt and go outside.  And we had a game going right away.  That was, that was the thing.  I loved baseball.  And there was a guy who lived behind me named Wilson Barrow.  He later on -- Wilson (laughter), Wilson was one of the best athletes I've ever seen at everything from marbles to, to baseball.  He later signed a contract with the Yankees and was on one of their farm teams for a while.  He could really throw a baseball.  But all I can remember is Wilson used to regularly, win all my marbles.  I loved to play marbles, but I was never good enough for him.  And he'd, he'd come out every morning, and if I had gotten some new marbles, he'd have them by, by sundown cause he was good (laughter).  And I never had the sense to just quit playing (laughter).
Story_ID: 16033
Speaker 1: So you were a good baseball player yourself?
Speaker 2: No, I wasn't that good.  I mean--I, I thought I was good.  Athletically, I always thought I was better than I actually was (laughter).  You know, in high school, I played basketball and played--I was always a starter on my teams and what not, and fancied myself much better than I was.  And I finally got my comeuppance when I went to college, freshman year at Notre Dame [University, South Bend, IN.].  And I thought, well, they just don't know what they got here, and I walk on.  It didn't take long for me to realize they had a lot of guys riding the bench who were about twice as good a me.  So what did you try to go in as, a baseball player or a basketball player?
Speaker 1: Basketball player, yeah, yeah.  And I, I really stopped playing baseball after about eighth grade cause, you know, it was just sandlot stuff.  There was no way I was good enough to be on, in, in an organized high school league.
Speaker 2: But you're pretty tall though.  You're around, what, about 6'3"?
Speaker 1: Yeah, 6'3", 6'3".  Okay, that's pretty good size for --
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah.  In basketball--
Speaker 1: They're so much bigger now--
Speaker 2: I was one of the biggest guys on my basketball team, but, you know, that was a small universe (laughter), yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, that part, now, you grew up basically in Ashland [Kentucky]?  Is that--
Speaker 2: Well, we lived in Ashland for six years until 1960 when I had just finished seventh grade.  And then we moved to, to Denver, Colorado for three years.  So I had just finished my sophomore year of high school when we moved the next time to Terre Haute, Indiana, which is where I graduated from high school.
Story_ID: 16034
Speaker 1: Now, tell us about grade school.  You know, how did you like grade school, and what was the difference in these cities.  And did you have any teachers there that served as mentor to you in any sense?
Speaker 2: Grade school, well, in grade school, all of my teachers were nuns --
Speaker 1: You went to Catholic grade school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and they were darn good teachers.  I was a left hander.  My mother had these old-fashioned beliefs about left handers.  So she asked the nun to make me a right hander.  The nun made me a right hander (laughter).
Speaker 1: Do you feel comfortable with that now?  I mean do you --
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I, I mean I do everything comfortably with my right hand, and I can't do a thing with my left now.
Speaker 1: So, but you started off with the left.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  And, you know, I was asking my, one of my sons the other night, do they ever--do you guys ever memorize poetry and what not?  No.  He doesn't know a line of poetry, but they had us memorizing poetry.  I can still today recite "Oh, Captain, My Captain" [ by Walt Whitman, poem from Leaves of Grass] and stuff like that.  And, you know, that's the measure of an education, but it's one aspect of things.  You need to have some appreciation for things of beauty and what not and, and have some of those things in your memory.  And they did that. They did that, and they taught me extremely well, the basics of math and grammar and everything.  And they were tough.  I can't say that any of them was a role model for me.  They just made me--they did several things for me.  They made me realize that I was gifted and that I had an obligation to, to develop those gifts.  They--and, and they gave me the wherewithal to do so by giving me good basics.  But on the other side, we were--I and my brothers and sisters were the only black kids in the, in the schools.  And so I was growing up kind of stunted actually.  And, I mean it didn't begin to dawn on me until, you know, I started approaching puberty and, and got interested in all those little girls.  And that became a, a problem for me.  I don't think my parents ever fully appreciated the difficulty that I and my brothers and sisters had because of that, the socialization business.
Story_ID: 16035
Speaker 1: Did you go to--were the Catholic schools segregated by sex?  Yes.  That was another thing--not all the way through, but, but in Ashland [Kentucky], yeah.  Boy and girls were in different classrooms.  And, you know, that--there's something to be said for it, and there's something to be said against it.  I mean, in, in certain ways it helps reduce distractions and everything else.  And then at a certain stage of your life, you're gonna be distracted no matter what (laughter).  No matter what they do.  So, yeah, that was, that was part of life for us, and not a very happy part from my perspective.  But, you know, I, I guess I learned to deal with it.  But the one thing--the best thing that ever happened to me in grade school was spelling.  My brothers and sisters all--and I, all were contestants in the spelling bees.  And we were darn good at it.  And it can get a little crazy.  I remember in seventh or eighth grade, they'd pull me out of class.  And I'd see all the kids out there at recess playing and having fun and I'm in there memorizing these lists of words.  But, you know, you can get crazy about anything.  But it's something I learned to do well and that brought me a measure of praise and, and satisfaction.  And, and to this day, stands me in good stead.  I mean that's the kind of work I do, work with words and that matters.  So that was part of it.  And so all things considered, I'm, I'm grateful the education I had.  There were aspects of it I'd change, but we moved to Denver [Colorado] right after the seventh grade.  And then the classes were no longer segregated sexually.  So I was in the same classes with the girls.  And, but still, at those schools, the last year of grade school, first year of--first two years of high school, still I was the only black kid virtually in my class.  My last two years of high school in Terre Haute, Indiana, again, a Catholic high school, there were a couple--three other black kids in the, in the class, which made a difference.  It was, it was healthier--not, not completely healthy, but healthier.
Story_ID: 16036
Speaker 1: Now, do you remember the names of any of these school?  Oh, sure.  From the first school, just give me the names of all the schools.  Yeah, I went to first grade in Dayton, Texas, Colbert Elementary School.  Then we moved to Ashland, went to Holy Family School.  In Denver, went to eighth grade at Cure' D'ars--French--C-U-R-E, D, apostrophe, -A-R-S.  And then the first two years of high school, went to Mache Beuf High School, named after one of-- a bishop.  M-A-C-H-E, B-E-U-F High School.  That's an unusual name.  Yeah, German name.  And then the last two years of high school in Terre Haute, I went to Schulte High School, S-C-H-U-L-T-E in Terre Haute.  And that turned out to be really fortuitous for me.  I enjoyed Denver, cried when we left there because I didn't get to say good-bye to any of my friends, didn't want to leave, had a girlfriend and all this other stuff.  This was between sophomore and junior year of high school--  That's a really critical time (unclear) --  Absolutely.  -- to pick up and leave and go so far away.
Story_ID: 16037
Speaker 1: Yeah.  But we ended up in Terre Haute [Indiana].  There was a prison there, and my dad had gotten a promotion and what not.  And so, and several good things happened.  Folks there were economically, I'd say a cut below those at the school in Denver [Colorado].  Everybody was a lot -- put on fewer airs, friendlier.  And, and it was, it was just a wonderful atmosphere at that school.  I played basketball, had a good time at it.  The first year I was there, my junior year of high school, we -- and my parents had brought us there during the summer to enroll us.  And somehow the word got around that this kid, a tall, skinny kid, six foot, nine [inches] is coming from Denver, and he's (laughter) -- I got there and I was a little bit of a disappoint in that regard.  But the football coach, I had never played football, never had any desire to play football.  And all of a sudden, in the space of a five-minute conversation, he's talked me into going out for football.  So I did.  I didn't enjoy it a lot, but it was a nice experience to have had.
Speaker 2: And what did you play?
Speaker 1: I played defensive end (laughter).  Mostly I, I played defensively, and getting out of the way of the big guys who came (laughter).  And the star of the team was one of the other, was one of the other black guys, a guy named Mike Harris, who was just fantastic.  What a good person and, and a great athlete.  He went on to Kansas and messed up his knee the first week I think he was there.  And he now he, I think he's in Cleveland [Ohio] now.  But anyway, I had a--it was a good atmosphere there.  And the best thing was the principal.  He encouraged me academically in a lot of ways to pursue scholarships and things of that sort. And one of those turned out to be so fortunate for me because in my senior year--I was a pretty good student, had pretty good grades.  And best of all, when I took the college boards, I did very well on those.  And he--the Archdiocese of Indianapolis then was giving away a scholarship to a, to a deserving African American student.  And he sent me to Indianapolis [Indiana] to, to interview for that scholarship.  And it turned that for technical reasons, I wasn't eligible for it.  But one of the guys on the interviewing committee was a graduate of Notre Dame [University].  And he looked at my grades and everything and, and asked me, you know, have you ever considered going to Notre Dame?  Of course, I hadn't.  That was just a name out there in the, in the marquee lights for me.  And about a week after the interview, the phone rang at our house one night.  And my mother answered and had this long conversation with somebody and came back and told me that Mr. Fisher had--from the interviewing committee, had called and wanted to know whether I'd like to go to Notre Dame [University].  And, and he started clearing away obstacles and--this was in April of my senior year of high school, and that was late to be starting this sort of thing.  But he made it happen. And I ended up there, going to college that fall.
Story_ID: 16038
Speaker 1: Now, did you have an idea of what you wanted to major in?
Speaker 2: I was already interested in politics.  And, and, you know, I, I figured I'd major in political science just because I thought I had an idea of what that was, but to be frank, I didn't know how college worked.  And so, I was just going, assuming I'd figure something out along the way.  That's, that's sort of what I had in mind.
Speaker 1: (technical problem)
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're at the legendary Notre Dame,you know, this is, you know, the legendary football school of the Golden Dome and all, what have you, Irish tradition--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: -- and all this that you see on television, this following of people that come, from all over the country to see the games.  It's just - so what is that like?  Did you have an image of Notre Dame in your mind--
Speaker 2: I'm not sure I had an image of it in my mind.  Before I went, I just had heard of it forever, and listened to their football games and what not and knew it was a big deal, and wondered how did I come to be there.  But, you know, my dad drove me up there in September and dropped me off, and I felt pretty lonely, and --
Speaker 1: Were there a lot of black students at Notre Dame when you went?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) there were exact--my class, my freshman class had more than any other class in it.
Speaker 1: How many (unclear)--
Speaker 2: There were eleven of us.  Actually, I say eleven, but I've never been able to count up more than nine.  And I can't remember the last two.  But there were eleven black freshmen that year and probably all told, there were twenty-five altogether in the University, out of -- that, that would have been out of 7,000 undergraduates.
Story_ID: 16039
Speaker 1: Now, at this point, Notre Dame is not co-educational, right?
Speaker 2: Not co-educational.  About three or four years after I graduated, unfortunately (laughter).
Speaker 1: So these are all, basically, white males and twenty-five of you all?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Right.
Speaker 1: And, okay--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I'll be very frank, there were so many times my first two years there when I would just think, "I am gonna get up and walk away from here and not stop walking till I get to some place that, you know--some place that looks utterly other than this," 'cause I was so lonely and, and probably depressed and, and unhappy.  But --
Speaker 1: (Unclear) in the middle of Indiana, hearing, like (unclear) (simultaneous) --
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's up in --
Speaker 1: There's some black local population --
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, there's, there's black population. And, you know, I had-- very early on, met a girl.  And, you know, her parents were really nice to me, nice people.  And so that was kind of a help. But heck, there was nobody there.  And it, that lasted for my first two years there.  I, I didn't give in to the temptation to walk away, frankly, because I felt like--God, my parents and everybody are depending on me to do this right.  And,  also fortunately, because of the education I had gotten, the work wasn't killing me.  I, I could do the work.  It was the, it was the social side of things that was hard.
Speaker 1: And it's ironic in a sense that that's a school that a lot of white males would go to, to socialize and to build their social connections and network for the rest of their lives.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And, and you go there and you're basically isolated.
Speaker 2: Although, to be frank, they wouldn't there to socialize.  They'd go there to, to build connections and what not. But the real distorting aspect of life there was the absence of women, to be frank.
Speaker 1: So it kind of affected everybody?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah.  I mean when Notre Dame eventually went coed.  [Notre Dame University President] Father [Theodore] Hessburg said, "We need women here to, to civilize us."  There were a lot of just uncivil behavior because it was all men, packed away together.  And, and I'm not sure that it's worked--
Speaker 1: They're (unclear) (simultaneous), right?  Exactly, exactly, doing crazy things.
Story_ID: 16040
Speaker 1: And so for two years, I suffered.  My last two years, a couple of things happened.  I, I don't know, I became a good scholar.  I became a really good scholar.  I got excellent grades my last two years.  I got deeply immersed in my studies and because I had that strength, I was able to navigate more readily socially.  I developed a little circle of friends, men and women because there was a women's college there; not nearly as many of them as men at Notre Dame.  And we had a--each, each succeeding class had more black students.  We had an Afro-American Society, we called it then.  We started doing things like, you know, on weekends, we'd have busloads of girls coming in from Catholic colleges around the Midwest.  And I met some young women, and that made life better.  And so my last two years, I really enjoyed myself.  I didn't enjoy myself in the same way that I would have at an Ohio State [University] or a [University of] Wisconsin or what not else, but I enjoyed myself.  And I felt like I was a good, I was a good scholar.
Speaker 2: I don't know, there's something that sounds very attractive about busloads of college women-- shipped in to, with a purpose, you know, to cheer you up.  There's something about that, that --
Speaker 1: (laughter)  Yeah, yeah.  That was, they were, they were nice young women, they were.  They were very good people.  There's, I mean, you know, lots of marriages came out of those, those-- And there was one young woman from Detroit [Michigan] that I particularly was fond of.  We lost touch after a while, but no, that made life livable.  And, I, I got a direction for myself also.  I, I felt like I, I can master this political science business, and I want to study, and I want to become a teacher of it.  And, you know, I had some excellent teachers who took person interests in me and helped foster that.
Story_ID: 16041
Speaker 1: And--Well, one of my--in fact, I just went back last week and had dinner at his house with him and his new wife, a man named Edward Gerner (ph.).  He taught--I took two political science courses from him.  And--he was just, he was brilliant.  And, what I gravitated toward was political philosophy.  And so he, he was excellent in that regard, and he, he's--he wanted to know about where I came from, what my prospects were and that sort of thing.  And there was another teacher named-- Walter Negorski (ph.).  He taught me my freshman year, political science course.  Later on he hired me as his student assistant.  And I took another course from him as well, a one-on-one directed readings course.  To this day, I, I think of him as the--as my ideal of a college professor because he was so personally invested in, in my success.  And I just, you know, I can't thank him enough for that.  He was very young at the time.  He still looks remarkably young, thirty years later.  And this, those two men were especially good to me.  There was another guy, Notre Dame [University] has this tradition of, what do they call them, 'Bachelor Dons', like, like at Oxford [University, London, England] and those places.  You know, you'll have these guys who came and never left.  And there was a fellow named Frank O'Malley.  He taught Literature, and he lived in one of the dormitories.  And I considered it one of the greatest honors when, one night Frank invited me to dinner with him because he was, he was such a, such an intellect.  And his lectures were just, they were wonderful experiences.  I used to work during the summers with the Upward Bound program[college retention program for underpriveleged youth] at Notre Dame.  And Frank lived in the dorm that the Upward Bound kids occupied.  And one day, he had his door opened, and one of the kids came to the door and looked in, and he said, "Come on in.  Come in here."  And he had a wall full of books (laughter).  And the kid looked at all the books, and he said, "Have you read all of these?"  He said, "Yes, I've read all of them, some of them twice."  And the kid looked at him, and he said, "Man, you must be sick."  (laughter).  And he said "Sometimes I think, he might--maybe he was right".  And he could laugh at himself that way and I liked it.  Oh, boy.  But those were three professors who really mattered to me in those days.
Story_ID: 16042
Speaker 1: So when you were getting towards the end of your senior year at "Notre Dam" or Notre Dame as we say, so what were, where were you going next?
Speaker 2: Well, I had--Professor Nagorski, in particular, had encouraged me to, to go to graduate school and apply for various scholarships and fellowships, the Rhodes and all these others.  And there was no way I was gonna get a Rhodes Scholarship, but I applied to the University of Chicago and I did win a Woodrow Wilson.  And --
Speaker 1: You got a Woodrow Wilson Scholarship, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and then was admitted to Chicago and a couple others.  I can't remember and decided to come here.  That's where Gerner and Nagorski had gone.  And, and that was in the days when, you know, the draft was always out there as well as a consideration.  But I wanted to get a PhD and teach, and --
Speaker 1: Now, this is 1969?
Speaker 2: 1969.  And so I showed up here in the Fall and enrolled of the U of C [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], was living in a, in an apartment at 47th and Drexel [Boulevard], a little studio.  And I pretty soon realized I had made a mistake, that I, I shouldn't have gone to grad school right away.  I should have done something else for at least a year.  But that's where I was, and I was getting depressed and, and I'd probably think the University of Chicago wasn't the best place for me.  This city in wintertime, when it's gray and you're in that gray, those gray buildings around there, and everything, ah, that can send you over the edge.  (Laughter), and that's where I felt like I was going.  And then on top of it all, I felt disconnected from, from the social movements of the time and everything, you know.  I mean Notre Dame was anything but a hot bed of social activism.  But at least I felt like I was in touch with, with what was happening.  You get down to the U of C and it's so heady and everything, you feel disconnected from, from reality in a certain way.
Speaker 1: Was it because of the intensity of academics there? And you (unclear) --  Yeah, oh, it's an extremely intense place, yeah.  And, and when--so, you know, that, that was my state of mind.  And then I woke up the morning of December 4th, 1969, flipped on the radio and heard about the police and the Black Panthers on the West side.  And that changed my life because I didn't know any--I didn't--you know, I had no connection to the Panthers except that I had seen Fred Hampton on TV a few times in interviews and what not.  And I felt a certain simpatico [sympathy] or whatever you'd want to say.  And when I heard that he had been killed, you know, it really hit me.  And then as I listened and read the newspapers over the succeeding days--and this is when newspapers really mattered to me.  I'd get up every day, go out and buy whatever paper was available and read every word I could about that incident cause I, I -- it just absorbed me.  And after a while, I started thinking, these newspaper people are doing a real service with this, you know.  And this, this would be a valuable way to spend your time, spend your life.  And, and so after a few months, I said, you know, you may want to do this.  So I finished my two--the third quarter at the U of C that spring, packed up my stuff, went home to Texas and started--
Story_ID: 16043
Speaker 1: Yeah, so you--what was it about the press coverage of the murder of Fred Hampton in '69  [1969] that, that impressed you?
Speaker 2: Well, let me just say right off the top that the one press that I wasn't impressed with was the Chicago Tribune [newspaper] because it was, it was kind of missing-in-action on the story.  But I remember the Sun-Times [newspaper] and Chicago Today [newspaper],  which was the afternoon counterpart of the Tribune at the time, did a heck of a job. I mean in--and the TV station, in particular, Channel 2 [Chicago, Illinois CBS affiliate TV station], did a heck of a job in ferreting out the truth.  This was billed at first, as a shoot-out between the police and the Black Panthers.  It turned out, it was just a shoot-in.  And, and--
Speaker 1: A one-sided shoot-in.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I mean they revealed all that.  I remember in particular, oh, I think it was the police that said, they gave out this picture of, what they said were bullet holes in this door.  And I remember the cover of the Sun-Times the day after showed close-ups of nail heads in the door the next day.  They had gone out and taken pictures of the same door and proved that these were nail holes.  And they said, those bullet holes aren't.  And I'm thinking, wow, these people are getting down to the truth of the matter.  That impressed me a lot.  And then watching as they worked and seeing them able to go out and demand answers to things and get answers, that, that really impressed me.  And so, I, I thought--and, you know, I mean you no doubt remember at that time, there was a lot of mendacity in the society in the [President Richard M.] Nixon administration [1968-1974] and everything else about the war.  And the notion of being deputized by your job to go out and ask the powers that be important questions and be able to demand answers to them, that resonated with me.  And it seemed far more important to be doing that than to be sitting in a library with dusty tomes, and, you know, absorbing that stuff.  And so I, I thought, I'm gonna do this.  And so I set about to do it.  Okay, that's a compelling thing, I guess, the idea that the press can actually be at the point of origin of a story--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and ask people, and people in high positions back then.  You have Edward Hanrahan --
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: --who was [Illinois] State's Attorney [of Cook County] at that time who was--well, history has shown, was lying.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  And I mean, you couldn't get much bigger than [Illinois State Attorney Edward V.] Hanrahan. He was the heir apparent to, to the old, old man Daley [Chicago, Illinois Mayor Richard J.Daley, 1955-1976].  So, yeah.  To be able to, to demand an answer.
Speaker 2: And keep pulling these coattails, saying, hey, what about--
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: What about this?  What about--
Speaker 1: Exactly, and the Chicago [Illinois] media did that very well in that instance.
Story_ID: 16044
Speaker 1: Did you have any feelings at that time about the media role in the Civil Rights Movement?  I know it's often been said that without the media, there wouldn't have been a victory in Montgomery or Birmingham [Alabama].
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I just said, I, I didn't really.  I had never really focused on the role of the media until that point.  Although, you know, as I think about it, we were always--when I was in, in high school and, and my teenage years, and we were--and, and, you know, Birmingham and Selma [Alabama] and all that was going, theTV was on constantly at home.  The radio was on.  In fact, my little--youngest brother--I, I remember him going through the house saying, "Negro, Negro!" because that's what he was hearing on the, on the news all of the time (laughter).  And so it was a constant presence, and--but I, the impact it was having never struck me until this particular incident.  And--
Speaker 1: I wonder when other people first found out that they were Negro, because I grew up the same time you did, and I heard it on TV and asked my mother.  I said, "Are we Negro?  What are, who's a Negro," you know--
Speaker 2: (Laughter.)
Speaker 1: There were all of those things.  The Negro is being denied.  The Negro shouldn't or he, you know, he can or--
Speaker 2: Exactly, yeah.  You know, I'm not sure when I came to that recognition.  I--it just seems like I always knew it, that, because of--well, I mean I didn't know we were called Negroes necessarily.  And my youngest memory is of being called worse or Colored and, and I, it seemed like my father was always in a rage over--from the time I was a little tike, was always in a rage about being disrespected in some way.  And so that, that impressed itself on me.  And I, and so I knew we were different than, than white folks, and there were not good reasons for it.  But, you know, when the name started to be applied, I don't know.
Story_ID: 16045
Speaker 1: Okay, so what did you with that?  Did you--I mean how did you actualize that dream of becoming a journalist at that point?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I went home to Texas, this would have been in about April, yeah, April of 19--end of March of 1970.  And--
Speaker 1: Before you-- Sure-
Speaker 2: I think I'd be remiss if I didn't ask you about how you felt about the assassination of Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] in '68 [1968]?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.  You were still there at  [The University of] Notre Dame  [South Bend, Indiana].  Notre Dame junior year, yeah.
Speaker 2: And I've asked people who were in similar situations where they were the extreme minority in an all-white situation and to hear about Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] being assassinated and kind of noticed that not everybody was upset about it.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I don't know if that was the case at Notre Dame or not, but--
Speaker 1: I don't,I don't--I don't recall any, any--anybody behaving badly.  And again, I had my little circle of friends that I associated with, and so I don't know.  But I, I was just thunder struck.  You know, I came back from--I had been at the library all day and came back to my dorm room that evening.  And somebody told me, I just couldn't believe it, really couldn't believe it.  And then, you know, you go into one of those, like at the [President John F.] Kennedy assassination and so many other things since then, one of these days long TV watching jags where you just sit in front of the TV and the whole thing unfolds in front of you.  So, yeah, I don't recall anybody behaving badly.  There may well have been though.
Story_ID: 16046
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  Becoming a journalist, it was--after I left Chicago [Illinois], I went home to Texas.  And I thought I wanted to be a TV reporter.  And so I was, started going to TV stations in Houston [Texas], offering my services and why I supposed I was gonna waltz in and be welcomed, I don't know.  But I wasn't (laughter).  And I, I had no experience.  But, and so I started going elsewhere.  And the first place I went was to the Houston Post [newspaper].  They had just built a new building, and I happened to be driving by one day.  My mother and my grandmother always took the Houston Chronicle, the other paper.  So that's where I normally would have gone, but the [Houston] Post happened to get in my way, and so I walked in there and went to the Human Resources office, and said, I'd like to fill out a job application.  I want to be a reporter.  And this woman listened to me for some reason.  And I, you know, filled it out and she sent me down to the news room.  And I talked with the managing editor, a guy named O. D. Wilson, and then the editor.  And a day or so later they called me and said, well, maybe we can train you, cause I had no journalism experience.  I later realized, you know, they had all of one black reporter in the news room.  And at the time, there was active in Houston [Texas], an organization--a Black Panther-like organization that called itself, People's Party Number 2, and they were--and not long afterwards had a shoot out with the police in the same way in which their leader, a guy named Carl Hampton, was killed.  Carl Hampton, that's really --
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean it was eerie.  It was eerie, the similarities.  But it was clear to me that they realized, you know, we've got to get some capability to be able to report in, in those areas.  And -- in case, you know, the match goes up.  And so they hired me as a trainee, put me under the tutelage of a guy named C. W. Skipper.  He was the former city editor of the paper.  And for about a month he taught me how to do journalism.  And then they gave me a beat in the suburbs, which in those days was where you put your least experienced people.  And so I started learning.  And I, from the very beginning, was a pretty good writer, but I had a lot to learn about reporting and other stuff, and it took a while.  And to be very frank, I didn't really become a decent journalist until I came back here to Chicago [Illinois] in '73 [1973] to the old Chicago Daily News [newspaper].  And I, by then I was on my third job.  I had worked at Houston  [Texas] for about a year and a half at the Dayton [Texas] Daily News [newspaper] and then, and then the Chicago Daily News.  And I could do certain things really well as long as it involved writing. but I wasn't a very good reporter.  And when I came to Chicago, they put me on the midnight to 8:00 shift where they put all the young reporters.  And we had a tough night city editor named Art Corlack (ph.) who basically taught me over the course of two or three years how to do journalism.  And I will never forget the first night -- I, I was in the habit of reporting stories, writing it, turning it into Art.  He'd pick the story up, look at it, and he'd put a piece of paper in the typewriter and rewrite it.  And I'll never forget the first night he looked at the, the paper, my story and said, good job.  And if you had given me Pulitzer Prize at that moment, it wouldn't have been worth more than that "good job" cause I felt like I had really measured up.
Story_ID: 16047
Speaker 1: What were the typical -- I don't want to call them mistakes, but, sir, what typically would be wrong with the story that you would write coming out of a literature background and trying to write news?
Speaker 2: --I'd write two long sentences.  And I--my stories were poorly organized really.  I didn't have the grasp of how to write in broad strokes and, and, and how to make it pull the reader in at the top.  So I, the stories would--you'd a gone to sleep before you got the message.  And over time, he taught me how to report well and how to, how to organize my stories better, make them move.  But the most important thing was the reporting because I had never done that.  I liked the idea of being able to confront powerful people, but I didn't know how to do it well.  And you might look outdoors and see darkness between midnight and 8:00 [a.m.].  As far as Art was concerned, it was daylight, and you'd have to act like it was daylight and get on the phone and wake up whoever you needed to wake up to get the answers.  And so that's what we'd do.  And, and he taught me a lot.  (laughter) he was a good man.
Story_ID: 16048
Speaker 1: Now you came to the Daily News at--Lu Palmer [political activist] had just resigned, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Maybe that's a good story, maybe to discuss.  I mean (unclear)  -- Chicago.
Speaker 2: Sure.  Yeah, Lu, in fact, when I interviewed at the Daily News, Lu was still there.  And one of the highlights of my interview was getting to talk with Lu Palmer and then realizing, you know, hey, I'm gonna get to work in the same newsroom as this guy cause, Lu had a certain fame, you know--he was a columnist.
Speaker 1: Yeah, give us some idea of the impact of Lu Palmer on Chicago (unclear).  I came here from someplace else too an had to--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I didn't know all of his history, but, but, you know, he had been around for a good many years.  He was, he was a very prominent figure in black Chicago [Illinois] and had been one of the first black journalists to really make a wave in, in the mainstream white press.  And his stature as a columnist at the Chicago Daily News, which was the--it was kind of the upper crust of the newspapers in Chicago at the time, was--made him a big deal.  And--
Speaker 1: It was kind of like a nitty-gritty paper of, I guess--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, it was where all the best writers and everybody were.  And, and then in the period between when I interviewed, and when I showed up to start working at the Daily News, Lu, resigned.  And I forget exactly what had happened, but he had written a column, and I don't remember what it involved.  But his column was shown before publication to another columnist, as I recall, to respond to.  And Lu took that as an insult, which he--it was.  I mean--
Speaker 1: And so they--
Speaker 2: And so he resigned.  For someone else to contradict what he --  Exactly.
Speaker 1: -- had written before it even came out.  So there'd be a rebuttal to it (unclear) the paper.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  And I don't remember exactly what the issue was, but it was something hot at the time.  I think it was the same -- had Fred Hampton, the Hanrahan case and all -- I think that was still on --  I don't know.  I think at that time if I recall.  I see, I can't remember.  But in any case, by the time I showed up in January of '73 [1973], Lu was gone by about a week.  And, and the shock waves were still settling.  And then I went on night side for two years as a reporter and then came -- got assigned to days briefly.  Then there was an opening for a night city editor.  And so I applied and they made me night city editor there.  And I did that for a couple of years.  And I requested to be education reporter cause education, school integration, that kind of thing was heating up, and I wanted to cover that story.  So I got that beat, and that's what I was covering when the Daily News folded in March of '78 [1978].  And it was, I was really sad about that because I was having a good time, and, and I was, I was having my best years as a reporter then, covering that story.  It was a, it was a, it was an important story.  And--
Speaker 1: Did you have any inkling of, of the Daily News folding up before it did?
Speaker 2: I, I'm sure somebody--there probably were some reporters, but one February day, Marshall Field walked into the newsroom and said, "You know, the paper's been losing lots of money and so we're gonna close it." And you could have knocked me over with a feather.  And I think most of the people there felt the same way.
Speaker 1: He just walked in and announced it?
Speaker 2: Yep, we had no idea.  And, and so on March fourth [1978], it published its last edition.  And, and people scattered to the four winds.  I was one of those who was, who was invited to go over to the Sun-Times [newspaper], which was Fields' other paper.  And I did that for all of one day, and then I decided, heck, there's lots of papers and country out there.  I'm gonna go see something different.  So I went, took a job in Seattle, and went out there.  And that was a bad mistake.
Story_ID: 16049
Speaker 1: (laughter).  I, I felt --
Speaker 2: Was it the Seattle and--
Speaker 1: Seattle Post-Intelligencer [newspaper].  I-- a lot of my, a lot of my mother's brothers and sisters had moved out there at the same time we were moving away from Texas.  They had moved up there and were working for Boeing [Aerospace Company, formerly headquartered in Seattle, Washington] and various places.  And so I had lots of relatives there and had vacationed out there and thought I'd enjoy it.  And it was one thing to vacation and another to live out there.  I felt like I had dropped off the edge of the world.  The news scene was not nearly as lively and I was still very much into news.  And so I stayed there only a few months and then worked my way back East.  I went first to the Dallas [Texas] Times-Herald, which was--in those days, it had just been bought by, I can't--the Washington Post Company.  And they were going around the country hiring lots of folks and bringing them in to put out a newspaper that had no connection to the city whatever, and people could tell it.  And, and it eventually went out of business too, after I had left.  But, and finally, after I'd been there about eight months, I got--a guy that I had worked with at the Chicago Daily News was at the New York Times [newspaper] in the 'Week In Review' section.  And he recommended me there when they had an opening, and I went and tried out, and they hired me.
Story_ID: 16050
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what did you do at the New York Times?
Speaker 2: This was the first time I was there from May of '79 [1979], I think until late 1981.  I was in the Sunday Week in Review section as one of the editors.  It was an arrangement where we'd write summaries of the week's news, and then edit analytical stories that were filed by the reporters and package them together.  And so I was, started out as one of the regional news editors, New York regional news, and then after a while was promoted to, to a supervisory role in the department.  And it was a, it was a great place to work.  I had a boss, Mike Levatass (ph.) who was kind of a crazy guy, but good to work for.  I learned a lot from him, and--
Speaker 1: In what ways was he crazy?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) He--Mike was tone deaf to some things (laughter).  He'd get an idea in his head and not be able to, to listen to other points of view sometimes.  And he was not an unpleasant guy, but, but he wasn't always attentive to other points of view.  And that made, that made working for him an adventure.  The thing I remember most of all was on Friday nights he'd open up the, the locked drawer of his desk and take out a couple bottles of booze and welcome everybody into his office to have a drink.  And he'd go through the office singing, "When the Red, Red Robin Comes Bob-Bob-Bobbing Along", (laughter) and a good man, a good man.  And, in fact, it was he who several years later, after I had left the Times, and, and he heard that they had an opening on their editorial board, he said, "Why don't you go after Don Wycliff."  And so that's when they hired me to write editorials there at his recommendation.
Story_ID: 16051
Speaker 1: What was it like for you to go from, you know, the [Chicago] Daily News [newspaper] and the [Chicago] Sun-Times to the New York Times, I mean--well, yeah, (unclear) order from the Dallas to the New York Times, I mean that's, I mean isn't the New York Times like the--that's the big one right?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, that's the big one.
Speaker 1: So it had to be exciting, and you'd never lived in New York before anyway, and so--
Speaker 2: No, I'd never lived in New York, and, it was--it was great.  I mean it was --in some ways it was immensely satisfying and in other ways it was, it was frustrating. Because, to be very frank with you, I was editing copy from a lot of people with very famous names, who I was surprised to discover were not very good writers (laughter).  And so they required a lot of work, you'd have to rewrite their stuff sometimes.  And, you know, we, on the staff there used to joke about just various people.  So that was, that was a revelation.  And, you know, how football coaches or basketball coaches, they'll say, they put their trousers on one leg at a time just like we do.  Well, that's where I discovered it, you know.  I, when you go through life being intimidated--I'm one of those people whose gone through thinking, "The next room I go into, I'm gonna find the guys who know all the secrets."  And there are no secrets (laughter).  The, the secret is that nobody knows the secrets and that, and that they all put their leg--trousers on one leg at a time just like I do.  And some of them were not very good !  And so that's the most important thing I learned during my time with, at the [New York] Times at 'Week In Review' [section].
Speaker 1: There's a lot of power in that, isn't it?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  (Unclear) to know that your opinion or what you think about something was as--
Speaker 1: Exactly, yeah, yeah.  And, but, you know, if you're, if you're plagued with an inferiority complex or a lack of self confidence, you never learn it just once.  When I went back to the  [New York] Times on the editorial board, I thought, "Whoa, boy.  These are the guys who, these are the guys who pull the strings in the society,  they know it all."  And for a month, I was afraid to open my mouth in that room.  And then I finally started to realize, hey, they don't have the answers either. You know, we're all just trying to figure it out here, and so--
Speaker 2: Wouldn't you think a conspiracy theorist would actually see that--
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) boardroom and--
Speaker 1: Exactly.  We should be so lucky just to be as smart as they think we are, you know, and organized and, and--and conspiratorial.  If only.
Story_ID: 16052
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer for the HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  We're continuing an interview that we started some time ago.  This Roll 5.  Sir, can you please state your name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My full name is Noel Don Wycliff, last name is spelled W-Y-C-L-I-F-F.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your date and place of birth?  December 17th, 1946, Liberty, Texas.
Speaker 2: And what is today's date?
Speaker 1: Today is Wednesday, July 2nd, 19--2003.  I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 1: We are at the offices of the HistoryMakers on Michigan Avenue in Chicago [Illinois].
Story_ID: 16053
Speaker 1: Now the last time, we were talking about your appointment to the editorial board of the New York Times, and you were discussing some of the trepidation around that.  And maybe we should pick up with that and just keep rolling, I guess.
Speaker 2: Sure, sure.  Well, I, I--during the [New York] Times editorial board, I think it was in February of '85 [1985].  And that institution has this reputation as, as the next thing to God or the [U.S.] Supreme Court.  And that's what I, what I felt I was joining.  I was pretty tense and, and felt inadequate when I first went there, didn't know whether I could measure up.  And it took about a month before I said anything in one of the meetings.  And it was, I, I got up the courage to speak after I finally realized that, you know, these guys--cause most of them were guys, put their trousers on one leg at a time just like everybody else.  And they were trying to figure things out just like I was.  They didn't have all the answers.  So it was at that point that I, that I got up the gumption to start speaking my mind in the meetings.
Speaker 1: Now, who were some of the editorial board members?
Speaker 2: Well, the, the head of the editorial board at that time was, was Max Frankel.  He's the guy that hired me.  Max had been the, the [New York] Times' Washington Bureau chief before that. And before that, he was a foreign correspondent, won the Pulitzer Prize [in 1973] for covering [President Richard M.] Nixon's trip to China back in '72 [1972], I think it was.  And he later became the Executive Editor of the newspaper--of the, of the New York Times.  And there was also his deputy, Jack Rosenthal, who had won the Pulitzer [Prize] in the early '90 [1990s]--early '80's [1980s] [1982- Editorial Writing] for pieces that he did on welfare and Reaganomics [economic theories of President Ronald Reagan, Reaganomics was partially based on the principles of supply side economics and the trickle down theory].  And there were people like Jack McKinsey who had written books and had--formerly was the [United States] Supreme Court reporter of the Washington Post [Washington D.C. newspaper] and was very knowledgeable about, about the law.  And, and a fellow named Peter Bassell (ph.), who was a, an economist.  He had been on the faculty of Columbia University [New York, NY] in the Economics Department.  And then he came to the Times and wrote editorials on Economics.  Those were the kind of people that they had there.  So they were a pretty heavyweight group.
Story_ID: 16054
Speaker 1: Now, were you the first black member of the editorial board?
Speaker 2: No, no, I was not.  There had been, oh, at least three others before me that I recall.  Roger Wilkins whose pretty well known, having been in the Justice Department under--I forget which President now,[James E.] Carter, [Wilkins was assistant Attorney General during the Lyndon B. Johnson Administration 1964-1968] I believe and now is a professor of History at George Mason University [in Fairfax, Virginia].  Hugh Price who later became the head of the National Urban League [civil rights organization] had been on the editorial board there.  And a guy named Bob, Bob Curvin who was -- Bob was very influential in politics in Newark, New Jersey.  And he later became the Vice President of PR [public relations] for the Ford Foundation [philanthropic organization]  and was very well connected in New York.  So those three at least had preceded me on the Editorial Board.
Speaker 1: How do you spell Curvin's last name?
Speaker 2: I'm pretty sure it's C-U-R-V-I-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Now, were you the only black member at the time that you joined?
Speaker 1: No, I was not.  There was a woman, Diane Camper, who now is at the Casey Foundation [Annie E. Casey, philanthropic organization for disadvantaged youth and families] in Baltimore.  She's head of PR [public relations] there.  Diane had been previously at the, at  [Maryland] Newsweek Magazine [national periodical] as a, as a Washington correspondent.  And there were the two of us who were the only blacks on the editorial board.
Story_ID: 16055
Speaker 1: How were members of the editorial board selected in terms of-- I mean can you give us any insight on that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, at the [New York] Times, actually, at any paper, it's the head of the editorial board who formally hires a person.  And how they scout people out and select them, at the [Chicago] Tribune, where I was Editorial Page editor, most of our selections came from within the newspaper staff.  This was one of those last steps in a career where you get to use all the knowledge and wisdom that you've amassed over the years.  And it's a, kind of a cushy job so it's a nice reward at the end for people, although increasingly, the effort is to hire younger staff members.  So you get a little more--how, how do I put it, fertile minds with fresh ideas and not so much steeped in, in conventional wisdom.  And so that's how it was done at the Tribune, mainly from within the, the news staff.  At the Times, they hired most people from within their news staff, but occasionally would go outside.  I came from outside.  I was brought in from Chicago [Illinois].  As I mentioned, Peter Baselle, he had been an Economics Professor at Columbia [University, New York, NY.].  And a couple of other people who were hired there while I was there, a guy named Michael Weinstein, he came on as an Economics writer after Peter left.  He was on the faculty at, I think it was Haverford College in Pennsylvania.  The essential thing is to be, is to be a good writer and to either possess some, some particular expertise that's, that's maybe not available within the newspaper or to be a good enough Journalist so that you can sort of make yourself expect on anything you need to in the course of writing editorials.  So that's generally how it comes about.
Story_ID: 16056
Speaker 1: To what extent is political disposition, you know, a part of this because I hear people often saying, well, the [Chicago] Tribune's a Republican paper and this paper's that, and, you know, Democratic paper.  How does that play, come about?
Speaker 2: Good question.  When I went to the [New York] Times, nobody asked my political disposition.  I imagine they had some notions about what I thought from what I had written in the past.  For that matter, and neither did they ask when I went to the [Chicago] Tribune.  Again, they had some idea on the basis of what I had written in the past.  There are certain things that--an editorial board works, for the most part, in a collegial, consensual kind of way.  And basically, you wouldn't, you wouldn't put yourself in a position of--in my case, for example, I wouldn't put myself in a position of accepting a job at a, at an editorial page where I knew I was gonna be in violent disagreement most of the time with what they write, The Washington [D.C.] Times [highly conservative newspaper owned by Rev. Sun Myung Moon, founder of the Unification Church] , for example, or some, something like that.  And nowadays most newspapers, you, policy, on policy issues, pretty much to a broad middle of the road.  At the, at the New York Times, I knew that essentially, when Presidential elections came around, first of all, I knew that, that the Times was probably gonna endorse a Democrat because they generally do and that I probably wasn't gonna have much of a say in it anyway because junior people generally do not.  And to be very frank, at most newspapers, I think that's a decision that's taken between the head of the Editorial Page and the Publisher.  Ninety-nine and nine tenths percent of the time it's the Editorial Page--the Board that's making the decision about what is gonna go on that page.  When you get to election years and Presidential and [United States] Senatorial and other big endorsements, that's when the Publisher comes in and puts his finger on the scale.  So you go in knowing that from the beginning, and if you want to fall on your sword all the time, well, you'll be looking for a new job every couple of years.  Or, you tell yourself, well, I'll make my points on those 365 other days of the year -- 364 other days of the year.  And on this day, the owner of the shop gets his say.  And that's how I pretty much looked at the thing.  Nothing personal; things are just gonna, have his way on that issue.  So that's how it goes.
Story_ID: 16057
Speaker 1: Did you ever feel  that you were like kind of going against the grain of what most of the rest thought or did you feel --
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --that you were all fellow travelers in the same school of--
Speaker 2: Oh, no, particularly, at the, at the New York Times, and it was probably because I was, I was such a junior member. But particularly there, I, I had disagreements with some of our positions.  I'm, I'm not a conservative, but I'm more of a conservative attitudinal person than, than a lot of people I know.  And so on issues like, on issues bearing on, for example, religion and some judicial issues, I was in disagreement with some of the positions.  But one of the things, one of the things that, one of the sort of vows you take when you go is that you don't talk about your disagreements outside the room (laughter).  So that's sort of how it goes. At the [Chicago] Tribune, Presidential endorsements gave me problems because I knew we were always gonna endorse the, a Republican--the Tribune never has endorsed anybody for President except a Republican.  And that put us in a position of endorsing some people who I thought were second rate.  Bob Dole [Republican Presidential candidate 1996] , for example.  And it also puts you in the position of, frankly, being taken for granted.  Right now, for example--I was talking to somebody the other day, they said, "I'll bet you get a lot of visits from members of the [President George W.] Bush cabinet."  I said, "No, not really.  They don't need us, they know they got us." We're not gonna, not endorse Bush.  So, you know, they take you for granted.  That's one of the, one of the trade-off's you make when you sell your soul. Not sell your soul, I shouldn't put it that way, but give your, give yourself away to, to one party.
Story_ID: 16058
Speaker 1: Okay.  What were the, I guess, the most important issues that you wrote about when you were at the New York Times?  What were the big issues that you--
Speaker 2: Well, the thing that I--I guess the biggest one had to do with following [Reverened] Al Sharpton as he maneuvered through this Tawana Brawley case, which was--I, I find Al Sharpton difficult to take seriously today as a Presidential candidate because of that.  You know, he'd call up, and "Don, what's going--"  You know, he never seemed a real serious person to me.  And when that thing finally did shake out, it was so disgraceful.  It was really this girl trying to get herself out of trouble with her mother and created this, this enormous thing.  It was like, it was, it was--I would almost say something like the Scottsboro Boys [1931 case when nine black teenagers were accused of raping two white women on a train. The defendants were sentenced to death, despite the fact that one of the women later denied being raped] being in reverse, you know.  That's, it's disgraceful.
Speaker 1: And  she accused, I think some sheriff's deputies or something of raping her--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: -- and something, a garbage dumping, covered with human feces --  Right, right.  (Unclear) in a plastic bag and something, which was incredible to think that somebody would do that to themselves or--  Yeah.  But--
Speaker 2: The way it shakes down--
Speaker 1: The way it shakes out, it sure appears that that's how it happened.  More than that, Al and, and the guys who were with him, C. Vernon Mason and what's his name--Alton Maddox, you know, they never were able to deliver any evidence to the contrary, which was--it was disgraceful.  Okay, so.  And so I spent a lot of time writing about that one.  I wrote a lot about education generally, which has always been an important issue for me cause I think it's essential for the advancement of black people, that we have good education.  And I forget what else now, that seems so long ago.
Story_ID: 16059
Speaker 1: Was the Jesse Jackson campaign for President a part of that?
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.  I wrote a few pieces about, about Jesse's campaign.  And --  Did you think he was a serious candidate?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yeah, I thought--I, I guess I've always taken Jesse Jackson -- I've always given Jesse Jackson more credit than most of my white colleagues are willing to.  For one thing, I think he's an incredibly smart guy.  I mean he's no dummy at all.  He's quicker than most, most people he comes across.  And I, I really think part of the reason he's hated so much is, it's because he's resented, people feel inadequate next to the guy.
Speaker 2: Those Presidential debates with the Jesse Jackson on the roster with the other candidates really made them seem--
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: It was a strange, well, you know, not to be funny, but they kind of paled by comparison.  They--he had, his rhetoric was so sharp, his grasp of the issues was so quick --
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: It seemed that nobody really could keep up with him.
Speaker 1: Exactly.  But yet, you knew they weren't taking him seriously.  Exactly.  More than that, they, they all come with Jesse compartmentalized as this race character.  But he's as, you know, he's broad in his thinking.  And he, he sees connections among things that, that go right by most people.  They just go right by them.  And, you know, I mean he can be an annoyance, but, but if, if I had to take the U.S. with Jesse as opposed to the U.S. without him, I'd have no question about which I'd take.  I'd have to have him.  I think he's done a world of good.
Story_ID: 16060
Speaker 1: He, well, I guess his--what did his campaign do for the country?  You know what, I wrote a piece which I never got into the paper.  But there was a point, and I can't remember now, cause my memory isn't that good, but it must have been 1988. The 1988 Jackson campaign--or was it '84 [1984], I can't remember which.  At the convention, he got up and he gave this stirring speech, and at the end of the speech, his whole family came up.  And they were all there together, and it occurred to me that that, at that point, that was probably the one time in several years that you had seen an intact, black family on TV in the United States of America (laughter).  Now, it's hard to remember that at this point cause, you know, you see lots of that now.  But at that point, that was unusual.  We were always portrayed in, in TV shows as, as kemp legged or, you know, splintered and what not else.  Shows like "That's (unclear)  Yeah, --  (Unclear) father, like 'Sanford and Son', where half the family's missing.  And, and I wrote a piece about that--it must have been '84 [1984] because, yeah, by '88 [1988], Cosby [ref. "The Cosby Show, NBC 1984-1992] and the others were on TV.  But at that point, that was a real important thing I thought.  And it was unappreciated by most people, I think.  And I just thought it needed to be called to people's attention.  That was one important thing that he did.  But, but more than that, I mean he -- '88 [1988] was [Democratic Presidential nominee Michael] Dukakis' year, as I recall.  And he, Jesse, gave the lie to the notion that this, that this Presidential race could be solely about, what was it?  Competence or technical competence.  This was this persona that Dukakis tried to project, you know.  Ends and means are -- ends aren't, aren't the important thing.  It's having that competence to do things.  And absurd.  Government's about the choices you make, you know.  And so I thought Jesse exposed that and did so, did the country a service in the process, yeah.  It was kind of the issues were raised that wouldn't be raised if he hadn't a been in the (unclear) on the ballot.  Yeah, yeah.  Not at the level (unclear).  Exactly, yeah.  And I think [former Democratic Presidential nominee George] McGovern was in one of those or both of those races, I think and --  Yeah.  (Unclear) other one than race, (unclear) --  Yeah, I'm having a hard time summoning up who was where then.  Yeah, I'm not sure if he was in '84 or '88 [1984 or 1988], but he was clearly not gonna win, you know --  Yeah.  He was just there to raise issues, he and Jesse for a while.  Then McGovern finally got out of it.  Yeah.
Story_ID: 16061
Speaker 1: How did you get to Chicago [Illinois] from the New York Times [newspaper]?  Or why would you leave the Ed Board [editorial board] at the New York Times and come to Chicago?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had always wanted to be a columnist, a newspaper columnist and, and where better to do it than on the Op-Ed page ["opposite the editorial page," features signed articles expressing personal viewpoints] of the New York Times.  And so, and I made this, this desire known.  And I talked with Arthur Sulzberger, Jr. who's now the publisher.  Back in those days, he was Deputy Publisher to his father [Arthur Sulzberger, Sr.].  And, and I talked with him.  I talked with Max [Frankel] who was then the Executive Editor.  And basically, they said, you know, fine aspiration, but the truth of the matter is, you've never worked in the New York Times newsroom.  I had always been in the 'Week In Review section', which is off by itself or the Editorial page.  And to have credibility, you know, you're gonna need to do that.  And so in April of 1990, I, I agreed to go to the newsroom, be a reporter.  I was gonna be a national, higher-education reporter, based in New York, traveling around the country.  Crazy.  And interestingly, at the very same time, in April of '90--April of '90 [1990], I got a call from the Tribune, from Lois Willy, who was the Page Editor at the time.  And she said, "Would you be interested in coming to the Tribune as Deputy Editorial Page Editor and eventually succeeding me as Editor?"  And I wasn't really.  I didn't want to leave the Times.  But, you know, she kept the conversation going, and Jack Fuller, who was the Editor of the Tribune at the time, also was very persistent.  And months were going by.  Eventually, I went down to the newsroom at the Times and started working as a Higher-Ed [Higher Education] reporter.  And at that point, my wife and I had had our, our second child in--this was '90 [1990].  He was born in May of, May of '88 [1988], so he was just about two.  The older one was nineteen months older than that. My wife, who had been a stockbroker on Wall Street [financial disctrict of New York City] and all that other good stuff was now a stay-at-home mother and frankly, was not doing well at it.  It was getting to
Story_ID: 16062
Speaker 1: This is the, this is the--and I started thinking--in fact, I remember I took one trip.  I came out here to Chicago [Illinois], did a piece on Hannah Gray, the President of the University of Chicago [1978-1993], went up to Madison [Wisconsin] to do another piece.  And this took up three, four days, and went back.  And my wife was there frazzled with these two little kids.  And, and I'm, I'm starting to think, "Now how is this gonna work when I am gone even longer and she's there alone with the kids?"  And then, it was in August, September that Nelson Mandela [Nobel Peace Prize winner, former President of South Africa] was released from prison [February 18, 1990].  And every shortly thereafter he came to New York.  And I'm sitting in the newsroom and the Metro Editor comes over to me, and he says, would you--we've got this interview at Gracie Mansion [New York City's mayoral mansion], all of these editors are going there.  Would you cover [Nelson] Mandela today?"  What an assignment!  And so I went, covered Mandela the whole day, came back in the evening, write my story.  It's about 7:00 in the evening.  Normally, when I was on the Editorial Page, I'd get out of the office about 5:30 and hit home forty-five minutes later.  So I'm still at the office at 7:00 o'clock [p.m.].  And I've turned in my story, and I'm waiting for the copy desk to give me a sign that it's okay enough, I can go home.  And so I called my wife.  And there was this sound on the phone of a woman at the end of her tether, and she was just not handling those kids well.  And, and--you know, I'm here on the story of my life, Nelson Mandela!  And I knew then, that I could not continue this, that I had to find a different arrangement so I could be more available to help with the kids.  And the offer from Chicago was still out there.  And it was good, and so it was then that I decided I was gonna come to Chicago.
Story_ID: 16063
Speaker 1: So you're coming to Chicago, and we, just off camera, we said, you missed the whole Harold Washington--you were here when he was elected, but you were--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --in New York the rest of the time.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, when he died and when he was re-elected, I wasn't here.  So you came to Chicago on the dawn, at the dawn of the [Chicago Mayor Richard M.] Daley era basically?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, how did you like Chicago [Illinois] and what is the [Chicago] Tribune [newspaper] like?
Speaker 1: Well, it's been, it's been good.  I, I have to confess I was a little--there was a little culture shock when I first got back.  As organizations, the Tribune and the [New York] Times [newspaper] had very different feels, although, as I think about it, it probably was because of the situation.  The particular situation I was in most of the time at the Times was in this small arena, the Editorial Page, which had a, perhaps a closer relationship to the Publisher and others.  So you got a sense of, sense of family in the place.  I suspect to people who worked in other departments, it seemed just like any other corporation.  The Times -- the, the Tribune felt very corporate to me, you know, very, very standardized in lots of ways, like corporations are and work.  And that was, took some getting used to.  It took some getting used to making personal relationships that lets you function in a corporation.  So it was hard at first.  And, and--but, but, you know, over time, it became very comfortable to me.
Story_ID: 16064
Speaker 1: Were there any individuals at the [Chicago] Tribune that kind of reached out to you and helped?
Speaker 2: I'd have to say, Jack Fuller, who was the editor when I first came, who recruited me here, was very helpful and, and remains so.  I mean Jack is nothing, if not a corporate man.  And yet, he's done things, organizations that he's a, he's a member of--he's made it possible for me to become a member of clubs and that kind of thing.  Not that I set a lot of store by that, but, but in his quiet way, he does things like that.  Another guy, his successor as editor, Howard Tyner, took very much the same approach. Talking to me about things like, like money and how to invest and that sort of thing and who to go to for advice.  You don't think about that sort of stuff, but, you know, I wouldn't know if somebody hadn't told me. And I guess, you know, they could have said, "Well, we gave him a job, what more does he want?"  But they went beyond that and, and told me those informal things that, you know, help you get ahead in life.  And so that matters.  There, there were other people.  There was a woman named Ruby Scott, Ruby was the Op-Ed Page Editor ['opposite editorial',  features signed opinion columns] when I first came to the Tribune Editorial Page, an African American woman, very talented.  And without Ruby in that position, holding down that side of the operation, I never would have been able to succeed as Editorial Page Editor cause you, you know, there are things you just have to have somebody at them that you trust, and that you know will get the job done, no matter what.  Ruby was that kind of person, extremely talented, warm, gracious.  I love her to death.  And fortunately, she's--was succeeded by two others who were just as competent, a woman named Dianne Donovan, who now is out in Baltimore [Maryland], and then the current edit--Op-Ed Editor [vice president and editorial page editor at the Baltimore Sun newspaper], Marcia Lythcott who's really good, and warm and friendly in that same way.  And then, most of my colleagues at the, on the Editorial Page have been good folks. And some of them took longer for me to learn to know and like and to like me than, than others.  A guy like Steve Chapman whose column, who I think is the best writer at the paper and whose column I don't always agree with.  But Steve is a, he's a terrific person.  It took a long time for us to--he's a Texan.  It took a long time for us to really kind of get to know each other, but eventually we did.  And then there are some people I never really warmed to, but that's life, you know.
Story_ID: 16065
Speaker 1: Who was,  the other blacks, was Vernon Jarrett around when you --  No, I, I knew Vernon, had known him for years, but he wasn't at the Tribune then.  Clarence Page is and was--was and is on the editorial board [editorial columnist].  And Clarence, when I first came was still living in Chicago.  He's since moved to, to Washington [D.C.] and works out of the Washington Bureau, communicates with us by telephone and everything.  That was--I like Clarence a lot and I think he's immensely talented.  Working by telephone was really hard, but I think he turns out a good column.  He's a provocative thinker.  Who else?  There was a young guy, Byron White, who--I don't know how I got to know Byron, but somehow we got together and, and talked.  And then I talked to Howard Tyner on his behalf and he was hired at the, at the Tribune, after he finished his Master's down at the U of C [University of Chicago]. And I think he, he stayed with the Tribune until last year when he went back to Cincinnati [Ohio], where he originally was from.  But Byron was a good person to be with and bounce ideas off of and what not.
Story_ID: 16066
Speaker 1: Okay, now when you first got here, you were in a situation where -- I guess in a very real sense the Tribune's a Republican paper, but Chicago, and Barry Wilson says, a Democratic town, almost a hundred percent --
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: A town with a City Council with no Republicans on the City Council at all.  Yeah, well --
Speaker 2: The Council is all Democrats with the Democrats.
Speaker 1: Exactly, and, but, but not -- those are not insignificant conflicts.  And the [Chicago] Tribune is not the same Tribune it once was or would have been where it would have followed any Republican out the door and off the cliff, you know (laughter).  I mean it knows how to choose among, among Democrats when necessary.  You know, when--and, and even at some of the higher levels, for example, it endorsed [U.S. Senator]Alan Dixon, never endorsed Carol [Moseley-] Braun, but endorsed, Alan Dixon for the [United States] Senate [ in 1992].
Speaker 2: Well, would you say it would be correct to, I guess typify the Tribune as a liberal Republican in a conservative Democratic city?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I call it merely moderate Republican.  And I wouldn't get, and I don't want to get too carried away.  Yeah, no, moderate Republican in a Democratic city.  Well, you think this is a conservative Democratic by any comparison or you think it's about--
Speaker 2: You know, some of the things that happened here really astonished me.  It would be my inclination to say it's a conservative Democratic city, but then there are lots of cities where the mayor doesn't endorse the Gay Rights Parade.  And, and you don't have a County Board under a John Stroger, passing a Gay Rights ordinance and things like that.  So maybe it's a schizophrenic kind of a, a Democratic city.  On the other hand, maybe it's just politicians chasing votes and, and there's one thing politicians know how to do, and that's count votes (laughter), and know where they're found.
Story_ID: 16067
Speaker 1: Maybe so, yeah, that's--I've often wondered how--well, what are some of the issues in Chicago [Illinois] that you remember that are important (unclear)?
Speaker 2: One that I thought was very important--two actually, death penalty.  And I, I frankly have always been kind of two minds about the death penalty. And, and I find myself opposed to it in moral principle because I'm not sure if we have a, have a right to extinguish a human life under any circumstances.  But, but--and as a black person, black people catch most of the death penalty.  At the same time, black suffer most from crime.  And so I've always been kind of torn in that regard.  But I think the [Chicago] Tribune's campaigning on the death penalty has been a real noble thing.  The other thing, which may seem more problematic to a lot of folks, is what's happened in education in the city.  I thought it was extremely important, and we editorialized in favor of it, and finally, it happened, that the struc-- the governing structure for public schools in the city be changed to, to what we have now, which is a situation where fundamentally, the Mayor [Richard M. Daley], who has to be politically accountable, appoints the head of the, the--the School Superintendent.  I just--the old system where you had, where there was no political accountability, just seemed wrong to me.  So that--and you can say they were insulated from politics.  Yes, but politics is how you hold people accountable for their performance in this department.  And so that needed to happen, and I was glad we editorialized for it and glad it finally happened.  At the same time, I'm not sure it's produced a motherload of improvement in the school system.  And to be frank, I'm not sure it can.  I have to say, if I had my druthers, if I had my way, I would go to a complete voucher system (laughter).  And I know that that puts me at odds with most of the black leadership, although I'm not sure it puts me at odds with most of the black rank-and-file.  But I think people have to be in a position where if their kids are not being properly served by the school that they're going to, they have to be in a position where they're empowered to get something better for their kid, because you do it only once.  And if it's done badly, the kid has to live with it the rest of his life.
Story_ID: 16068
Speaker 1: Now, what--what makes the black middle-class basically against the voucher system?
Speaker 2: Well, the polls don't indicate that they are.  I think a lot of the black middle class are in favor of a voucher system because they're paying their taxes and not getting a lot for it.  Those who are opposed, and I can understand a certain opposition, in, in large part, I think it's because the schools are large employers for us.  I mean that's been one way up and into the middle class.  And my grandmother did it, and, you know, I've got two or three brothers and sisters who are teachers.  And I don't begrudge them, but I do think a parent with a child has to be in a position where they can, if that kid isn't being well served, get good education for them.
Story_ID: 16069
Speaker 1: It's a sticky issue.  Has anybody resolved this issue, you think?
Speaker 2: Actually, in a certain way that maybe hasn't been appreciated fully yet, I think [President] George Bush's and [U.S. Department of Education Secretary 2001-2004] Roderick Paige's "No Child Left Behind Act" that was passed last year, year before, is sort of, sort of a stealth voucher system because that, that law has some really tough requirements.  If they don't relent, it has some really tough requirements about what has to happen if a school doesn't perform well and a child is lagging behind. It's got really tough requirements about making options available.  Now so far, the options are all within the public system, but at some point, folks are gonna start saying, "Well, why should we be so restricted, you know?  Well, why shouldn't, why shouldn't we have the option to go where I know my neighbor is getting a good education for his kid, the Catholic school or the private school or whatever else?"  And a charter school, that sort of thing.  I'm not big on those charter schools, but I think--and the way these things happen it seems is usually by surprise.  That's the way the, the change in the school governance in the city happened.  The Republicans took over this one year and all of a sudden they were saying, "You've been wanting this, we'll give it to you," and they did.  And the sun still rose the next morning (laughter).  And --
Story_ID: 16070
Speaker 1: Now, you've written quite a bit lately about nomenclature in terms of how we characterize different opposing forces in world politics, particularly about the Palestinians and the Israeli situation.  You want to discuss that for us (unclear).  What's that issue?
Speaker 2: Sure.  You know, it's interesting.  It's now been a couple, three years ago.  It was about May of 19--of 2000, 2001--May of 2001. I'm sitting at a dinner table with my two sons and my wife.  And older son, who at that time was fourteen, said, when I grow up--and, you know, he was at that stage where he liked to say things that'd really shock mom and dad.  He said, "When I grow up, I want to go to Israel and shoot Palestinians."  And I was taken aback by this.  And I, I started arguing with him about this.  And, of course, he wouldn't be moved because he had already gotten what he wanted, which was to see me upset (laughter).  But, you know, I started thinking, "Why would my kid say that of all the things that he could have said to try to shock his father?  What's he absorbing in terms of whose good and whose bad in the world and that sort of thing?"  So I, I thought about this for a couple of weeks, and then I said, I have this column, you know.  I've got to write about this.  I didn't want to write about what he said, but I wanted to write about that situation.  So I wrote a column that said, you know, as near as I can figure it out, what the whole brouhaha in the Middle East is about, is that the Israelis are trying to take the Palestinians homeland, the West Bank and Gaza, with these settlements.  And all hell broke loose, cause I guess you don't say that.  But the more I think about it, and the more I've read and written about it, the more everything seems to go one way.  I mean you've got these people--you've got Israelis who say, all I want is to push all the Jews into the sea.  But you've got these settlers who--
Speaker 1: You mean the Palestinians are saying that.
Speaker 2: The Palest--the Israelis are saying the Palestinians just want to push all the Jews into the sea.  But you've got these Israeli settlers who have left Israel and gone to what they say is land that God gave them 4,000 years ago.  And essentially, they want to push the Palestinians off of that.  And that doesn't seem right to me.  Everybody's got to have a place.  When this situation was created, we said, we're for you here.  This is Israel.  That's somebody else's.  I'm sorry.  I can't sign onto your taking the other guy's.  And, and so, it upsets me a lot.  I guess it has always upset me when I thought, I'm not allowed to say something that I feel strongly.  And that's what gets me upset.  So that's why I, I've written about this.  We went through this issue and decided that the paper not label people terrorists because that implies a judgment about motivation and, and goodness and badness.  And the feeling was that we, as, as journalists, if you're on the opinion page, you can do that.  If you're reporting the news, you're not supposed to make those value judgments. You let the reader do that.  So that's part of, part of the thinking behind it.
Story_ID: 16071
Speaker 1: Now, you said an interesting thing, and I guess in sixteen minutes I could say (unclear).  It's kind of like a serious thing because there's a lot of loose talk about this, but there's some truth in--I mean certain things and criticism of Israel don't fly too well in the American press, you know --
Speaker 2: No, it doesn't.  And, you know, I can understand why the Jewish community gets, you know, defensive and very upset cause they've got, they've got a lot to be afraid of, anti-Semitism is a reality.  But not everything that's a criticism is anti-Semitic, especially not where Israel is concerned because there's some people doing some bad things.  They're trying to take other people's land, other people's property, other people's homeland.  And how am I gonna defend your homeland if you won't respect his, you know?  So that's the way I feel about it.  And, and I think, I think the United States has served itself and the cause of peace badly by not being more evenhanded.  And I don't think the American press has served the cause of truth and, and fairness and, and a resolution of this dispute very by not being more evenhanded.
Story_ID: 16072
Speaker 1: On the local front, again, and I just want to throw this out, there was something I heard about City Hall reporters say.  I don't know how it affects you, but often City Hall reporters, I think it was a columnist, a Tribune columnist who--I can't think of his name now--
Speaker 2: Cass.
Speaker 1: Cass, John Cass, who discussed being shadowed by young men in City Hall who are employed by the [Mayor Richard M.] Daley Machine.  The track you with a notebook.  They walk around and follow you around.  (Unclear) talking to, they'll take notes.  He wrote a column about that.
Speaker 2: Really.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and it seemed to be kind of a revelation to everybody.  You know, in the non-profit if you were--every time we'd go over there, the guy's following us around, you know, writing, you know (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: So they, and they go, presumably these kids are interns and stuff there, the Daley Machine, they write down what you say and they report it back. They write a column, and--have you heard about that and what effect--
Speaker 2: No, but, no.  It's never affected me, but it kind of surprises me that.  It's creepy.  I mean it sounds--I don't want to mischaracterize people, but it sounds like something--no, I won't say that.
Speaker 1: Have you heard of anything like that in any other city?  Does that go on in New York, do you know?  No, no, I've never heard of anything like that, never.  And I think the Mayor [Richard M. Daley] would be well advised to stop it if, if he's at -- if it's his doing.  And I'm trying to think of whose else it might have been, might be.
Story_ID: 16073
Speaker 1: Oh, I wanted to ask about, now, Salim Muwakkil was an editorial page columnist.  And there was a little bit of controversy about him leaving--  Yeah.
Speaker 2: -- and you addressed it on some level in the paper.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I didn't make any judgment about it publicly, but tried to explain how it happened.  I, I'm the one who, who contracted with Salim to do a column in the first place, and, in fairness, I did so after being made aware of Salim by Bruce Dold, who is now the Editorial Page Editor and who decided ultimately to get rid of Salim.  And I think he didn't -- I don't think Bruce decided to get rid of Salim because, because he -- well, I won't say that.  I, I can't, I can't say that.  I can't say why he decided to do so.  I'd like to believe it wasn't because of the ideas Salim was expressing.  But Salim was, you know, he had some strong opinions, and I thought they were healthy to have those expressed routinely cause they didn't get expressed a lot.  And, but what I tried to explain in that column of mine, and which I guess I didn't because a lot of people have misinterpreted, was that there was a point when I first came on as Editorial Page editor, I thought, "Gee, there's a lot of talented writers in Chicago.  We ought to get more of them on the page"--
Story_ID: 16074
Speaker 1: Okay, I was mentioning that when I first became Editorial Page Editor [for the Chicago Tribune], I thought there's a lot of talent here in the city, we ought to make more use of it on the Op-Ed Page.  And so I conceived this idea of a revolving column with four different writers, each of whom would write once a month.  And so I went out and contracted with different people, Phil Ponce at Channel 11 [WTTW-PBS affiliate station] was one.  Laura Washington who was then at the 'Chicago Reporter' [investigative monthly which documents issues of race and poverty in the Chicagoland area] was one, a couple other people, to represent different groups and points of view and all.  And the idea was that at the end of the year, everybody would be shed and then we'd start a new wheel of different folks.  Some of them lasted though.  Some of them got followings, Salim [Muwakkil- Chicago Tribune Op-Ed columnist] being one of them.  And so Salim stayed on, I don't know, it must have been four or five years.  And I still get mail as Public Editor now from people lamenting Salim's departure.  But in any case, when Bruce [Dold] became Editorial Page Editor in 2000, the summer of 2000, he wanted to put his own stamp on things.  And I guess he and Marsha Lythcott, the Op-Ed Page Editor, got together and talked about how they could change things.  And one of them was, was to replace Salim.  And I'm not sure, I think it may have had to do with--Salim, I don't like to talk about shortcomings of people in public, but Salim sometimes had trouble making deadline on time and that sort of thing.  So all those little things play into judgments when you're--when things are up in the air.  And, and maybe a little thing becomes magnified or whatever, but in any way, it was regime change and part of the regime change was his changing the line-up on that page. I personally like--I personally would rather read Salim than read the guy whose replaced him, Derrick Jackson, whom I don't think is as good a writer and not nearly as provocative a thinker.  But, you know, why do I say Derrick Jackson replaced him, and why shouldn't I say somebody else did and get rid of him?  I don't know, but that's how that happened.
Speaker 2: It was just unfortunate that the timing of it was such, I mean, now Salim, himself, has never claimed that.  He's always said that it was a temporary position anyway, and he could be taken off--he was overdue.  He said that himself--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --he's never said anything different, but--
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: But the timing of his, his--I think his last column was a very sensitive issue around the war.  Yeah.  And it appeared to many that, if he hadn't a written that column, he'd be there, you know.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Yeah, yeah.  No, I know Bruce [Dold] had been thinking about that for some time beforehand.  And I'm not sure why that instant, but, you know, I guess no matter what instant it was, there'd a been some issue, yeah--
Speaker 2: Cause the job (simultaneous) --
Speaker 1: 'Cause Salim, hey, I mean part of your job as a columnist is to provoke people, and he did.  He really did.  And he had a, he had a significant following too, which is part of the reason I'm sad to see him go.
Story_ID: 16075
Speaker 1: Now, columns, you know, thought-provoking columns and insights and so forth are good, but we also have cartoons, you know.  And, and I know you you've written a lot of cartoons,
Speaker 2: --  Yeah.
Speaker 1: -- Editorial Page cartoons.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we had this one recently.  Again, I don't like to get into talking about people's shortcomings in public, but it was a pretty bad cartoon.  And when I say, bad, I mean badly done.  I can imagine somebody else, another cartoonist taking exactly the same idea and making it work in a cartoon, but [Dick] Locher [Chicago Tribune editorial cartoonist] didn't do that.  He, he executed it badly.  And --
Speaker 1: What was it?  Tell us (unclear) (simultaneous).  Oh, this was the, this was a cartoon about a month ago in which he showed Bush, showed -- it was labeled Midwest--Mideast Gulch Bridge Over a Chasm.  On one side is [Palestinian president Yassir] Arafat.  And he's behind [President George W.] Bush.  Bush is there laying out a carpet of, of dollar bills in front of this figure who presumably, you're supposed to know this is [Israeli Prime Minister] Ariel Sharon, but he wasn't Sharon. He was labeled with a, with a Star of David, and, and a big nose.  And Sharon doesn't have a big nose.  And, you know, as soon as I saw this, I said, holy --
Speaker 2: And the money-- (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: And the money, yeah, you know, yeah, I forgot. He was saying, the Sharon figure was saying, well--looking at this money and saying, "Well, the prospects for peace look so--look a lot brighter."  I mean obviously, Jewish stereotype.  And, well, the "oomph", hit the fan as soon as that cartoon appeared.  And, and then I was called on to, to write a column about it out of season.  I mean it appeared on a Sunday, when my column normally appears on Thursday because the outcry was so great.  And, you know, I explained how it was chosen and everything expressed my quite sincere appall--shock and abhorrence of the thing because, you know, you--as I was saying a little earlier, you--not every criticism of Israel is anti-Semitism.  And you fight for, to make these distinctions and then along comes something that just blows it all way and makes it impossible for you to have a reasoned conversation.  And this was that.  It was terrible.  I--when I was Editorial Page Editor, the worst problems I ever had all had to do with cartoons.  And I never wished so much that I was running the New York Times Editorial Page where they don't have cartoons because, because, you know, with, as I said in the column, with words, you trim and nip and tuck and, and look for nuance and subtlety and a cartoon, hey, it's just thumb in your eye.  And I can remember half a dozen different instances where I felt the world was coming down around my ears because of a cartoon.  And -
Story_ID: 16076
Speaker 1: Now, are these cartoons you see before they go to printing?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  In this particular case, you know, we had a couple editors who selected this cartoon from a batch.  And, and they looked at this and saw a message about how the U.S. could leverage its foreign aid with Israel to, to, you know, get some cooperation on this roadmap to peace.  If you're not, if you haven't looked at those books and seen the stuff that appeared in Germany during the '30's [1930s ref. to anti-semetic Nazi propaganda] and what not else, I can see how you might not understand what they images convey, but, boy --
Speaker 1: You've got to have a pretty high social I.Q. to be able to run an Editorial Page, I would guess?
Speaker 2: I guess, yeah, yeah.  You've got to, you've got to be aware of--I get amused when I hear people scoff at the notion of diversity, but you, if you're gonna--
Speaker 1: When you can do it (unclear) (simultaneous) --
Speaker 2: -- do this, you could do a lot of damage without that knowledge, you know.  And the same cartoon with a Japanese guy looking at the money wouldn't be offensive.
Speaker 1: Exactly.  But with--
Speaker 2: Exactly.  With a black person and this fried chicken and stuff --  (Laughter) right, right, yeah.  And the Jewish guy with a big nose, following a trail money, that's--
Speaker 1: Big nose, black suit, the whole--the Star of David, the whole bit.  And, and what troubled me, as I said, what troubled me so much about it, apart from the image itself, was the fact that, once again, this makes serious conversation about legitimate criticisms of Israeli policy almost impossible because you've got the big, the big notion that you're anti-semitic hanging over you.  You can't have a, you can't make legitimate criticism when you're doing that.  And so it was a disaster, a disaster.
Story_ID: 16077
Speaker 1: Okay, do you ever find yourself in a position where you're seen as someone who represents the black community, and do you feel comfortable in that role of representing the black community, of being one of the few black people in all of, you know, the lofty position that you're in?
Speaker 2: I don't feel comfortable that way, no.  But I have to say, increasingly, and this is one of the things that gives me hope, increasingly, I find fewer and fewer people, white people, any kind of people in such circumstances looking to one person to represent a community.  I go to meetings and what not and, and the rhetoric, the way people express themselves--and frankly, the complexion of the people who speak up on, on behalf of diversity and things like that has changed radically.  Rarely, do I attend a function where, where there isn't one or several white people whose, who will discourse in, in very passionate and persuasive ways about the need for diversity in the newspaper industry.  And you can tell these are people who've thought about this and had experience with it.  And, frankly, as you just pointed out, if you've had the experience of having a cartoon blow up on ya, well, it didn't take too many of those before you start to realize that, yeah, you've got to have a pretty high social I.Q.  You need to have people of all kinds in your newsroom that you can check with.  And, I mean, for example, in our newsroom, one guy, Jewish guy on the Editorial Page, said, this doesn't bother me at all.  But several others said exactly the opposite.  And, you know, we've got--I'm sorry, I hit the mic.  We've got three black people on the editorial board.  Frequently, issues come up, and there are differences of opinion among us.  So I think people are getting used to the idea that it's not just 'The One'.  And I never felt comfortable being 'The One' anyway.  I went through my whole childhood being 'The One'.
Story_ID: 16078
Speaker 1: What's been the most rewarding aspect of being on the editorial boards of two of the biggest papers in the country?  Or being part of editorial policy at those two papers?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, well, it's seeing things that you've advocated for come to pass.  And like, you know, the change in the school governance; like the death penalty business.  I mean my role on the death penalty was tiny, but--and there were others there who did much more major work, but just to have been a part of that, it's--that's really special because I think back to why I got into this business, you know, the whole--that, that epiphany and the Black Panther thing [ref. to the Chicago police shootout with the Black Panthers in 1969- see Wycliff_Don_05].  That's why.  And to make something good happen, ooh, boy.  That feels right, yeah.
Story_ID: 16079
Speaker 1: What's been the biggest challenge, you know, of being in this position?
Speaker 2: The biggest challenge has been to, to think in long-range terms.  Even today, for example, my column, I would like to go in every week and express exactly what I feel like saying all the time.  But I've got a certain charter to be a media press critic of a sort.  And so I need to make my points that way.  And the challenge of doing that is enormous.  The challenge of getting said what I want to do say, while doing that other thing at the same time, is, sometimes feels impossible.  But I'm think I'm getting better and better at it, and, and always technique is the biggest challenge.  It's--yeah, just learning the technique.
Story_ID: 16080
Speaker 1: Well, here's a question we always ask people we interview, and we always frame it like this, and it goes like this:  What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community?
Speaker 2: Oh, God, there're so many.  Hopes--I guess if I had to name one, my biggest hope would be that, my biggest hope would be that we come to appreciate the diversity among us and learn to use it to our best advantage.  And concerns, well, let me figure out how to get a good inspiring education for our kids.  I think that's always been the number one challenge and will continue to be.  And the approach to doing it changes from age to age and decade to decade. But the challenge is always the same, to get our kids as well and inspiringly educated as, as we can.  I think we were much bigger on the inspiration in the past.  And, and part of the difficulty nowadays is that we aren't very inspired in the way we do it.  But that gets into a whole 'nother realm.
Story_ID: 16081
Speaker 1: Do you have an ideal, do you have a model for what you think this would like, for what an inspired education for black children would look like?
Speaker 2: I've heard of some cases where it's been done.  I think, for example, of-- and I have not explored this myself, but I've heard of, for example, Provident [Providence] St. Mel High School [Chicago, Illinois].  I just think kids need to have instilled in them the sense that everything depends on you.  Do you remember that movie 'Amistad'?  And there's this scene where, where the, the--what's his name?
Speaker 1: Cinque?
Speaker 2: Yes.  He said, he says, all--I can't repeat it word for word, but basically, he says, all my ancestors have lived for this moment so that I can do what I have to do.  And I think that's the way every kid has to be taught.  And I say, I think we did that better in the past than we do now because, when the odds were all against us, I think we found it easier to think that way.  Now, now, the odds aren't all against us, and we tend to get a little scattered in our thinking and to forget what we need to be about.  So that's it.
Story_ID: 16082
Speaker 1: Okay, is there anything that you would do now--you're still young and got a lot of time to go, but, you know, is there anything looking back at what you've already done that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: So many things.  I guess--I'm sure there's something.  It probably, if I had to think about it, it probably would be that I'd move around less.  I'd be more rooted, probably would have stayed in Chicago because I love the city.  And I love being here, and I wouldn't have missed a lot of stuff that I've missed.  But I guess that would be it.  Yeah, I'd be more rooted.
Story_ID: 16083
Speaker 1: Okay, what--and once again, you're still young, but what would you consider at this point as your legacy?
Speaker 2: Ooh (pause) The nine years that I spent as Editorial Page Editor at the [Chicago] Tribune, the fact that I was able to get that page to say some things that, that I don't think it would have said otherwise, and it isn't saying now, and that have caused people to come up to me and say, I wish you were still running it. That feels good when they do that.  And in a lot of ways, I didn't do it as well as the guys whose doing it now, but we invest ourselves differently.  And I invested mine in, in making sure a different mindset appeared on the page.  I wasn't concerned a lot with cosmetics and technique and stuff.  I wanted the substance to be different, and I think it was.  So, and maybe only a few people can appreciate that, but over time, it matters, I think.  And I hope my kids will be my greatest legacy.
Speaker 1: How many do you have?
Speaker 2: I have two boys.
Speaker 1: Okay, how old are they at the present?
Speaker 2: Fifteen and sixteen.  And real challenges (laughter), but I love them.
Story_ID: 16084
Speaker 1: Okay, now the final question is--this is different from legacy.  How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: (long pause) That's a hard question.  I guess I'd like to be remembered as somebody who made other people think.  There was a kid I knew when I was in college who used to go around, and he'd say, "You people just want to live, but I intend to see that you live right" (laughter).  Obnoxious as could be. But when you think about it, I don't care whether you live right or not, but I do care that you live awake.  And so I want people to think about, gonna be a considered life.
Story_ID: 16085
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of me as, I think, a sophomore at the University of Notre Dame.  You can see the golden dome in the background.  That would have been 1966, '67 [1967] school year.
Speaker 2: [Don Wycliff at the University of Notre Dame in South Bend, Indiana in 1967. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of b/w photograph.]
Story_ID: 16086
Speaker 1: That's a picture of me and my son Grant, the younger one, the smaller of the two, and Mathew, my older son.  This would have been in March of 1989 during a vacation in Barbados, I think it was.
Speaker 2: [Don Wycliff with his sons in Barbados. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photograph. Courtesy of Don Wycliff]
Story_ID: 16087
Speaker 1: That's a picture of my high school basketball team in my Junior year in Terre Haute, Indiana, the Schulte High School Golden Bears.  And we were a pretty good team.  I am Number 42, and I can't remember the names of most of the other guys at this point.  But the coach on the far left is Mark LaGrange.
Speaker 2: [Don Wycliff on his high school basketball team in Terre Haute, Indiana. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of b/w photograph. Courtesy of Don Wycliff.]
Story_ID: 16088
Speaker 1: Okay, and that's a picture of me on the left, my sister, Karen in the center and my older brother Franois on the right.  I must have been about three or four at the time.  My sister is a year younger than I and my brother is about three or four years older than I, Franois.
Speaker 2: [Don Wycliff with his brother and sister in the late 1940s. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of b/w photograph. Courtesy of Don Wycliff.]
Story_ID: 16089
Speaker 1: On my First Communion day in Ashland, Kentucky.  That would have been in the Spring of 1955.
Speaker 2: [Don Wycliff at First Communion in 1955. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of b/w photograph. Courtesy of Don Wycliff]
Story_ID: 16090
Speaker 1: At the bottom is a picture of our whole family in front of our house in Ashland, Kentucky, again in the Spring of 1955.  Left to right is my sister, Karen, no--Ida is the little one, Karen is next to her, my father, Wilbert, my brother, Francois, my brother, Chris in front, and there's my mother holding the baby, named Joy, and at the far right -- oh, the far right is Francois.  I guess that was me that I mistook for him (laughter) earlier.
Speaker 2: [The Wycliff family in 1955. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of b/w photograph. Courtesy of Don Wycliff]
Story_ID: 16091
Speaker 1: Okay, at the top is the three boys in our family at the time, again, Spring of 1955.  My brother, Francois on the, on the left, me in the middle and my brother, Chris on the right, all decked out in our Sunday best.
Speaker 2: [Don Wycliff with his brothers on 1955. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of b/w photograph. Courtesy of Don Wycliff.]
Story_ID: 16092
Speaker 1: Well, the baby -- the picture's of me as a baby.  I don't know how old.  I don't even my mother remembers at this point, but that was the kind baby picture they took in those days.
Speaker 2: [Don Wycliff as an infant. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of b/w photograph. Courtesy of Don Wycliff.]
Story_ID: 16093
Speaker 1: That's my mother when she was a young woman, I think even before she was married, probably in her high school days.
Speaker 2: [Don Wycliff's mother. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of b/w photograph. Courtesy of Don Wycliff.]
Story_ID: 16094
Speaker 1: Okay, that's a picture of my grandfather, Socrates 'Sprig' Wycliff in front of his blacksmith Shop in Dayton, Texas.  And I spent many a happy hour in that blacksmith shop.
Speaker 2: [Socrates "Sprig Wycliff in Dayton Texas. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of b/w photograph. Courtesy of Don Wycliff.]
Story_ID: 16095
Speaker 1: Above that is a picture of my father with some of the, some of the things made by his class.  He taught at a high school in Orange, Texas for a couple of years and, Industrial Education and those were some of the lamps and other things that his students made.
Speaker 2: [Don Wycliff's father. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of b/w photograph. Courtesy of Don Wycliff.]
Story_ID: 16096
Speaker 1: Is that your father and mother at the bottom?
Speaker 2: Ah, yes, those are my parents at the bottom, Mother on the, on the left and Daddy on the right.  Daddy wearing his Notre Dame hat there in the, out in one of the fields next to their house in Texas.
Speaker 1: [Don Wycliff's parents in Texas.MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of b/w photograph. Courtesy of Don Wycliff.]
Story_ID: 16097
Speaker 1: My wife, Kath--my wife, Kathy when she was pregnant with our older son, Matthew.  That was in a backyard in Montclair, New Jersey.  And standing in front of her is her dog, Buddy.
Speaker 2: [Kathy Wycliff, Don's wife. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photograph. Courtesy of Don Wycliff.]
Story_ID: 16098
Speaker 1: The picture is of me in a, some kind of an arcade in London [England].  It was the first time I had ever been across the sea [ocean] in 1986 or '87 [1987], I think it was.  And we went to London in April of that year.
Speaker 2: [Don Wycliff in England. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photograph. Courtesy of Don Wycliff.]
Story_ID: 16099
Speaker 1: The one in the middle here, the Pope.  Yeah, that's a picture of the Pope.  I was covering his trip in, in Canada in, about September of 1983 for the Chicago Sun-Times. And we got grounded, forced to land up in Yellowknife in the Northwest Territories.  And they had just this little box of a, of a terminal there.  And all the press corps and the Pope and everybody else were huddled inside.  And so I got a chance to get a good picture of the Pope.
Speaker 2: [The Pope, taken by Don Wycliff. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photograph. Courtesy of Don Wycliff.]
Story_ID: 16100
Speaker 1: Okay, this is a photo taken in, I think it was 1986, Thanksgiving is when my family always gets together in Texas.  Our son, Matthew had been born just a month before that.  And you can see him in there with, in my wife's arms.  And those are all of my brothers and sisters and their kids and, and spouses at the time.  We all managed to get together that Christmas.  And, in fact, that Thanksgiving, rather, and in fact, my older brother -- my younger brother, Chris and his wife had adopted their first child just the day before.  And I don't know whether Emily is that picture or not. But, yes--she's a very tiny figure in there.
Speaker 2: [The Wycliff Family at Thanksgiving in Texas, 1987. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photograph. Courtesy of Don Wycliff.]
Story_ID: 16101
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's a picture of Kathy and me and our older son, Matthew in Mountainside Hospital maternity ward the after--3 days after he was born. He was born on October 15th, and this was taken on the 18th.
Speaker 2: [Don Wycliff, wife Kathy and new son, Matthew. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photographs. Courtesy of Don Wycliff.]
Story_ID: 16102
Speaker 1: This was taken in the front yard of my parents' house in Dallas [Texas] where they were living at the time.  This was about 1975.  And again, it was around Thanksgiving.  I was home for Thanksgiving and going from left to right, standing are my sister, Joy; my sister, Ida; my sister, Karen; Mother; my sister, Jean; me, my Dad; my little brother, Brian; my older brother, Francois; and the little shorties are my nephew, Nick; my sister, Karen's son; her daughter, Alisa and my grandmother who was the last of her generation to die in the family.  And lastly, on the--on the left my sister, Judith.
Speaker 2: [Don Wycliff with his siblings, parents, grandmother and nieces and nephews. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photograph. Courtesy of Don Wycliff.]
Story_ID: 16103
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my parents standing in front of, standing behind a wedding cake--at their 40th Anniversary celebration which we put on in Dayton, Texas back in June of 1982.  And it's the wedding cake they never had on their wedding day.
Speaker 2: [Don Wycliff's parents , Emily and Wilbert at their 40th wedding anniversary. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photograph. Courtesy of Don Wycliff.]
Story_ID: 16104
Speaker 1: Yeah, and that's mother saying, giving greetings to some of her close friends.  The woman whose hand she's shaking is, is Ms. Pearl St. Julian, who was a real close friend of hers all her life, died several years ago.  And in front of Ms. Pearl is my Aunt Myrtle.  She was--she's still living, must be close to ninety and still makes the best sweet potato pie in the universe.
Speaker 2: [Don Wycliff's mother, Emily at her 40th wedding anniversary. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photograph. Courtesy of Don Wycliff.]
