Story_ID: 135744
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe.  I am interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My full name is Love Henry Whelchel, III.  That's L-O-V-E, H-E-N-R-Y, W-H-E-L-C-H-E-L.
Speaker 1: And, what's the story behind your name?
Speaker 2: Wow.  It's a interesting story.  It goes back to--it's a generational name.  I'm the third.  My son is Love [Whelchel], IV.  And, the story goes that when my grandfather found out that some of the first born sons were given the first name of Love, that he changed his name from Henry Whelchel to Love Henry Whelchel.  So, that's where the American tradition began.
Speaker 1: So, the first born sons in his family line on--
Speaker 2: In his family line.
Speaker 1: Were they, were they Whelchel too?  Or,--
Speaker 2: They, well, they were, they were slaves (laughter), but when he did some research and kind of going through the oral tradition--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I believe, there were some Loves, some of our family in northern African.  And, in northern African, I think, there was a French translation of Amour, which is French for Love.  And, that's what he found out, so he, you know, wanted to embrace that.  So, early in, I guess, around 1918, 1920, he changed his name to Love Henry Whelchel.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, so these, this is a name that goes back into slavery days--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: In your family?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  All right.  And, what about Whelchel?
Speaker 2: Whelchel, from what I know about it, it's a German name.  I believe, it's pronounced over there as Velchel [ph.].  And, most of the Whelchel's that came from Germany, I believe out of Hamburg [Germany], there were, was a great presences of Whelchels.  They moved to northern Georgia, Dahlonega, which is where my grandfather grew up.  And, where my great-great-grandfather worked on the Whelchel plantation there in Dahlonega, right off of Whelchel Road.  And, then they later moved to a neighboring town called Gainesville, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was the name of the first town?  I'm sorry, I--
Speaker 2: Dahlonega.
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: I think it's D-A-H-L-O-N-G-A [sic, Dahlonega], I think.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Dahlonega, Georgia, and then they moved to?
Speaker 2: Gainesville.
Speaker 1: Gainesville.  Okay.  All right.  Now, okay.  Well, we'll get back to the family history in a minute.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Okay.  I was born February 4, 1969, in Birmingham, Alabama.  I was born in a little Catholic hospital called St. Joseph's Hospital.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, so, what is your occupation and your title?
Speaker 2: My occupation currently is, I head up human resources for Bad Boy Worldwide [Entertainment Group].  I also am in charge of some of the operations such as information technology facilities.  So, I get involved in a little bit of everything but my primary role is to head up the HR function.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is July 31, 2012.
Speaker 1: And, where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are in New York; Manhattan, New York, 1710 Broadway, Bad Boy Worldwide Headquarters.
Story_ID: 135745
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we ask as a warm up.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And, they only require a short answer.  The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Wow.  I do not.  I like all food (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Blue.
Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Favorite time of the year is the fall.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Got a lot of 'em.  I like Latin America.  I like Hawaii (laughter).  Those would be my, two of my favorite.
Speaker 1: Well, the last questions is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Don't make an excuse.  Make a way.
Story_ID: 135746
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, I'm gonna ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But, we'll start with your mother's side first to keep 'em separate until we get 'em together.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My mother's full name is Larma Miller Whelchel.  And, that's L-A-R-M-A, M-I-L-L-E-R, W-H-E-L-C-H-E-L.
Speaker 1: And, what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: You know, I'm embarrassed to say, I don't have her exact date and (laughter) so, I can't share that with you.  But, she was born in Quitman, Georgia.  And, I think that's Q-U-I-T-M-A-N.
Speaker 1: You think around 1940 or so?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  The--yeah.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) 1940?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  What's their story?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: Their story, they, my mother's side of the family, they're mainly West Indian.  So, they're from the West Indies and probably around, I don't know, 19-- between 1916, 1917, I believe, they migrated from the West Indies Islands to the Florida, Georgia area.
Speaker 1: Do you know where in the West Indies they're from?
Speaker 2: I know we have family in Barbados.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  All right.  So, so they came around the, they were here around the [Marcus] Garvey era, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Absolute--
Speaker 1: Were they involved at all with that?
Speaker 2: Not heavily.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: But, they were, there were some involvement--
Speaker 2: There was some involvement from what I understand.  But, not a--I don't know a whole lot about--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Their involvement.
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay.  So, what do they do for a living?
Speaker 2: They were business owners.  They owned grocery stores, you know, very industrial side of the family.  And, mainly, you know, they were farmers and business owners.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you know your grandparents on that side?
Speaker 2: No.  My--in fact, my--I never met my grandfather on my mother's side.  He passed, I believe, when my mother was five or six years old.  My grandmother, Lucille Miller, got really fond memories of her.  I spent a lot of time with my grandmother, Lucille.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did she talk about the Caribbean at all?
Speaker 2: Not very much.  Not very much.  I mean, mostly what she liked to talk about was, you know, because they came from a background in farming, she talked a lot about nature, taught me a lot about, you know, agriculture.  She was a big boxing fan (laughter).  But, no, we didn't talk a whole lot about the Caribbean part of the family.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Who was her favorite?
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Did your grandmother have a favorite boxer?  You said she was a boxing fan.  Did she--?
Speaker 2: She was a, she was an [Muhammad] Ali fan (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I remember her talking a lot about Muhammad Ali.  Yeah.
Story_ID: 135747
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, so, what, what stories did you mother [Larma Miller Whelchel]--well, what did you find out from your mother about growing up in Quitman [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: She just talked about how, you know, their family had the neighborhood, you know, grocery store and they moved actually from Quitman to Moultrie, Georgia.  And, I guess, that's where they actually ended up opening up the store.  And, you know, her planting the pecan trees and all of that.  So, she has really fond memories of her childhood.
Speaker 1: That's M-O-U-L-T-R-I-E?
Speaker 2: I-E.  Correct.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  Okay.  So, so they had pecan trees and they had a store?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Now, what were race relations like in Moultrie for her growing up?
Speaker 2: You know, from what I can remember from my mom telling me, you know, there was a, I guess, a section of town, I guess, in Moultrie where they pretty much did their own thing and she didn't, she didn't run into a lot, have a whole lot of issues with racism in Moultrie.  So, I guess, you know, they kind of ran--they had their stores, they had their schools and, you know, they kind of operated independently.  So, there were no traumatic stories of any racial incidents that she ever mentioned to me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, did she have a chance to finish school and all of that?
Speaker 2: She did.  My mother finished, you know, she went to undergraduate school at Paine [College, Augusta, Georgia].  That's where she met my father [Love Henry Whelchel, Jr.]; Paine College in Augusta, Georgia.  Then she went on later to get her master's and her doctorate degree.  She has a Ph.D. in Women's Studies.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, so, she--okay.  So, what did she major in at Paine?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't remember (laughter) what her undergraduate degree was in.
Speaker 1: Was it education or social work or?
Speaker 2: I'm gonna, I'm gonna go with education because, you know, for her background and what she's done up to present.  But, I don't know the exact degree.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, she went back to school at some point to get this Ph.D., right?  (Simultaneously).
Speaker 2: She did.  She did.  My mother was a homemaker.  Gosh, for quite a while.  I remember she was a homemaker up until the time I was about six or seven years old.  So, then she later decided, hey, I'm gonna go on and go back to school and get my, get my doctorate degree.  And, you know, the family was very supportive of that.
Story_ID: 135748
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, let me go to your father's side.  Can you give us your, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Love Henry Whelchel, Jr.
Speaker 1: Well, there's no need to spell it.  We already--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Got it.  I'm sorry.  And, what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Again, I know he was born in June of 1940s.  I don't have his specific birth date.  And, he was born in Warrenton County, Georgia [sic].  And, I think that's W-A-R-R-I-N-G-T-O-N; Warrenton, County [sic, Warrenton, Georgia in Warren County, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Warrenton County, Georgia.  Now, what, what can you tell us about your--okay.  What can you tell us about your father's family?  How far back can you trace them and what they doing?
Speaker 2: We can go back to my great-great-grandfather who was a slave in Dahlonega, Georgia.  And, then we can talk a little bit about my great-grandfather who was a C.M.E. [Christian Methodist Episcopal] minister.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, let's talk about the slave in Dahlonega.  So, he was a slave on a plantation?
Speaker 2: On the Whelchel Plantation.
Speaker 1: Whelchel, okay.
Speaker 2: There in Dahlonega.
Speaker 1: Are there any stories that are passed down from that experience about his relationship to them?
Speaker 2: You know, from what I remember, you know, the thing that's most interesting about the relationship with my father and the slave masters was that there was a lot of, and this is not uncommon I guess, there was a lot of familiar ties.  I mean, they were actually kinda of close even after slavery was abolished in 1865.  So, it--I guess, that's why a lot of my family ended up staying in the area after slavery was abolished.  I know that that side of the family actually was helpful in making loans to our family to open up business; gas stations and et cetera, so the stores.  So, there's a close family tie.  And, even some of the family reunions I went to, you know, back in the '80s [1980s] and '90s [1990s], both sides, both the white Whelchels and black Whelchels actually came together for some of those reunions.
Speaker 1: Now, are there other blood ties with the white Whelchels?
Speaker 2: I'm sure there are.  I can't--I don't know how to connect all the dots.  But, yes, there definitely are.
Speaker 1: Yeah, rather suspicious, you know, they're able to--they wanna help and that sort of thing--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: There's usually a story of a blood tie in there--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Somewhere on the (simultaneously).
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  I mean, we could go throughout, you know, many families have that same, same history.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 135749
Speaker 1: Now, I know, you mentioned earlier, off camera, that your father [Love Henry Whelchel, Jr.] and--when--your father's side is closely tied to the C.M.E. [Christian Methodist Episcopal] Church.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Was that--is that a tie that goes all the back to slavery days, or?
Speaker 2: Yes, it does.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, it does.
Speaker 1: Now, I think the history of the C.M.E., I think, it was grew out of a Southern Methodist Church.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Which broke off from the regular Methodist Church over an issue of slavery.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  Yeah.  Got tired of sitting up in the balcony, wanted to have full participation in the services.  And, then, I believed, it launched as the Colored Methodist Episcopal Church.  Then, later became the Christian Methodist Episcopal Church.
Speaker 1: Right.  Right.  So, was your great-grandfather a minister?
Speaker 2: My great-grandfather, I mean, very spiritual people.  I don't know if he was a preacher.  But, I know that, you know, they were very religious and attended, you know, like a lot of the slaves, they would steal away, if you will (laughter), and spent a lot of time going to church.  But, I don't think he was, what I would call a minister.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 135750
Speaker 1: Well, what are the stories on, on your father's [Love Henry Whelchel, Jr.] side?
Speaker 2: Wow.  My father has an interesting background.  Now, unlike my mom [Larma Miller Whelchel], he went to a private school right outside of where he grew up.  I wanna say, it's called Holsey-Cobb Institute [Cordele, Georgia], where they would have to walk quite a few miles to get to this school from the county that they were, that he lived in.  And, so, the kids on the bus would throw rocks and things like that at them as they walked to school.  So, his, he definitely--they experienced a lot of racism in the area that he grew up in.
Speaker 1: Now, is that H-O-L-S-E-Y?
Speaker 2: H-O-L-S-E-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Holsey-Cobb, C-O-B-B--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Institute.
Speaker 1: Holsey-Cobb Institute.  Okay.
Speaker 2: And, that was private school for African American children.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, is this a boarding school, like?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't think it was a boarding school.  It was definitely a pri--I guess, it was definitely funded, you know, they paid to go to school, paid to go there to get their early education, but they didn't live on the campus.
Speaker 1: Was it supported in part by the church?
Speaker 2: I'm sure it was.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, did he have any stories about, about Holsey-Cobb?
Speaker 2: Not many.  Just, you know, his trek to school, always had adventures with rocks and things being thrown at 'em.  That was--
Speaker 1: So, the white kids would throw rocks at the bus?
Speaker 2: Yeah, from the bus.  Yep.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, by this time, your father was the son of a minister, right?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Your grandfather actually became a--?
Speaker 2: Yes.  He--my grandfather [Love Whelchel, Sr.] was an ordained minister.  Who--actually, we had a chance to see his seminary records from 1925 over at ITC; the Interdenominational Theological Center in Atlanta [Georgia].  So, my grandfather, Love Henry Whelchel, Sr. as an ordained minister in the Christian Methodist Episcopal Church.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, and he was a graduate of ITC in Atlanta?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, so your father followed in the footsteps of his father?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And, became a minister.  And, he attended Paine College [Augusta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: My father attended Paine College, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, did he have any other stories about growing up before we--?
Speaker 2: I mean most of the stories that I heard that he, I guess, spoke a lot about were in his undergraduate years, and him dating my mother, and going to Paine.  And, then going to NYU [New York University, New York City], and Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts], where he received master degrees.  And, don't ask me (laughter) what the degrees were.  But, I know he received a master's, I guess, a master of divinity at Boston.  I don't know what the master's was in at NYU.  And, he would tell me about, you know, going to parties, and again dealing with some racism with roommates when he was at Boston University.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Boston.  Now, when he was at Boston U, was he, was a contemporary of [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.]?
Speaker 2: He was.  My father was an aide to Dr. King, and literally followed his footsteps.  And, a big part of the reason why he went to Boston University was because of Dr. King.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  I thought it might be a connection there.  That's interesting. Okay.
Story_ID: 135751
Speaker 1: So, is there a story about how your parents [Larma Miller Whelchel and Love Henry Whelchel, Jr.] met at Paine [College, Augusta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: I know that my mother was the homecoming queen and so, I think my father heavily pursued my mom.  So, my mom, the homecoming queen, my dad a pretty good basketball player.  So, they were pretty popular (laughter) young people on campus.  So, that much I can remember.  I know that he, you know, he was really fond of my mom and I actually read some of the letters that he typed to my grandmother about getting, you know, an allowance so that he could take my mom out.  And, so, I know that they had a very, you know, I guess a whirlwind romance (laughter) when they were in undergraduate school.  And, yeah, so that, that I, you know, I--they didn't any specific stories.  But, I do know that he, he was a popular basketball player, she was the homecoming queen, and he was doing everything he could to pursue her and was very serious about marrying her.  You know, and he's probably, probably in his junior year, he made his mind up that he wanted to get married to my mom.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 135752
Speaker 1: Well, tell us a little bit more about your parents [Larma Miller Whelchel and Love Henry Whelchel, Jr.] in terms of their talents and abilities and what they've been able to do.  I know, your father's a renowned church historian.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And, he teaches at ITC [Interdenominational Theological Center, Atlanta, Georgia] or did--
Speaker 2: Right.  He still does.
Speaker 1: He still does it, in Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And, your mother's got a Ph.D. in Women's Studies.  So, tell us something about 'em.
Speaker 2: I mean, my parents are incredible.  An absolutely amazing source of inspiration.  And, I guess, that's where I get my quote:  Don't make, you know, make a way, don't make an excuse, make a--you know, because I came from a way out of no way kind of mentality.  My mother, extremely bright, extremely talent vocalist singer.  She sang opera, you know, so I remember she was, she was, you know, I would go down to the basement where she would wash clothes and my wife--I mean, my mom is singing to Porgy and Bess and all of those things.  So, she was a very artistic person.  She directed the choir.  You know, very well-written, great communicator.  And, my father, an amazing orator, great speaker, academician, theologian.  So, I had a really buttoned up background.  Because, I mean, they were very no nonsense.  Even though my father was a great athlete, he and my mom emphasized academics.  And, I guess, that coming from where they had come from and dealing with what they dealt with growing up, that was really the way to upward mobility.  It wasn't athleticism but education.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, your father's an author of a book called, 'Hell Without Fire: Conversion in Slave Religion.'
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: 'Conversion in Slave Religion.'
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And, 'My Chains Fell Off [:William Wells Brown, A Fugitive Abolitionist]' the Williams Wells Brown story.  And, a book about the life of C. Eric Lincoln ['How Long This Road: Race, Religion, and the Legacy of C. Eric Lincoln'].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, I mean, he's really a scholar.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, when you think about your parents' talents, and their gifts, and their habits, and their looks even, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Wow.  I am--I think I'm a pretty balanced combination.  I--there's an artistic side of me that's definitely from my mom.  But, there's a very--you know, I love history.  You know, I'm a student always.  Always a student first and I get that from my father.  I think I get a lot of my oratory, you know, style (laughter) from my dad.  But, the drive is something that they both had.  And, I--all of my drive, all of my passion comes from both of my parents.
Story_ID: 135753
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory is living in Durham, North Carolina.  I'm about four or five years old at my--at a birthday party.  It actually is my birthday party.  So, it's my fourth or fifth birthday.  And, it's in the educational building of my father's [Love Henry Whelchel, Jr.] church.  His church was called Russell Memorial C.M.E. Church in Durham, North Carolina.  And, I remember my father holding me while the rest of the students and faculty and staff were singing happy birthday to me.  That's one of my earliest memories.
Story_ID: 135754
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have siblings?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I have two older sisters and an older brother.  So, my oldest sister is April Whelchel.  Then I have Kenyatta Whelchel who was named after Jomo Kenyatta.  And, my older brother is Noel Whelchel.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I think like two of them are lawyers and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --one's an engineer, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My brother's an engineer.  Both my sisters are, are attorneys.
Story_ID: 135755
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So, this, did that constitute your family growing up, your household?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, 'cause you know, sometimes, you know, grandparents live with you and other things--other people (simultaneously).
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It was pretty much just our immediately family and because in the C.M.E. tradition, you move.  You know, you don't stay, you know, like some denominations you kinds of have a church for life.  And, the Christian Methodist Episcopal Church, you move a lot.  So, you know, we went from Alabama to North Carolina to Ohio, and so on and so forth; and it was just our immediate family.  Just brothers, brother, sisters, mom [Larma Miller Whelchel] and dad [Love Henry Whelchel, Jr.], you know.  All my grandparents, uncles, cousins, they would always visit us where ever we, where ever we lived, but just pretty much the immediate family.  And, of course, our extended church family had a lot of involvement with, within our lives.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, 'cause C.M.E. Church is controlled by bishops--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Who will find ministers of (simultaneously)--
Speaker 2: Right.  Every summer they'll have the conferences and at the conference, you may be moved.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so, your family went from North Carolina, from Durham, to?
Speaker 2: To Dayton, Ohio.
Speaker 1: To Dayton?  That's, yeah--okay.  What church were, was your father involved in in Dayton?
Speaker 2: Dayton, that was, gosh, this is embar--Phillips Temple [Church, Dayton, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Phillips Temple.
Speaker 2: Phillips Temple C.M.E. Church.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, how old were you when your father--?
Speaker 2: About twelve or thirteen years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When we moved to Dayton, Ohio.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, that would've been 1975, '76 [1976]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, about, about, yeah about '76 [1976] or so.
Speaker 1: And, then from Dayton where did you go?
Speaker 2: From Dayton, we moved to Los Angeles [California] to another Phillips Temple C.M.E. Church.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, how old were you then?
Speaker 2: By that time, I was seventeen.  So, I was going into my senior year of high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  (Unclear) about 1980?  I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That was act--yeah.  It was late, mid-'80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, and then you went on to college after that, right?
Speaker 2: Then, I went on to college--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In Atlanta [Georgia]; Morris Brown College in Atlanta, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  I just wanted to get that sequence (unclear).
Story_ID: 135756
Speaker 1: Now, we always ask this question, can you describe some of the, the sights, and sounds, and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Of?
Speaker 1: Of growing up.
Speaker 2: Of growing up.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  In all these places, I guess, 'cause (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yes.  It's such a mix of different regions and things.  But, I remember, you know, in the '70s [1970s] now, you know, when I was a little boy, and when I say a little boy, I mean, when I was four, five, six years old.  I guess, [President Richard] Nixon would've been in office, so, I'm coming in--I'm growing up in the, kind of going in the post Nixon era, a year after [Reverend] Dr. Martin Luther King [Jr.] has been assassinated.  My father [Love Henry Whelchel, Jr.] heavily still, you know, involved with the Civil Rights Movement and now he's working with [HM] Benjamin Chavis [Jr.], who was a student with him at Duke University [Durham, North Carolina].  And, you know, so, I'm going to church where there's television cameras because we're bringing Dr. Chavis with us to church, you know, on work--on a kind of a release program.  'Cause he's incarcerated for the Wilmington Ten incident.  So, I remember, actually marching, you know, and hearing the chanting (laughter), that comes along with marching through the streets of Wilmington [North Carolina].  Those same rally cries, I heard around our church to free the Wilmington Ten, and Governor [James B.] Hunt.  So, I'm getting that visual.  Down South, I mean, the smells of, you know, sweet potato pies, and honeysuckles and all of those things come to mind.  You know, the whole Black Power Movement, you know.  A lot of (laughter) a lot of afros and (laughter) and black fist, and picks with red, black, and green, and fist balled up.  And, then you kind of move that on 'til when I went to Dayton [Ohio] where the hip hop movement is beginning to swell.  And, then we're going into the, you know, whole crack epidemic by the time I moved to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] So, you know, I've gone from, you know, the age of innocence to some degree in the South, to a crash course in Civil, in Civil Rights Movement, to here's the new hip hop culture.  And, then that clashed, you know, which was a great movement and then that's trying to be undercut by this horrible drug epidemic called crack cocaine in the '80s [1980s].  So, I mean, it's just a whole lot was going on over those last twenty years.
Story_ID: 139295
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay.  So, you were giving us the chronology of some of the sights, and sounds, and smells of growing.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And, we were starting to talk about Dayton [Ohio].  And, you're in Dayton, you're in Dayton during the tail end of the funk era, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Absolutely.
Speaker 1: So, you knew some of the funk musicians.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We actually had, I guess it was, was it the group Slave?  Yes.  Some of those were, you know, band members were members of the church [Phillips Temple Church, Dayton, Ohio].  I remember them singing in the choir.  And, I was like, wow!  I mean, (laughter), these, these, musicians, I mean, these are professionals.  So, that was a real treat growing up, going to Phillips Temple, just a really exciting, exciting time.  A lot of talented, dynamic and smart people.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Slave, Ohio Players, Lakeside, Roger Troutman--
Speaker 2: Roger Troutman and Zapp.
Speaker 1: All those groups--
Speaker 2: Oh, Yeah.
Speaker 1: Were there, you know.  And, you said the beginnings of hip hop were starting in (simultaneously).
Speaker 2: So, as we go into the early '80s [1980s], you know, hip hop becomes infectious, contagious, and it's spreading across the country.  Especially, in inner city with black youth.  So, you know, I'll, you know, I'mma early B-boy and listening to Kurtis Blow, and the SugarhHill Gang, and you know, loving that, that rhythmic beat, you know, just incredible.  And, that just kind of--that took a hold of me, I mean, that, that music was kind of like--I look at it as they were the town criers.  So, rappers were telling you what was going one in the community.  So, a lot of people outside of the community, if they didn't know what was going on, all you had to do was put on a 12-inch.  Or, put on a rap album and you would get a preview of what was happening in the inner city, in America at that time.
Story_ID: 139296
Speaker 1: Now, what, what was the difference for people that are, they're old like I am, what would you consider the difference between hip hop music in those days at the beginning, hip hop music and what was popular before; disco and funk and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: You know, hip hop, you know, much like rock was was re--rebel music.  But, the difference in rock from what I know, and hip hop was it took that rebellion and really kind of dug into politics, you know.   It, you know, whereas rockers would say, you know, basically, we're not gonna take it, you know.  We're gonna, you know, fight for the sake of fighting.  Hip hop would tell you exactly why we're fighting.  You know, I'm beaten down because of poverty.  I'm beaten down because of racism, you know.  Cops are beating us across the head, shooting us in the streets.  It got really graphic.  I mean, so, hip hop took it one step further than the old rock 'n' roll, and told you specially what was happening in the black community.  And, I think that's the biggest difference.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you mentioned we're not gonna take it.  I'm reminded of this video by Twisted Sisters [Twisted Sister], I think.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: These are white rockers and wore eye shadow.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Wore wigs and I think they were like rebellious but, (simultaneously).
Speaker 2: It's rebellious but it wa--yeah, this was way more focused.  You know, so, all the way until the time of NWA [Niggaz Wit Attitudes].  When I'm not on the West Coast, and NWA is building momentum and their talking about the police.  And, Eric--you know, and Ice Cube is basically telling you, if we don't get things right, you know, there's gonna be hell to pay in these cities.  And, then, fast forward into the '90s [1990s], and you got the riots popping up (excuse me) again.  'Cause you had the riots back in the '60s [1960s] and so, now here we are in the early '90s [1990s], people are fed up, and you got rioting in the street.  If you could of--if you were listening to those hip hop records, they would've told you, hey, guys, here's what going.  Listen world, listen American, this is what's happening in inner cities, coast-to-coast and everywhere in between.  So, you would've, you know, if you listen to the music, they were telling you.  They're the town criers.  Its eleven o'clock and all isn't well, you know.  There things that are bubbling up.
Story_ID: 139297
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I'mma take you back to grade school days--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Here.  And, now, what were you like as a grade schooler?  What did you like to do and what were your favorite classes in school, and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: I was a mischievous child for the most part.  I was the youngest of four.  So, you know, I was, I was a kid if the lamp got broken, you know, Love did it.  Whether I did it or not, because I was so mischievous I would get the blame (laughter).  So, as a child, I guess, I had some early signs of kind of leadership, you know.  I remember reading about the Black Panthers, and hearing about the Black Panthers at home.  So, I actually, went to Immaculata Catholic School [Durham, North Carolina] when I was in elementary school in Durham, North Carolina.  And, not fully understanding all of what the Black Panthers were about, I knew that they were black men who came together to fellowship in ca--in some ways.  So, me and the other black kids who weren't always allowed to play ball with the white kids at Immaculata, we formed a group called, the Black Panther Party (laughter).  And, we would play together (laughter).  And, it was just a group of five or six black grade skid kool--grade school kids who would just kind of hangout and play amongst ourselves.
Speaker 1: And, you called yourselves the Black Panther Party (laughter)?
Speaker 2: And, we called ourselves the Black Panther Party.  I remember it vividly (laughter).
Speaker 1: What (clear) that have on the white students?  I mean, what did they--?
Speaker 2: We got--you know, my father [Love Henry Whelchel, Jr.] spent a lot of time with (laughter) the principal, Sister Mary Elizabeth [ph.] (laughter).  How--he spent probably about every week.  You know, I was in the office and my parents [Larma Miller Whelchel and Love Henry Whelchel, Jr.], my father in particular, was visiting the school to get me out of some trouble.  Because, I mean, not necessarily that I was causing fights, but I was saying and doing some pretty radical, radical things as an eight, seven or eight year old (laughter).
Speaker 1: Like, what for instance?
Speaker 2: Hey, hey, hey, you know, get outta my way (laughter).  I just came back from the USA.  So, we would all lock arms and walk through the playground and tell people to just get out of our way, 'cause we're coming through.  So, me and my group of friends, we would just kind of marched through the park.  That's what we do the whole recess.  Hey, hey, hey, get out of our way, I just got back from the USA.  We'd just walk, you know, through and wouldn't move out, you know, and force people to just kind of disperse and move out of our way.
Speaker 1: So, what you're saying, I guess, is that the--you and the other black students that formed this Black Panther Party were doing, you know, as a self-preservation thing, or a unity thing, or?
Speaker 2: It's kind--it was more of a unity thing.  It was like, you know what, we got some commonalities, you know.  You--we go to the same church, you know (laughter).  We, you know, and it's what, less than ten of us in this school, you know.  So, the school went from K through let's say sixth grade so, you know, we were, we were just uniting and looking to kind of hangout and have a good time with each other.  And, really, it was, it was like okay, you're either hangout with your friends, or you know, or you know, with these guys or you're basically, you know, are just kind of sitting on the sidelines.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, it wasn't a lot of comradery between the black and white students?
Speaker 2: Not, early on.  It did begin to change by the time I got, you know, a little bit older going to the fourth grade, things begin to change.  But, a lot of kids, and we're talking about '76 [1976], '77 [1977], you know, it was still kind of, you know--segregation was just kind of forming its roots.  So, you have to kind of keep the historical context in mind.  We're in the South.  Segregation is just being--I mean, in North Carolina, we would drive around, you'd still see a sign that'd say "KKK [Klu Klux Klan] Rally on Sunday."  So, it's just the sign of the times.
Story_ID: 139298
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, was there, was it tough to, was there any issues around trying to reconcile going to Catholic school [Imaculata Catholic School, Durham, North Carolina] with being a C.M.E. [Christian Methodist Episcopal]?
Speaker 2: Not really.  I mean, at that time, you didn't have a whole lot of choices.  You either go to a Catholic School or you go to a public school.  So, there were a lot of Jewish kids in my class, agnostic kids, you know.  So, it was just, it was just, it was really just about the education.  And, this was some of the best education that was available.  So, it just happened to be a Catholic school.  But, it wasn't a really big issue.  A lot of, you know, the Catholic Church is the mother church.  So, when we would go to Mass, I knew the order of those services 'cause it wasn't total different from what we got in the Methodist Church.  So, it wasn't, it wasn't a traumatic experience at all.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, it (simultaneously) religion?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 139299
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you moved to Dayton [Ohio] in '77 [1977], or '78 [1978] you said?
Speaker 2: Probably, actually, yeah, about '79 [1979].
Speaker 1: Seventy-nine [1979], okay.  Okay, 1979.  And, and where did you go to school in Dayton?
Speaker 2: So, I went to school, I started off at a school called Stivers [School for the Arts, Dayton, Ohio], which was a magnet school.  Probably went there for one year and then after that I then went over to Archbishop Alter [High School] in Kettering, Ohio.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, Alter High School.  And, that's--what was it like going to Alter?
Speaker 2: Alter was interesting in that again, Catholic School--and now that you've mentioned this I'm just thinking about it, had a lot of the same nuances as Immaculata [Catholic School, Durham, North Carolina] did when I was in elementary school.  Because, here again, you had a couple thousand students going to Alter, and about fifty of those students were African American.  So, again, here I was, you know, we were kind of segregated to be, you know, just blunt about it.  And, we all kind of congregated together.  Most of us played on a sports team, ran track, played football, basketball, and that's probably how a lot of us ended up at Archbishop Alter.  I didn't, you know, my, my goal was to focus on my studies and my parents [Larma Miller Whelchel and Love Henry Whelchel, Jr.], you know, really placed an emphasis on that.  So, that's what I did.  But, most of my--the other students, African American students played sports.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah.  Alter was the home of the Paxson brothers [John Paxson and Jim Paxson], right?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: They played in the NBA and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Dorties [ph.]--my classmate was Jeff Graham who played professional football with The Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio], played for [Pittsburgh] Steelers and several other NFL teams.  So, yeah, it was big school.
Speaker 1: Right, the wide receiver for the--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.  He sure was.  Right, right.  Pittsburgh [Steelers] and then Chicago [Bears].
Speaker 2: Chicago.  Exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Kind of, now you in both cases, I would guess that you're probably one of the first classes that integrate those school's probably in Durham [North Carolina], surely and--
Speaker 2: Surely in Durham.  I mean, I think, my--and at one point, all of my siblings, we were all at that school.  So, I think we're, you know, among the first African American students to go to Immaculata [Catholic School], so, absolutely.  Alter, is you know, by then it was, you know, going into the '80s [1980s] mid-'80s [1980s], you know, we weren't, you know, like you said, you think about it, probably weren't too far removed (laughter).
Speaker 1: No.  I know growing up in Dayton I know they, they were not at Alter--
Speaker 2: They're not many.
Speaker 1: There were no black students at Alter when I was in school.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Wow, so, yeah.  So, I guess, we were some of the early African American students there too.  And, so of course, that comes with challenges.  And, we, we faced a great deal, you know.  You look back on it now, it's like, wow!  You know, but, when you were in the middle of it, it was just, it was what it was, you dealt with it and, you know, you persevered and you really didn't--I didn't really didn't put a lot of thought in it at the time.
Speaker 1: So, Alter was also like a fairly, in a largely white community?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, Kettering--
Speaker 1: Kettering is very, very white, yeah.
Speaker 2: Centerville [Ohio]--yeah, predominately white, white side of town (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right.  Exactly.  So, did you have to--did your parents take you to school or did you catch a bus, or?
Speaker 2: My father [Love Henry Whelchel, Jr.] took me to school every morning.  Later, I think, you know sometimes I would ride in with friends after they had their driver's licenses.  And, they had cars and sometimes I'll ride in with friends.  But, for the most part, my father would drop me at school in the morning and pick me up at the end of school.
Story_ID: 139300
Speaker 1: Okay.  Who was some of your teachers and mentors in school?
Speaker 2: Well, one of my earliest mentors in school was Ms. Dawkins.  I think that's D-A-W-K-I-N-S.  And, I'm remiss now that you're taking me down memory lane.  I actually, went to another school in Durham, North Carolina [sic] called St. Mark elemen [St. Mark Catholic School, Wilmington, North Carolina]--I don't know (simultaneously).
Speaker 1: Now, is that before Immaculata [Catholic School, Durham, North Carolina] or after?
Speaker 2: That was before Immaculata.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, St. Mark.  I spent some time at St. Mark.  And, Ms. Dawkins was my first teacher who really kind of honed in on me and, you know, kind of snatched me under the ear and say, hey, you got, you know, you got some talent (laughter), let's--let me help you, you know, help nurture that.  I'll never forget Ms. Dawkins.
Speaker 1: Is she first grade or second grade?
Speaker 2: She was first grade.
Speaker 1: First grade, okay.  What about at Immaculata?  Was there anyone there that--?
Speaker 2: Immaculata there was teacher name Miss Derkskin [ph.].  I think that's D-E-R-K-, K-I, Derkskin, S-K-I-N, Derkskin.  I think that's how you spell her name.  But she was, she was my homeroom teacher at Immaculata.  And, she was the woman who figured out, this is the teacher that figured out that I needed glasses (laughter).  So, she spent enough time with me to know that, hey, you're nearsighted, you can't see (laughter).  So, I'll never forget her.  She was a great influence, a spectacular teacher.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, they didn't have just nuns teaching there, they had--?
Speaker 2: No.  The nuns and the priests, the priest kind of were, you know, we'd go to Mass weekly and the nuns were the administrators and they taught some of the classes.  But, Sister Mary Elizabeth [ph.], of course, she was the principal.  And, then some of the other nuns taught some of the other classes.  But, we had, you know, teachers that were not a part of, the--were not nuns and were not priests too.  So, it was a mix.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now, what about at, at--in Dayton [Ohio] at Stivers [School for the Arts, Dayton, Ohio] or [Archbishop] Alter [High School, Kettering, Ohio] ?
Speaker 2: Stivers was really almost like a flash.  I was in and out of there so quickly, so I don't remember a lot of the teachers there.  Then at Alter, no teachers really stand out for me there either, because--and then, you have to understand, then I left Alter and went to another high school in Los Angeles [California].  So, really, hit these schools really, was kind of a staccato, boom, boom, boom, you know.
Story_ID: 139301
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--
Speaker 2: But, I do remember one of my senior high school teachers, great guy, he taught us, I think the class was called culture awareness.  And, the teacher's name is Ivan Baldwin.  And, I believe, Mr. Baldwin was related to the writer.  And, he, he had a great impact on my education and on my life.
Speaker 1: Now, what school is this?
Speaker 2: This is Westchester [High School, now Westchester Enriched Sciences Magnets, Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 1: Westchester.
Speaker 2: In Los Angeles [California].
Speaker 1: Now, was this a public school?
Speaker 2: This was a public school.  The deal was since I'd gone to Catholic school a lot, since they was moving me my senior year, I was able to choose whatever school I wanted to go to.  So, I saw the young ladies getting off of the van, the volleyball team and I said, "Let's go check this school out."  'Cause we had just left the Catholic school.  And I said, "Well, I wanna see what this school is all about with the (laughter) the volleyball team getting off of the van.  And, then we--I enrolled immediately (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, what neighborhood is Westchester?
Speaker 2: Westchester is in the, in the, in the town of Westchester [Los Angeles, California].  So, it's very close to the Los Angeles International Airport.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Near LAX.
Speaker 2: LAX.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, you said Ivan Baldwin--
Speaker 2: Ivan Baldwin.
Speaker 1: Was related to James Baldwin?
Speaker 2: James Baldwin, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And, he taught--did he teach English and writing too?
Speaker 2: He taught literature and he had a class called culture awareness, where we would study world cultures.  And, he also had a group called APBA, the Association to Promote Black Awareness, which I was a member of.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, this is in 19--?
Speaker 2: This is about 1985, '86 [1986].
Speaker 1: Eighty-five [1985], '86 [1986], okay.
Story_ID: 139302
Speaker 1: So, how are you doing as a student in school?  How, how are your grades?
Speaker 2: My grades.  I was a--you know, I started off in junior high school, you know, you know, very good student, making, you know, great grades, you know, A's and B's.  By the time I got into the ninth, tenth, going into the eleventh grade, you know, kinda got side track off into music, off into dealing with things that were going on, you know, you know, in our community.  And, moving around so much, I began to kind of lose my way, academically.  But, by the time I got into my senior year [at Westchester High School, now Westchester Enriched Sciences Magnets, Los Angeles, California], I was back on track, grades were back where they once were.  And, I guess, I would, at this point, I would just attribute that to all the moving, you know.  Just kind of dealing with, you know, meeking--making new friends and being in a new place.  It's pretty, it's pretty traumatic.
Story_ID: 139303
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you have any particular heroes or anything, when you were in school?  I mean, in high school.
Speaker 2: You know, no one particular hero outside of my immediate family comes to mind.  My father [Love Henry Whelchel, Jr.], my grandfather, my grandparents, you know, those are my heroes.  My uncles and aunts, those are really my heroes, 'cause those are the people who are consistent in my life who were basically kind of saying, "Hang in there.  You can do it."  That's where I was kind of getting some positive reinforcement from.
Speaker 1: So, your family really had a challenge on trying to keep the family, you know, in communication moving so much, you know, I guess.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) but, that was--so, how did, I mean--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That was, yeah, it was, you know, like I said, when you're going through it, it's one thing.  When you kind of look back on it, you know, now I really give my parents a lot of credit.  Because, as a father myself, and I only have one child, they had four, I don't know how they were able to hold it all together.  Especially, with all that was going on with, you know, the drug epidemics, the gang epidemic.  I mean, there was so many things going on and for us to kind of stay together, you know, not get in any real trouble; all complete not only our high school but our college degrees.  I mean, you really, they did --they did a phenomenal job.
Story_ID: 139304
Speaker 1: Now, what kind of activities were you involved in in growing up?  I mean, were you in clubs or the scouts or anything like that?
Speaker 2: Yes.  In every--any club or organization that was affiliated with the church, COIF [ph.], Boy Scouts.  You know, I didn't figure it out until I got older.  But, my parents [Larma Miller Whelchel and Love Henry Whelchel, Jr.] had me in church pretty much seven days a week (laughter).  So, that kept me out a lot of trouble.  So, I was, you know, the choirs, usher board, I mean, any activity that the church provided, you can believe the Whelchel kids were gonna be there.  And, that was all the way up until I was eighteen years old.  So, you know, it's a, it's a blessing now that I look back on it because I think that kept me out of a lot of trouble.
Speaker 1: I know that NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and the Urban League, I think were big at Phillips Temple [Church, Dayton, Ohio].
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  Absolutely.
Speaker 1: The youth--
Speaker 2: At both Phillips Temple.  They were big at the Phillips Temple in Dayton [Ohio] as well as Phillips Temple, Los Angeles [California].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you were part of the youth (simultaneously)?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  Oh, yeah.  I was involved in both of those groups.  I know the Urban League had a summer program that my brother and sisters were involved in where they would work at one of the General Motors plants through the Urban League.  So, yeah, it was, yeah, big part of, big part of the community, big part of our church.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let's see.  What kind of information was coming into the household?  Your parents are both, you know, academically oriented, so what, what were they reading (simultaneously).
Speaker 2: You know, the dinner table discussion was politics.  Politics, economics, world events, again, you know, my father a historian.  So, he would give the historical context what was happening from--I remember the SALT [Strategic Arms Limitation Talks] treaties, was talking about things like that, to talking about the drug epidemic.  And, he would tie that into, you know, what may have happened in Asia with the opium.  And, so I mean, it was very interesting discussions around the table, you know.  So, we were, we were not only giving spiritual food, and physically, you know, nourishment but we were also giving a lot of educational food.  I mean, you know, it was--we never thought that there was anything that we were not gonna be able to do.  Because it was like, the world is literally your oyster.  You can do anything; math, science, you know, politics, all of that was on the table, literally.
Story_ID: 139305
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So, all right, so in high school then what, what were some of your activities in high school?  Were you in clubs in high school too?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I--In high school, I (laughter), I was in a glee club by the time I went to Westchester [High School, now Westchester Enriched Sciences Magnets, Los Angeles, California].  I played the trumpet for several years.  Put the trumpet down and decided to sing.  So, from eight to eighteen, you know, playing the trumpet and we talked about that offline; started it, you know, when I was in North Carolina, did a little bit at Stivers [School for the Arts, Dayton, Ohio].  By the time I went to Westchester, I got tired of carrying the trumpet case around.  So, then I joined the school choir, in kind of a glee club.  And, I sang and that was really, it was kind of a segue into my hip hop as well because I met some young men who were in the glee club who also like to rap.  So, we would, we would rap as well, when I was at Westchester.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Who were the artist that were influencing you the most when you were in high (simultaneously)?
Speaker 2: On the West Coast it was Ice-T.  Ice-T was the, you know, he was the, he was the rapper to watch if you were in Los Angeles [California] at that time.  Of course, I also loved Run-D.M.C., they were--I was a huge fan of theirs.  And, those, those artist had the biggest influence on me during that period of time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I don't know that much about hip hop.  But, I would've guess that Ice Cube would've been a big influence, but (simultaneously).
Speaker 2: Ice Cube came a little later.  So, Ice Cube really came out by the time I was in college.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: So, by the time he came out there was a whole NWA [Niggaz Wit Attitudes] movement that was--now, we're moving into the '90s, [1990s] early '90s [1990s].  And, then that's when he--and I actually met O'Shea Jackson, Ice Cube.  And, just an extremely intelligent man and, yeah, he wou--that, he--that took it to a whole nother level, you know.  We're dealing with politics and kind of what's going on, on a global scale.
Story_ID: 139306
Speaker 1: Now, was there a conflict in those days with East Coast and West Coast and rappers?
Speaker 2: There was.  There was.  You know, I don't know how much of that was driven by the media (laughter), how much of it was real.  But, yeah, there was definitely an East Coast-West Coast conflict.  And, you have someone like me, who was kind of smack dab in the middle, you know, having lived on both coasts.  So, you know, I just loved who I loved.  I didn't really care if you were from California or New York.  If the music was good, you know, that's what I was listening to.  I--you know, so from, you know, that back then in the '90s [1990], you got Public Enemy coming on the scene, who's highly politicized; love Chuck D and Public Enemy.  And, I just, I just like to listen to the rappers who were saying something.  If you were saying something, I was a lover of the lyrics.  I'm listening to your lyrics.  The beat is great.  That's, but that's, that's the, that's the icing on the cake.  I'm listening for your lyrics, your--I'm listening for your substance.
Speaker 1: I remember the discourse in those days around what the lyrics of hip hop records were.  And, some of the conflicts for the first time, I think, youth were bringing records home with people talking like they don't necessary talk in the family around the table (laughter).
Speaker 2: Right.  Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, was there any conflict in your family around the lyrics?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  Absolutely.  My family, my father [Love Henry Whelchel, Jr.], my mom [Larma Miller Whelchel] didn't want anything to do with hip hop.  They didn't want me to have anything to do with.  They didn't want it inside of the house.  Which of course made me do what?  That made me want it more.  (Laughter) so, a cautionary tale for parents.  I'll remember that as my son is getting older.  But, it really made me more interested in this taboo music.  But, I also tried to encourage my parents and, my father in particularly, to listen to what they were saying.  Get past the profane words and listen to what they're talking about.  And, in order for them to describe how horrible the situation is, they're using colorful language, I said.  And, eventually, my father actually came around.  And, we--I remember us listening to DMX together, you know.  Y'all gonna make me lose my mind, you know.  And, he's like, "Okay, I get.  I sees what he's talking about."  But, that was much later.  By this time, I was graduating from college, I was a grown man (laughter).  But, but yeah, if you listen to the substance and get pass the profanity, you know, there's, there's often times something substantive that's being said.
Story_ID: 139307
Speaker 1: All right.  So, when you were a senior in high school [at Westchester High School, now Westchester Enriched Sciences Magnets, Los Angeles, California], then what were your prospects?  What were you looking at--I know you were going to college.  You took a college prep course and everything.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: But, what were you thinking about doing as a career?
Speaker 2: I wanted to own hotels.  So, you know, not just any hotel.  I wanted to own casino hotels, convention hotels, luxury properties.  So, I had it in my mind that I would go to school and study business.  Then as I'm going through my applications, I find out there are these few programs, and back then it was a very few.  I could name probably three of four schools who had the program called Hotel Restaurant Management.  And, those schools were UNLV [University of Nevada, Las Vegas, Las Vegas, Nevada], Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York], and Morris Brown [College, Atlanta, Georgia].  So, I kind of wanted to, you know, fly the nest, get away from mom [Larma Miller Whelchel] and dad [Love Henry Whelchel, Jr.], and leave the West Coast.  So, I choose to go to Atlanta [Georgia] to study hotel restaurant management with a minor in business.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was there any particular inspiration that came along that really made this idea blossom in your mind?
Speaker 2: I think, you know, traveling a lot with my father and just, you know, being exposed on, you know, summer vacations going to these beautiful resorts and properties with my family.  I was like, I'd like to own one of these (laughter).  So, that's really where it came from.  I'm like, this is amazing.  I'd love to put my name, you know, on one of these properties.
Speaker 1: I'm trying to think if there was a black figure that owned a hotel in the '80s [1980s].  Like, I don't, I don't know--
Speaker 2: At one point, I know that when we went to visit my grandparents, we stopped through Atlanta.  And, of course, Atlanta had Paschal's which was very, you know, prominent during the Civil Rights Movement.  I think that's where [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] would stay and do meetings, have meetings at Paschal's.  And, they had a great restaurant too (laughter).  And, then there was a Ramada Inn that was black-owned for a short period of time in Atlanta.  So, those are the only two that immediately come to mind.
Speaker 1: Right.  That's right.
Story_ID: 139308
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So, now, did you have good counseling in high school in terms of?
Speaker 2: Not necessarily.  Not, not, not from school, you know.  I hate to say it.  I didn't have great counseling from the folks who worked in my high school at the time.  I got great counseling, again, from my parents [Larma Miller Whelchel and Love Henry Whelchel, Jr.].  So, when I moved from Dayton, Ohio to Los Angeles, California; in the Ohio systems you have to get 18 credits to graduate.  In the California system you have to get over 220 credit to graduate.  So, needless-to-say, I was a bit behind (laughter).  So, I went to Saturday school.  I went to night school.  And, I took a full load, you know, during the day so that I could graduate.
Speaker 1: These are equivalent credits, 18 to 200.  I mean?
Speaker 2: They're not equivalent.
Speaker 1: I mean.  Okay.
Speaker 2: They, what they, what the schools did at that time was, they looked at your code or your chart, and they matched everything over verbatim.  So, they don't say, okay, these four credits are now worth forty; four credits are four credits.  And, so, I remember the counselor saying to me and my parents, "He's never gonna graduate.  He's not gonna to be able to make up these credits."  Well, I graduated on time at the top ten percent of my class.  So, again, make a way out of no way.  I was told there was no way by my counselor.  My parents told me, "Absolutely you could, let's figure this out."  And, we mapped out the fact that if I take a full load during the day and in the evenings, and go to school on Saturday's, that could make up all these credits.  And, I did.
Speaker 1: That's seems unfair for some reason.  I mean, to be--
Speaker 2: It is.  It is an unfair system.  But, yeah, that's, those were to cards that were dealt to me (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, Westchester [High School, now Westchester Enriched Sciences Magnets, Los Angeles, California] now, was this an integrated school, or?
Speaker 2: Westchester was.  Westchester was, was phenomenal in the sense that, you got this young man moving from the west--from the Midwest coming to the West Coast, a school that's practically on the beach.  Kids coming to school with surf boards under their arms.  I mean, one reason why I thrived is because I was so stimulated by the new environment that I was in.  Leaving cold winters where we were dealing with blizzards and now it's seventy-two and sunny (laughter) in L.A. [Los Angeles, California'  So, that was, that was an amazing experience for me in that sense.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, were the, was the black population of the school by, what do you think?
Speaker 2: It was probably about, gosh, back then, I wanna say 50 percent black, and then there's a whole bunch of other mixes in that other 50 percent; white, Hispanic, and Asian.  I mean, it was a, it was--Westchester was a melting pot.  There was, there was, you know, there was some of every nationality represented at that school.  Which was amazing too.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Huge difference from just black folks and white folks (laughter) in Ohio.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Huge difference.
Story_ID: 139309
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, Morris Brown [College, Atlanta, Georgia].  What were you impressions of--did you visit Morris Brown first or did you just?
Speaker 2: I had, you know, visited my sisters [April Whelchel and Kenyatta Whelchel], both went to Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia]; both Spelman graduates.  Brother's [Noel Whelchel] a Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] graduates.  So, I was aware of all the, the Atlanta University Center.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, pretty much, you know, early on, you know, I was exposed to the Atlanta University Center.  But, I had not did a, you know, gone on a visit to just visit Morris Brown College in particular.  What I wanted was, I wanted a degree in hotel restaurant management.  I wanted to get away from my parents' house (laughter).  And, I wanted, you know, just a different experience.  So, you know, there were other schools that I was, you know, could've gone to.  Like I said on the West Coast, would have been relatively inexpensive to go to a state school.  But, I sought out Morris Brown, because I thought it would be a phenomenal experience and the experience was actually better than I'd even imagine.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, this is a--you graduated from high school in what year was it?
Speaker 2: Eighty-seven [1987].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, the summer of '87 [1987], I'm on a plane with my mom [Larma Miller Whelchel] and dad [Love Henry Whelchel, Jr.] heading to Atlanta [Georgia] to start my freshman year.
Speaker 1: Now, this is close up on, I'm--correct me if I'm wrong here, but I think it's--this time period is about the time that Spike Lee made the movie 'School Daze?'
Speaker 2: This was right after 'School Daze.'  So, 'School Daze' happened between '85 [1985], '86 [1986].  My siblings were all there for the taping of 'School Daze.'  Most of 'School Daze' was shot at Morris Brown because Spelman and Morehouse would not allow him to shoot on campus.  So, all the gym scenes, probably 70 percent of the scenes you see on campus are at either Morris Brown or maybe even Atlanta University [now Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia].  But, a lot of that was at Morris Brown.  We--and, plus we had the facilities.  You know, we had a large indoor gym.  None of the other schools had that.  We have the, we had the largest campus in the AU Center.  So, if you wanna shot that kind of movie, it was really the best place to shoot it anyway.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I thought that might factor in--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: As I remember it correctly, I think.  I think he got kicked off the campus of A--Atlanta U, I think, because of some conflict--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I did hear--
Speaker 1: Spike Lee had a conflict with administration.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.  He was, you know, Mr. Spike Lee is a controversial, you know, he can be a controversial figure.  But, you know, yeah, we--the doors were open for Morris Brown, and yeah.  I remember my brother and sisters coming back home with a Mission College T-shirt, which was the fictitional [sic] school.  So, I used to wear that T--I wore the T-shirt to high school.  So, I had all the college paraphernalia; Morehouse and, Spelman, you know, paraphernalia.  I had that when I was sixteen, seventeen years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  I thought I'd raise that 'cause that was a big deal in those days (simultaneously).
Speaker 2: It was a, it was a tre--it was a huge deal and a lot of it came from--and, I know we probably can't record now 'cause all the noise.  A lot of it came from the fact that they felt like 'She Gotta Have It,' ['She's Gotta Have It'] his first movie, was pornography.  So, they didn't want him on a Christian campus because of the subject matter (laughter) of his first film.  So, he didn't even get an opportunity to set up a camera at Morehouse.  They were like, we don't want anything to do with you.  In fact, don't even tell anybody you went to school here (laughter).  So, funny how things change over time, but that was the perception of Spike Lee early on.
Story_ID: 139310
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so what did you think of Morris Brown [College, Atlanta, Georgia] when you got there?  Did you like it?
Speaker 2: I loved it.  Morris Brown, when I was there I got involved in the debate team.  I was on mock trial and now I'm meeting kids from all over the world.  So, I'm befriending folks from, what is now Democratic Republic of Congo, you know, the Bahamas, and Bermuda, of course Jamaica, it's a lot of Caribbean kids attending Morris Brown at the time, at the AU [Atlanta University] Center, you know.  So, it was really a, it was a different type of experience.  It was just exactly, like I said, it was what I was looking for but ended being more so.  So, it was a totally different experience from anything that I experienced up to this point.
Speaker 1: Now, who were some of your fellow students that you remember?  Were there any remarkable stories about the students, or?
Speaker 2: Wow!  (Laughter) where do I begin.  Aaron Jackson [ph.] who was a roommate, he actually attended Morehouse.  He's a certificate public accountant, he's, I think he is now back in Atlanta [Georgia].  Another--my friend from Zaire, from Democratic Republic of Congo, Didier, D-I-D-I-E-R Bangoudie [ph.].  He and I met on the mock trial and debate teams.  Gosh, I mean it was--I'm trying to remember that I had a great professor, my literature professor.  Oh, gosh, I can't remember his name; Dr. Middleton [ph.].  He went to the debate team coach and said, "There's a guy in my class that you gotta put on your team."  And, that's how I ended up being on the mock trial debate.  Because, we would debate and go through literature and I would just dissect it and go back and forth with him and anyone else.  And, it was--he really made me dig deep and made me back up everything I was saying with documentation.  And, so, he really pulled, pulled it out of me; Dr. Middleton, an amazing professor.  Probably one of my best professors.
Story_ID: 139311
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, was Maynard Jackson still the mayor [of Atlanta, Georgia] when you were there?
Speaker 2: Maynard Jackson, you--when I came--when I--in '87 [1987] I think he, he was, was he--I think, someone else was in place when I got there in '87 [1987] but then he ran again and became the mayor around the time of the [1996 Summer] Olympics [Atlanta, Georgia].  So, that was around '90--, between '9--, the '92 [1992] and '96 [1996], I know that he was the mayor in place during the Atlanta Centennial Olympic Games.  I believe.
Speaker 1: [HM] Andrew Young I kinda think was mayor when you were--yeah, (simultaneously).
Speaker 2: It was between Andrew Young--
Speaker 1: I know he was mayor in '88 [1988], I know--
Speaker 2: Andrew Young--okay, so when I got there it was Andrew Young, and then I think, Maynard came in for another term.  And, then Bill Campbell--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Was the--by the time I graduated, [William] Bill Campbell was the mayor of Atlanta.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Yeah, Atlanta [Georgia] was sort of a boom town--
Speaker 2: It was.  I mean, I was fortunate enough to be living, going to school, working in Atlanta during an amazing time for that city.  A lot of growth, you know, the whole college experience and then to see this being one of the absolute meccas for African Americans.  I actually enjoyed and experienced all of that.  So, it was an amazing time.
Story_ID: 139312
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, on the hotel management end, how did that, you know, how was being taught [at Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia]?  And, was that satisfied?
Speaker 2: That was very satisfying.  You got a full immersion.  So, not only did we get these great professors who had real experience in the industry but, we also interned and had our own on premise restaurant.  We had relationships with Marriott, The Ritz Carlton.  So, we would go get, you know, the instruction during the day and on, you know, and in the evenings we would spend time actually in these great properties, learning hands on, you know, how to manage a restaurant.  So, it was amazing experience.  Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Any other professors at Morris Brown [College, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: I had a great speech professor; Miss Casterlow, C-A-S-T-E-R-L-O-W.  She was my speech teacher.  So, she kind of helped me with my oratory skills.  And, she was just always opened to help and not only with my verbal communications, but with my written communications, you know.  She would stay on top on me about, about, you know, this is how you would write a letter, you know, to complain about a service that you had.  Or, this is what, this is how you would, you know, this is how you would put together a letter or correspondence to spend praise to a property who had really done some things that were outstanding in your, you know, to you.  So, she was, she was a great professor as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, were there any people coming to campus that was inspirational?  I know they usually bring, they have convocation, they'd bring--
Speaker 2: You know, most of the people that we were exposure to were, you know, business leaders.  So, we would have senior executives from General Motors.  We'd have senior executives come in from the corporate offices of Marriott and Disney.  But, we didn't have a lot of political folks come in.  I mean, I know some of the other AU [Atlanta University] Center schools had that, and I certainly was exposure to that 'cause I could go to--when you go to the AU Center, you can go to, you know, activities on all the campuses.  But, at Morris Brown it was really a focus on business leadership.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, when it was, when it's time to graduate-
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now did you have any special honors or anything when you graduated from Morris Brown?
Speaker 2: I mean, I, you know, I graduated cum laude.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, I was probably nominated the most, you know, likely to succeed in my, in my class.  Those are the only two things that I can remember.
Speaker 1: So, this is 1991?
Speaker 2: It's about '91 [1991] yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 139313
Speaker 1: Now, this is the year, as we were mentioning before of the, I think the riots in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] took place in '91 [1991]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: The Rodney King?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: This is national news.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: And, then on the youth scene, you had like the big gang confrontations in L.A. too?
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.
Speaker 1: And, I don't know were you parents [Larma Miller Whelchel and Love Henry Whelchel, Jr.] still living in L.A. then?
Speaker 2: They had actually moved to Atlanta [Georgia] (laughter) by '90 [1990], '91 [1991].  But, it was always, I mean, you'd hear probably every week about gang violence in L.A., you know.  It had reached what, you know, epidemic proportions because it had left south L.A., and was flowing into west L.A.  And, so, now it was becoming, you know, now it's a real problem.  And, you know, unfortunately a lot of that is still the case in Los Angeles.  I man, the gang--
Speaker 1: Bloods and the Crips (simultaneously).
Speaker 2: Bloods, Crips, and you know, some, you know, several, you know, other gangs and break offs of those gangs exist and it's, you know, that is unfortunately a big part of Southern California culture; is the gangs.  And, I know, you coming from Chicago [Illinois], you, you may be familiar with some of that with El Rukns and the Vice Lords [The Almighty Vice Lord Nation], so, it's very similar.
Speaker 1: The Disciples [Black Gangster Disciple Nation] and all that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Disciples.  Well, you know, it's a, it's a way of life unfortunately for some people.  And, it's really put a stranglehold on the City of Los Angeles.
Story_ID: 139314
Speaker 1: Okay.  But, everybody--your whole family then is now in Atlanta [Georgia] for (simultaneously)?
Speaker 2: For the most part.  Let's see, so at this time, my sisters [April Whelchel and Kenyatta Whelchel], now, they're going to law school so they're, they're not in Atlanta anymore.  My brother [Noel Whelchel] is in Atlanta, between Atlanta and, you know, working for different companies as an electrical engineer.  So, he moving around.  So, they're in and out.  But, they're going on to school at this point.  So, their all getting their master's degrees or J.D.s.  So, they're in and out.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what was your plan after, after graduating from Morris Brown [College, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Plan after graduation really was, the plan was to get a management position in a hotel.  Unfortunately, during the early '90s [1990s], we were going through a pretty serious recession.  So, there weren't a whole lot of jobs.  So, I ended up working for a small distribution company, publishing, you know, books, and distributing books and items like that.  And, I learned how to use some technology, AS/400 [Application System/400] machines.  So, I kind of became a, somewhat of a techie with some shipping and distribution skills.
Speaker 1: Now, what company was this?
Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness.  I didn't write in down 'cause I probably can't remember it.  Gosh, New Leaf, New Leaf Distribution [sic, New Leaf Distributing Company].
Speaker 1: New Leaf, okay.
Speaker 2: I forgot about New Leaf.  That was my first real job outside of school.  And, so, I'm at New Leaf Distribution and that carries me for a couple years and then I ended up working with the Atlanta Centennial Olympic Games [1996 Summer Olympics, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--
Speaker 2: Yep, here we go again (laughter).
Story_ID: 139315
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you were saying that you got involved with the [1996 Summer] Olympic Organizing Committee, I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: In '90 [1990]--
Speaker 2: The Atlanta Centennial--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Organizing Committee for the '96 [1996] [Summer] Olympics [Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, this was the, was this the centennial of the City of Atlanta [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: This is the centennial.  This was the one hundredth year.  So, this was huge.  So, I actually ended up, you know, because I had the distribution and some of the tech skills from New Leaf [Distributing Company], I was able to work with the technology for distributions at the Olympics.  There were very few of these shipping systems that were built.  So, since I had that skill, they tapped me to, to help out in that regard.  That eventually became a management position for me.  And, that was really my entry into human resources because I was charged with hiring a lot of folks to work in the mail and distribution centers.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, this is, this is a time, we were saying off camera, was a time of tremendous amount of event organizing in Atlanta (simultaneously).
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  A lot of opportunity in Atlanta during this period of time, from the, you know, the early '90s [1990s] through the late '90s [1990s].  I mean, you know, conventions, you know, the games, real estate boom, just anything that you could imagine; businesses growing, the dot com boom touched Atlanta.  You know, so a lot was happening at that time which was the perfect storm for me to get into human resources because there was a lot of hiring.  So, I left the Olympics and started working with recruiters, a company called Recruiters International [Inc.].  And, I was recruiting folks who would be upgrading systems for Y2K [Year 2000 Problem].  So, I certainly enjoyed that period of time.  It kept me busy.
Speaker 1: Now, is there a story about the Olympics?  Do you have a story about--that was such a big event.
Speaker 2: It's a big event.  I mean--
Speaker 1: Were you there through the Olympics?
Speaker 2: I was there through the Olympics.  So, I got a chance to attend the ceremonies, the events.  I got a chance to meet a lot of the athletes.  I remember Shaq [Shaquille O'Neal] had to hide in the, the shipping center (laughter).  Because they would bring him through, by the freight elevators.  And, unfortunately, I remember some not so great memories of the bombing.  That was in Centennial Olympic Park which was directly across from where I worked.  And, arriving in my office the following working with GBI [Georgia Bureau of Investigation] agents, you know, everywhere.  And, it was a pretty sad time.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  'Cause they accused a security employee--
Speaker 2: It was a security employee.
Speaker 1: Of the games, right?  (Simultaneously).
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was--yeah, he--yeah, he was initially accused--
Speaker 1: Richard, somebody, I can't think of his last name.  Richard [Jewell], somebody, I can't--
Speaker 2: I don't recall.  I picture his face vividly.  But, yeah, he was wrongfully accused.  So, yeah, it was a, it was a--so, we went from a really festive, you know, an amazing time and that was a, you know, that was a, a pretty rough patch.  So, yeah, I remember that very vividly, and the divide in the city and, you know, it really, it really kind of, you know, took that innocence away from Atlanta, you know, being hit like that.
Story_ID: 139316
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, all right, so, you were there throughout the games [1996 Summer Olympics, Atlanta, Georgia] and then, and so, you went to Recruiters International [Inc.] and what year was that?
Speaker 2: That was probably around '90--, I guess '96 [1996] right after, right after I left the games.
Speaker 1: Right after the games, okay.
Speaker 2: And, that's where I kind of honed my human resource skills, my talent management skills, my talent acquisition skills on hiring computer technology professionals.  A lot of AS/400 [Application System/400] programmers (laughter).
Speaker 1: Is there, is there a--do you have a philosophy in terms of recruiting people for jobs?  I mean, how do you, in terms of interviewing people and bring them in, what--how do you--what do you think are the key--?
Speaker 2: Well, it really depends on, you know, by the time I'm talking to a prospective candidate or a candidate, they've been vetted.  So, I've already seen their resume, their CV [curriculum vitae].  I already know that they have the skills.  I already know what their education is.  By the time I'm sitting across from a prospective hire, I really honing in on some of the soft skills.  Because, you can have all the technical skills you want.  If you don't, if you're not a culture fit for an organization, then you know, it's not gonna work.  It's not going to be a successful hire.  So, by the time I'm sitting in front of them, I'm asking things about their management style, you know.  I'm asking them questions about, you know, why they wanna leave their current job.  So, I'm, I'm drilling down in a lot of other ways to see if they're going to be a fit for the organization.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So, what would be a reason for not hiring someone, in terms of (unclear)?
Speaker 2: If they're not, you know, you know, people, you know, if you're asking what I call behavioral, which is known as behavioral type of questions, people will tell you not to hire me (laughter), you know, if you ask the right questions.  They'll say, "Listen," basically, "this is not the job for me."  They'll tell you that in so many words.  Sometimes, very directly.  And, most of the folks that I've been involved with hiring are at the senior levels.  So, you know, we kind of, everybody knows what they're dealing with.  So, it's no reason to kind of to play any games.  But, people will tell you, they're like, "You know what, this is not going to be the environment for me."  And, I'll--or I'll say, you know, maybe this is not gonna be a fit for these reasons.  But, you know, you generally will know in that first round of meetings, if this is gonna be a fit or not if you're drilling down properly on some of those soft skills.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, in terms of personnel that you have, what assessment tools do you use to determine what their--
Speaker 2: I didn't hear you, I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: What assessment tools to you use for those you already have on board, you know?
Speaker 2: The assessment tools is well, you know, organizations that I've work with, that I currently work with, we want to make sure that we're retaining the best and the brightest.  You know, we want to retain the best talent.  So, we're always looking for opportunities for development, and education.  So, there's a learning component.  So, I'm constantly working with the management on identifying opportunities to grow these executive.  You know, I'm talking to our chairman and CEO about opportunities to grow his direct reports.  Because, in order for us to grow and be better, there has to be a plan in place not only to retain but to make us better because the marketplace is constantly changing.  And, so, you have to constantly update your skills, and update your level of exposure to new ideas.  Most of the companies I've worked for over the last, you know, decade, are creative companies.  And, so, when you talk about creative companies, it's all about having great ideas.  So, we're looking for, not only to bring on people with great ideas but to foster, you know, you know, that thought process with our executives.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  All right.  So, well, and at Recruiters International, you recruited specific people for executive positions and?
Speaker 2: Largely, I recruited programmers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, we would bring in programmers to, you know, reprogram computers so that they can put the year 2000 in systems, because they stopped in 1999.  So, these were programmers.  Largely AS/400 programmers.  And, they were paying them, you know, a large amount of money to go into banks and, you know, different companies to upgrade these systems.  So, it was very lucrative time, I might add, for myself because I got a commission plus a salary on placing these executives.  And, I had no shortage of work.  I was placing them from the UK [United Kingdom] throughout the United States.  So, we were busy.
Story_ID: 139317
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so you were with--we had you--we were talking about Recruiters International [Inc.]--we have a note here, just tell me if I'm too soon on this.  But, when did you start working with TWA--
Speaker 2: Chiat\Day.
Speaker 1: Chiat\Day, yeah.
Speaker 2: TBWA\Chiat\Day was around 2004, 2005.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, we're going a little bit too fast if we get on them yet.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, why--
Speaker 2: I didn't put everything there because if I put (laughter), I just put the last three or four.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So.  So, how long were you, were you with Recruiter International?
Speaker 2: Recruiters International, I was probably there for a little over two years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That company, I believe, got bought out and when they were purchased, I moved on.
Speaker 1: So, where did you go next?
Speaker 2: From them I went to consultancy, another agency called Top of the World.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Which took me to Los Angeles, California.  So, it was boutique firm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what were you recruiting for?  I mean--
Speaker 2: Information technology professionals and some, you know, executive search mixed in there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, were you glad to get back out to Los Angeles?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Actually, I was.  It was nice to kind of be back on the West Coast.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, how long were there?
Speaker 2: So, I was at Top of the World, I probably was there for another couple of years.  And, then that firm opened up, moved its offices to Research Triangle Park, [Durham] North Carolina.  I didn't wanna go back to North Carolina.  So, I went to a company called Global Conductor [Inc., California], which I was doing the same thing.  The only difference is our focus was on a program called PeopleSoft.  Which again, brings you back into HR.  The PeopleSoft Software is used for human resource information systems and finance functions.
Story_ID: 139318
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, things are starting to, I guess, change a little bit--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: In 2000 in terms of the--
Speaker 2: Absolutely, things are beginning to change.  Again, we, you know, we're going through the dot com boom in the late, in the late '90s [1990s].  So, as I'm doing this consulting, I'm picking up, you know, position and, you know, moving around quite a bit around Southern California.  And, I get a call from a colleague who tells me that there's something closer to home.  Because I'm driving about one hundred miles round trip to go to, to do these consulting jobs, which isn't bad.  I mean, I know some people who do much worse.  But, I wanted something closer to home.  So, there when the opportunity popped up with TBWA\Chiat\Day, which is a global advertising agency.
Speaker 1: Now, that's the--this is the ad agency that did the famous 1984 ad for?
Speaker 2: For Apple.
Speaker 1: For Apple.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  So, Lee Clow was the head creative on the project.  A lot of the work early on that I did was for the Apple account.  This is right around the time, I guess, when you're getting ready to see these iPods.  So, the really well-known silhouette ads with people wearing the iPods and the billboards, that work was also created by Chiat\Day when I was there, which laid the groundwork for what you guys now know as the iPhone; did all of that advertising as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, all right, so, you were there--okay, 2004, 2005, right?
Speaker 2: Right.  I was there 'til--so, about 2006.
Story_ID: 139319
Speaker 1: So, I left there I believe in 2006 and was tapped by Young & Rubicam to head up global HR in New York [City].
Speaker 2: Okay.  Young & Rubicam is a pretty--
Speaker 1: So, Young & Rubicam, you mentioned Apple with TBWA\Chiat\Day.  One of the interesting facts about Y&R [Young & Rubicam] is, Y&R created the tag line "A Mind is a Terrible Things to Waste" for the United Negro College Fund [UNCF].
Speaker 2: Now, I didn't know that.  I did not know that.
Speaker 1: Yep.  A lot of history there.
Speaker 2: And, George Bush [sic, Dan Quayle] got it wrong.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: So, I don't know what he was sa--I can't remember what he said now, it was so long (simultaneously).
Speaker 1: Yeah.  He, yeah, I remember he bungled the (laughter) the tag line.
Speaker 2: So, they, did they do--was this a pro bono thing?
Speaker 1: It was a pro bono account.
Speaker 2: And, way back in the '60s [1960s], I guess.
Speaker 1: Way back in the '60s [1960s] exactly.  I believe an executive by the name of Ed Ney from Young & Rubicam was--had a close association with UNCF [United Negro College Fund].
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right, so, you did the, you did recruiting at Young & Rubicam and you were?
Speaker 1: So, yeah, I was in recruiting and then, you know, I was pretty much an HR generalist.  So, a lot of my job focused on talent but it also focused on, you know, benefits; focused on, you know, your compensation; focused on employment agreements and contracts.  So, I dealt with a lot of legal compliance issues.  Really dealing with all the functions of a Human Resource Department on a global scale.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now they--so, they are glo--they were global, right?
Speaker 1: They are.
Speaker 2: In terms of the other (simultaneously)?
Speaker 1: Yes, both, both Chiat\Day was global and so was Y&R.  Y&R was probably about 189 countries around the world.
Speaker 2: So, did that necessitate you traveling to some of these places?
Speaker 1: Yes.  Absolutely, gave me a chance to travel around a little bit.  So, yeah, it was a, it was a very, very intense (laughter) position.
Speaker 2: What size staff did you have?
Speaker 1: Gosh, when I came in it probably had a staff of around forty.  That size with the, again, another recession to shrink of the mid-late 2000, around 2007, that staff had shrunk considerably.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, did you have a--was there--in this experience, did you have any particular challenge or crisis that you can tell us about?
Speaker 1: Yes.  One of my--
Story_ID: 139320
Speaker 1: We were talking about a crisis at--
Speaker 2: Young & Rubicam.
Speaker 1: Yeah. Young & Rubicam or Y&R.
Speaker 2: So, the advertising industry was hit in, you know, maybe around 2004, 2005 with lawsuits around diversity and inclusion.  But, the bottom line was studies had shown that the advertising industry was pretty much in the same place in the area of diversity as it was forty years ago.  So, with that said, probably about 20 percent of my job, at the time, was dealing with the matters around diversity and inclusion.  That actually started at [TBWA\] Chiat\Day and I took that role on in a pretty large capacity at Young & Rubicam to hire and retain executives of color, with a specific focus on African Americans.  'Cause those were--that's where the numbers were the lowest.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what did you, I mean, this may seem like a simple question, but like, what were they missing?  Why didn't they have more African Americans?  Was it--
Speaker 2: Well, it's really, it, you know, it's an interesting questions, a very good question because if you thinking about, I know when I think about my own experience when I was in school, I had no exposure to these large general market advertising agencies, you know.  The, you know, I didn't know anyone who was going to work for a Y&R, a TBWA, a DDB [Doyle Dane Bernbach], a JWT [J. Walter Thompson], that didn't even cross your mind.  We didn't even know these companies.  So, a part of it is a lack of exposure.  So, there, so African Americans are not in that industry for one reason because they haven't been exposure to it.  So, that was one of the problems that we had to combat.  The other issue was, when African Americans did get an opportunity to work at some of these agencies, be it on the creative side, creating the ads or the print, the television, the radio, or working on the account side, working directly with the client, they hit a glass ceiling pretty quickly.  So, we had to figure out a way to attract diverse talent, and retain diverse talent.  So, that was the challenge I had at Young & Rubicam.  And, I'm happy to say that the numbers that we turned in for three years concurrently with the New York Human Rights Commission [sic, Commission on Human Rights] were among the best, if not the very best in the industry.  Out of all the agencies that were monitored during that time period, Young & Rubicam had the best numbers for diverse employees.  And, a lot of that was due largely to us working with HBCUs [Historically Black Colleges and Universities], like Hampton University [Hampton, Virginia] to create theatre programs.  Thereby, exposing African American students to general market advertising.  And, a lot of it had to do with us, you know, working with a great CEO in Hamish McLennan who--and, working with [HM] Dr. Price Cobbs who helped us put a plan in place to basically do a Rooney Rule.  If we're gonna see five executives, we wanted a diverse slate of candidates.  And, so, we would have at least one African American candidate, you know, interviewed for those senior level positions.  And it proved to be, it proved to do very well for us and that's why we probably had the best numbers in the industry for those three years.
Story_ID: 139321
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, tell us about your relationship with [HM] Price Cobbs.  Who is he and how did help you?
Speaker 2: Dr. Price Cobbs, I knew him as an author of 'Black Rage,' ['Black Rage: Two Black Psychiatrists Reveal the Full Dimensions of the Inner Conflicts and the Desperation of Black Life in the United States' by Price Cobbs and William Grier] which was required reading when I was freshman in college [at Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia].  So, I, you know, and the book was around the house even before then.  My father [Love Henry Whelchel, Jr.] had a copy of it.  So, I knew who Dr. Cobbs was early in, you know, in my life.  I came to meet Dr. Cobbs as I was going through the interviewing process at Young & Rubicam.  Dr. Cobbs was a consultant for Y&R brought in by Ann Fudge who was at that time was the CEO.  And, so, Dr. Cobbs helped in the vetting processing and the interview process of candidate for the chief town officer/chief diversity officer role.  So, I flew to San Francisco [California] to meet with Dr. Cobbs for the first time.  And, we had a very enlightening conversation and, you know, I was, you know, in awe of this great author and this, this, you know, historical figure who basically created corporate diversity and inclusion as we know it today.  So, it was an amazing meeting for me to meet someone who I considered a hero.  And, he really, as a psychologist, as a, you know, he knew how to pull the right information out of me.  He knew what questions to ask and, you know, it's just, he's just a brilliant man.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  I just wanted to establish that.  So, Price Cobbs is, you know--okay.  Yeah, Price Cobbs has certainly made a mark.  So, now, at some--now, now this is 2006 you're with the Young & Rubicam, and how long did you stay there?
Speaker 2: I was there for about four years.
Speaker 1: 'Til about 2010.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: I think that--which takes us to your present position, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And--
Story_ID: 139322
Speaker 1: Now, how did you, when did you meet Sean ["Diddy"] Combs?  When did you meet him before you got this position?
Speaker 2: I did not.  I--the first time I meet Mr. Combs was when I interviewed with him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In Los Angeles [California].
Speaker 1: Well, tell--just walk us through, how did you, you knew about Bad Boys--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --[Bad Boys] Worldwide Entertainment [Group], right?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: And, did you--when did you think about like working for them or were you recruited or what happened?
Speaker 2: I was recruited.  So, I was approached by a head hunter, who told me about the opportunity.  And, I, like a, you know, a good husband (laughter), I talked to my wife about it.  And, next thing I know I met with some of the executives, some of his core team here.  And, shortly after that, I flew to Los Angeles to meet with Mr. Combs directly.  And, it was a fascinating meeting.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, we were talking about the beginnings with Bad Boy Entertainment.  And, so, you were recruited and--
Speaker 2: Yes.  I was recruited by a head hunter.  The head hunter arranged for me to meet with some of the senior executive here.  My final meeting was with Mr. Combs, and it was a, it was a fascinating meeting.  I mean, the interview, you know, he asked some of the best questions that I've ever been asked in an interview.  And, he knew exactly what he was looking for and that kind of just struck me as, you know, you know, odd.  Because a lot of the CEOs that I've worked with in the past, you know, they use the HR function one way or the other.  But, you know, a lot of 'em don't really have an opinion, you know, here or there about, you know, it's an HR function as a necessary evil, whatever.  But, he knew exactly what he wanted and knew exactly what kind of questions to ask, you know, to get the proper executive for his organization.  So, that really, that was really, that was really interesting.
Speaker 1: What kind of questions did Diddy ask you that--?
Speaker 2: He asked me, he basically did, you the behavior format and asked me, okay, he would give me a situation and how would you respond to this situation.  So, then he drilled down, and this way he found out about how I would deal with employee relations.  He asked me questions that would, that were associated with how I vetted talent.  He ask me questions on how I would work with other senior leaders on his team.  And, he asked me about what type of technology one would need in order to centralize his HR function.  So, the questions, were very good and, you know, a meeting that could've lasted a few minutes, probably lasted, you know, about forty-five minutes or more.  Because, you know, the questions, you know, he really drilled down.
Story_ID: 139323
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, some people who are watching this might be surprised because there's a popular culture image of Sean ["Diddy"] Combs as Puff Daddy, P. Diddy--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --Diddy, or, and you know, a guy with lots of jewelry, fancy clothes, lots of women and, you know, the music blaring all the time, you know what I mean.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: They don't see a person that who know anything about--
Speaker 2: I know the CEO.  I know the chairman and CEO, Mr. Combs.  I address him as Mr. Combs.  That's who I know.  The entertainment image, you know, you know, when we're, when we're talking about matters around his business, it's strictly that.  It's strictly business.
Speaker 1: And, he does have a business background.  Does he not, I mean, this--?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I mean, he has the uncanny ability to look at a brand or look at, you know, this beautiful mind, where he can look at something and basically create something grassroots and it would just, you know, take flight.  You know, that's just, you know, that's just the, you know, an amazing talent.  He did it with the Ciroc Spirits.  He's done it with the clothing line.  I mean, he just has that je ne sais quoi.
Speaker 1: Okay.  In that regard, I mean, there's a, there's Ciroc, there a clothing line [Sean John], there's a--how many other--
Speaker 2: Television network [Revolt TV].
Speaker 1: Businesses?  Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Record label.  An in-house advertising agency.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Revolt, I think is the--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Television network.  In-house agency's is Blue--
Speaker 2: Blue Flames.
Speaker 1: Blue Flame.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: The advertising agency.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So, there's a lot here.  And, more to come (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 139324
Speaker 1: All right.  So, now did your--now, all--once again, bouncing off the popular culture image of Bad Boy [Worldwide] Entertainment [Group], you know, I mean, the sense, you know, Bad Boy Entertainment (laughter).
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: So, you know, people envision like a place where you might get hurt.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Or something, you know.  Did you parents [Larma Miller Whelchel and Love Henry Whelchel, Jr.] have any trepidation about--?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I mean, my parents come from a generation where, you know, hip hop was the big bad wolf, you know.  So, but, they also are sophisticated enough to know that, you know, this is a business and that Mr. [Sean] Combs [Puff Daddy, P. Diddy] is a  businessman, and this is a serious business organization.  But, yes, the visual that some folks might get, the perception that is just, you know, a whole bunch of blaring music and rappers.  They would be really surprised, pleasantly surprised I'm sure, if they came to our World Wide Headquarters here in New York [City].
Speaker 1: Right.  'Cause what we've heard so far is construction from across the street--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: I haven't, I haven't heard any blaring speakers.
Speaker 2: Right.  Right, there not a whole bunch of, you know, people are just here getting it done.  People are here working.  Just like those gentlemen are, and ladies are across the street.  People are just here getting it done.  And, that's really what Bad Boy is all about, is we're gonna get it done.  And, we're gonna do it in a, in a--in an amazing way.
Story_ID: 139325
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So, what, what size staff do you have here at [Bad Boy Worldwide Entertainment Group]--?
Speaker 2: Come again?
Speaker 1: What size staff do you have here?
Speaker 2: The HR staff here consists of six.  So, it's six of us here.  We have an HR manager, HR coordinator, HR assistant, and a recruiter in place, and of course, myself.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, what functions are you hiring, I mean, do you manage in terms of--?
Speaker 2: Right now, we're doing, we're hiring for our Blue Flame Advertising Agency.  We're hiring for the Revolt Television Network, feverishly (laughter) right now.  And, we--there's always some incremental hires with some of the other projects that we're working on.  So, there's no shortage of work in HR.  While I was charged with centralizing the HR function, it was siloed where we had different HR functions for each of the different entities.  So, we've added a new HRS system that goes online this week.  We've kind of audited and assessed our benefits so we're making improvements to our benefits function.  We are on a centralized payroll system, which is for the first time since all these entities kind of grew out of Bad Boy, the record label.  So, a lot of changes.  We have a learning and education development initiative that we're working on.  We started a Lunch and Learn series where we bring executive in and managers in to talk about what they do in their perspective line of business so that other companies can get knowledge and immersed in what's going on at other companies under the umbrella.  So, HR is a, it's a, it's a, it's a busy, it's a busy, busy role for me here.  And, I'm fortunate to have good leadership that's been very supportive of these initiatives and very helpful with us making the transition.
Story_ID: 139326
Speaker 1: Okay.  Wha-- what's been the biggest challenge here [Bad Boy Worldwide Entertainment Group]?
Speaker 2: I think the biggest challenge was, or you know, that I'm-- is, is, is dealing with each of those different org--companies under Bad Boy, under the Bad Boy Worldwide [Entertainment Group] umbrella.  Have different personalities; the record label [Bad Boy], you know, they, you know, they're the first.  And, they're a little bit different from the folks who work in the advertising agency, Blue Flame.  And, now we have a whole new entity in the television network, Revolt [TV].  So, you know, trying to centralize and get everybody on board and understanding that, you know, we're really one team, one family, with one goal is something that you have to constantly kind of address.  Because, people will get caught up, just like in any department, and this is my job and I'm just concentrating on my job.  But, you have to look at the big picture, and we all have to work together.  And, that, that can be challenging (laughter).
Story_ID: 139327
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have relationships with--intern relationships with any of the black colleges [HBCU], or--?
Speaker 2: Yes.  We work with an inner city program called Ladders for Leaders, which is a [Mayor Michael R.] Bloomberg initiative.  And, Ladders for Leaders allows us to tap into local high school and college students.  So, we currently have some of those students in the building.  And, we have relationships with Syracuse [University, Syracuse, New York], the City University of New York schools.  A host of programs and a host of different colleges around the country send interns to Bad Boy Worldwide [Entertainment Group].  We currently have about fifty interns in the building to date.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  And, I guess what--now, does Bad Boy International in terms of its scope, are there personnel, any stationed in other places outside the U.S.?
Speaker 2: We are growing internationally.  There are some fo--we do have an international presence with the clothing line [Sean John].  We will be expanding with the spirits with Ciroc [Vodka] over the next year or so.  So, we are growing.  We, you know, I wouldn't say that we're a huge global company now, but we're definitely growing our brands internationally.  And, the clothing line has already started their penetration into, into Asia--India, and China.
Story_ID: 139328
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  I have here that you said that one of the first things that you would tell somebody inspiring to do what you're doing is that the first thing is that you're a coach.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And, you, you've gotta make an assessment of you have.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: On your team first.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  I mean, you really have to know what you're working with, so to speak.  You can't come in and make any changes or move some things forward until you know what you are, you're working with.  So, it's paramount that you assess, you know, the folks that you're gonna be working with.  And, you kind of build from that.  So once you know, you know, what you have on the team, then you can kind of figure out the game plan from there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  And, you said, "It's important, it's important also for--to understand to meet with the, meet with the CEO (simultaneously)."
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  If you're not vision aligned with the CEO, in our case, the chairman, CEO and by the way the founder, then you're not gonna be very successful.  You've gotta understand what your leadership wants.  And, you know, and once you are vision-aligned, then you, you know, you got your marching orders and you can go out and start making some impacts and start making the changes that your CEO, that your leadership wants.  You can't go in with your own game plan.  That's a good way (laughter) to end up in trouble or that's a good way the end up failing.  Because, our role is to push our founder's vision through.  And, a large part of that that was attractive to me about this [Bad Boy Worldwide Entertainment Group] is, I not only understood my chairman and CEO's vision, I genuinely believe in his vision.  So, it's not a chore, it's not difficult for me at all to push that vision through because I genuinely believe in his vision.
Story_ID: 136262
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what is the vision of Bad Boy [Worldwide] Entertainment [Group], in terms of?
Speaker 2: The vision of, of Bad Boy is to be first in class in the areas of media, entertainment, spirits, fashion, whatever we get involved in, we aspire to be number one.  So, it starts with that.  It starts with the vision of excellence.  Our chairman and CEO [Sean "Diddy" Combs] believes in leaving a legacy.  And, you know, we're on board with him in building that legacy of excellence and tapping into the brightest minds, the greatest thought leadership to carry us to higher heights.  So, if we're going to expand and become, you know, the next Google, you know, we're aligned.  And, my job is to make sure he has the team in place to get him there.  To get us there.  And, I think, everyone on the senior leadership team is in lockstep with that vision.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I think I, I saw an article, you know, in our packet called The Forbes Five, I guess, hip hop--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yep.  And we were number one (laughter).
Speaker 1: Moguls (simultaneously), yeah.  And, yeah, you all are, Bad Boy is number one.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Right now.  And, had been for quite a while, I guess.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 136263
Speaker 1: So, now, have you ever been in a situation where you're the the, your vision didn't match up with the CEO, or that the CEO's vision, like, shifted as you were involved in it?
Speaker 2: I've been here about a year.  I haven't had that happen yet.
Speaker 1: Well, not here.  But, I'm just saying--
Speaker 2: But, in the past?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.  And, it's, you know, I tell, I tell folks who are building their careers that when you get to a place where your visions aren't aligned, I mean, and you feel strongly about what you wanna do than it's probably for you to, time for you to take your leave.  Because if this is vision of the company and you don't believe in it, you're not gonna be very successful.  Because, you have to have, I think you have to be in lockstep with the vision and the direction of the company.  And, if you're not aligned then you have to have a serious conversation with yourself about, you know, is this the place for me.  Because you're going to ultimately clash with your leadership.  If you're going left and the company's going right, it's simply not gonna work.  And, I've had those situations happened and I've chosen to leave.  Because that is not the direction that I wanted to go in and as a person who is, you know, the curator of the culture of companies working in HR, if I'm not in lockstep agreement with the direction of the company then I can't, you know, honestly sell that opportunity to talent that I might recruit.
Story_ID: 136264
Speaker 1: Okay.  What, what's the, as a human resources officer, what is your vision, I guess, or what do you think is a good environment for employees?
Speaker 2: You know, I think all environments should be inclusive.  I don't believe in the, you know, big I's and little you's.  I mean, from the time you walk into a building, a guest reception to all the way up to the C Suite, everyone should have a voice and we should show from the top down and the bottom up, that we care.  So, that if I'm the CEO and I see something that's not right, of course, I'm empowered to fix it.  But, that receptionist that greets you when you come into the building, he or she should also feel empowered to fix something that isn't right.  So, an environment of inclusiveness is key to going to a place where you're happy to get up in the morning to go to work.  Or, Sunday nights you're excited about Monday.  Inclusive environments have such people in the building.  And, you know, that's what I look for in an environment and I wanna work in an inclusive workplace where everyone has a seat at the table.
Speaker 1: The people here have regular hours?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, (laughter) define regular hours.  What is, what is regular hours?
Speaker 1: I mean, is the expectation that they're work like--
Speaker 2: We put in a lot of hours, you know, undoubtedly.  You know, we are in the process of building, you know, new networks and taking some of the existing brands to higher heights.  So, we, we're putting in overtime because--but, it's not an overtime that is hard and grueling.  We're enjoying it 'cause we enjoy what we're doing.  But, we're not looking at the clock.
Story_ID: 136265
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now, in terms of recruitment, are--do you have a hard time trying to find the people you want?  Is it difficult or are pe-- people flocking to be a part of this [Bad Boy Worldwide Entertainment Group]?  Are they, are they--or, are they intimidated by, you know, the idea of--?
Speaker 2: Well, people are definitely flocking, I mean, we don't have any shortage of applicants.  So, there's a lot of talent in the marketplace.  Is it the right talent for us?  You know, a lot of times it's not.  I mean, there are very few people who will do well in these type of environments.  We are high energy, high impacted, you know, like I said, we don't look at the clock.  We're every entrepreneurial and if you don't have those attributes, this probably is not going to be a place where you're gonna be successful.  So, even though we have a lot of applicants, you know, many are called, few are chosen.
Story_ID: 136266
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Let's see, let's see, well, I'm, I don't wanna leave this without, you know, asking a good question, so is there anything that you think I should--should've asked you that I have not?
Speaker 2: You already asked me about what motivates me, right?  Did you ask me that?
Speaker 1: Well, well, yeah, I, yeah, well, that's a good question (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.  Yeah, all right.
Speaker 1: It is 'cause we usually ask something like that as we tail out.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But, wha-- what does motivate you?
Speaker 2: My family is my motivation.  The legacy that I'll leave is my son.  Love Henry Whelchel, IV.  So, my primary motivation for what I do in my personal and professional life is my son.  My only child.  When you talk about history, the reason it's important is because, history is a long story that continues and grows and move--goes on over time.  And, a lot of times we get caught up in the presence which is the short part of the story.  I'm interested in the long story.  I'm interested in my legacy picking up where I'm leaving off and taking it to higher heights to the next level.  So, all those things motivate me.  Thinking back on my great-great-grandfather, who was a slave, and looking at where I'm sitting now, that's because of history.  Times have changed, you know, from slavery, you know, to Bad Boy Worldwide [Entertainment Group] and the story's not over yet.  So, now, I've gotta pass the torch to my son and let him take it even further.  So, what I'm doing, you know, when I'm, when I'm sitting dealing with, you know, the challenges that I'm faced with on my job, I'm thinking about that legacy.  I'm thinking about that history.  I'm thinking about what motivates me.  And, that's what keeps me going even when we get a little discouraged.
Story_ID: 136267
Speaker 1: What are some of your, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: My hopes are that we will continue to be resilient.  My concern is, you know, going back to that, you know, history of slavery.  Nobody was jumping from the basement, as my father [Love Henry Whelchel, Jr.] says.  You know, we were, you didn't get any lower than that, you know, as far as your standing in life.  You know, you're a slave so, you know, there was nothing but an up (laughter) side to begin a slave.  But, now that we've enjoyed some level of success, you know, lest we forget where we came from.  Because if think if you forget where you came from, you impede your path on where you're going.  So, I guess, my concern for the African American community is that, you know, lest we forget.  Don't forget where you came from.  Because, when you get caught up into the trappings of the presence, or your present state of being and forget about your history, that's when you run into problems.  So, lest we forget.
Story_ID: 136268
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there--when you look back over your career to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently if could go back and change it?
Speaker 2: There is nothing major that I would change.  Yeah, I, you know, I could've been more mature for sure.  But, the great lessons that were learned from even the mistakes that I've made, those lessons were invaluable.  And, those lessons are what, you know, made me the person that I am.  So, I don't have any regrets about those decision that were made and I don't think I would change a thing.  Because, I think, if I change it, you know, I might not have had some of the successes that I've had.  The failures led me to the successes.  And, the failures were far greater than my successes but the successes were so much sweeter because of those failures.
Story_ID: 136269
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, tell us about your family.  We didn't talk about--you have children, you're married, right?
Speaker 2: I'm married.
Speaker 1: Where did you meet your wife?
Speaker 2: I met my wife in Los Angeles [California] around 2000 and (laughter).  We actually met at a barbecue (laughter).  And, she had been a great inspiration and an incredible friend and partner.  I also have a seven year old son [Love Whelchel, IV] who is--I call him seven going on seventeen.  The way this child's mind works, you know, just kind of blows me away.  He's, you know, he was a, you know, he's a kid who basically grew up on my lap, working as a consultant.  So, he, you know, he wasn't even six weeks old when he was sitting in front of a computer screen, tapping on the keys, and you know, and playing with other digital devices.  So, it's, you know, so just to watch him deal with technology is just fascinating.  And, I love his fresh eye on things and I like the fact that he actually has an opinion even at seven years old.  So, I'm definitely enjoying my family life.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, your parents [Larma Miller Whelchel and Love Henry Whelchel, Jr.] are still alive, are they?
Speaker 2: Both of my parents are still living.  Both of them live outside of Atlanta, Georgia.  And, my siblings [April Whelchel, Kenyatta Whelchel, and Joel Whelchel] are all around the country.  I have a sister in Seattle [Washington], one in the Maryland, and a brother who's also in Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  All right, now is there anything I have not asked you that I need to ask before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: No.  I think you've covered it.
Story_ID: 136270
Speaker 1: All right.  Well, last question is similar to legacy, but it's a little bit different.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as a change agent.  I would like to be remembered as someone who looked at things a little bit differently from my predecessors.  And, why I say that, I think you can always improve on things.  I don't think, you know, there's, you know, people says there's nothing new under the sun.  I'm not saying, created something new.  I'm saying let's do some things better.  So, I would like to be known as a person who, who did HR better than the last person did it.  And, therefore, creating a conv--a foundation for my successor to even take it higher heights and took--and take it to the next level.  I just wanna be a part of that story.  Well, okay, Love Whelchel brought it here, and the next person took it there.  I just wanna be a part of the story.  And, a lot of that comes from reaching out and helping someone.  I think it's our job as human beings.  It's our job as African Americans to give hand ups.  So, my charge is, as I wanna be remembered, I wanna give people an opportunity to go as far as they can go, and I want them to remember that.  Saying, "Hey, you know what, Love Whelchel gave me a chance.  He gave me a shot."  And, I'm gonna give somebody else a shot.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you, sir.
Speaker 1: Okay--
