Story_ID: 329262
Speaker 1: My name is Loretta Henry and I'm doing the interview and Scott Hearns [sic. Scott Stearns] is the videographer.  And we're gonna continue: could you just please tell me your full name middle name included and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Barry B-A-R-R-Y, Lawson L-A-W-S-O-N, Williams W-I-L-L-I-A-M-S [HistoryMaker Barry Williams].
Speaker 1: And your date of birth and where you were born?
Speaker 2: I was born on July 21, 1944 and I was born in Manhattan medical center although I've never lived in Manhattan [New York] in my life but I was a premature baby born, emergency medical center but you can only be born where you're born.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: So even though I never lived there my birth certificate says New York Manhattan medical center.
Speaker 1: Okay, good. Today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is the 11th of October 2005.
Speaker 1: Right. And the location of this interview, the address?
Speaker 2: You're at Four Embarcadero Center, Suite 3700 in San Francisco [California].
Speaker 1: Okay and your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a business person principally.  I have various activities, I spend about a third of my time on real estate, I spend a third of my time on corporate board of directors and I third--spend a third of my time and hopefully more each year on not for profits and other things.
Story_ID: 329263
Speaker 1: I'm just going to ask you a few short questions but you can give me a short answer just kind of to relax us, okay?  What's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Probably lobster.
Speaker 1: And your favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Warm weather, anytime, summer (laughter).
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Okay your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: That's easy. Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
Speaker 1: Fantastic. Do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I do not believe I do.  I like language a lot and appreciate language; I don't think I have just one.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, next--
Speaker 2: I'll probably repeat myself a lot in the interview you're going to tell me I have one (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. I will.
Story_ID: 329264
Speaker 1: We're going to start with your family background, okay.  So could you please tell me about your mother what was her name and where was she born?  Could you spell her name for us please?
Speaker 2: Ilza, I-L-Z-A Louise Berry, B-E-R-R-Y [Ilza Berry Williams]. I'm a Barry, she's a Berry and she was born in New York [New York] where most of my family is from and she was one of three children which is important because she had three children and I have three children.  So we do things in threes in my family.  She had a brother who died quite early his name was Lawson [Lawson Berry] and that is why I have Lawson as my middle name.
Speaker 1: She has a very interesting first name.  Do you know the origin of her first name?
Speaker 2: I really don't, and I've never found anybody including my mother who knew the derivation and her middle name actually is Louisa, but everybody said Louise but those were not attached to any particular people, family or what have you.
Speaker 1: Okay. Do you know anything about her background and her growing up, her young years or background?
Speaker 2: Well I come from a family that lived in a small geographic area so in my family on my mother's side the furthest south anybody lived was the Bronx, New York and the furthest north anybody lived was the end of the next county, Westchester County [New York], and that's about sixty miles.  So it wasn't a big family but it was a close family and so I know a lot about my family.  We used to meet as a family; I'm talking about the whole family, cousins probably once a month.  So some of that old charm of old families and for a long time my grandfather [Thomas Berry] lived on my street and my grandmother.  Now we're all successful and living in different places and what have you.  But my mother actually had kind of a rough childhood in the sense that her mother died right around birth and she was really raised by friends of my grandfather who I consider my grandfather also and my grandmother.  My grandfather actually remarried twice more and was very close but it was kind of hard growing up without a mother and--for a lot of it but she grew up with her sister [Beryl Berry Morris].  They had these wonderful people who were very close and were substitute parents and they lived with for a long time.  She grew up in New York; she's a New York gal born in New York, went to school in New York, went to Hunter College [New York, New York], always wanted to be a teacher and became a teacher.
Story_ID: 329265
Speaker 1: How would you describe her?
Speaker 2: There are various ways to describe my mother [Ilza Berry Williams].  Everybody would describe her the same way: she never stopped talking.  I think I've inherited a little of that.  She had tremendous interest and energy.  She absolutely loved people, she loved education, she loved kids, she loved books there's nothing she didn't love without a passion.
Speaker 1: That's wonderful.  Did she ever share any stories with you about her growing up?
Speaker 2: Not really because my mother was always conflicted about the period without her mother and getting used to two other mothers and then getting used to one set of parents and having to go back.  What she talks about most growing up is the continued friendship she had with her sister [Beryl Berry Morris] and those two were just the absolute closest friends.  The other story she talks about was when they were young ladies, young girls at Hunter College [New York, New York] and it's in the mid-'30s [1930s] and no one's got any money (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: They didn't know it was the Depression [Great Depression] 'cause no one had any money anyway.  But there were a group of young ladies who all were in school and in fact many of them came and lived with my grandfather [Thomas Berry] in the house and that group stayed together the rest of their lives and she would talk about that group.  They had an interesting name called The Chatterboxes [ph.].  They'd meet once a month and every one of them, I grew up believing was my aunt and it wasn't until I was in my teens that I realized that some were just godparents or some were just friends but it was a very close knit family.  And so I think those are the stories my mother really dwells on rather than her early childhood.
Story_ID: 329266
Speaker 1: It's interesting she went to college [Hunter College, New York, New York] during the Depression [Great Depression]. Did--?
Speaker 2: I have to say that I always joke and say I went to a typical--I grew up in a typical black family.  Both my parents [Ilza Berry Williams and Otis Williams, Sr.] went to college and grad school and met in the post office because in those days you worked in the post office on Christmas vacation to make your tuition and they met sorting mail.
Speaker 1: That's a wonderful story.  Your mother went to college during Depression that's very unusual.  Do you have any idea how your grandparents--your grandfather financed it?
Speaker 2: I grew up thinking my grandfather was the richest man in the world.  My grandfather always worked with a suit and tie for Singer Sewing Machine [Singer Manufacturing Company; Singer Corporation].
Speaker 1: What's his name?
Speaker 2: Thomas Berry, B-E-R-R-Y and when my elder brother [Otis Williams, Jr.] was about eighteen he had a summer job at Singer and I remember he came home embarrassed because he said I always thought grandpa was a senior executive at Singer.  What he really does is run the mail and copy room.  However, if you think during that time for an African American man to run what was general services and to have worked there, I think he worked there for forty years before he retired; wasn't college educated, that was quite an accomplishment at the time.
Story_ID: 329267
Speaker 1: What could you tell us about your father?  What was his name and where was he born?
Speaker 2: My father is clearly the other side of the family, Otis Lenzy Williams [Otis Williams, Sr.].  He was born in Massachusetts; his family was from North Carolina.  The story is that like a lot of African Americans they escaped slavery to go north.  They thought they were going to Canada and wound up in Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts] and New Bedford [Massachusetts].  So slight wrong track but so the family grew up and has been several generations in New Bedford, Massachusetts.  As I said my parents met in New York, my father went back to North Carolina where his grandfather was from and went to--I have his diploma the North Carolina College for Colored Gentlemen that is now North Carolina College in Durham [North Carolina] but at the time it was called the North Carolina College for Colored Gentlemen [sic. North Carolina College for Negroes; North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina].  Then he went to--did a year a graduate work in New York, never completed it and that was sort of the two sides of my family.  My mother [Ilza Berry Williams] was a lot of motivation and my father very smart, but I think he'd just rather have fun.
Speaker 1: What was his occupation?
Speaker 2: My father was an accountant in the post office, and never wanted to do anything more or like that.  He really lived outside of work.
Speaker 1: Okay. How would you describe your father?
Speaker 2: Well that's difficult.  I'm his and clearly always have been and was his favorite son.  He enjoyed things, he enjoyed sports, he was a contact bridge player--a championship contact bridge player, he liked to travel and he was very interested in me as a person.  I always say that I always admired my father because he did the things that he wanted to do in life.  Whatever was important or fun for him, he did.  So some people have different agendas and are more motivated, I think he was very happy with his life.
Speaker 1: Wonderful. Did he ever tell you any stories about his growing up when he was young?
Speaker 2: Well he grew up in Massachusetts, and when my parents were married my mother was a teacher and had summers off so we spent every summer in Massachusetts and this goes back to where were you born.  I always have a hard time because people say, "Where are you from?" and I grew up in New York, I spent a lot of time in Connecticut but I also spent a lot of time in Massachusetts.  But--yes because New Bedford is a small town, it's a very interesting town because it's one of the few towns that are predominantly Portuguese.  We are not Portuguese but we know a lot of Portuguese people and it's a very mixed town.  So I knew all about my father's friends.  It was a little bit of an accomplishment for some in New Bedford to grow up and go off to college and my father was an athlete and reasonably smart (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What did he play?
Speaker 2: He played football in college.
Speaker 1: Did he ever talk about the relations between the Portuguese and the blacks in the town?
Speaker 2: Yes we actually lived in the Portuguese side of town and I'm not sure why that happened and we always had great relationships and lots of friends.
Speaker 1: Okay, wonderful.
Speaker 2: I was a complete failure in life to my father because my father wanted me to come back and be the mayor of New Bedford (laughter).  He said any person who went to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] could speak Portuguese was an African American; I had all of the attributes to be the mayor of New Bedford so I disappointed him in life.
Story_ID: 329268
Speaker 1: How far back can you trace your ancestors?  Do you know on both sides where they originated and anything about your family history (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I explained to you that my wife is an author and her name is [HistoryMaker] Lalita Tademy and she wrote a famous book ['Cane River,' Lalita Tademy] on four generations of women in her family.  So my wife was able to trace her, four greats, grandmother and find the bill of sale for her great-grandmother.  I admire her for being able to do that.  The best I can go back is a generation or two.  On my--I know that my grandfather's [Thomas Berry] people on my mother's [Ilza Berry Williams] side came from Virginia and that he moved north, got a job at Singer [Singer Manufacturing Company; Singer Corporation] and each year had one of his sisters come from Virginia to live in New York where they got married and raised families and that's why our family always lived in the same area.  I do not know anything about his parents.  It's why I like this project because our family was the kind of family that said one day we're going to sit around and put a microphone in front grandfather and get all this recorded and we never did so it's gone.  So that's my mother's side, on my father's [Otis Williams, Sr.] side I indicated all I know is that his father and I believe, I'm sorry he'll be his grandfather, came from North Carolina to New Bedford [Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Are there any family stories that your parents told about their extended families?
Speaker 2: We really lived in the present as a family and I know a lot of families sit around and tell family stories.  We mostly lived in the present.  We knew about each other and the current generation and didn't spend a lot of time going back beyond one generation (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 329269
Speaker 1: I'm going to talk a little bit more about you now.  What was your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, I was actually thinking about that the other day.  I can remember a lot of things starting when I was about two and a half but one of my earliest remembrances is that the woman across the street was my babysitter.  She was an elderly woman called Ma Brown [ph.] and everybody had tremendous respect for Ma Brown, and my mother [Ilza Berry Williams] said--had complete confidence in Ma Brown.  Now you have to understand in my day people didn't have babysitters, you had family but everybody was working in my family including my [maternal] grandfather [Thomas Berry] and his third wife and my parents were divorced shortly thereafter but my parents were working when they were married and living in the same house.  So we were lucky to have this elderly woman who could take care of me.  So my mother told her only one thing you cannot take him to church--to her church because Ma Brown was somewhere between a Pentecostal and a holy roller.  My mother was a staid high Episcopal.  But Ma Brown had to go to this one service and she said, "Just don't tell your mother, I have to go."  I think actually it was a funeral for a friend of hers.  So I went to the service and I loved the music, I loved the people getting happy and expressing their emotion and there actually was some throwing money around, pennies and nickels, as all part of an offering.  I just sat there and knew that I couldn't say anything about it although I just loved the experience, I loved the music, and I loved the atmosphere.  But what I apparently did is I picked up a bunch of pennies and I came home and of course my mother asked me where did I get these pockets full of pennies.  I had to tell her of course my mother did not get mad at Ma Brown, but I just remember vividly I was torn, my moral dilemma between not ratting out on Ma Brown and making sure that I did what my mother said but I gave it away with the pennies in my pocket.
Story_ID: 329270
Speaker 1: How would you describe your family life?
Speaker 2: Most of my life there is sort of two families' lives.  I mean, until I was twelve my parents [Ilza Berry Williams and Otis Williams, Sr.] were married and they lived in the same house.  Then when I was twelve my parents got divorced and it was quite different.  But I think always in my house the way I would describe it is our house was the center of activity.  Everything happened at my house.  I actually learned that trait because I eventually had three sons [Barry Williams, Jaime Williams, and Andrew Williams] and I made sure everything happened at my house just so I would know what was going on.  But there always was a center of activity and everybody was always doing something or going someplace in groups and it was a very lively wholesome experience.  Also I would say that my mother was, I wouldn't say just a teacher she took it to the extreme.  I mean she tutored after school and we always had kids in our house being tutored.  So my vivid relection [recollection] of my house is my mother always in some room tutoring some student and also asking if we could help because she had extra students.  I tell the story because I always thought my mother--I couldn't believe how such a smart woman could be so disorganized or whether she just needed the money.  I couldn't figure out why she was double scheduling.  It wasn't until years later I realized by getting my brothers and I to help her tutor, she was making sure we did our homework and read too (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She was a smart lady.
Speaker 2: So she was a smart woman.  But no it was--you might say chaotic but it was a very lively household, the center of gravity.
Speaker 1: Were there any special events or holidays, did you celebrate those?
Speaker 2: Well again, my family got together once a month and we lived in Mount Vernon in Westchester County [New York] but my mother had grown up in the Bronx [New York].  So every Sunday we went back to the Bronx to church and that was kind of special 'cause we saw all of our friends who were the children of people she had grown up with and then we went to see all our cousins who were in that area.  Sunday was an all-day affair.  We left at nine o'clock in the morning and got home at nine o'clock at night.  Then the summers were great 'cause we always went to Massachusetts and that was different from growing up in New York and we looked forward to that also.
Story_ID: 329271
Speaker 1: Did you tell us that your aunt--you had some aunts--when you were growing up you had some aunts that you later found out were not your aunts.
Speaker 2: Well my mother's [Ilza Berry Williams] group this group that I mentioned that she went to Hunter College [New York, New York] with and became her club they were all aunts.  Several of them became godparents of us and so those three aunts in particular or four actually are interchangeable with real aunts and my family have played a great role in our lives.  For example, my godmother, Grace Messiah is ninety-one or ninety-two, still living in Ossining, New York and still a part of my life and I'm still a part of her life.  Another godmother, Mildred Tolbert [ph.] when I had kids she came out for a week or two to live with us, I guess she didn't think we could raise kids and stayed for two or three years.  So I'm talking about people who continue to play a role in your life.  Another godmother of my oldest--elder brother [Otis Williams, Jr.] her children are out here now and I sort of look after them and we're very close my Aunt Marian, Marian Challenger [ph.].  So these were just not friends or not just casual aunts these were people who our families were interwoven.  I remember whenever--I went away to school both for high school [Westminster School, Simsbury, Connecticut] and college [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and I remember I'd get a call from any of these aunts saying how are you doing?  They were just as interested as a parent would be in my sports, my education how I was doing.
Story_ID: 329272
Speaker 1: You weren't an only child.  Could you tell us about your siblings?
Speaker 2: No, I was an only child; I had two brothers (laughter).  Each of us would describe it that way.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us about these three only children, your other two only children in your family?  What were their names, who was the oldest?  When were they born?
Speaker 2: Well my elder brother Otis Williams [Otis Williams, Jr.] was eight years older.  I hardly remember him 'cause you remember in those days eight years was a century.  He didn't want anything to do with a little kid but I followed him around and people used to call me Little O and he was Big O.  We had similar features and he was very interested and a protector of his little brother.  He was a lot of fun; he was smart, but not the best student.  He was very interested in life and people and I really respect him because he eventually moved to Brooklyn [New York] and did a lot of community work.  He was an accountant and an auditor and at his funeral it was so impressive the people who came out and respected him and who had worked with him.
Speaker 1: What kind of things did he do in the community?
Speaker 2: He worked in redevelopment and worked with children and sports and--
Speaker 1: And your younger brother?
Speaker 2: My middle brother--so that's Otis.  My middle brother Keith [Keith Williams] is alive.  He lives here in Oakland [California].  He is three years older--two and a half and he had the misfortune of being a little too close to me because my parents [Ilza Berry Williams and Otis Williams, Sr.] always ditched me off on him.  He must have felt that I was his twin.  We did everything growing up together.  Actually I was a little taller than he was (laughter) so we could get away with it.  We've been long standing friends and now he lives out here.  He, again in finance--the men in my family do finance.  He worked out here for Levi Strauss [Levi Strauss and Company] for twenty years particularly in international operations, in fact lived in Brussels [Belgium] for five years working in the international side of Levi Strauss, he was international controller.  Now he's retired and he also went to Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts].  The reason I was telling you the story about my eldest brother is people look at the paper and say well two brothers went to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusets] and the third struggled through about four schools but my oldest brother was very effective in his and what he did and perhaps didn't put the emphasis when he was young on education but later in his life put the emphasis on really doing a good job and helping people and making sure that he did this job in the best way.  So--
Speaker 1: That's wonderful.
Speaker 2: Many tracks to be effective in life and to make a contribution.
Story_ID: 332758
Speaker 1: We've been talking about the family.  Is there any other family you want to tell us about?  Have we covered everybody?
Speaker 2: I think the interesting thing about my family is that I told you the story of my maternal grandfather [Thomas Berry].  Of his coming up from Virginia, getting a job [with Singer Manufacturing Company; Singer Corporation] and then getting his sisters up here and getting them situated and the fact is that each and every one of the next generation went to college.  So clearly education was thought of as the key and his later wife Jeri [ph.] was a school teacher and you will see that many of the women not only were educated, were school teachers.  And I think that tradition of getting yourself educated, getting motivated and improving yourself generation to generation is very firmly on that side.  On my father's [Otis Williams, Sr.] side even though they were mechanics and policemen and firemen each of my grandfather's brothers had a job in New Bedford, Massachusetts and they had to have been the first firemen, the first black policemen.  But again, with whatever education they had, they bettered themselves and got a job and their children went to school.  So it was very interesting my first wife [Adrienne Foster Williams] her father was a college president and her family emphasized education.
Speaker 1: What school was he president of?
Speaker 2: He was president of Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama].
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: Luther Foster [Luther H. Foster, Jr.] and that's a very interesting story because my father went to Virginia Union [Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia] for half of his senior year and that's a whole long story (laughter,) and knew the son of the treasurer at the time which was my eventual wife's father.  So they sort of knew who each other were or didn't put any significance to it.  But I'm just saying again on all sides of the family you said are there any people--the common theme on both sides of my family through marriage has been the emphasis on education.  That at least gets you the options to decide what you want to do in your life and I've had family who have done a lot of things with their education and other people who have chosen to use it in different ways.  But at least they got that base of education so they could have options.  If you want to be an Indian [Native American] chief, you could be an Indian chief, if you want to be a CEO, you could be a CEO.
Story_ID: 332759
Speaker 1: We'll talk about your neighborhood.  Can you tell us the street you lived on and what was the street like in your neighborhood where you grew up?
Speaker 2: I grew up in Mount Vernon, New York and it was a very mixed lower middle class neighborhood.  I would say that it was predominantly Irish Catholic and a handful of black people.  There were at least five or six black families on my street, and color was not an issue on my street.  It was whether you came from our neighborhood and all the kids had each other's backs in that neighborhood.  I remember you asked some are early stories I think I told you before we started talking that I'm still in touch with my best friend.  His name is Walter Anderson and we were best friends at age two, and we're going to be best friends all the rest of our lives.  You know how kids are, race doesn't matter until you sort of get in junior high school and the issue of girls comes about.  And Walter's sister at the end of his party asked all the boys to line up because we had behaved so well, and she was going to give each a kiss on the cheek.  She was like sixteen, she wore a bra, she was our idol we were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How old were you?
Speaker 2: --ten or eleven so she gave us a kiss on the cheek and I remember Patsy Tucci [ph.] said--she was laughing and she said, "Carol [ph.], you know what you just did?"  Carol said, "What?"  And she said, "You just kissed a nigger."  So I remember the neighborhood was in an uproar because the kids had all--we played in each other's yards, we slept over each other's houses, we were all on the same baseball team, basketball team and the parents got us all together and said, you know, we just can't have race and things like that become a factor after all this time.  The neighborhood sort of got back to normal and I just remember Walter coming to our house about a day later and he said, "Mrs. Williams [Ilza Berry Williams] I have a question."  And my mother said, "Well what is it?"  He said, "What's a nigger?"  She said, "Well, why did you punch him out?"  He said, "All I know, my friend was mad because of what somebody else had done to him and I just want to defend my friend."  So that's the kind of neighborhood we had, all for one, one for all.  It didn't matter color, it didn't matter what your parents did and there were some wonderful people in that neighborhood.  It was also a neighborhood it was tough to live in because you had ten mothers or ten fathers and any parent on that block could reprimand you if they saw you doing something wrong.  So just because your parents weren't home that day did not matter.  I was given an award by Mercy College [Dobbs Ferry, New York] in New York which is a great institution.  There are, I think it has six campuses and about eleven thousand students and half the students today are the first in their family to go to college.  So I very much support that institution and have created a scholarship in my mother's name there and so they gave me a big fancy dinner.  But we had six people from my old neighborhood there that night and it was great seeing everybody.  The Davenports, the Thompsons, Walter Anderson we were all there so we're still friends.
Story_ID: 332760
Speaker 1: Are there any sights or sounds or smells that when you come in contact they immediately take you back to your childhood?
Speaker 2: I would say what immediately takes me back to my childhood is open space.  You have to understand where I lived [in Mount Vernon, New York].  We lived in a house.  It was four bedrooms and it was actually it was two stories and even it had a cellar--a basement something people in California don't know.  It was an East Coast house, you had a front yard, a backyard and side yards where there was grass and the houses weren't stuck together because land has a different value back east.  And our house actually was the carriage house to the house next door where the Averys [ph.] lived and the garages in our backyard were the garages for this historic mansion.  So we had six garages in our backyard, in fact we rented them out to everybody in the neighborhood and because of the garages there was a big space for the cars to get in and out and turn around plus our yard which had grass on it.  All I'm saying is, our backyard was the playing field and you know, I, like everybody, you go back to your home--all this probably takes up forty or fifty space but when I was a little kid we had a full game of baseball with infielders and outfielders (laughter) and I always thought it was the biggest yard in the world and the biggest house in the world.  So that's what takes me back to that neighborhood.  I actually play a game with my brother and I tried to see if he can match me in naming by name who lived in each house going up and down the street, I can get pretty far up the street.
Speaker 1: You mentioned your family lived in a carriage house.  There might be some young people don't know what a carriage house is.
Speaker 2: Well I think a carriage house was probably a time for servants or what have you.  It was a big house and I think later on it was added onto, but it wasn't the main house on the property and I only say that because that's how we got these extra garages which were to my mother [Ilza Berry Williams] a source of income to us the basis of the playing fields.  That was their importance.
Story_ID: 332761
Speaker 1: But I also have to tell you that I made a key decision early in my life which is that I wanted to go away to school.  I just wanted to try something new so I actually went away to school for four years in high school [Westminster School, Simsbury, Connecticut].  I went to a small New England boarding school and very much enjoyed that.  I enjoyed being in a little smaller pond that I could develop.  People always laugh, but I wasn't a great athlete when I was fourteen but I got a chance to play a lot of athletics at school and I got a chance to get educated in smaller classrooms and wound up going, I think to a good school.
Speaker 2: Okay, yes you did. Before you went off to school you must have started in elementary school in your neighborhood [in Mount Vernon, New York].
Speaker 1: I did.
Speaker 2: Could you tell us about it?  What was the name of the school you attended--your elementary school?
Speaker 1: Well we have to go back because I warned you that my grandmother was a teacher and my mother [Ilza Berry Williams] was a teacher.  So at age three for lack of a babysitter I went to my mother's school and I went to kindergarten.  I went to kindergarten when I was three, I went to kindergarten when I was four, and I went to kindergarten when I was five.  By the time I was five I was doing the introductory session for the class.  I would tell them where the blocks and what have you.  But that was P.S. 68 in the Bronx [New York] and I went every day with my mother that was babysitting.  So I went to P.S. 68 until the end of the first grade and when I was elected class president, vice president, host and hostess we realized that people liked my mother so much they were afraid to vote against me (laughter).  My mother was the assistant principal by then so we decided I had to switch schools.  So then I went to school in Mount Vernon, Grimes [Pennington-Grimes Elementary School, Mount Vernon, New York].  Grimes was an elementary school and I went there second through fifth grade and because our city was expanding, the sixth grade was moved to be a part of the junior high school.  So then I went to George Washington Junior High School [ph.] as a sixth grader.  Sixth graders were sort of lost in a big tough urban junior high school so my parents decided that maybe I should try a private school.  So for the seventh and eighth grade I went to the Westminster School in Merrimac [sic. Simsbury, Connecticut].  So every morning I'd get up and walk down to the train station and I'd take the train two or three cities and then I would take the bus back to the Westminster School, and that was--I felt I was a big boy; that was fun.
Story_ID: 332762
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What kind of student were you?
Speaker 2: Well I was always a good student.  You have to be a good student if your mother's [Ilza Berry Williams] a teacher it's not like you had any options (laughter) and if you were tutoring other kids you had to have done your homework.  So I was always a good student but I think I really became a good student when I went to private school [Westminster School, Simsbury, Connecticut] for the seventh and eighth grade.  There were no rules of what courses you could take in what order so they pushed to whatever you wanted to do and I had real math aptitude and science aptitude and that continued when I went to private school for high school [Westminster School, Simsbury, Connecticut].
Speaker 1: So how big--?
Speaker 2: I was a strong student.
Speaker 1: How big was your middle school was it 200, 500 students?
Speaker 2: Oh I think you'd say about 100 in grades one through eight.  It was very small.  We did all the academic courses in the morning; we did drama, music in the afternoon.  It was split between those two and equal emphasis put on both.
Story_ID: 332763
Speaker 1: Were there any teachers that you recall?
Speaker 2: Oh sure. I'm, I've--
Speaker 1: Could you tell us about them?
Speaker 2: Well I've always liked certain teachers, and more important there's always been a teacher that's picked me out and made me their project or their pet or what have you.  So we could go back to second grade [at Pennington-Grimes Elementary School, Mount Vernon, New York], Mrs. Sericnoto [ph.] and this is very interesting because Mount Vernon [New York] was not without its racial problems and most African American kids systematically got left back in the second grade.  Part of it was supposedly their reading skills weren't up to grade, part of it was almost automatic it was presumed if you were black let's leave you back and get you settled.  And of course my mother [Ilza Berry Williams] was a schoolteacher so she was up there and it wasn't happening with her children.  But I remember Mrs. Sericnoto saying, hey you're a good student and I'm going to work with you and make you a better student.  So I've always had that and teachers in second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth grade were wonderful like that.  When I got to junior high school, Terrie McKay [ph.], she was my prince I would say.  She gave me extra work and she put me with the eighth graders day one.  I was supposed to be in the seventh grade and I remember she said well you're tall enough; you'd be funny looking with the seventh graders.  But she just wanted to push me to see if I could do it and I did the work.
Speaker 1: What did she teach?
Speaker 2: Well then teachers taught all subjects they weren't specialists.  So she taught all the academic subjects. It was like five every day.
Speaker 1: What kind of--oh, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: No I'm saying it wasn't in--high school it was the same way teachers really are interested in the students who were interested in learning.  I remember Mr. Olmstead [ph.] in my ninth grade.  We called them forms but they're ninth grade.  He knew that--he saw that I was interested in Egypt and the course was on ancient history but he saw that I had more than a passing interest.  I was fascinated by the story of King Tut [Tutankhamun] and one day in my life I'm going to write a play where King Tut is the central character 'cause I'm crazy about Tut and tomorrow we're flying down to see the Tut exhibit ['Treasures of Tutankhamen'] in Los Angeles [California].  Mr. Olmstead saw that and nurtured that interest but there were many.  This was at the Westminster School in Simsbury, Connecticut.  I remember one time Mr. Burdett [ph.] was the teacher and he came to me and he said, "Would you like to learn Russian?"  As it turned out I couldn't keep it up, I was playing three sports, I was involved in every activity the glee club but we learned Russian it wasn't for credit.  I remember we were all trying to get into college and he said no this is learning for learning's sake and 'til this day I can say (speaking Russian), "Zdravsstvuyte, zdravsstvuyte, kak pazhivayete, (unclear), spaseeba."  I learned that and that was like the ninth and tenth grade.
Speaker 1: Could you translate it for us?
Speaker 2: I said, "Hello, how are you?" (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: No, but I can even say in college [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] I remember two teachers in particular.  I remember my junior--I'm sorry it wasn't my--my junior year where a teacher said what's interesting you're a government major but what is interesting about government to you?  To me it was different forms of government and she gave me some books about different forms of government and just sparked my interest.  A teacher can make all the difference.  You need a student (laughter) but a teacher can make the difference and I've been blessed with teachers.
Story_ID: 332764
Speaker 1: What kind of child were you?  Were you well mannered?  Were you rebellious?  Were you rambunctious?
Speaker 2: Probably all those at certain times like any child.  I was gregarious I'd say mostly and very active.  I never had time for television.  Either I was playing sports or reading a book or doing my homework or something.  I used up every hour of the day.  I always had a lot of friends, I was the center of gravity 'cause our house [in Mount Vernon, New York] had the backyard, we had the cherry tree. We were the magnet and I had these extended family of mothers who were always looking over my shoulder looking after me.  There were a lot of people there for me.
Speaker 1: When you were a young child, what were your dreams, what were your aspirations, what did you see yourself becoming?
Speaker 2: Oh, that was simple in my town we had one African American doctor, one African American lawyer and so you said when you grew up if you wanted to be a professional you wanted to be a lawyer or doctor.  So I remember I wanted to be a lawyer and I expressed it when I met an African American lawyer I told him I wanted to be just like him.  I wanted to be a persecuting lawyer.  I didn't know it was prosecuting I heard some word and I said persecuting lawyer so that's what I wanted to be and I eventually went to law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and I didn't practice law in the courtroom but I am a lawyer and member of the California bar.
Story_ID: 332765
Speaker 1: Did your family attend church?  Could you describe some of your experiences there?
Speaker 2: Yes my mother [Ilza Berry Williams] attended church particularly her old church and we were altar boys and acolytes.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: I never could figure out which the function of church was to see our old friends or whether it was religious but there was a lot of activity around church and then we were active when the church eventually--my mother continued to be active in her church and--
Speaker 1: What was it? What was the name of the church?
Speaker 2: St. Luke's [St. Luke's Episcopal Church] in the Bronx [New York] was the church, and then St. Clement's [St. Clement's Episcopal Church; Church of Sts. John, Paul, and Clement] in Mount Vernon [New York].
Speaker 1: They were Episcopal?
Speaker 2: Episcopal churches and I went away to a religious school.  It was supposedly non-denominational, but we had chapel every day and I always enjoyed that.  I enjoyed the solitude of it and the music (laughter).  So I think I'm basically a religious person but I'm not overly religious but I sure love the music in church and I love the solitude of there.
Story_ID: 332766
Speaker 1: You are still in contact with your childhood friends what about your friends in junior high school?  Do you still keep in touch with your friends in junior high school and high school [Westminster School, Simsbury, Connecticut] or were they some of the same people? You went away (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No because I went away to school and I have to say junior high I sort of lost touch with them.  So if they weren't in my direct neighborhood, I've largely lost touch with them.  Most of my friends would go back to college [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and from then on that I've kept up with them.  It's hard to keep up when you go to a private school where people come from all over the country but there are a few that I've kept up with.  I keep up with friends.  People have valued me and so therefore I value people and I'm a person that keeps in touch.
Speaker 1: That's a good quality.  Was there anybody who influenced you a great deal when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: I think I was a sponge. I mean, obviously my mother [Ilza Berry Williams] did.  I am my mother in terms of drive and a lot of values although I have some of the values of my father [Otis Williams, Sr.].  But I never believed in heroes that was until I heard of Nelson Mandela.  That was the one genuine hero that I think everybody acknowledges.  I think a lot of people tried to help me and people have asked me: how do you get ahead in business?  One of things I tell them--one of the most important things is to be make yourself attractive, I don't mean pretty or beautiful but attractive to want to be helped by someone 'cause you can't make it all on your own no matter how smart you are and no matter how much drive you have.  So as I told you with the teachers but all through my life I've just been blessed with people who found me sufficiently interesting and attractive enough to want to help me.  Some of them unrelated to me and I don't know why they picked me but they did.  So instead of having one role model, I have many but if there was one I'd have to say my mother because she showed the example of how you can fully be successful in your career and still have a family, still have lots of friends.
Story_ID: 332767
Speaker 1: How did you spend your time when you were out of school, your free time, your weekends?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: What did you like to do (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) As a kid?
Speaker 1: As a kid what were your hobbies, what did you like to do?
Speaker 2: As a kid, I played sports until dinner time.  Every day was an Olympics.  We played basketball, we played stick ball, we played touch football, we'd rotate our sports as a kid.  So I got studious when it got dark and after dinner but until dinner it was sports.
Speaker 1: Were you in any organizations, Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America] or church groups or anything?
Speaker 2: Did 'em all Cub Scouts, Boy Scouts.
Speaker 1: Did--?
Speaker 2: My mother [Ilza Berry Williams] in particular made sure we had the full range of experiences.  She didn't force us to continue them but she did make sure we tried them.
Story_ID: 332768
Speaker 1: When did you know that you wanted to go to college?
Speaker 2: Probably when I was born.  I don't think it ever was an issue of if.  In my family so much emphasis was put on education, as I indicated, as a way of enabling yourself to do what you want in life the only issue was when or where.  So the only battle I had in my family is my father [Otis Williams, Sr.] said you can go anywhere in Massachusetts and my mother [Ilza Berry Williams] said you can go anywhere in New York (laughter) 'cause she was from New York and he was from Massachusetts but my father won out.
Speaker 1: When you were in high school [Westminster School, Simsbury, Connecticut]--so you finished high school and how did you decide to go to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]?  I mean, your parents had this battle how was it resolved what made you go where you went?
Speaker 2: Well Harvard obviously is a great university but in addition Harvard was in an urban area of Boston [Massachusetts] where I had family and roots.  So it was the combination of not only being a great university but being in Boston and I loved Boston.  Got family there.  So when other students were having soft boiled eggs for dinner on Sunday, I was going to my [paternal] grandmother's for smothered pork chops--
Speaker 1: That's good.
Speaker 2: --with my roommates.
Speaker 1: What was Harvard like?  Can you tell us the year that you started?
Speaker 2: I would have started Harvard in 1962.  I was the first large class to be admitted to Harvard.  Harvard would have had 1,684, I think that was the magic number of students coming in each year and we were 30 African Americans, and my class represented more African Americans than there were combined in the sophomore, junior and senior class.  But never felt any racism or discrimination when I got there.  Again, it was Boston so I knew it.  In those days even though there weren't a lot of African American students in any one school, we all knew each other.  So on the weekends whether you were from BU [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts], Northeastern [Northeastern University, Boston, Massachusetts] or what have you, everybody got together.  It just mattered that you were there in Boston.  One of my sons went to Harvard and he was in the African American association, and he ate at the African American table.  I think it's great that he found what he wanted to find on campus.  I had a different experience, I think a richer one because I came into contact with African American students throughout the region, and some are still my friends.  But I was well prepared to go to Harvard, having gone four years to private school, so Harvard wasn't overwhelming.  Could have used a little more color (laughter).
Story_ID: 333139
Speaker 1: When we last ended, you were talking about Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and that you had this wonderful experience there, and that you knew a lot of African American students from different colleges in the Boston [Massachusetts] area.  So what else can you tell us about your experience at Harvard?
Speaker 2: Well the other thing I remember 'cause people always ask me, "How was it like to be a black student at Harvard?"  And there were 30 of us but they were 30 out of 1,684 and one of the things that my parents [Ilza Berry Williams and Otis Williams, Sr.] instilled in us is the knowledge of who we were.  So I dealt with before.  When I went to that little junior high school there were two blacks per grade and when I went to the private high school [Westminster School, Simsbury, Connecticut] there was one black per grade.  So I was kind of happy when I saw 30 (laughter) I thought that was great.  Even if there weren't we knew who we were, that we were black, what it meant to be a black American and that's something my parents taught us and gave us confidence in very early.  I'd also say it was interesting because I had a big issue come up in my sophomore year in the sense that I declared I wasn't going to be white during the day and black at night or on the weekends and that I was going to be a black American full time on the campus of Harvard and not utilize this natural safety net I had with family and friends outside of the campus.  So it--that was kind of interesting.  I remember that transitioning and demanding activities and my presence and my friends to be more on campus.
Speaker 1: What were some of the things that you did to--?
Speaker 2: Well we spent a lot more time with the African American students, we made sure there were African American activities it was the time of the Civil Rights Movement (laughter).  But the difference is we didn't do it in Boston, now, we did it on campus.
Story_ID: 333140
Speaker 1: How did the Civil Rights Movement affect you?  How did you feel about what was going on?
Speaker 2: Well, I think it was the beginning of a wider concern about people in general.  I had been fortunate, and it was the first time I heard the argument: so what difference does it matter if one or two get through if everybody else is left behind?  And realizing that the total context of the race was the issue that we were all dealing with, that how did we all or how did we make numbers or how do we all get through and come through as a race?  So that was very challenging.  We didn't want--we wanted to individually succeed, but we didn't want that to be the excuse of why society could afford then to leave everybody else behind and I think that was the essence of the Civil Rights Movement.  And then as you know it was very difficult when you're going through a process of defining your own identity that those nice white roommates and friends who were on the picket line you had to sort of push them aside and say, no we've got to do some of this for ourselves.  There were a lot of hard friendships lost in that self-defining process, and then again the war started.  So you remember we were standing there talking about civil rights and all of a sudden it was the war in Vietnam [Vietnam War] and all of the liberal white protest movement ran to the antiwar and said what happened about us; we haven't finished civil rights.  So those were--civil rights was very important and very trying during those times.
Story_ID: 333141
Speaker 1: What were your classes like?  Did you enjoy the academic atmosphere at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: It did.  I was a government major, and I wound up majoring in comparative government, Russian studies again from the little influence of that teacher [Mr. Burdett (ph.)] many years ago.  China was not even of interest to academics at that time and wound up when I graduated having a difficult decision to make of whether to go to graduate school in Russian studies or to go on to law school.
Speaker 1: What were some of the other things you--other activities at Harvard that you took part in?
Speaker 2: Well, I had a lot of activities, mainly because I had functioned in a small private school [Westminster School, Simsbury, Connecticut] where everything was sort of laid out for you.  So when I got to a big university like kids do today--like my kids do, you want to experience everything.  So if there was a person behind a desk and a signup sheet, I signed up for it.  I signed up for [U.S.] Air Force ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps], I signed up for the jazz radio station [WHRB Radio], and I signed up for a job to do dorm crew cleaning up rooms.  If there was a signup sheet, I signed up for it and did it.  But I did have a lot of activities in college; I played college basketball for four years.  I started three years on the varsity and was the captain.  I also was a major person in the--what is called the Harvard Student Agencies which are--creates jobs for students on campus.  For example, four of us had the concession for hot dogs and sodas at the football stadium.  So I made a hell of a lot of money (laughter) so much that the university took the concession away from students in later years but I made a heck of a lot of money and I think that encouraged me to be an entrepreneur which I've done a lot of in my life.  But I was very active in organizations and was elected the equivalent of class president; we call it the first class marshal so I was the class marshal of my class.
Story_ID: 333142
Speaker 1: You mentioned basketball, and I know you have some records some college records that stood for a long time.  Could you tell us about your basketball records (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I have two records depending on your perspective, one's good and one's bad.  I was a rebounder so I had the rebounding record and--
Speaker 1: Which was? How many?
Speaker 2: Career rebounds, and I don't remember the number but it was a lot and I had the season rebounding record too and that lasted, I believe for twenty-five years after I graduated [from Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  I always say that the person who broke my record the changed the rules and allowed people to play four years.  So he had four years to break my record, but he did a good job.  But the record that we all talk about was that I guarded Bill Bradley the night Bill Bradley established the Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey] scoring record and I think since I helped him that it's a shared record.  So Bill and I tell that story all the time.  We've kept a friendship, I was very active in his campaign for presidency and I gave a big fundraiser and someone in the audience said well, who didn't know the history, said, "How did [HistoryMaker] Barry Williams become such a good friend of yours?"  Because I'm from New York, Bill Bradley is from Crystal City, Missouri.  Bill Bradley without a flinch looked him in the eye and said, "When a guy lets you score fifty-six points against him--against you, you call him your best friend."  I've always said if Bill Bradley could have conveyed that humor, he'd be president.
Speaker 1: You said he was running for president.  Could you tell us when he ran? For those of us who--the young people?
Speaker 2: I'm getting old, but he ran a couple of terms ago (laughter).  He was in the democratic primary against Al Gore, did well on a couple of states but really if you're running for president now I believe you have to be within the party apparatus and the way these primaries come up in each state you don't have time to do well in one state, start and get organized and try and do well in other states, it just happens.  So he did I think a credible but not as well showing against Gore.  We all know the Gore story.  A lot of have tried to convince him to run again but as you know in politics four or eight or more years is an awful long time and life's moved on for him and he's happy.
Story_ID: 333143
Speaker 1: Is there anything else you'd like to tell us about your years at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]--undergraduate years?
Speaker 2: I had some great friends and roommates.  I still talk to three of four of my roommates that I had during those times.  One of my roommates, he was from--Allen Williams.  Allen's family had always gone to Harvard for their education from Whitefish Bay, Wisconsin outside of Milwaukee [Wisconsin] and whatever Allen put on his application Harvard said we've got to mix it up so they put us together with a few other people and sure enough regardless of whether you were white, black, big city, small city, Jewish, Episcopal whatever we all got along notoriously and we're still friends and that's one of the fun things of life of being a friend for a long time to see people through different stages.
Speaker 1: Were there any professors in your undergrad years who influenced you? Do you remember (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I think--Harvard had a very strong Russian department.  At the time they had just everybody except one professor out here in Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] who were on the forefront of Russian history--Russian studies.  So Merle Fainsod and those fellows were great but what I remember most was a teaching fellow who literally said to me, "I'd like to help you and be your advisor on your honors thesis."  And he was, and I graduated with honors.  When I was in law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] he came to me and said, "I think you should be in teaching," and it led to my teaching--in my case it was African American studies--first as a teaching fellow at Harvard and then as a visiting lecturer at University of Massachusetts of Boston [University of Massachusetts Boston, Boston, Massachusetts], which I loved.  So again it's a case of somebody reaching out for you, but--I would single out those two as the most influential.
Story_ID: 333144
Speaker 1: You graduated from Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]; you got your B.A. in 1966 and you stayed at Harvard and what did you (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No I didn't, I did something very important.
Speaker 1: Oh, you didn't stay?  What did you do?
Speaker 2: I got a fellowship to travel around the world for fourteen months.
Speaker 1: Delightful.
Speaker 2: It was called the Corning Glass Fellowship.  It was the Houghton family who used to own Corning Glass [Corning Glass Works; Corning Incorporated] wanted to make sure young Americans got international experience before they came back and pursued their career.  So we were not allowed to go to school, we had to experience the world, and in 1967 they gave what was then a reasonable amount of money, five thousand dollars, which I combined with another fellowship I won, and I spent fourteen months going around the world.  I spent probably half the time in Latin America, where later on I went and lived and worked.  I spent several months in Africa and I spent a few months in Europe.  In fact, I didn't get all the way to the Far East, I went to the Far East the next summer but that was a tremendous experience to me to get to see the world outside of the United States. So it was after that year that I came back and went to Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Okay, when you were travelling during your fourteen months were there any experiences that are really outstanding, any events that just kind of sum up the whole--?
Speaker 2: Everything was an experience, I mean I never had been out of the country and I think I found my love for Brazil but I found my love for several countries and it was a tremendous experience just proving that you could be self-sufficient 'cause you'd be in a country, you'd be in a country for three or so weeks, you'd have to find your way around and what to do and you try to make sense of a country knowing that you're only going to be there for three weeks.  Is it just an experience or what are you going to try and make out of it?  So I had different experiences, and I wound up playing, when I was in Lebanon, on the basketball team with the university, 'cause that was a way to meet people and have fun.  Other places, I got involved in work so there were a series of different experiences, mostly getting an international perspective and not being afraid of the world and understanding that I could be self-sufficient in a foreign environment.
Speaker 1: Did you speak any other languages besides Russian?  English and Russian?
Speaker 2: I had probably a month of Spanish so I took Spanish lessons, I took Portuguese lessons when I went to Brazil.  Unfortunately my living in New Bedford [Massachusetts] hadn't served me well so I had to start from scratch but those were the two I had to learn.
Story_ID: 333145
Speaker 1: So after this wonderful--gosh, you were so fortunate--after this wonderful experience you went back to Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: Yes, I had deferred admission for one year 'cause I had a fellowship [Corning Glass Fellowship] and I came back to Harvard Law School, and I went to Harvard Law School and Harvard Law School then was very much a corporate business oriented law school and people went to Wall Street after to work. So while I was there I got interested in business and decided to go to business school.  I wound up being the first years of graduates of the joint program of the business school [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] and the law school, but I say that because the only reason I went to business school was so I could be a better corporate lawyer.  I've never subsequently been in corporate law but at the time that was important and that's how it came that I went to both the business school and the law school and I graduated in 1971.
Speaker 1: And you took the California bar also or did you take the California bar later?
Speaker 2: I took the California bar later.  I decided that, faced with working in New York [New York] for the rest of my life for a Wall Street firm with a white shirt and a suit, that I ought to have a year of fun before I--and I wanted to find out what was this business thing.  You have to understand, my knowledge of a business person was my [maternal] grandfather [Thomas Berry] who ran the mailroom and copy room or my best friend's father who ran the corner store.  I didn't know blacks in business; I didn't know what that business thing was.  I had a degree but I really didn't know what it was.  So I'd never been to San Francisco [California], I heard it was a nice place and I picked that out and said I want to--arranged a deal with the law firm that I would go to California, work in business for a year and then come back to the law firm.  As it turned out I never went back to New York, I never went back to the law firm.  I always said I'm probably a senior law firm, I don't know if they ever took me off the rolls.  No, I came out here and went into business and have been in business throughout my career with some law work.  You asked me did I take the bar right away: no, because I wanted a good summer after going to business school and law school, I couldn't be faced with taking the bar right away.  So I didn't and it was two years later I had to take a couple of months off from work to take the bar and that was quite a chore but successfully passed it.
Story_ID: 333146
Speaker 1: Did you go back to Asia?  You had said you didn't--
Speaker 2: I went back to Asia the next summer when I was in law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and fell in love with Asia.  So I've been to Mainland China I think six times in my life.  I have a fascination with China and was just there in August and encourage people to see it now 'cause it's changing so fast.  I was there a year ago, and it's changed since a year ago.
Speaker 1: Really? How's it changing?  To get off the subject, but how is China changing?
Speaker 2: China is modernizing, and it's going to look like New York [New York].  It's very urban and getting very industrial, and they're good at preserving their history though but it's pulling a lot of people in from the farms into the cities.  You have to realize with their population a small percentage means a lot of people.  Their birth rate is 25 million people a year.  So every year they birth an Australia or a Canada and this is under the policy of one child per family in the cities and two in the farmlands.  So it's just a lot of people coming into the economy and coming into the city.  It's very fascinating.  But what I like about it of course is the history and the art and the terra cotta soldiers, Xi'an [China] to me are one of the wonders of the world.
Speaker 1: I would agree with you. Yes, but--
Speaker 2: We're off the subject, but it's a big world out there, we're only a small part of it and we have to remember we are in that context of that world.
Story_ID: 333147
Speaker 1: You have a law degree from Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and you have a M.B.A. from Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, those two. Okay so you graduated, you've been to Asia and now you're starting to work, right?
Speaker 2: I took my first job (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, could you tell us about that?
Speaker 2: --for an exorbitant salary.  I think it was about five or six thousand dollars more than any of my classmates.  It was for twenty thousand dollars at McKinsey and Company, an international management consulting firm who worked on major issues, principally strategic issues for Fortune 500 companies, and I loved that, in fact a year later when I was supposed to be making up my mind and going back to New York [New York], I was late at work working on a project and not even thinking about it and shortly thereafter not only did I continue in management consulting, but had the chance to go back overseas and work in an overseas contexts which was even more interesting.
Speaker 1: Could--for those of us who are not--who don't have a business background could you explain exactly what some of your responsibilities and the focuses?
Speaker 2: Well, the best way to say what a management consultant does, at least the type that McKinsey does, is that we would work on any major issue that would be a major issue to a CEO.  So we wouldn't be working on a technical issue per se unless the technology was key to the strategy of the company.  So we were working at top management level issues.  Mainly for private business but we also did work in the state and public sector.
Speaker 1: Okay and how long did you stay with them?
Speaker 2: I was with McKinsey for seven years.  I wound up working in Venezuela for a year, I wound up working in Mexico for a little more than a year and I wound up working in Brazil for a year.  And this goes back a little to what I'm talking about.  If you get some education and a series of experiences, then you are positioning yourself to succeed in the future.  I mean, the reason I got to go to Venezuela 'cause I had only been in the firm a little over a year but we got this big project in Venezuela and the group couldn't figure out where the airport was and I happened to be walking down the hall and I said of course the airport is not in Caracas [Venezuela], Caracas is in a valley.  The airport [Simon Bolivar International Airport, Maiquieta, Venezuela] is outside of Caracas in La Guaira [sic.] and you take the train up or drive for an hour to the city.  And they said, next thing I knew, they said, "Here's a guy that knows something about Venezuela."  What did I know? I knew where the airport was (laughter), and similarly when we got a major study with the transportation system in Brazil, I said, "Oh. Falo portugues."  So I think it's very important that you position yourself for alternatives in life and position yourself to do the kind of things you want to do, position yourself as success.  These places keep coming up in my life and they're built on a foundation.
Speaker 1: They certainly are.
Speaker 2: I proposed to my--I think you're supposed to say your wife, you're not supposed to say your current because she said I'm her current last wife.  I proposed to my wife (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Your first wife [Adrienne Foster Williams]?
Speaker 2: --in Rio de Janeiro [Brazil].
Speaker 1: Oh did you?
Speaker 2: Second wife [HistoryMaker Lalita Tademy].
Speaker 1: Your second wife okay.
Speaker 2: We'll get there.
Speaker 1: We certainly. Okay, good. So you stayed with McKinsey until 1979?
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: About then.
Story_ID: 333148
Speaker 1: And then you went to Bechtel [Bechtel Group, Inc.; Bechtel Corporation]? Is that right?
Speaker 2: You must be from the east; we say Bechtel.
Speaker 1: Bechtel.
Speaker 2: People from the east say Bechtel.  Yeah, I wanted a job in finance but really didn't want to leave California and searching around the best finance job I could find was at Bechtel.  And didn't really mean to say that long but I found Bechtel it's just a wonderful company, wonderful people, wonderful culture and stayed eight or nine years.
Speaker 1: What were some of the things that you did? What's some of your jobs and (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I started out in finance again focusing on Latin America but on the whole area of project financing.  How do you finance large projects?  Then I was tapped to be the executive assistant to a key person who became the president of the investment side [Bechtel Investments, Inc.] and so I was his executive assistant for years and then was also corporate secretary of that sector and then became a, what they called, managing principal and ran part of the portfolio there.
Speaker 1: Oh. Gosh, that's very impressive.  So and--you stayed at Bechtel until like 1987?
Speaker 2: About '86 [1986]
Speaker 1: Eighty-six [1986]--
Story_ID: 333149
Speaker 1: Then I decided I wanted to try it on my own.  I figured if I tried it on my own and failed, I'd do it in time to get back into some corporate setting, safety net but I had fun doing it on my own.  The life of an entrepreneur is not a straight path.  I've had many horrible things happen in my life.  I always call it the three Ds.  I had a period which was divorce, death and destruction.  I had a very fine wife, and we looked at life differently and got a divorce.
Speaker 2: What was her name?
Speaker 1: Adrienne Foster Williams, and she is deceased after we got divorced, but we had three wonderful children [Barry Williams, Jaime Williams, and Andrew Williams] together, so that was catastrophic.
Speaker 2: I'm sure.
Speaker 1: Then my older brother [Otis Williams, Jr.] died--
Speaker 2: What was destruction?
Speaker 1: And then I lost my house in an Oakland fire [Oakland, California], and I lost my partner in my business.  It seemed like it was a period when nothing was going right.
Speaker 2: Oh my goodness.
Speaker 1: But I've had quite a nice ride.  I served on, since then, on thirteen public company boards.  I have a joke: I think I'm Vernon Jordan [HistoryMaker Vernon E. Jordan, Jr.], west 'cause I don't think there is an African American who has served on as many boards as I have and certainly not first, I'm second.  I've had a chance to run some companies and I've had a chance to do some other activities so I've been pretty happy but it wasn't a straight path.
Story_ID: 333150
Speaker 1: You said that you started your own company.  Could you tell us the name of your company?
Speaker 2: Williams Pacific Ventures [Williams Pacific Ventures, Inc.] which is a holding company to do anything I want to do.  It principally focuses on real estate but I've used it as an acquisition vehicle to be in other businesses and I owned majority and run a engineering firm which specialized in providing services to electric utilities.  I've been an owner and ran a cable television network.  I've been involved in a number of interests.
Speaker 1: Sounds like an interesting business that you have, then.
Story_ID: 333151
Speaker 1: You mentioned the Oakland fire [Oakland, California] and for those of us who are living in the East Bay [San Francisco Bay Area, California], it was a horrific experience.  Could you tell us something about your experience if you don't mind?
Speaker 2: Well for those who don't know the Oakland fire, I still believe is the largest urban fire.  There were--2,800 homes that were destroyed and another couple of hundred multi family structures.  So when you think about a fire and if you think of where I lived when I first knew that there was a fire the fire was as the Caldecott Tunnel [California].  So I would say my house was three or four miles from the fire and therefore I never had any fear that the fire would get to my house.  As it turned out, the fire jumped the highway which was the barrier and sparks were flying and so the fire ended two blocks from my house except for some sparks that came and destroyed my house and my neighbor's house.  It was particularly ironic because the area around my house was used as a staging ground and the only reason we were asked to evacuate was not because of fear of the fire, but because they had the fire trucks there.  So I spent the day helping five or six other people get out of the fire zone instead of worrying about my own house (laughter).  But I turned on the television after helping somebody move a lot of stuff from their house and television was reporting another fire and it said, "Look at that really nice house just burning, and nobody's doing anything about it."  And I said, "That's not just a nice house, that's my house."  So I called my children, I was able to get one of my sons [Jaime Williams] and he said, "Yeah, I'm looking at our house."  But in a sense I knew it was over--
Story_ID: 332782
Speaker 1: Your son was watching the Oakland fire [Oakland, California] on television and you knew that your house was gone. Could you please repeat the story for us (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, what I mentioned was that I was watching television and saw my house go at least inflame with no one attending to it so I called my son, I was able to get my middle son Jaime [Jaime Williams] and he happened to be watching television and he knew it.  So the point I was trying to make was, for better or worse, I knew my house was done, cooked at one o'clock in the afternoon.  A lot of people had to wait the whole evening to find out whether their house was impacted or not.  As it turned out I was one of the first people to go the next morning to see about the fire.  I got up real early and was stopped by a policeman who said no one could go in the fire area.  But he was, I think from the Peninsula [San Francisco Peninsula] and he was assigned to help out and he was helpless because people kept asking for directions and instructions and he didn't know the neighborhood.  So I was just standing there and decided to help him.  So I would tell him if a person wants to go here that's how they get here or if they're looking for this store it's over here or what have you.  I thought we were getting along fine and the guy turned to me and he said, "Shut up and get in the car."  So I said, "Well maybe I pushed him across the line."  He was a policeman of course so I shut up and got into the car and he got in the car and he said, "Don't tell anybody," and he drove me through the fire zone.  I confirmed that my house was gone, I confirmed that some of my friends' houses were gone but luckily I confirmed that the wife of a good friend of mine who had spent the night protecting the house she was all right and their house was okay.  So we just did a quick tour but once we got out I said I noticed the one truck that they were allowing in the zone was from our utility, Pacific Gas and Electric [Pacific Gas and Electric Company], and I happened to be a director--a member of the board of directors which means I don't work there but I'm on the board of directors.  So I called up a friend of mine who was the area manager, Bob Harris [HistoryMaker Robert Lewis Harris] from PG&E [Pacific Gas and Electric Company] and I said, "Is there any way that I can get in to the fire zone?"  And Bob said, "I don't know, I don't know of any way except you are a director and as a director you should get what you want."  And I said, "Okay, I'm a director" and Bob met me with the jeep about twenty minutes later and we went in and I checked on twenty-two houses and all the twenty-two were fine.  I called people on their cell phone because the worst thing for people was the not knowing and either not knowing it was still there or not knowing the house had been burned down.  My house was totally burned down.  The only thing I had coming out of that fire were my car, the clothes on my back and fortunately that one old suit that you kept in the office for emergencies.  Other than that I didn't own anything.  But to me it wasn't the end of the world.  I lost the house, I still had friends, and I--we bought another house and moved on in our life.
Story_ID: 332783
Speaker 1: And you mentioned that your sons [Barry Williams, Jaime Williams, and Andrew Williams] were a little--they were embarrassed to have their friends over to the new home because--
Speaker 2: Well, we were in temporary housing first.  We lived with some friends and they were fortunate enough also to live part time with their mother [Adrienne Foster Williams] but you have a lot of reactions from the fire.  I remember my own mother [Ilza Berry Williams] called me immediately and said, "Did you lose everything?"  And I said, "Yes I lost everything."  And I was perfectly clear and her next question was, "Did you lose your Harvard diploma?"  And I said, "Didn't you hear me? I said I lost everything."  She said, "What are you going to do without your Harvard diploma?"  And I said, "Mom, I'm the boss.  No one at my job can say, 'Let me see your diploma to check on you (laughter)'."  I said, "I'm the boss."  And the point is, I had the education so the degree--the piece of paper--didn't matter.  I've never gotten it replaced.  Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] has offered.  You can pay ten dollars and we'll give you a new one, it doesn't matter to me.  I got the diploma and move on.  So what I was talking about with my children is that one good thing about the fire was some of the lessons they learned.  They learned--excuse my French--that shit can happen to anybody.  Doesn't matter whether you're good, bad, tall, short, white, black, sometime in your life shit can happen and they learned that it's important how you face that and recover from that.  My kids were very reluctant to invite their friends over after the fire even when we got our new house because it wasn't the old house, it wasn't the big house, it wasn't the big yard, it wasn't the pool.  And I told them your friends will come because they like you, because they care about you.  And when the kids came over they wanted to go back to the old house, they wanted to see it, they wanted to see that the fact that the chimney had burned down, and it was nothing left.  I think my kids learned not only that stuff happens but also the really important things in life are who your friends are and how they care and how you care about them and how they care for you and if somebody is only interested in you for material things so be it they can go their way.
Story_ID: 332784
Speaker 1: You've lost everything in your home but you still have your business [Williams Pacific Ventures, Inc.], right? So we're gonna start (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I sort of had my business because I moved into my new house and I lost my business partner--
Speaker 1: Oh dear.
Speaker 2: --and then as I said my series of Ds happened, then my brother [Otis Williams, Jr.] died.  So it wasn't the easiest getting back on our feet but we did and it makes it all the more important to us that we did, we did it.
Speaker 1: Okay and some of the other businesses you were involved in one was Flagg Power [C.N. Flagg Power, Inc.] in Connecticut.
Speaker 2: That was the first company that I purchased and ran as CEO.  It was an engineering construction company that focused on electric utilities.  It--the easiest way to explain it is that, on a nuclear power site every eighteen months you have to shut down the big nuclear reactors and then you get GE [General Electric] to come in and fix the rods and the complicated equipment.  While that is happening, that's not me that's a GE, but while that's happening and while the plant is down, you do everything else that needs to be done to the plant.  So what my company did was do the painting, the carpentry and all the other things while the plant was down for what we call a refueling.  So it was a very nifty business, it's done on a multiyear contract cost plus and I made a nice piece of change.
Speaker 1: Are you still involved with that?
Speaker 2: No we sold it.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, you sold it. And another company that you were involved in was your cable TV.
Speaker 2: The cable company [Falcon Community Ventures].  We took cable companies mainly located in rural areas where cable was the principal communication device, and we improved their subscribership of the systems and then sold them.  So I made a nice piece of change there.
Speaker 1: You are good at making small change, good change.
Story_ID: 332785
Speaker 1: I found it very interesting: you are a senior mediator with JAMS.
Speaker 2: I spent about seven or eight years with JAMS.
Speaker 1: Could you first tell us what JAMS is (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) JAMS stand for Judicial Arbitration and Mediation Services.  So an alternative to the court system is to take something to mediation slash arbitration and that's where you voluntarily go and try and seek a solution amongst the parties.  Now there is a technical difference between mediation and arbitration.  Mediation is where the mediator tries to get you together but he can't force a decision.  Arbitration is where the judge comes to a decision which you have to abide by.  But again I have this dual education, law and business, and I've always had this sense that I want to do something with my law.  I spent three years and paid a lot of money to go to law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and a member of the bar and I had this theory that if the goal of the process of mediation or arbitration is to settle.  I thought a lot of times it's probably, you're settling on a business basis, you're making business decisions on whether you want to settle now or pursue the case.  So I approached what is--what was and what is the most outstanding mediation arbitration firm JAMS and said, "I'd like to be a mediator.  I'm not a retired judge," that's the J in JAMS, "but I'd like to do some joint mediations and I'd like to really see if I could help settle cases by identifying the business considerations and how they interface with a solution."  So I did that for many years jointly with a very good friend of mine and significant person at JAMS, Judge Danny Weinstein [Daniel Weinstein], and Danny was wonderful because the first couple of days he said, "This is a friend of mine who is sitting in," and then I was his assistant and then I was his co mediator (laughter) and Danny gave me all the opportunity in the world.  I developed a specialty of complex business litigation where multi parties, multi issues and the area I very much liked was the environmental area and I eventually became a trustee or the trustee of an environmental site where I was not the mediator, I was in charge of cleaning up the site.  I had the litigation, the insurance, the technical side and what have you.  So for those reasons I had to leave JAMS because I was full time on a site.  But I came across a lot of interesting cases when I was at JAMS.  One of the cases [Pigford v. Glickman] that I spent a lot of time, more than a year on, was the settlement with the federal loan home board [Farmers Home Administration] and the black farmers of the South  where the black farmers had won a class action showing discrimination for years within this government agency in dispensing of loan funds, and so then we had to divvy up the money that had been put together as damages.  And we adjudicated many, many cases, and I did a lot of the individual cases, but we had many people doing that.  The thought was that there might be about twelve thousand black farmers.  I think we adjudicated more than twenty-eight thousand cases and there was a recent case saying that there were plenty more black farmers who either didn't have legal representation or what have you.  So we had many people adjudicating these suits.  And so I was with a panel of three other people: a former California state supreme court [Supreme Court of California] justice; a law professor; and the dean of a local law school.  And we tried to put together a quality control program so that there was some consistency in the rendering of decisions.  But I'm very proud of that case, and the opportunity through JAMS to work on a case like that.
Story_ID: 332786
Speaker 1: But I am a business person, and there are all types of businesses and mediation and other businesses, you know, you can only work so hard, you only can charge so much an hour. I'm an equity guy.  I like, as we say in my profession, sometimes I like to earn money while I sleep.  It's not dependent on how many hours I work or how much I charge that hour.  So I wanted to get back to the business side so that's what I do.  I get into situations where we can improve the value of the company and sell them and that's not related to the hours we put into it.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But I've done a lot of things.
Speaker 2: You certainly have.
Speaker 1: I've taught at Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California], I've taught in the entrepreneurship class, and I had a wonderful experience there.  I have always felt there was a difference between black entrepreneurs and regular entrepreneurs, so I taught a course in black entrepreneurship at the business school, at the University of Berkeley, graduate school of business, the Haas School [Haas School of Business, Berkeley, California]--
Speaker 2: But did you--oh (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Then wound up teaching the entrepreneurship class, in fact I got so far away from my own topic and never had time to do research I had to cut that off and try to do many things at one time.
Speaker 2: How does black entrepreneurship differ from regular entrepreneurship?
Speaker 1: There are a host of things, but clearly the access to capital is the main one.  And--but there are other factors, the type of business, whether it's service oriented or what have you.  I'd loved to find some time to do some more research, because I have a feel for five or six reasons but I don't ever have the time to academically substantiate them.  And I--It's one of the projects that I've had in my life.  I've got a bunch of projects to go (laughter).
Speaker 2: I'm sure, I'm sure.  We'll talk about some of those projects later.
Story_ID: 332787
Speaker 1: You also became the interim president and the CEO of American Management Company?
Speaker 2: American Management Association.
Speaker 1: Association--
Speaker 2: American Management Company International is the largest provider of business seminars, and I was on the board, and we had a dispute about the direction of the company and the board was split right down the middle.  And my friend who bought me in was on side and I was backing him.  And I had to do one of the toughest things in my life because we were split right down the middle, half the board wanted to back my guy and go forty-six left, half the board wanted to back somebody else and go forty-six right.  And I noticed, after this discussion took a year, that we were not attending to the business so I said, "Listen let's send my guy off into the sunset, treat him well, and let's move on."  And then I made the mistake of going to the bathroom.  When I came back in the room they said, "We like your solution, and you're the interim CEO, and you're the one who's got to tell him (laughter)."  So I probably lost a friendship over that, but we did the right thing, because no business is--no person is too big for the mission of a business particularly a nonprofit enterprise focusing on education.  But I had a wonderful experience being interim CEO and getting a new person in but in the meantime right sizing the organization and putting it on a better strategic path, and that was a wonderful experience.
Story_ID: 332788
Speaker 1: You've got so many business experiences that Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] honored you--your--Harvard Alumni [Harvard Alumni Association] gave you an honor.  In 1979 you got a Harvard Medal.
Speaker 2: Well I'm honored in that way--in the Harvard Medal.  Harvard gives out two to four medals a year for alumni who have done outstanding service in their profession and their community and for Harvard.  So I have always been very involved in Harvard activities, I've been very involved in alumni activities and was the president of the alumni organization at one time, but I also was in the governance structure of Harvard what we call not board of trustees but overseers who oversee the university.  And I think I was the second youngest ever member of the Board of Overseers.  So for a host of Harvard activities I got the Harvard Medal which I'm very proud of, only a couple a year.
Speaker 1: Well, see now you have something that replaced your diploma.
Speaker 2: I got another medal (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 332789
Speaker 1: You also co-founded the African American Experience Fund in connection with the National Park Service?
Speaker 2: Well I'm sixty-one, I'm moving on.  I've got a lot of new challenges in life and there are a host of things that motivate me now.  I'm a great reader.  That's not hard to understand having had a mother [Ilza Berry Williams] who taught reading, and my mother died a couple of years ago.  Prior to the time she died, she read a book a day.  She was sitting up in a senior's home, and her mind was one hundred percent but her body was aging and so one thing she could do was read and I decided she shouldn't read junk so I'd sort of read a little bit of the books I'd get her each week, because if you didn't get my mother a new book, she'd read the same one and she read them all.  And so I got back into reading and so I read a lot now and that's fortunate because my wife [HistoryMaker Lalita Tademy] is an author--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and you can't read enough if your wife's an author.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: I also am very interested in the theater.  So two years ago my wife and I financially backed and exec [executive] produced some new works being not masterpieces but new productions by up and coming artists.  We backed 'Levee James' [S.M. Shephard-Massat] a very highly acclaimed new play by a young black woman out of Atlanta [Georgia] Sherry Shephard-Massat, and we loved that experience and we attracted a lot more people to the theater than traditionally go black and white and the theater loved it exposing new people to what the theater was trying to accomplish.
Speaker 1: Where is the theater? Sorry (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is American Conservatory Theater here in San Francisco [California], and so this year we are exec producing an August Wilson play 'Gem of the Ocean' and it's obviously taken on a lot more significance because three months ago we heard August was going to die of lung cancer and three months practically to the day he passed away.  So I think it's very important to get this work shown to make sure that it gets shown to the diverse audience that he intended to see it.
Story_ID: 332790
Speaker 1: So you asked me a question, you asked me about my favorite and that is the National Park Service and specifically the African American Experience Fund.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: It's a little bit of a long story but I got to give you--
Speaker 2: Please.
Speaker 1: I've gotta give you two bits of introduction.  First a fellow director on the board with me it was the same board of the utility came to me and said, "You ought to go on the board of the National Park Foundation."  Well you've seen my resume, I don't need a lot of help to find things to do, I've got not enough time to do all the things I'm trying to do now.  So I thanked him very much and said you know, "I've got my list you've got your list, I respect your list please respect my list."  And he kept coming after me for over a year.  And finally something he said resonated with me.  He said this was the most fun thing he'd ever done in his life.  Here was a guy, as it turned out, he spent most of his life being a CEO in business but actually wrote children's stories as a hobby but he said he was looking for fun and this turned out to fill the bill.  And I looked at myself and I said whether I realize it or not sometime in my life I'm going to want to have fun (laughter) not just be busy and why don't I give it a try.  So I fell in love with the National Park Foundation.
Story_ID: 332791
Speaker 1: And you were telling us about the National Park--
Speaker 2: Well, I fell in love with the National Park Foundation.  The National Park Foundation is a federally chartered foundation.  It's the only federally chartered foundation in that space which raises money, private money, for the national parks and over the last couple of years we've been averaging raising $50 million a year for the National Park.  This is very important because the government principally is the principal source of money for our national parks.  But money tends to go to maintenance and capital projects, not to education, not to outreach, and one of our goals is to make sure there's lots of interpretive material so parks are not only where you go see a bear.  You know, we have this wonderful collection of American history in our parks.  They are an educational institution but you need the interpretive material to go with, and then you need the outreach programs to make sure kids and diverse people come to our parks.  Well, I happen to be in a meeting where we were putting together a program to fund the Civil War sites, and between the state parks and the national parks we've got about 80 percent of the Civil War embodied in our parks.  I thought it was a great project, but it's not what I came to spend three days to--it's not my principal cause.  Well, interesting enough a young black woman came up to me her name is Falona Heidelberg.  I remember that 'cause she had called me and I had meant to answer the call but when you get a call from somebody named Falona Heidelberg you wouldn't suspect she was a young black woman who really had something she wanted to talk to you about.  She asked me to make a long story short how I felt about the conversation 'cause she said there were seventeen national parks which principally deal with African American themes and because they are small parks, new parks, because they don't have bears and wolves they're not the attraction, they don't get the funding.  So we had just allocated a couple of hundred thousand dollars for Civil War, I went back in there and said, "Well how about a program for these seventeen parks?"  And she raised her hand and said, "I'd like to work with Director Williams [HistoryMaker Barry Williams] on this," and we looked at each and said, "We expect the same allocation for the national parks" and the group said yes.  We started the African American Experience Fund.  Our goal is to raise money for those seventeen national parks and historic sites, eighteen if you include the Underground Railroad because quite frankly I couldn't name them all, they're not household names.  You would know about the Martin Luther King center [Martin Luther King, Jr. National Historic Site, Atlanta, Georgia].  You might know about the Tuskegee Airmen site [Tuskegee Airmen National Historic Site, Tuskegee, Alabama], you wouldn't know about Nicodemus [Nicodemus National Historic Site, Nicodemus, Kansas], you wouldn't know about Cane River [Cane River Creole National Historical Park, Natchitoches, Louisiana], you wouldn't know about Maggie Walker [Maggie L. Walker National Historic Site, Richmond, Virginia], you wouldn't know about Frederick Douglass site [Frederick Douglass National Historic Site, Washington, D.C.].  Frederick Douglass is my favorite site.
Speaker 1: Why?
Speaker 2: A black man who went to the White House [Washington, D.C.] in the early 1920s who had a ten thousand volume book collection and a bottle of 1890 Chateau Montagne wine in his house and had a mansion in Anacostia Washington, D.C. which is a slum now as people call it that's where his mansion was.  And this has to be reserved, and one of goals is to get the books out of storage into a working collection.  But there are lots of these stories that we need to tell African Americans, that we need to tell Americans, that we need to tell children.  And one of the interesting discussions I've had was--I can't even remember the name of the picture, but I've always been impressed with Jewish people and how they tell their story and I said, "What's the difference between the Jewish experience and the African American experience?"  I don't know if these are the principal differences but the differences that resonated with me is that when you look at the Jewish story and how they've told the story it's not only a story of survival, it's a story of triumph.  And I believe if we characterized what we've done, which is an equal story not just of survival but of triumph, it would mean a lot.  The other thing Jewish people do is they teach their kids and so that's my focus in this African American Experience Fund to teach the kids.
Story_ID: 332792
Speaker 1: When we finished the last time we were talking about the African American Experience Fund.
Speaker 2: What I was mentioning is that last April we gave a dinner.  We were trying to figure out how to raise money so we could re-grant money to the parks--the eighteen.  So we decided to give a dinner, we gave a big old fancy rubber chicken dinner at the Rockefeller--Rainbow Room at Rockefeller Center [New York, New York] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In New York [New York].
Speaker 2: --and we honored John L. Lewis [sic. HistoryMaker John Lewis].  We were able to clear I believe it was $340,000 which we re-granted to the parks and so we're very excited because this year we're honoring Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] and we're going to do it at the Starlight Room [sic. Starlight Roof] at the Waldorf Astoria [Waldorf Astoria New York, New York, New York].  So we think we'll raise even more money.  We had additional seating capacity and we think General Powell will be a tremendous draw.  So I think we're getting this organization its ability to raise money and re-grant to the parks on a solid footing.
Story_ID: 332793
Speaker 1: You have done so much.  Is there anything I've forgotten in your professional career?
Speaker 2: I don't think anything was forgotten (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Some things you'd like to mention?
Speaker 2: --but I've had a great career and I've made enough money so I know that I'm not going to starve and my kids [Barry Williams, Jaime Williams, and Andrew Williams] are going to be okay.  So now what's important to me is impact of--a combination I would say of continuing the legacy of which I was a recipient.  I was a good athlete, I was smart but I didn't get here all myself lots of people helped me starting with my own family and that tradition reaching out and helping others is very important that we continue that tradition.  But the other thing is, I've been business school [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts], I've been to law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], I've lived overseas, I've worked in various corporate environments, I've done various things so the question is where do you want to make your impact?  Sure I still want to make a good buck, I've got an entrepreneurial streak in me that--you want to go around on the merry go round and see if you can grab the brass ring, but at the same time there are many other issue, institutions in life that if you take my bag of experiences and apply to them you could make a great impact.  And that's just becoming more and more important to me as a person.  It helps to have had a successful career that was satisfying and rewarding but I think more of my time will be on these projects.  I could list many more projects than that for you but I think I've told you some of the more exciting ones.
Story_ID: 332794
Speaker 1: You are so busy.  You must relax.  You have some hobbies and things, you like to play tennis and you like to travel is that right?
Speaker 2: Well, I used to like to play tennis.  My knees and other issues--I can't play tennis on a competitive level.  I used to play at least three times a week and really play competitively.  Now it's onto golf, Tiger Williams.  But no, I love to cook.
Speaker 1: What kinds of food do you cook?
Speaker 2: Anything unhealthy and if it's on a barbeque.  Anything with seasoning.  No I like--I find cooking relaxing.  I don't like to do every day cooking--no one does--but I like to enjoy a good meal.
Story_ID: 332795
Speaker 1: I told you I like to read.  I actually started something which has outgrown me and that is when my mother [Ilza Berry Williams] passed away, I did a couple of things.  I think I told you I set up a scholarship for college students who want to go into teaching in urban areas which is where my mother started out.  But another thing I did is I developed a reading list of books that I had read.  It was in honor of my mother and I sent them to a group of people and said here are fifteen or twenty great books I read in the year you would enjoy reading them and send it back to me with your list of books that you think that I would read.  Now people heard about it and they say, "Where's that list?"  So now I send it to 250 people and last week somebody said, "Where is your list?" and I said, "No I send it out in January when I finish the year.  I need some time to read books to tell you what I want to read."  I spend a lot of time reading and I very much enjoy that.
Speaker 2: What are some of the books that have been on your list?
Speaker 1: This year? You want a preview (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, just a few. Okay, last year.
Speaker 1: Let me talk about last year because one of the books and I think it's one of the greater books I've read.  I've read 'The Known World' by Edward Jones [Edward P. Jones] and I had been told to read 'The Known World' probably for a year or two and resisted it.  I resisted it because when people described it they said it's a book about black people who owned slaves as if that was an excuse to make slavery more palatable and that's how you would describe the book.  It certainly is involving black people who owned slaves and I think it's interesting to reflect that if you were a free black person in an agricultural agrarian economy which was based on slave labor and you had to compete you'd probably own slaves, I would own slaves (laughter).  But the book is really about the human condition and relationships being a slave or not and it is just a most wonderful, wonderful book.  This year, I really liked 'The Kite Runner' [Khaled Hosseini]; I like ethnic books.  'Kite Runner' is about an Afghanistan family and their history here and in Afghanistan.  There is an absolute crazy woman called Zadie Smith.  She's a young black British writer and she's written her third book called 'On Beauty.'  This--she is one of the best at characterizations, not so much on story line but on characterization.  I think she just invents characters 'cause she's so good at depicting their attributes but she's great on characterizations and relationships and that's a wonderful book.  So I spent a lot of time reading.
Story_ID: 332796
Speaker 1: Spent a lot of time traveling.  We travel once a quarter so this year we did Bermuda where we have some great friends.  We did France and England and went to the Paris Air Show [Paris, France].  We did China in November, we go Vietnam and in January my pick we go to back Rio de Janeiro, Brazil (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Why do--
Speaker 1: We go to other places in Brazil but Brazil fascinates me.
Speaker 2: Why Brazil? Why Rio de Janeiro? What's so--?
Speaker 1: Well, I have always been intrigued with Brazil.  It's Portuguese and even though most of the Portuguese people in my father's [Otis Williams, Sr.] hometown New Bedford [Massachusetts] were from the Cape Verde islands off of Africa and not from Brazil, Portuguese extraction, culture has always interested me.  But historically, more blacks were sent to Brazil from Africa than ever came to the United States.  Slavery was abolished in Brazil before it was abolished in the United States [sic.].  So Brazil has great respect although I wouldn't say it, still has issues with racism too and that intersection between economics and racism are still there, but at the same time there is a great respect for diversity and culture and traditions.  There's a famous saying and it's actually Spanish it's, "El que no tocar flecha" excuse me, "El que no tira flecha, toca tambor."
Speaker 2: And it means?
Speaker 1: It means who ever doesn't, tira, draw the bow beats the drum.  It means all of us are of one origin or another, Indian, African, or what have you.
Speaker 2: Oh, that's a good (unclear).
Speaker 1: I'm horrible at going from Portuguese to Spanish, you see me stumbling I get totally confused.  So that's what I do, I spend a lot of time entertaining.
Story_ID: 332797
Speaker 1: I guess I forgot the most important thing.
Speaker 2: What's that?
Speaker 1: I spend a lot of time with my family.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) you do that?
Speaker 1: I like my family, and I'm trying to create that environment where I grew up in where you got together.  So we get together for a lot of meals, spend some time together and (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, that's--shall we talk about your family now?
Speaker 1: Sure
Speaker 2: You've talked about your parents [Ilza Berry Williams and Otis Williams, Sr.] and brothers we never talked about your sons.
Speaker 1: Well, I have three.  I have Barry Chandler Williams [Barry Williams], he's twenty-seven and Jaime Alexander Williams [Jaime Williams] who is twenty-six, and Andrew Foster Williams [Andrew Williams] who is twenty-three.
Speaker 2: Can you tell us about them?
Speaker 1: So Barry Chandler, Chandler is the maiden name of my former mother-in-law [Vera Chandler Foster], Jaime Alexander that's the Alexander in my family name, Thomas Alexander Berry, and Andrew Foster is the Foster from my former wife's [Adrienne Foster Williams] family.  So I'm trying to keep that tradition.  My sons are great kids.  They've had lots of experiences.  They've seen life from all sides and they're taking it to the next generation.  My oldest son says whenever they do something that surprises me he said, "What do you expect from the children of the generation that pushed the envelope?  We're the next stage of the envelope." So my--start with my youngest son.  He's finishing school now.  He is a musician.
Speaker 2: What does he play?
Speaker 1: Well parents would understand this.  After eighteen years of classical music training, he's playing the keyboard, does hip hop, and does jazz poetry (laughter).  He also has his own business.  He has electronic publishing and he publishes music for people his age where you publish one CD cut or what have you, so he is entirely self-sufficient.  So he's doing wonderfully.  My middle son is about an inch taller than I am but he is not a basketball player.  He loves to play basketball, he's an engineer, works for a large engineering firm and my oldest son, I put him last 'cause you'd love this, my oldest son works for the agency who represents 50 Cent so everybody likes to hear that (laughter).  You've heard of 50 Cent?
Speaker 2: Well tell all the people that don't know.
Speaker 1: They know.  Anybody ten years old know 50 Cent the hottest hip hop singer.
Speaker 2: Well, okay.
Speaker 1: You obviously listen to '28 Questions' [sic. '21 Questions'].
Speaker 2: Yes. Yes, I have.
Speaker 1: So this is the form of communication for that generation and 50 Cent is quite an enterprise.  He endorses a Reebok sneaker, he has a clothing line, line of restaurants, he's doing a movie ['Get Rich or Die Tryin''] which will come out in a month.  He is quite an enterprise and what my son does is assist him in logistics on tours but he also does the branding and I say that because when I grew up if you were an Afro- African American there was a handful of professions you would think about.  It was the lawyer/doctor or teacher or educator or minister that was about it.  So what pleases me now is that young African Americans understand the range of things and I hope more go into energy.  That's the new frontier of this generation.  I hope more go into the entertainment business that's where the money is.  So--and even understanding what branding means and how you brand an image and how that sells which is what my son is doing.  It is a very important new area that younger people ought to think about.  I hope some become doctors, lawyers, Indian [Native American] chiefs but there are a lot of other frontiers that they ought to experience.
Speaker 2: You don't have any grandchildren yet?
Speaker 1: No but I'm waiting.
Speaker 2: You're waiting.
Speaker 1: I have one son married; I think I have another son about to get married.  I hope my son that's married doesn't provide me grandchildren 'cause, right away, his wife in his law school, first year student and I hope she's home studying.
Speaker 2: And what's her name?
Speaker 1: She has a very interesting name.  Her maiden name was Bari B-A-R-I al-Hakim.  After 9/11 [September 11, 2001] and getting stopped in the airports for being black, tall and with a name like al-Hakim she gladly gave up the women's lib [liberation] and adopted my son's name.  So she's Bari Williams [Bari al-Hakim Williams] now, no longer stopped in every airport.  But she's in law school at Hastings [University of California, Hastings College of the Law, San Francisco, California] which is the law school here and they're a young couple facing all the challenges of life.  So that's why I like to cook; she needs somebody to cook a meal for her so between her mother and I we keep them fed.
Story_ID: 332798
Speaker 1: And you've remarried.  You have a second wife and her name is?
Speaker 2: I remarried, I was married [to Adrienne Foster Williams] for a long time, got a divorce.  I then had a long term relationship with another woman.  We could somehow never get to the next level and then I hadn't quite given up but I wasn't in any hurry to be looking and sometimes when you're not looking--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --you find someone.  So I'm married to [HistoryMaker] Lalita Tademy, and she's a very interesting person because if she were sitting here she would describe much of her life as I describe my life.  Education was key in her family, family was key in her family and she had a very successful career in high tech ending up as a general manager at Sun Microsystems [Sun Microsystems, Inc.].  But she got out of there it was not what she wanted to do.  She literally burned out and she got into genealogy.  She actually tried a couple of things.  She burned all of what she tried to call paintings, so that didn't work but she got into genealogy and felt that the stories were so compelling that she'd try and write a book.  She had never written a book.  So she wrote a book, 'Cane River' [Lalita Tademy] the Cane River region of Louisiana and it was very successful.  It was an Oprah pick [Oprah's Book Club], it's still selling and now she just completed her second book 'Red River' [Lalita Tademy].  It is a story of her father's family.  It is again multigenerational and it's the story of the transference of values generation to generation and I love it.  I haven't read the final final copy; she's done a lot of hard work.  A book takes a long time to write, particularly when it's researched based.  They call it fiction but our legal system forces you to call things fiction because otherwise not only do you have to get release from everybody but everything has to be said in the order it actually happened and you need to dramatize certain things in a book to get the points across.  So--but it's a lot of work so--five years it took to write the second book from day one.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you--
Speaker 2: It's an interesting story because in the first book she was rejected by twelve--I'll tell you this is a book that was a bestseller Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] pick.  She was rejected twelve times by agents.  It was her thirteenth agent who accepted her, and I think she demonstrates that if you believe in your work you'll find a way to do it.  And similarly in this book it was rejected a couple of times too so maybe that's good luck maybe it means it will be a great book because it similarly got rejected by people.  But she felt she needed to tell the story.  This case it was rejected because a lot of people wanted 'Cane River 2' and weren't open to other stories of equal value.  But I am very interested in this next book.  I probably violated everything my wife would let me do, but talking too much about the book.  I don't mean to jinx it but it starts out with Reconstruction and that's a period that we really don't study and we don't understand that in Reconstruction, blacks were more at risk than in slavery.  The system--the safety net as horrible as it was of slavery at least afforded some protection.  In Reconstruction, anything can happen.  We were talking to her publisher and she said, "Life repeats itself."  Here we are with the incident in New Orleans [Louisiana], a bunch of poor disenfranchised black and white people, quote, waiting for the republicans to come in.  That was reconstruction all over again (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's true.
Speaker 2: Life has its parallels so I'm looking forward to this book.  I'm the associate assistant vice president of marketing that's what I've named myself so I'm going to make sure this book gets to the audience that I believe needs to read it.
Story_ID: 332799
Speaker 1: You had mentioned before that your family gets together, not only to eat your food, but what are some of the other things?  You had mentioned that your family had a family reunion?
Speaker 2: Well, we've never had a family reunion because my generation represents what a lot of us have done.  It's not that we didn't disrespect the way our parents raised us, it's that we were looking for new frontiers.  So you've got a family--my family which only lives, what an hour/hour and a half band of itself in New York and an hour/hour and a half band of itself in Massachusetts.  I've got three cousins in Miami [Florida], I've got two cousins living Atlanta [Georgia], I've got a cousin living in Memphis [Tennessee], my brother [Keith Williams] and I live out here [California], I've got three cousins living in Denver [Colorado] all first generation moving with their dream, their sense of opportunity.  So we decided it's time to have a family reunion so we had one and it was a lot of fun.  I'm going to try and do one again this year.
Speaker 1: About how many people attended?
Speaker 2: Oh well, you know in my family as I told you we don't distinguish between who is real family and who is not.  There probably were about sixty people and I'm not sure all of them were family but a lot of people we've known for a long time said, "Hey, we're coming and having some fun."
Speaker 1: Where was it held?
Speaker 2: In my backyard, I cooked (laughter).  What else?  And we just--that's what we did, we just spent some time with each other and I mentioned we're going to go to Brazil.  That's actually partially a family trip and it's just a time to spend some time with each other.  It's the second time we've done it.
Story_ID: 332800
Speaker 1: I have to tell you a cute story, because my wife [HistoryMaker Lalita Tademy] and I dated, I would say a year and a half, before we got married--before we got proposed to get married.  So on a woman's timetable that's a long time, and a man's timetable boy that's rushing at break neck speed to commitment, that magic C word which I'm still learning how to pronounce and say.  But the reason it took eighteen months is I knew that this was the woman for me and my life and what I wanted to do and what have you, and as I was saying before is one of the things she's wonderful is that she's had the business experience so she can relate to what I do most of the time, but also she brings a whole new creative world.  And my wife has said the greatest day in her life is when she knew more authors than business people.  That was the crossover day in her life, and she's trying to make sure it's true for me, too, and we're getting there.  But the reason it took so long is I knew after a year, this is the person I wanted to marry.
Story_ID: 332801
Speaker 1: You had told me a cute story.
Speaker 2: Well, I was telling you about after a year of dating--
Speaker 1: Right, right, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I knew this is the woman [HistoryMaker Lalita Tademy] that I want to marry but I also wanted to do it in a unique way that was me.  So we had been to Brazil the prior year with our group of friends and we went down to see a wonderful festival which I also think is one of the great wonders of the world.  It's the festival of either you could say Lemanja or Yemaya.  Lemanja or Yemaya is the goddess of the sea.  She is the one who seduces sailors into the sea.  They don't drown, they're not shipwrecked, they're seduced by the beauty of Lemanja/Yemaya.  So on New Year's Eve there was is a famous ceremony where you dress in white, go down to the seashore and send flowers out to the goddess of the sea in the hope that she will release your loved ones and be attracted by the flowers.  Now you have to understand this takes place in Copacabana [Rio de Janeiro, Brazil] and there are 3 million people and they're all dressed in white and all of us are drunk, you know we're having a good time.
Speaker 1: That makes it work.
Speaker 2: So we went back to that and that's where I proposed.  I couldn't believe that she didn't get it 'cause she said, "Why are we going back there?  It's such a wonderful experience; it couldn't be the same," and I said, "It's even going to be better."  And then at the last minute I invited my three sons [Barry Williams, Jaime Williams, and Andrew Williams] and my son's fiancee [Bari al-Hakim Williams].  Everybody could figure it out, we were getting married.  So we do family things and it won't be the same crowd but it will be family in Brazil again and we haven't been for two years.
Story_ID: 332802
Speaker 1: You asked me about your wife's [HistoryMaker Lalita Tademy] family (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Well, the only reason I mentioned that is we talked an awful lot about my family but if you read my wife's book ['Cane River,' Lalita Tademy], the arch of it is how generations build on prior generations and as it happens in African American families, it's women who help that leap from generation to generation even if there are strong men involved.  You know I think all our families there are women like that; there are strong men like that, and fortunately for my wife she can go back four generations.  I can't go back that far but I just want to say that I think this project is terrific for trying to get this down.  Now, I'm highly critical, 'cause I think that if you look at how you're doing it you ought to go to Microsoft and Microsoft ought to give you the technology to reduce the cost--the processing cost.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause this is so important, and what I liked particularly what I heard by what she did in Chicago [Illinois] where she weren't just looking for the [HistoryMaker] Barry Williams who've been successful in business or so and so.  But you're looking at the porters--the people who helped create institutions.  My step-grandfather he was a chef New York [New York], New Haven [Connecticut] and Boston [Massachusetts] that's what black people do.  They were porters and chefs on that train and I remember I think I was eight the biggest gift I got was I got to travel along from New York to Boston.  Now you know, my grandfather was the only chef every damn person, conductor was looking out for me but I thought I was doing it on my own.  But those are key parts of our history.
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: It personally hurts me that you can't find a black porter, you can't find practically a black baggage handler, and it's hard to find a black restaurant more and more.  It's hard to find a black barber shop.  I think in this move to advance and get better, we got to understand that we've got to preserve our institutions.  Not everybody is going to go out downfield and take the long pass.  So we've all got to help each other push forward.  That's what I had to say.
Story_ID: 332803
Speaker 1: Your resume is so extensive.  Are there any group or organizations that you've belonged to that you'd like to tell us about?
Speaker 2: Well I think I should mention one other group that I'm very proud of.  When I worked at Bechtel [Bechtel Group, Inc.; Bechtel Corporation] there were five or six other African Americans.  Bechtel was located in San Francisco [California]. We all lived in Oakland [California] and on Friday, as you know, the traffic is very bad so we decided wouldn't it be good just to get together and have a drink for an hour or so until the traffic died down.  That was very therapeutic because somebody would say, "You wouldn't believe what happened to me on the job this week.  My boss did the X, my co-worker did X."  Somebody said, "You think that's bad? You ought to hear what happened on my job."  By the time we got finished not only did we have a good drink or two but everybody felt fine and didn't go home and beat their wives and children (laughter) because they got it out of their system the frustrations that naturally occur in a job.  We took in more people and finally at one time we had a roster of 140 people and we'd get together four times a year for dinner.  Now unfortunately, it got started with a bunch of guys and we never could get over what the purpose was.  Half the guys saying we should include women and the other half saying no this is a guy thing and that was my greatest disappointment we couldn't reach some consensus that way.  But it was a wonderful clearinghouse for ideas, and if you were new in town or you're one business sector this afforded you a chance to meet some other people.  We always had a topic.  One time the topic was prostate cancer, why you should get a checkup.  Other times were about politics or some important business or what have you issue.  Now I purposely left out the name of the group.  The name of the group was called The Board.  And everybody always says, "How did you get the name The Board?"  The person responsible was my secretary 'cause about three o'clock on Friday I would say I forgot call these nine or ten people and tell them I want to have a drink with them and it would be left to her to do it.  Well I've got to tell you young black men trying to get ahead in the corporate world are not responsive to a secretary calling them on Friday saying somebody telling them to come have a drink and if they weren't responsive their secretaries were not responsive to immediately getting them the message.  So my secretary came up with the idea of calling it The Board.  So she would call at three o'clock and said, "Remind your boss there is a board meeting for (unclear) drinks (laughter)."  That's how we became The Board and the name stuck ever once.  But it was a wonderful organization.  I've tried to pass it on, no one wants to do the damn work but we're trying to figure out a way to preserve this.  We're trying to do something more than just invite women for the Christmas party because obviously women in business have the same issues as men in business and we'll get it going.  So that's an organization that I feel really proud of.  I didn't start it but I led it for many years and hope to find a way to perpetuate it and have somebody take it to the next step.
Story_ID: 332804
Speaker 1: But as I told you, it doesn't have to be an organization.  You asked me what I'm most proud of this year.  A law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] friend [Robert Tubman] of mine from Liberia, his brother [Winston Tubman] who's also a friend decided to run for president of war-ravaged Liberia.  They've had brothers killed in the many years of conflict.  Everybody in Liberia has suffered a lot.  When I heard that they wanted to go back now that there is peace in Liberia and help in the reconstructing of that country democratically, economically and what have you, I said, "I'll help."  I remember my wife [HistoryMaker Lalita Tademy] said, "What in the world do you care about what's going on in Liberia?  You've got a plate load."  And I said, "It's important that we support our friends.  It's important that black people know our international links and, Liberia, these are our people directly."
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: So we gave a couple of fundraisers and raised some money for them and the election is today and we'll see what happens and whether he wins or loses it doesn't matter to me, I hope he wins of course.  But I remember because the rubber hits the road when you ask people for money and I ask a lot of people for a lot of money for a lot of causes and I told people, "I need help on this one, this is important."  And I was amazed the support that I was able to generate including amongst a lot of white people.  I always have to be careful because my son says, "If you want to be called black then they're white, if you want to be called African American you've got to say Caucasian."  So I shift between African American and black, I shift between white and Caucasian.  But I just was overwhelmed with the support when people understood what they were trying to do 'cause they have an option, they don't have to go back there.  But to go back and help their country put itself on its feet.  I'm just very proud of that and it just says to me that as black people we have to have a broad spectrum of cares.  We need to support a whole lot of things and I know it's not our tradition because survival--just surviving has been our tradition but I hope that we also find a place to always help others whether they directly help us or not because somebody's helped you, other people need help.  We're now in a position to be the providers of help.
Story_ID: 332805
Speaker 1: You had also mentioned that you only have one hero which was Nelson Mandela.
Speaker 2: Well, I think I told you that I'm against heroes, 'cause I think there are people who can make all types of contributions and I'm not sure why we call certain people heroes in that.  You go off and fight a war--and I'm intrigued with this series on television 'Rome' about Julius Caesar.  Caesar gets all the accolades but Caesar's on a white horse and everybody else is fighting in the trenches; they're heroes, they did the fighting, but Caesar got the rewards.  So that's been my reluctance for heroes plus--'cause I think everybody makes a contribution and I also think you can learn from everybody.  So why do you call certain people heroes that you can learn from when there are many other people you don't call heroes.  But I'll tell you, under any definition there is one hero, and that's Nelson Mandela.  Not only for what he stood for but how he conducted himself.  I don't understand why the man is not full of hate.  That--why he is so focused on the long term goal and how he can push aside these intermediate stuff.  He's my hero for what he did, what he's done.  He's my hero because I want to learn that.  If it was me I would've reacted differently.  If it was me in other situations I think I'd get caught up in what goes on down the way.  I'd really like to model myself and situations the way Nelson Mandela did.  I saw Nelson Mandela come to the Oakland Coliseum [Oakland-Alameda County Coliseum, Oakland, California].  I had a box there with my friends and children; it's one of the greatest days of my life.  I saw Nelson Mandela when he came to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and he rocked Harvard Yard.  Harvard Yard has never rocked like that and a couple of years ago I was a U.S. delegate to the world conference on national parks [IUCN World Parks Congress].  So I went to Durban, South Africa and there was Nelson Mandela.  And--that's my definition of a hero.  I hope we can produce some more.
Story_ID: 332806
Speaker 1: Is there anything else you'd like to add that we haven't asked?
Speaker 2: Well, I hope you understand this has been as interesting for me as maybe it has been interesting for you because although I've talked about a lot of things all I've done is raise issues about what else we've got to do.  So maybe it's time to end because I want to get back to work and to working on some of these issues instead of talking about things in the past.  There's a lot to do, and I think the key to it is that we need to spend a lot more time with each other to understand how we can help and we have to get comfortable that you shouldn't feel bad because you don't have a lot of dollars.  Dollars are one component in these many challenges we have in life but everybody can contribute and it is equally as valuable, some of the hands on and other things you can do for people than just sending the dollar.  We're struggling with Katrina [Hurricane Katrina].  I think the Red Cross [American Red Cross] overall does a good job.  They did a great job in the Oakland fire [Oakland, California], and we sent some money there and we sent some miles to provide hotel rooms for people, but what I'm focusing on now is on the local institutions, the churches that house people, the universities, and I'm focusing even on non-monetary ways we can get New Orleans [Louisiana] back on its feet and moving forward.
Story_ID: 332807
Speaker 1: Anything else that you, you've always, "Oh I want to do that?"
Speaker 2: You're asking the wrong person that question (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Am I? Why?
Speaker 2: In China I said, "I'm sixty-one years old, I have no intention of dying anytime soon.  However I have no intention of letting time drift by and not doing at least ten more things that are crucial in my life."  So I started the process and I'm only in the process of, what are the ten things and when am I going to do them?  I told you Tut has been my stepbrother--King Tut [Tutankhamun] all my life.  My cousin first time out the box was a co-producer of 'The Wiz.'  I want to be Kenny Harper [Kenneth Harper] and 'The Wiz' with my production of Tut so Tut's on my list.  There is a book I want to write, there is also a book I want to do on the eighteen African American sites.  I saw a book about the Jewish Holocaust, and it was funded by private corporations and it provided a funding mechanism for that cause and I think if we could write a nice table top book which explains these sites that not only will be an educational device but people will buy it and the money will be a constant source of support for the African American Experience Fund.  I've got places I want to travel.  I've never been India.  That's a whole culture that I don't understand.  I want to go back to Egypt.  There are parts of Africa that I still would like to spend a lot more time in.  Being Portuguese speaking I've never been to Angola and Mozambique so I don't know how that plays.  I think I'm the only American that's been to South Africa but hasn't been to Cape Town 'cause I spent all my time in Pretoria [South Africa], Johannesburg [South Africa] and Durban [South Africa] so there's a lot of South Africa to see and understand.  I think those are--if I were twenty years younger I'd pick up my stakes and go to South Africa.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: That's how strongly I feel on the potential of South Africa.
Speaker 1: Interesting.
Speaker 2: For all the bad things that happened with the British and Dutch that country has a lot of resources and it has the basic infrastructure.  They're faced with unemployment and health issues and they're not self-sufficient in energy but they're going to get on top of those and I think it's going to be with Indias and Chinas in the future in terms of the power.
Speaker 1: What do you think (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So I've got a lot of things.
Speaker 1: You certainly do. You will be--you will never be bored.
Story_ID: 332808
Speaker 1: When you think on, back on your life do you have any regrets or something that you either wish you could do over or do differently?
Speaker 2: Well I'm a very selfish, inward person.  I review my life all the time and so I am very highly critical of things I didn't do or didn't do as well or didn't do as fully.  But at the same time you can't spend all your time with regrets.  You've just got to do as much as you can.  When I said to my wife [HistoryMaker Lalita Tademy] the other day I have business regrets she laughed.  She said, "You've been so successful," but I said, "Well if I had done this I could have succeeded in this area if I spent full time on it."  And she said, "Yeah but remember if you did do that you wouldn't have been able to spend time in other areas."  I didn't tell you one of the greatest journeys of my life through an arrangement that we both agreed on.
Speaker 1: You and your wife?
Speaker 2: Yes, I actually raised my kids [Barry Williams, Jaime Williams, and Andrew Williams] as a single parent with lots of help--
Speaker 1: Did you--?
Speaker 2: --from family and others.  But I think few very successful business people had the time to take a couple of years off and focus on their kids.  Sure, during that time I didn't get as far in business but I have experiences I wouldn't trade with anybody.
Speaker 1: The priceless ones.
Speaker 2: So now, I probably wish that I would have appreciated what we could learn from people that no longer here like our parents.  I wish we had a (unclear) history of them, but I strongly believe you can't spend all your time criticizing, analyzing the past you've got to move forward.  If I had one thing to say to people I said, make sure you do everything at a young age (laughter).  No I don't remember in that time I traveled around the world I was on Mykonos Island in Greece.  I was sitting there the whole trip.  Most beautiful beaches in the world eating the cheese, the bread with the wine and there was a seventy year old couple, they'd worked hard all their life and they were sitting there with a certain amount of frustration and they said, "We spent all of our life to be able to enjoy this and now we don't have the strength, the energy to enjoy it the way we pictured it."  I'm sure they were enjoying it.  But all I say is that there are some experiences you got to enjoy now.  There are some you can enjoy much later in your life, but don't put off everything get the exposure.  I think it's critical in my life that I did different things; it's critical that I got the international experience.  Those are critical and naturally when you have them they lead to things, you get more opportunity because it builds on it.  So yeah we all sit there and have our regrets but--
Speaker 1: Nothing major.
Speaker 2: But I think it's important to spend some time on your regrets.  I think it's helpful to not only be reflective but to remind yourself what you did and why you made this choice or that choice but then get comfortable with it and move on.
Story_ID: 332809
Speaker 1: What are your hopes and concerns for the African American community?
Speaker 2: Boy, I think my hope and concern is that we can work better together.  All of us are on a broad spectrum.  I hope that we can take prime responsibility for making our children's lives better.  So I've got a hell of an agenda for the black community.  I hope that we won't depend on a few colorful leaders but that everybody will join and play a role in this and as I said I really hope that we start by focusing on kids.
Story_ID: 332810
Speaker 1: What values do you consider to be very important that you'd like to pass on?
Speaker 2: Well I think that the value that I'd like to pass on is, you can organize your life around a series of interests and, if you've got a lot of energy and you're a little organized, you can do more things than you think you can.  I used to say I've got all the time in the world to do the things I want to do and not much time to do the things I want to do--don't want to do (laughter).  But that's probably somewhat true, but if you try and you care it's amazing how effective you can be in helping a lot of people and letting other people help you and we can all get a lot accomplished.  So I think the value is don't have an agenda about why you should do something.  Don't wait 'til someone does something so that you'll do something in return.  Just do it.  If that's what you believe in and I've always found that eventually good things happen.
Story_ID: 332811
Speaker 1: When you look back on your life, what stands out the most?
Speaker 2: I think what stands out the most in my life is that I've been able to move around, sometimes lead a nontraditional life, and accomplish a lot of things that I wanted to do in my life.  I think the other thing stands out if you know anything about me is just the absolute joy of my kids [Barry Williams, Jaime Williams, and Andrew Williams].  They're--when I grew up the model was, grow up and be independent as much as you can.  I can assure you that by the time I had turned nineteen, the information flow to my parents [Ilza Berry Williams and Otis Williams, Sr.] stopped and the only thing my parents heard was what I wanted to tell them and coincidentally it was only good stuff.  This is a different generation; it's very sophisticated, very mature.  My kids initiate and are willing to talk to me about things that I can't believe and so I'm finding I'm more involved in parenting now, not so much as telling but listening than ever before.  When I went to China, I was amazed; China is the number one country now in terms of adoption.  It has surpassed the eastern European countries, it has surpassed Russia in providing for adoptions and the major people adopting Chinese girls--the Chinese for some reason don't value women and I don't know they're going to have more boys unless they keep a bunch of girls there but--Spanish in thrones [sic. droves].  Spanish people adopting young Chinese babies.  I almost thought of adopting a kid.  I want to work with younger, younger, younger kids.
Story_ID: 332812
Speaker 1: You have children [Barry Williams, Jaime Williams, and Andrew Williams], in the future you may have grandchildren.  Is there a message you want to give to your children or your possible grandchildren?
Speaker 2: Well I want them to have fun in life.  I want them not only to be successful but to have fun, and I want them to care about others as well as themselves I think that's very important.  But to not be so selfish that all of it is focused on their own selves or own family and I think if you saw my sons they got that message already and they are wonderful examples.  They are helpers in their communities of their friends.
Story_ID: 332813
Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered?  What do you want people to say about you?
Speaker 2: Well I would say two ways.  I just answered your question when you said what word do you use the most I think it's well (laughter).  Well is summation word.  Maybe I like the word well.
Speaker 1: Well is a good word.
Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered as someone who had impact in a lot of areas and showed concern beyond his little sphere.  But I have to say there is a second one.  I want to be the person--remembered as a person who worked hard in creating institutions that lasted between generations.  I think that's the key, I think that we need to spend a lot of focus on people but institutions help people.  I think if we get some institutions going, and that's why I like this African American Experience Fund and why I want to do the table book 'cause it's a vehicle for helping people on a larger scale than just one on one and it makes it easier to help people when you have institutions.  And I'm fascinated by institutions, I just recently went on a not for profit board.  Now it deals with the environment.  So you could say well yeah, "But why are you really doing it?  You don't get paid and it takes a lot of time."  We allocate $40 million a year for environmental causes.  I want to understand those money flows and how those policy decisions are made that's what an institution means.  So I'd like to--that's what I say I said I've given on the board trying to find somebody else, I will never give up because it's an institution, it's a vehicle for young African Americans in business to get together.  We need more institutions like this so building some institutions.
Speaker 1: That's wonderful and I want to thank you.  This has been a wonderful evening.  You've been so gracious to give of your time.  You've had a wonderful life and I want to thank you for sharing with us.
Speaker 2: Well I have one request and that is you only covered the first sixty-one years of my life.  I intend to live a long time, I intend to have a resume that puts that one to shame.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I intend to accomplish far more than I've done so far.  So I hope facing histories [The HistoryMakers] will come back in ten or twenty years and we'll have something more to talk about (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, I think I plan on being here, and in twenty years and I will come back and we will finish--
Speaker 2: All right. It's a deal.
Speaker 1: --and we will complete this interview.
Story_ID: 332152
Speaker 1: That has to be San Francisco [California], first son Barry Chandler [Barry Williams] and this should be around 1978.  Me with hair, very important picture and my godmother Grace Messiah.
Speaker 2: That's lunch at Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts] during commencement exercises.  I would say that would be roughly in the--around about 1990. I hope I'm not too far off.  It might be a couple of years later than that but I was president of the Harvard Alumni [Harvard Alumni Association] and the afternoon commencement speaker was the president of the Czech Republic and Mr. Havel [Vaclav Havel], H-A-V-E-L and he's an author so that was kind of interesting.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Christmas which always is at my house and always involves family.  That's probably the last Christmas that my mother [Ilza Berry Williams] could attend so I'm in the front row with my mother on the end of the couch.  In the picture behind me is my brother [Keith Williams] and his wife [Renee Proctor Williams] and next to my brother would be his son [Christopher Williams] and his son's wife [Michelle Gilliam Williams] and on the other side of my brother's wife would be his granddaughter [Jordan Williams].  She is being held by my son, so then I would have at least one more son in the picture.  I only had one son in the picture probably because the other son is taking the picture.  So Andrew [Andrew Williams] my youngest son is on one end, Barry Chandler is on the other end.  In the front is my brother's stepdaughter [Quineen Shelton] and on the far right are a stepson [Jarron Shelton] and his son.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next.
Speaker 2: That would be my first son's graduation from high school Head-Royce [Head-Royce School] in Oakland [California].  He would've--it would have had to have been about 1995 and in the picture are myself and my mother.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next.
Speaker 2: That was when Bill Bradley was running for the presidency.  It was a function I hosted for him so you have Bill Bradley and myself and my son Andrew shaking his hand, and my then girlfriend Nettie Anthony Harris [ph.].  Boy she would love to get the picture.
Speaker 1: This would have been my youngest son's graduation from high school.  He attended University High School [San Francisco University High School] in San Francisco [California], he's the one in the middle and either side of me are my other sons Jaime [Jaime Williams] to my right in the picture and to my left in the picture is Barry and included in the picture is my first wife Adrienne Foster Williams and in the middle is her brother's [Luther Foster, III] daughter Janet Foster.  You want a date?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yes please.
Speaker 1: Let me do some calculations '82 [1982].
Speaker 2: It says '63 [1963].
Speaker 1: No it can't be '63 [1963].  What's it say there?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DICUSSION)
Speaker 1: No it can't be it has to be oh 6/03/2000 [June 3, 2000].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That's the same day with my son Andrew and myself at his graduation.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next.
Speaker 1: That is at my first son Barry's graduation and I gave you the date before, but that is a woman who--her name is Nettie Hamilton [ph.] and she's significant because we met her at a party.  She was the caterer and we asked her would she do catering for us and then it turned out that we started cooking--having her cook for us and then she was our housekeeper for twelve years.  So she lived through divorces and everything like that and a very instrumental person in my sons' lives.
Speaker 2: I have a place in Cancun, Mexico that's my son and I.  We go once a year and that's my son Barry.  That's probably a good five or six years ago but we have a timeshare in Cancun.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next.
Speaker 2: That's that same Harvard graduation that I mentioned where I was president of the alumni organization so I am being escorted in.  I led the parade.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next.
Speaker 2: This one I got right this is like 1992. I'm there with a person I met in Venezuela, Carlos Ignacio Mendoza and that's Carlos' wife and his daughter and some of their friends.  But I worked with him in Venezuela in 1973 and '4 [1974], and we've been friends ever since.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next.
Speaker 2: I can describe two of the people there.  That's me in front sitting closest to this side which would be my left is Robert Tubman from Liberia.  Robert Tubman and I went to law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  It is his brother Winston [Winston Tubman] who is running for the presidency.  The other two are two Liberians that he knew.
Story_ID: 332153
Speaker 1: I would say that's about three years ago.  That's myself and two camp mates at the Bohemian Grove [Monte Rio, California], I'm a member of the Bohemian Club which is precious to me and members in that it's for the fellowship of men with lots of great music and things like that.  So we're in our camp at the Bohemian Club.
Speaker 2: That's me and my nearer to God experience.  I'd sent my son--this would be about '96 [1996], I sent him down to Costa Rica for the summer and then promised we'd go back and visit the family the next year.  The road was washed out so we took a short cut and got lost for six hours in the mountains and we were climbing mountains and high altitude and that's where I told God that if he got me through I'd be a better person that's--and we were making a deal.  I think one time I told him to go get horses or go get--I couldn't go any further.  You know how the altitude--it just takes it out of you.  Five minutes later you're right, ten minutes later you're sitting down like that (laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Little bit down on the right. Towards you. Okay, thank you.
Speaker 2: That is me in Santa Fe, New Mexico.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Year and occasion?
Speaker 2: Vacation and I would say about eight years ago.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSTION)
Speaker 2: I would say that's my first trip to Mainland China.  That probably is about 1986 and it's with American President Alliance [ph.] and that's the chief counsel of American President Alliance and a bunch of Chinese kids who had probably never seen a foreigner.
Speaker 1: Athletics, key part in our life that's Barry Chandler [Barry Williams] he must be about six years old so that would be '84 [1984], '85 [1985]
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Where?
Speaker 1: In Tahoe.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next.
Speaker 1: I would say that would be about--I'd say about '94 [1994], '95 [1995] and that's one of my closest friends Jaime Rudner [ph.] and that's his middle daughter's wedding in Caracas, Venezuela.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right, next.
Speaker 1: Those are my three sons and I would say that would have to be like 1990, and after I got divorced my sons and I went off to Europe with my mother [Ilza Berry Willimas] and a friend of mine and we toured Europe.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): What's this one?
Speaker 1: Santa Fe, New Mexico and I would say that's three years ago my wife and I, [HistoryMaker] Lalita Tademy.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That was July last summer.  That was the first family reunion of the assorted Berry family and also combining with my wife's family but Heard, Williams, Morris, Foster and Berry are my side and Harrison on my side.  Tademy and Billes or Bills as they would say is their side.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is my mother's group that started out going to Hunter College [New York, New York] together, formed a group called The Chatterboxes [ph.] and were friends for life.  In that picture would be one real aunt.  The rest are godmothers or fake aunts but they all were considered aunts.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Subgroup of The Chatterboxes the only difference is that includes my mother's sister Beryl [Beryl Berry Morris] who is the second from the left and is described in their life as those two were inseparable.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: As I indicated my grandfather brought each daughter--each sister up and so that is my mother and her two cousins.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: I would say that each of those pictures are in the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That's my grandfather, Tamaris Alexander Berry [Thomas Berry] my mother's father.  He would have died in 1958.  He was the person who was in charge of the mailroom and copy functions at Singer Sewing Machine [Singer Manufacturing Company; Singer Corporation] where he worked for fifty years.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That's my mother and her group The Chatterboxes wearing what was customary in the day their hats.  I would say it's early '50s [1950s].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That's my mother's sister Beryl Morris and her husband Herbert Morris, Sr. and my cousin Herbert [Herbert Morris, Jr.] who is seventy years old this year so that was seventy years ago you do the math (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: As I said my mother was one of three children.  My mother had three boys, I had three boys and my mother's sister had three boys.  So those are my first cousins Roger [Roger Morris], Bernard [Bernard Morris] and Herbert. I'm very close to each of them.  I would say that would be about 1952.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That's my father [Otis Williams, Sr.] and my mother I would say about 1950 and I would say that was Jones Beach, Long Island [Jones Beach State Park, Wantagh, New York].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That one is before my time before I was I--before I was me so those are my parents but--first of all my father has hair so I bet you that's 1940 or earlier and I couldn't tell you where that is because it's before my time (laughter).
Story_ID: 332154
Speaker 1: I would say again circa 1950.  That's myself and my brother and my cousin Jean [ph.] but in the background is our house that we lived in, in Mount Vernon, New York.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: It's got to be 1974.  That's Wellesley, Massachusetts, myself and my brother, my brother's son [sic.] Jean who is the cousin in the picture right next to it growing up with her first son and my father [Otis Williams, Sr.].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That's last July, the wedding of--I think I lied to you that is actually last August.  That is my son [Jaime Williams] and his wife [Bari al-Hakim Williams] at my wedding Hillsboro, New York.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: So that's my wedding Hillsboro, August 8, 2004.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That's my first wife Adrienne Foster [Adrienne Foster Williams] and it looks like about 1948 and her brother Hilton Foster [Luther Foster, III] and that has to be Tuskegee, Alabama.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That looks like about mid-'50s [1950s].  It's my first wife Adrienne and her brother with her father [Luther H. Foster, Jr.] a very interesting character graduated from Virginia Union [Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia] and went to the Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts].  He had to be the second black to go to Harvard Business School.  He got out of Harvard Business School because of his age and the Depression [Great Depression], couldn't get a job so he went into education and became president of Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] after getting his graduate degree at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  His wife [Vera Chandler Foster] is a social worker and one of the first women to go to China with Shirley Temple Black.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That's my wife [HistoryMaker Lalita Tademy] with her hands on her hip and she's got them on her hip.  She's obviously about four or five years old and that is in Cane River, Louisiana.  In the middle is her mother [Willie Dee Billes] and the four brothers.  The most interesting brother I believe is on the far right.  She had four brothers and his name is I.V. [I.V. Billes] and I asked, "Why did they call him I.V.?" They said, "No he's the fourth brother and it's roman numeral I.V. Billes, number four."
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: He's alive and just survived Katrina [Hurricane Katrina].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That's my wife's family the Billeses.  That's probably--I bet you it's probably 1880, that picture goes back three generations, if not four generations but she has four generations of great-grandmothers and that's in Natchitoches that's how you pronounce it, not Natchitoches, but Natchitoches, Louisiana.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Could you spell that for us?
Speaker 1: Natchitoches (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay let's get myself and my brother in.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That's my fake birthday party.  I gave myself a fiftieth birthday party 'cause I never had one.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: I was fifty-nine, I was turning sixty that's why I had to have it.  That's at the Villa Taverna club in San Francisco [California], the best place to eat in San Francisco.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That's my wife's family before she was born so her father and mother, including her father Ted [Theodore Billes] and probably about forty--1945 and that's her oldest sister--probably both older sisters, yeah.
