Story_ID: 227713
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My names is Joan Wallace, J-O-A-N, W-A-L-L-A-C-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You don't use the Scott in it at all?
Speaker 2: Yes, I do.  I should have put that in there.  I do, 'cause I don't write, I write, Joan S. Wallace most of the time, but it is Scott.
Speaker 1: Do you have a middle name?
Speaker 2: Edaire, E-D-A-I-R-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you have a nickname?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born November 8th, 1930, in Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Retired (laughter).
Speaker 1: Retired?
Speaker 2: (Laughter)  That's a little hard sometimes (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)  You're an educator--
Speaker 2: --but I guess I've had two careers, one as an academic professor and administrator in universities, and the other career was in public service, in the United States Department of Agriculture.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In administration.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: August 31st, 1904, I mean 2004, sorry.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Got Wayback Machine on.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: The address?
Speaker 1: Well, it doesn't have to be the exact address.
Speaker 2: Oh, 5020 South Shore Drive.
Speaker 1: In Chicago [Illinois], right?
Speaker 2: In Chicago.
Story_ID: 227714
Speaker 1: All right.  Now before we go into depth, there are five People magazine-ish type questions that we always ask and they only require a short answer.  The first one is, ma'am what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: (Laughter)  There's so many.  Ice cream, I'll say.  Non-sugar, sugar-free ice cream.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Not really.  I like many colors.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Well, when I lived in Chicago [Illinois] it was spring and fall, but I live in Florida now, so it becomes winter.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Well, now I guess it should be Chicago, since we spent three months here this year.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I used to have a favorite phrase.  I haven't used it in a while, but when I gave speeches, I used to say, "When the door of opportunity opens," as Mary McLeod Bethune used to say, "be ready to put your foot in."  Well, I usually added, "and leave it open for your brother and your sister."
Story_ID: 227715
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let me ask you about your family history.  I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side of the family, and your father's [William Edouard Scott] side of the family, but we'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Esther, E-S-T-H-E-R, Fulks, F-U-L-K-S, Scott.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born in Charleston, West Virginia, in January the 11th, and I have to think, '91 [1891], 1891.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And how far back can you trace the ancestors on your mother's side of the family?
Speaker 2: I suppose just back to her father [Sylvester Fulks] and mother [Anna Fulks].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you know them?
Speaker 2: No.  I knew, I had a great aunt who was a sister of her mother, but I didn't know any of the others.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And great uncle too, I'm sorry, had a great uncle too.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there is any family lore that's passed down about, about the history of the family?
Speaker 2: Yes, one of the brothers, one of my mother's family--mothers--mother's, mother's brothers was appointed state librarian in Charleston, West Virginia, and I have that document.  Also, one was a doctor, and one ran a newspaper.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are they all Fulks, F-U-L-K-S?
Speaker 2: Yes, I think so.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you know the name of any one, of any of these--
Speaker 2: Not off-hand, but I have information in my home in Florida.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Any stories about 'em, about those positions?  Now the one that was a librarian, did he acquire that position during Reconstruction or something?
Speaker 2: No, he acquired it because the state librarian died and he was the next in line and no one expected that he would become a librarian, but he did.  I can't give you the date now, but I have it--they were all very proud of him.
Speaker 1: Now he must have made history in West Virginia?
Speaker 2: (Laughter)  Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They were very proud of him.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Any stories about your ancestors on that side?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, there were many stories about the various members of that family, but they were more, they weren't humorous stories or any--there was, they were more related to who married who and more serious kinds of things, but not, not, you know I, they've been gone so long I really haven't, my mother died in '65 [1965], so I've forgotten; I've aged (laughter) and she's been gone.
Story_ID: 227716
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Esther Fulks Scott] talk about growing up in [Charleston] West Virginia?
Speaker 2: Yes, she, she grew up in West Virginia with one brother and the brother went to the service and unfortunately, he got tuberculosis while he was in the [U.S.] Army and died, and he never married, so she was the last on her side of the family.  She also taught school.  She went to college for two years and taught school and then, well she wouldn't have stopped college except for the brother because she wanted to stop so he would have a chance to go, but he never had a chance to go because he was in the service and died.  But he--she grew up when what was kind of a, certainly the value system was middle class.  How much money they had I have no idea except that with one brother running a newspaper, they had a house and I saw the house that my mother grew up in and used to enjoy going to visit there in the summertime.  It was across the street from one of the schools so I used to have good friends there.  But, you know, they had lots of friends in West Virginia.  It was a trip we used to make almost every summer.
Speaker 1: Now, did your mother have a chance to go to college?
Speaker 2: Two years.  She went to West Virginia State [University; West Virginia Collegiate Institute, Institute, West Virginia].
Story_ID: 227717
Speaker 1: Now, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: William, W-I-L-L-I-A-M, Edouard, E-D-O-U-A-R-D.  It's the French spelling.  Scott.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Indianapolis, Indiana, and his date of birth was March 11th, 1884.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what do you know about your father's side of the family?  How far back can you trace that side?
Speaker 2: Well, I only have pictures of his parents [Edward Scott and Eliza Johnson Scott], but there is a, there is a family tree that was constructed by William [E.] Taylor of Indiana University[-Purdue University, Indianapolis, Indiana], because he's the--my father was an artist and his, William Taylor is the authority on William Edouard Scott.  So he constructed a family tree.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I do know that the great--they had that house in Indianapolis for a hundred years and one of the paintings ['Traveling (Lead Kindly Light)'] that my father did was of his great-grandparents [sic. grandparents] on an oxcart coming to, coming to Indianapolis from North Carolina.
Story_ID: 227718
Speaker 1: So his [Wallace's father, William Edouard Scott] grandparents were from North [Carolina] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  Great-grandparents [sic. grandparents].
Speaker 1: Great-grandparents, his great-grandparents--
Speaker 2: Uh-hm.
Speaker 1: --were from--
Speaker 2: Uh-hm, and I do have a letter from, I don't know who it's from, a minister it seems to me, from North Carolina.  My mother [Esther Fulks Scott] copied it because the actual letter deteriorated, but she copied it and we still have that, giving her a reference, and it was 1847.  And we have the trunk at home that has the hide on it like [President] Abraham Lincoln's trunk, little thing, and it has a newspaper in it with 1847, and it's still there.  I keep thinking, I must go somewhere and get this preserved but I don't know where to go.  Nobody ever, I've asked libraries and nobody knows.
Speaker 1: Eighteen forty-seven [1847], that's--what newspaper is it?
Speaker 2: It's a Philadelphia Gazette [sic.], I think.  I know it's from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So they went right to Indianapolis [Indiana] from North Carolina, directly?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Settled there in 1847.
Speaker 2: Settled there, uh-hm.
Speaker 1: Now that's a, well that was a--
Speaker 2: And slavery was still going on at that time.
Speaker 1: Yes, and not only that, but Indiana was not necessarily the most hospitable place for (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  No, it wasn't.
Speaker 1: --black people.  So--
Speaker 2: You know, they I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)  And you say that with conviction.  What happened?
Speaker 2: Well, I know about Indiana from other, other things, but what is interesting to me about that, my father and my mother, is they never really, they always thought you could rise above racism, and it was, it was kinda like, you know, education and doing two or three times as much work as everybody else did, and just being "the best."  My dad used to say, "Beat them (laughter), that's what you have to do in this world," and, you know, it's just very interesting to me as I look back and you ask me the questions that I can hardly, you know, they never said you can't do this and you can't do that because I really found out that I couldn't eat everywhere, you know, because I went to try, but they didn't tell me that.  It was, you know, I mean, and certainly I never knew there was sexism.  Never heard of it in my growing up.  You can do it, you know whatever it is.  Nobody said some guys are not going to like you doing it.  I just never heard it until I experienced it, but, so you know they, I guess the thing I can say about them is that they were very positive people.  If you were smart, you know, they built on that, you know, they fed on that, that you know, you can do anything you put your mind to, even being the president of the United States.  I remember my father saying that, and it seemed so far-fetched, but I guess if you never reach for anything, you never get anywhere (laughter).
Story_ID: 227719
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well tell us something about your father [William Edouard Scott].  Now he's a famous artist and so, how did he get his start and what was his career like?
Speaker 2: Well, he grew in Indianapolis [Indiana].  His father [Edward Scott] was a laborer.  His father was, there were stories, well, he used to say that people tried to make a lot out of his, he had some Indian [Native American] ancestry, but he always, everything he painted was about black people.  He was one of the only artists of his time to do that.  But he started it at Manual--he went to Manual Training High School in Indianapolis, Indiana, and this man, Otto Stark, I can remember daddy talking about him, took--he was head of the art department and he put daddy to teaching in the art department.  Now that was, there were no black teachers, but he had him doing it and he told him he had to get to Chicago [Illinois] and he had to go to the [School of the] Art Institute of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  And so and he told me his father only made a dollar a day in that he was a laborer.  I remember grandpa with a leg cut off because he had diabetes and he was retired though.  I remember snow white hair.  But my dad got to Chicago, worked in all these various restaurants that were around the Art Institute, and put himself through the Art Institute, but they, they gave prize money, so he often would win prizes, but he always said he did three paintings, always did at least three paintings every time he was assigned one painting (laughter).  And that was his, you know, he believed that's how you get ahead and with, in spite of racism.  Racism is not anything that's going to hold you back.  You just keep on, you just do more and that makes you a stronger person.  And, so if I remember anything out of my childhood, I remember that.  And they would not tolerate a B from me or any low grade.  I mean I can remember the pressure of being an only child, I'm an only child, the pressure of being an only child.
Story_ID: 227720
Speaker 1: Now how did your parents [William Edouard Scott and Esther Fulks Scott] meet?  Is there a story?
Speaker 2: That's a good story, I mean they met (laughter), he always said that my mother won him because she made some shrimp salad and invited him to her house for shrimp salad, but you know, they won--I mean they met kind of coincidentally.  Somebody introduced 'em, friends introduced 'em and then, you know, well they dated.
Story_ID: 227721
Speaker 1: My dad [William Edouard Scott] was really, my mother's [Esther Fulks Scott] gregarious, my father was more shy, more a loner, got up at four o'clock in the morning to paint.  Never, he enjoyed going out, but he would never really institute going out, so as I think back about it, my mother took me to the Goodman Theatre [Chicago, Illinois] and to plays and we sat all the way up in the dollar and a quarter seats and all of that.  They had the same high values and high standards for me, but my dad only occasionally took me to the circus, places like, occasionally out, but very, you know, really very little compared to my mother.  So my socialization was much more through my mother than through my father.  But they went to dances together, to the Forties Club [sic. Forty Club, Chicago, Illinois].  I remember hearing about him, the Chicago Assembly [Chicago, Illinois] had a dance and they would go to that and everybody would call them Mutt and Jeff because my dad was tall and my mother was small, but they, you know, didn't really have money at all, because you know artists don't have money (laughter).  My father--my mother would buy paintings from my father to keep him from selling them, for a hundred dollars.  Anybody came along and offered him a hundred dollars, he'd sell the painting. When he was, when I was growing up I remember we had a big collection of antiques because he loved--I grew up with spinning wheels and flax wheels and all these things around the fireplace, you know, brass containers, those things, you know you can buy everything now, it's not hard to buy, but he was always moseying into a antique shop and buying some kind of antique for our house.  So when I grew up and moved away, I mean I wanted all modern furniture because I didn't appreciate the antiques until later on and then I went back myself to them.  He was an interesting person, unique person, and the fact that he was an artist, he was at home when I would come home.  When I came home for lunch he had my lunch fixed, and he sat at the table and either ate or chatted with me or read, he liked to read those pulp magazines called western magazines.  In his day, that's what they had.  And so I enjoyed him during the day and I enjoyed my mother in the evenings and on weekends 'cause that's when she would plan something for me to do, being an only child.  But, you know, they were, she was always getting me into some kind of group of young people that she thought were desirable, and, you know, we would go somewhere.  The worst thing she ever did was to put me into the Junior Opera Guild [Illinois Opera Guild juniors] which I hated.  It took me a long time to like opera, 'cause I had to listen to it every Saturday, all day long.  You know the opera would go on like four hours, I don't know, remember now how long, but it seemed forever, and so a bunch of little girls were sitting there knitting or crocheting or doing something and bored to death, you know, and I was bored to death.  I really did not like the opera, but, but you know, I know that all they wanted was the best for me and they'd shoo away suitors, (laughter) I learned later.  I didn't realize that, but I learned later (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  They were simply shooed away.
Speaker 1: Yeah, suitors that would come along.  And, yeah, because they, nobody was ever good enough.
Story_ID: 227722
Speaker 1: So when I graduated--
Speaker 2: Now I don't want to get you out of school yet.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Wait a minute, let's go back a little bit.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Some questions we always ask and I'll be remiss if I don't ask 'em,
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, do you have a first childhood memory?
Speaker 1: A first childhood memory.  Well, yes, but I don't know whether it's my memory or it's a memory because he [Wallace's father, William Edouard Scott] painted me like that.  He painted me, painted a picture of me with my teddy bear and my doll called Brown Betty, and I was four, and so the first painting that he did, did of me was of, was of Brown Betty and my teddy bear.
Story_ID: 227723
Speaker 1: Can you describe your neighborhood and what were the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: (Laughter)  My dad [William Edouard Scott] was a good cook, so smells of growing up would be him cooking.  He did all the cooking except for he wouldn't do pastries, but he would make beautiful plates.  If my mother [Esther Fulks Scott] had a bridge party, you know, he might, what I remember is lobster salad.  That was favorite thing that he would make.  And then he put the lobster tail over the, with the salad under and he'd do all kinds of fancy things to the celery, radishes and, you know, so I remember that.  I--'cause my mother, you know, went out to work as a probation officer in the court and so she wasn't there really to cook.  In my early days I went to the Rosenwald Nursery School [Chicago, Illinois] and my parents moved to the Rosenwald [Apartments; Michigan Boulevard Garden Apartments, Chicago, Illinois] so I could to that nursery school.  That was the other thing about them, they, they were so anxious for me to have the best, they were always looking for places to go so I could have this experience or that one.
Story_ID: 227724
Speaker 1: That was one (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The Rosenwald [Apartments; Michigan Boulevard Apartments, Chicago, Illinois] building housed a lot of people that became famous later on and successful (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)  And they had a wonderful nursery school [Rosenwald Nursery School, Chicago, Illinois].  And they also--Miss Pochecka [ph.] was the head of that nursery school, and the Rosenwald had a roundup back in 1990 or so, I can't remember, but they invited all of the children who had graduated from the Rosenwald. And something like eleven in my class and six of 'em came to that roundup.  People I hadn't seen in all those years.  So the Rosenwald, it was a great place, I liked living there because there was a playground and there were kids around and you didn't have to worry about running out in the street or anything of that sort.  And I took dancing nearby but I never could do much with the dancing 'cause every time I start taking it, I would get something like the chicken pox or measles or whopping cough.  Those childhood illnesses.
Speaker 2: Did you take dancing with the Bruces [Mary Bruce and Sadie Bruce Glover], one of the Bruce sisters, or was it ballet or?
Speaker 1: It was, I don't know who that was that taught there, but it was supposed to be ballet, uh-hm.
Story_ID: 227725
Speaker 1: How would you describe yourself as a little girl?  What kind of personality did you have?
Speaker 2: I wanna say none.  I was a very shy child, skinny, so ashamed of how I looked because I was so skinny and, of course, the kids were being daunting, they just, you know, tell you how you look all the time.  And all of my girlfriends I thought were beautiful and glamorous and I was so skinny, miserable.  I was.  But, but I, I did well in school so I guess that made up for some of the other shortcomings that I had.  And I was either in the first seat in the first row or there was another girl that was similar and we vied for that honor of being in the first seat in the first row.  One time I was in the first seat in the first row and then she had picked a fight with me and sat on me.  She was big and I remember I couldn't get up.  I couldn't do anything.  But my parents made a big thing about academic achievement.
Speaker 1: Now, you went to A.O. Sexton School [Austin O. Sexton Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Now, I didn't start there.  I went to Rosenwald [Nursery School, Chicago, Illinois], and then I went to Oakland School [(ph.), Chicago, Illinois].  And I got a double promotion in Oakland School, and--
Speaker 1: Oakland School was on Cottage Grove [Avenue]?  Where was it, or was it?
Speaker 2: It was somewhere near like 40th Street, and you know where the, there's a, on Oakwood Boulevard, there's a community center [Abraham Lincoln Center, Chicago, Illinois] and on Langley [Avenue], I think it's Langley just down the street from that community center is Oakland School, or used to be.  I don't know if it's still there.
Story_ID: 227726
Speaker 1: And in that community center, I can't remember the name of it, but I remember writing--
Speaker 2: Was that Abraham Lincoln Center [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 1: Yes.  Writing a play which we put-- I put on (laughter) in that center called 'Boy and the Ferry,' something like that.  But it was about a child that didn't want to do his chores and then he had this dream and through the dream he learned he should, he should go to do his chores.  I'm sure it was about me, but (laughter), but at any rate, it was put on at Oakland center [sic.].  We had people playing these parts and so forth, I was eight when I wrote it.
Speaker 2: Now you were there, now did you meet any of the famous people--now I--were you there during the WPA [Works Progress Administration] Writers' Project?
Speaker 1: No, my father [William Edouard Scott], my father, you see, did a lot of painting during the WPA.  He did lots of painting during that period.
Speaker 2: Okay, 'cause I know, I've been told that in Chicago [Illinois], [HistoryMaker] Gordon Parks was here for a while, Charles White, Richard Wright, Margaret Walker--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I don't remember any of them, I mean I know who they are now, but I mean I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  And they were working out of the, what's now the [Jacob H. Carruthers] Center for Inner City Studies [(CCICS), Northeastern Illinois University, Chicago, Illinois], the old Abraham Lincoln Center at 700 East Oakwood--
Speaker 1: Oh, is that what's it's called?
Speaker 2: It's now the Center for Inner City Studies, you know, of Northeastern Illinois University.
Speaker 1: Oh, is that right.
Speaker 2: Black--I think, the Black Stone Memorial Church [sic. Monumental Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois] is across the street--
Speaker 1: Um-hm, I remember there was a church across the street.  But that, I don't know whether that was before or after my time, but I didn't know about it at the time.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But I did go, I did go there [Oakland School (ph.), Chicago, Illinois] and I used to, being thin--well I did learn how to bluff, you know the guys that--the girls that were gonna beat you up, I did learn how to pretend like I was powerful--
Speaker 2: You could talk tough (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Mighty Mouse (laughter), but I couldn't do anything.  I didn't know how to fight anybody.  But I remember going to school and you know, maybe being afraid but going on anyway.
Speaker 2: So you were there 'til about eight years old, you say?
Speaker 1: Well, I was at, I know I wrote that play at eight and I went on to, I left there in fifth grade.  How old are you in fifth grade?
Speaker 2: Ten.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Usually, nine or ten.
Speaker 1: I left there and my parents bought a building on Eberhart [Avenue] and 60th [Street], 6030 Eberhart.  And I transferred to Sexton [Austin O. Sexton Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois].  That's when I transferred to Sexton and the community was all white.
Story_ID: 227727
Speaker 1: Now, we had left you at A.O., A.O. Sexton School [Austin O. Sexton Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], right, at--is that 61st [Street] and Langley [Avenue], is that--
Speaker 2: It's at 60th [Street]--
Speaker 1: 60th--?
Speaker 2: --and, is that Langley?  I think so.  I'm not positive.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, I had been at Oakland School [(ph.), Chicago, Illinois] before because my mother [Esther Fulks Scott] had been a playground worker at Oakland sometime back, and she remembered it as a good school, so she, she wanted me to go there.  So they moved to 51st Street so that I could go to Oakland School.  And so when they bought this building in, on Eberhart [Avenue], 60th, 6030 Eberhart, they were again looking for schools and Sexton School was the school, and I was there from fifth grade to eighth grade.
Story_ID: 227728
Speaker 1: Now you say when you moved in the neighborhood was mostly white?
Speaker 2: It was all white.  It was completely white.  When I moved out, it was completely black, three years, in three years when I graduated, it was completely black.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Which is, you know, unique for Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: What ethnic group lived there before?  Was it just a mix?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry, I just knew they were white.  I hardly knew anything about ethnic groups in those days.
Speaker 1: I know the Oakland [Chicago, Illinois] neighborhood was mostly Jewish at one time.
Speaker 2: Was it?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's what I've been told anyway, I don't know, you know, from first-hand experience, but I've been told that it was mostly Jewish.  The Oakland Theatre [Chicago, Illinois] was there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  In those days, I--who was over there?
Speaker 1: You remember the Oakland Theatre and all that over there by--
Speaker 2: I don't remember it, but, maybe.  I just don't remember, it's been too long ago for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And I don't know if even Holy Angels [Catholic School, Chicago Illinois] was there.
Speaker 2: Oh yes, it was there.  That I remember.  Holy Angels was there.  And, you know, yeah, you're right, and that school was white then.
Story_ID: 227729
Speaker 1: But Sexton [Austin O. Sexton Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]-- was, I remember being--I enjoyed Sexton.  They had some crazy teachers.  I remember an art teacher that used to throw books.  A white teacher.
Speaker 2: Throw books at the--
Speaker 1: Throw them across the room.  I'll never forget her (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  Just, not at the students, but just across the room?
Speaker 1: I think she'd often aimed for a student, but she never hit anybody.  It was an interesting change from Oakland School [(ph.), Chicago, Illinois], but, and, you know, I would come home, and, it, the neighborhood got to be, got so that I could come home and my, my mother [Esther Fulks Scott] or father [William Edouard Scott] would say now, who was that boy you were walking home with because somebody in the neighborhood would tell them, I saw your daughter walking down the street with a boy.  I would be so amazed that they would know that I was just walking down the street with a boy, but that was a big deal to them.  But anyway, I would, I remember being captain of the monitors at Oakland School, not Oakland, Sexton, Sexton School.
Speaker 2: You were a captain of the hall monitors?
Speaker 1: Um-hm, yeah.  And I went to St. Edmund's [Episcopal] Church [Chicago, Illinois], Episcopal Church.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 61st [Street] and Michigan [Avenue].
Speaker 1: I grew up there.  I was captain of the Girl Scouts [of the United States of America], and sang in the choir, walked to church every day and had a lot of friends, and I have friends when I come back here, I have some friends that I went, who went to that church with me, or went to [Englewood] High School [Chicago, Illinois] even, with me.  So, you know, some folks I've known for a long time.  But Sexton, the Sexton School was interesting.
Story_ID: 227730
Speaker 1: My parents [William Edouard Scott and Esther Fulks Scott] took me to, right before Sexton [Austin O. Sexton Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], my parents, my mother and my great-aunt took me to Mexico in a car.  We drove to Mexico.  My father was supposed to go but he was doing the [American] Negro Exposition [Chicago, Illinois].  There was a Negro exposition in Chicago [Illinois] and art was, art exposition.
Speaker 2: Now what year would that have been?
Speaker 1: I was ten when that was going on.  Now I was born in '30 [1930] so that had to be '40 [1940].  And he didn't get to go.  And that, he did a lot of, almost all the murals there.  And he did, even did a few dioramas.  I'd never heard of a diorama until then.
Speaker 2: Where was it held, do you know?
Speaker 1: I want to say [Chicago] Coliseum [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Sounds like that might be right.
Speaker 1: Is that, is that right?  But, that's when I think he did find out something about his heritage.  He had a full Indian [Native American] outfit, the whole suit with a big war bonnet that was supposed to be Cherokee, I guess vis-a-vis North Carolina, and I gave that to, all I had was a headband eventually, and I gave it to the, what's the museum in New York [New York]?  The black museum?
Speaker 2: The Schomburg [Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  I gave a whole batch of his things to the Schomburg.  What they did was they, they threw away all the original newspaper clippings, et cetera.  I mean they copied them and threw the originals away (laughter).
Speaker 2: Oh, the clippings you gave them?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Well they had a clipping file online, I mean, well you can't get it online but it's on microfiche of all the old clippings that come to the Schomburg.
Speaker 1: Well may be they made microfiche out of it.
Speaker 2: I think they probably did.  That was the project.  If you gave it to them--
Speaker 1: Well I gave to 'em when I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) was it Miss Hutson in charge of the Schomburg when you did that?
Speaker 1: I have no idea.
Speaker 2: Jean Hutson.
Speaker 1: That sounds right though.
Speaker 2: Jean Blackwell Hutson.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Because [HistoryMaker] Howard Dodson's in charge now.  He's been there for some years now, but she was before him.
Speaker 1: I gave them that, and I included that band, so that if they needed to research it, maybe they had something to do, because it had deteriorated.  Everything deteriorated except for the band of beads.
Speaker 2: So you had the whole suit?
Speaker 1: I had the whole suit, the war bonnet.
Story_ID: 227731
Speaker 1: From North Carolina?  Was that [Native American suit] from, did his [Wallace's father, William Edouard Scott] father [Edward Scott] bring that with him when he came or?
Speaker 2: That's just hazy to me.  But I do remember him talking about it.  I read articles about him being part Indian [Native American], which used to make him so angry because he just wanted to be black.  I mean Negro I guess you called it then.  But, and he used to tell me, you know, "People try to make you something else, but, you know, this is my, this is who I am."  And, so I grew up knowing black history way before anybody, any of my other friends because of my daddy painting it.
Speaker 1: Now did your father know George [L.] Lee by any chance?
Speaker 2: Could of.  I don't--
Speaker 1: Did you know of him?
Speaker 2: I don't remember him.
Speaker 1: He was an artist.  He used to draw black history pieces for the newspaper.
Speaker 2: Now daddy drew for The Crisis Magazine, the cover, several covers of Crisis Magazine.  He--there's a painting of his down in New Orleans [Louisiana] of [Jean Baptiste Pointe] DuSable, not DuSable, Toussaint L'Overture going up the hill with his soldiers.  In one of the schools here there's one with Douglass talking to, Frederick Douglass talking to [President Abraham] Lincoln.  It's a mural.  And then another one with George Washington Carver and Booker T. Washington that I think I've seen here in Chicago [Illinois] somewhere.  Then he did a lot of ecclesiastical things for churches.  He did a lot of, you know, baptismal fountain areas and then he would have--
Speaker 1: Did he paint anything at St. Edmund's [Episcopal Church, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Not at St. Edmund's.  He painted at St. Anselm's [St. Anselm Catholic Church, Chicago, Illinois] because he was Catholic.  He became Catholic at seventy or something like that.  It was a big, he was in the hospital and there was a big fight about, between, a big competition, I shouldn't say a fight, between the two priests, Father Martin [ph.] at St. Edmund's and Father Louis [ph.] at St. Anselm's, across the street from each other.  You know they kept going to see daddy, trying to get him to join their church.  And he admired Father Louis because Father Louis would climb up and paint the walls and do things at St. Anselm's and he didn't think that Father Martin would do that, so he decided to become Roman Catholic.  We always told him, you know, "You're going to have to confess all your sins."  "Oh, I don't remember any of my sins," he'd say.  I'd say, "That doesn't matter, you have to confess them anyway," (laughter).  But he became Roman Catholic.  He had been Baptist before, yeah.  But my mother [Esther Fulks Scott] really wanted him to become Episcopalian 'cause that's what she was.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's right across the street.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He did a lot of painting for St. Edmund's, I mean he built wishing wells for their teas and he'd do a lot of things for St. Edmund's.  He just didn't care much for Father Martin (laughter).
Story_ID: 227732
Speaker 1: What was your favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: My favorite subject?  Sort of liked everything, I mean I did.  I was okay and everything.  I guess I thought I was even good in math until I got in college [Bradley University, Peoria, Illinois] and the veterans were coming home and you know they were in, and they were taking, I was taking slide rule, or something like that.  They were so much faster and all.  And older, they were older and all.  So I won't say math but I liked math.  I had nothing, no problem with math.  My parents [William Edouard Scott and Esther Fulks Scott] wanted me to be a doctor, an M.D., not a Ph.D.  So I took all the pre-med things, but I must admit that I worked in the summer at the family court of Cook County [Family & Juvenile-Cook County Clerk of the Circuit Court, Chicago, Illinois], and it was so interesting that I got interested in social studies and social work.  That was kind of my first thing that I got interested in.  Before that--I mean in college, after college, but before that I had, I liked art, but having a father like my father, it was very difficult to be an independent artist because he would have to tell you what to do and had to tell you how to do it and had to tell you what you did wrong, and have to tell you, so, I found myself drawing away from art.  I did all the, all the illustrations in my yearbook for my high school [Englewood High School, Chicago, Illinois], but I kind of pulled away from it because it was very hard to do that.  I went to the Art Institute [of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] on the weekends, on Saturdays also.  But he was so good there was no way to (laughter) catch up with him, let alone compete with him (laughter).  So I sort of gave it up.  And over time, I mean, I took the social work and so forth, I got a master's [degree] in social work, but my doctorate is in social psychology, which is a research degree.  But that's whole 'nother story you haven't gotten to yet (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)  Okay--
Story_ID: 227733
Speaker 1: Well, you went to Englewood High School [Chicago, Illinois], right?  And what was Englewood like?
Speaker 2: Well, my parents [William Edouard Scott and Esther Fulks Scott], my mother tried to get me a permit to go to [Francis W.] Parker [School, Chicago, Illinois].  She didn't want me to go to Englewood.  It wasn't up to whatever standards she had about where you should go to school.  But I went to Englewood and I really had a good time at Englewood except for still being skinny, you know, in high school and all of that and being shy.  And I just laugh sometimes about boys because the big thing that, you know, happened if you went on a date which I never went on a real date, I mean, was a boy walked you home from school.  I mean that was sort of a big deal in those days and my mother even said that when she graduated from high school, her mother [Anna Fulks] took her to the, with her and her date went to the prom.  Her mother went to the prom with her, so, so just thinking about high school and boys and so forth.  The president of the class name was Scott [ph.], and I was the treasurer of our high school class when we graduated and I was the first black salutatorian at my high school.  The funny part was that it was, I only had 200th of a grade point beneath the valedictorian, who was a white person who got a scholarship to Roosevelt [University, Chicago, Illinois].  I had a, I got the scholarship to Bradley University [Peoria, Illinois] because she didn't, she could've had it.  It was for either a valedictorian or salutatorian.  So I went to Bradley University on that scholarship.
Speaker 1: In Peoria, yeah, Illinois.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 227734
Speaker 1: Now tell me, when you were in high school [Englewood High School, Chicago, Illinois] were there any teachers that really stood out in high school with you, that made a difference?
Speaker 2: Well my chemistry teacher.  I was a little afraid of chemistry and I remember I would, I went to him and said, you know, I'm trying, when I had a clue that I could be a salutatorian, there were no black teachers in high school.  I never had a black teacher until I got to college [Bradley University, Peoria, Illinois].  Everywhere they were all white teachers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well my chemistry teacher was very good.  I said, "I'm not sure that how good I am in chemistry, but I'd like to become salutatorian so I'd like to get an A in chemistry so could I get some extra credit projects, some project to do so that I could get an extra credit?"  And he gave me projects to do and I did get the A and I did become salutatorian.  But I was, you know, I was shy on one hand, but when I look back at my life I was never shy about school, and grades.  I would challenge any teacher that gave me a grade that was wrong.  And I did in college.  Some teacher he gave me a B or something and I knew I had all A's on my papers so I went to him.  He said, "Next time you'll get an A."  Then I went to the head of the department and he told him to give me an A right away.  But, about other things I was shy, but not my academics.
Speaker 1: Now when you were a senior, what were your career aspirations?  What did you think you would be?
Speaker 2: A doctor.  Pediatrician.  That's what my parents [William Edouard Scott and Esther Fulks Scott], that was my parents.  It was never me really.  I thought that would be nice.  I never had any idea what it would be like except from watching my pediatrician, but that's, that's what they expected.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I, they were dead before I ever got my Ph.D. or anything else.
Story_ID: 227735
Speaker 1: Now tell us about Bradley.  Now you went to Bradley University in Peoria [Illinois].  Were there many black students there when you arrived in Bradley?
Speaker 2: I integrated the dormitory at Bradley University because they thought I was white.  I just came charging into Bradley fearless.  I guess I've always been a little fearless, but I came down there and came to Sissen [ph.] House.  It was a small dorm.  From Chicago [Illinois].  The blacks that were there were men primarily because right before it became a university it was a Polytechnic Institute [Bradley Polytechnic Institute].  So it had all things like engineering and all kinds of technical subjects there.  And a number of blacks were going there, especially graduate students, from Missouri because they couldn't go to school in Missouri to get degrees, so Missouri would pay Illinois, pay Bradley, to send them to school.  So there were a number of black men.  There was, in my, and the school was heavily men.  In my class there were a thousand men and one hundred women.  We had a lot of veterans also.  So, and then we had that great football, basketball team, Bradley Braves.  It was a wonderful basketball team and I remember standing in line from two in the afternoon 'til eight at night to get a ticket.
Speaker 1: Was Bradley winning a lot of games in those days?
Speaker 2: It was top.  It won the pennant for several years and then it had a scandal.
Speaker 1: The NCAA [National Collegiate Athletic Association] Championship, was it?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: All right. There was a scandal while you were in school?
Speaker 2: I had gone off to Puerto Rico on a special summer project and I read it in the newspaper or heard it on the news or something and I was just hurt, so hurt, because Bradley had been so good.  They didn't have any black players in those days, all white.  But everybody loved that Bradley basketball team.  And there was one black fraternity which was the Alphas [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity], I think, and, no it was the Omegas [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity], the Omegas.  And then they had no sororities that were black so I became a Delta [Sigma Theta Sorority] by going all the way to the University of Illinois [at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois] and going through down there.  But I didn't have, I mean, I never really had a lot of involvement because it was just too far away at Bradley.  But, you know, I mean I learned, Bradley was a white world, primarily.  A few blacks.  Certainly enough guys to date (laughter) and I enjoyed Bradley.
Story_ID: 227736
Speaker 1: Now your major there [Bradley University, Peoria, Illinois] was?
Speaker 2: I started in pre-med and changed to sociology.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we had one black teacher who taught anthropology, and he was kind of, everybody loved him and he was kind of a father to all of us, yeah.
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: [Dr.] Romeo [B.] Garrett.  He just recently died.  But we--I also got interested in the theater at Bradley, not at Bradley, but in Peoria [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Were you in any plays?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I played Laura in that, there was a movie called 'Laura,' and I have to try to remember the name of the guy who placed the policeman because he was a civil rights person.
Speaker 1: Oh, he played the person that was in love with Laura (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  No, the one that played the person in love--
Speaker 1: --a private detective or something I think it was.
Speaker 2: But there was another person in there that was from, he lives in Atlanta [Georgia] now, he's still alive.
Speaker 1: Not [HistoryMaker] Reverend [Dr. C.T.] Vivian was it?
Speaker 2: Yeah! C.T. Vivian went to school with me.  You got it.  Have you interviewed him?
Speaker 1: I think he might have even mentioned it too, you know, on some level, but I don't, I don't know how I remembered, yeah, but Reverend C.T. Vivian, he was Macomb, Illinois.  He grew up in Macomb, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he went to Bradley, and he was in that, and my deceased husband [Reverend Maurice A. Dawkins] knew him very well and, in fact, he was my, all involved with [Reverend Dr.] Martin [Luther] King [Jr.] and so forth, but we saw him.  We went to Atlanta oh, maybe five or so years ago and we saw him again.  I was so glad to see him because I hadn't seen him since Bradley.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he's very active, very upbeat man, always.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Cordy Tindell Vivian, yeah, C.T. Vivian.
Speaker 2: Is that oh? (Laughter) Now I know what it was (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)  Yeah, that's his name, Cordy Tindell, yep.
Speaker 2: Yep, well he was one of the people there and he was, the community center had this play and I don't even remember how we got the parts or anything, but I, and my father [William Edouard Scott] had painted my portrait when I was eighteen.  It was a life size portrait so we shipped that portrait back to Peoria, so that they could have that portrait to do the Laura thing.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's exciting.  And there's a song even called 'Laura.'
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know.  You're right.
Speaker 1: Yep.
Story_ID: 227737
Speaker 1: You seemed to have an exciting time in Peoria [Illinois] there.
Speaker 2: I did, I did.  I met a young man and we dated until he graduated and then, and then I dated other people but, I later learned that my mother [Esther Fulks Scott] thought we were getting too close so she told him, you know, that she had plans for me and he shouldn't have any (laughter)--so, I mean we're still friends.  He lives in Indianapolis [Indiana].  But I had a good time at Bradley [University, Peoria, Illinois].  I mean, it was wonderful because I had never been out on my own, being an only child, and a girl and all.  It was a good growing up experience, I mean, but my parents, you know, the girls would go out of the window and stay out late.  Not me.  One of the things they taught me and I mean it makes me kind of a drab person, but was that you know you can't do the things that other folks can do.  And you just have to follow the rules, 'cause in this whole business of beating them, doing better, et cetera, you've got to follow the rules, and I often think of Adam Clayton Powell [Sr.] who really never had that message.  He did a lot of wonderful things, but he refused to follow the rules.  So I have to be glad, I guess, that I was a little less rambunctious than he was.  But I admired his audaciousness.  I had wanted to be like that, but gotta follow the rules.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was Adam Clayton Powell one of your heroes in those days?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I liked him.  In fact, we knew his son [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.], the one that looks just like him.  There's one that looks just like him.  And I, you know, I thought he was, you know, an audacious kind of person and the fact that he could just sort of, you know, if you can do it I can do it.  But sometimes, some things maybe you can't, and you have to make your priorities.
Story_ID: 227738
Speaker 1: So where did you go after Bradley [University, Peoria, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Came home [Chicago, Illinois], worked in the welfare department for the summer, I remember that.
Speaker 1: Did you graduate with honors at Bradley too?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  I graduated in three and a half years, and, in fact, before that, one thing I did leave out was that I went to the Episcopal church in Peoria [Illinois] and they had a summer work program and I looked at the catalog and saw that one part of it, one place you could go was Puerto Rico.  So I chose to go to Puerto Rico, and I told the people about it and they said, "Well, oh, we didn't expect you to choose Puerto Rico," you know, like how we going to get there?  But they decided to take me on as a project and they had bake sales and all kinds of fundraisers to send me to Puerto Rico.  So I went for the summer to Puerto Rico, lived in the convent with the nuns, and there were two other women, one from South Carolina and one from Wisconsin, and I who were there for the summer and we worked in the jails and we worked in the church and someplace else.  I'm trying to recall where else.  But any way, we were very busy during the summer in Puerto Rico.  And we, we--the bishop gave us a trip to St. Thomas [U.S. Virgin Islands] and we went to St. Thomas, and I had something like five dollars when I went to St. Thomas and they told me that I had to pay four dollars and fifty cents overweight to get back, and I only had, I landed in New York [New York] with fifty cents (laughter) in my purse.  My mother [Esther Fulks Scott] 'bout had a fit.  I said, "What would I need money for if the plane went down, I didn't need any money," (laughter).  But anyway that was my first overseas experience was Puerto Rico.
Story_ID: 227739
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So when you left Bradley [University, Peoria, Illinois] where did you go?
Speaker 2: Columbia University School of Social Work, in New York [New York].  I got a scholarship to go there.
Speaker 1: This is 1951?
Speaker 2: Two [1952].
Speaker 1: Fifty-two [1952]?
Speaker 2: Even though I finished in three and a half years, I didn't even get to graduate because of the, they didn't have a graduation in the middle of the year, so I had to come back and in the summer to graduate.  No, I mean June, not the summer.  Then, let's see, I went to Columbia and was in New York for two years.  My school was in the Andrew Carnegie Mansion [New York, New York] and it was the Episcopal Service for Youth [ph.] gave me the scholarship so--meanwhile, in the second, before I got to the second part of the experience, I met my husband, John [H.] Wallace, and we got engaged.  We were going to get engaged because of, but my parents [William Edouard Scott and Esther Fulks Scott], you know with their, you know, nobody's good enough ideas that they were not for that.  So we eloped and then I went on to school.
Speaker 1: Now what year was this?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: What year is this?
Speaker 2: '53 [1953].
Story_ID: 227740
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about Columbia [University School of Social Work, New York, New York] now.  Were there very many black students in School of Social Work there?
Speaker 2: Well not very many, but there were some.  And we were all good friends, and you know, it was kind of, because it was small, I mean relatively small not in a big university which is in a mansion [Andrew Carnegie Mansion, New York, New York] and all the classes were in a mansion.  But we go to be, you know, good friends and close and it was a nice two years that I enjoyed there.  But, meanwhile, as I said, I got engaged and then married [to John H. Wallace].
Story_ID: 227741
Speaker 1: Eloped, huh?
Speaker 2: Eloped.  We went to the same place my parents [William Edouard Scott and Esther Fulks Scott] had eloped to.
Speaker 1: They eloped too?
Speaker 2: They eloped in Wheaton, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you all went to Wheaton?
Speaker 2: And got married.  My parents never, never knew.
Speaker 1: That's where our videographer [Scott Stearns] grew up, but--
Speaker 2: Really?  Well they never knew.  I had a great big wedding when I got my master's degree.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I, you know, it was kind of my big rebellion.
Speaker 1: Well, they didn't like him?
Speaker 2: They didn't like anybody.  You know, my father would find something, you nickname for this one because he was small.  He called one, like the guy I used to date in Bradley [University, Peoria, Illinois], a nit (laughter) because he was small, and he called John [H. Wallace] a name 'cause he has kind of an Asian face.  He called him dish face (laughter).  You know, he just played with all the guys that were, you know, came around.  None were good enough.  They all had their plans for me, so I just kind of said, this has got to stop.  So, we got married, and we were married twenty-three years, twenty-four years really if I add the additional year to it.  And, we remarried on the 20, that, 1954, when I finished college [Columbia University School of Social Work, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: So you had another ceremony?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  I didn't do it to hurt 'em, I just did it to know myself that I could do it, so to speak, I guess.  I didn't want to hurt their feelings.
Speaker 1: So you had a formal wedding.  Was it here in Chicago [Illinois] at St. Edmund's [Episcopal Church, Chicago, Illinois] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.  At St. Edmund's.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  At St. Edmund's and then, you know, then we had three sons [Mark Wallace, Eric Wallace and Victor Wallace] and three years apart, and we lived happily after until about--oh, until, well we went to, he, we went to Washington [D.C.] after I got my doctorate.
Story_ID: 227742
Speaker 1: Now you were at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] for a while?
Speaker 2: --and I was associate dean at Howard University.  Well, I was, first I was at the University of Illinois [at Chicago (UIC), Chicago, Illinois].  It's there somewhere but it might be mixed up, University of Illinois, and--
Speaker 1: Okay.  So there's a kind of, sort of a gap between when you came out of Columbia [University School of Social Work, New York, New York] and when you went back and got your Ph.D.
Speaker 2: Oh I don't have it down there because I, I, when I came out of Columbia I was a social worker, so I went to St.--I was at St. Mary's Home for Children [Chicago, Illinois] as a social worker.  I later was at the Family Service Agency--Bureau [ph.] I guess is what they called it, as a social worker.  Then I got a job at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], and that's on there, as a social work analyst, and that was nice.  It was a big research project, and, for the Midway Research Project [ph.] it was called.  It was a three year project and I worked for three years in that.  And following that I was, I went back to the university--back to St. Mary's Home for Children as a director of casework, and then that led me to the University of Illinois where I stayed as an instructor, field instructor and then later assistant professor and later associate professor.  Then I went off to get my doctorate.  By that time I was almost forty, and they were, Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] said in their catalog, you couldn't apply after thirty-five.  Well I decided I was already assistant professor, I should be able to apply and I applied, and they took four students in and one got drafted or something and they called me and asked me if I would come.  I refused to take the GRE (laughter) because I had been out of school so long I knew that I would never pass it.  And I felt I was an assistant professor, they shouldn't ask me, so, I got in and it was a whole new field, social psychology, I thought it was going to be like social work, but it was all research and I had never had a course in the statistics, so I took the undergraduate statistics and I struggled and struggled, but I did finally get through all the statistical courses and I graduated and did my dissertation on something that was happening at Barat College in Lake Forest [Illinois].  I meanwhile was director of African American studies at Barat College while I was still in school, working on my dissertation, so I did my dissertation there on the black students at Barat College.  I thought that if they had took African American studies that they would have, feel stronger internal control.  Internal control is, I'm the master of my fate, and minorities and women have less higher scores than majorities and men.  And, of course, it has to do with whether you believe something out there controls your fate or whether you control your fate.  So I thought that if they took African American studies that they would--but what it showed was that the white students who took African American studies had lower self-esteem, not self-esteem, but control of their fate because they suddenly realized there was something out there called racism that has to, that plays havoc with your being the master of your fate.  So it was kind of interesting to do, but I did do mine.
Story_ID: 227743
Speaker 1: So, let me get this straight, it was the, one of the blacks--what was the result of African American studies on the black students?
Speaker 2: That didn't show anything.
Speaker 1: Didn't show any difference?
Speaker 2: Didn't show any difference.  And the black students, let me say this, they were students that they had brought up to this college [Barat College] in Lake Forest [Illinois] during the summer in an Upward Bound program, and they would do very well during the summer but when the white students would come in in the fall and they suddenly were the minority again, and they did silly things like take the students to Saks Fifth Avenue as a part of orientation, I mean, just, and these were inner-city students that they--that was just, you know, and it would lose these students by the second semester they had lost all of 'em every year.  So we were determined that we were going to keep them there by this program.  So we had a fifteen course program which I ran, and, my husband [John H. Wallace] taught in it too, and I had a social work student from the University of Illinois [at Chicago (UIC), Chicago, Illinois] who had been, who was a student getting, and we made that a fieldwork placement, and she counseled the students during the time that we were there.  We didn't lose a student, and we were able to--and actually I think one of our students became the valedictorian of the class.  But we worked, I mean, we did lots of things, we had parties for them at our house, we did a lot of things with them, not for them, but with them and we enjoyed it.  We enjoyed working with them, but it was clear to me that the isolation factor was the big factor that they experienced once all the white students came because they knew that they were so different and they really didn't have the resources, you know, they couldn't go to Saks Fifth Avenue.  They didn't have a support system.  And they didn't want the white students to be their, what do you call that?
Speaker 1: Tutors?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they didn't want that.  'Cause once we got some up higher, that meant that they could be the tutors.  I didn't stay but a year because I was, I graduated, I mean I was working on my doctorate all the time and I stayed a year but got the program started and they kept it up and the students, we got a valedictorian out of it.  So I was really feeling good about that experience because I learned a lot too.
Speaker 1: What, this was 1970?
Speaker 2: That's a good question.
Speaker 1: Was it '70 [1970]-what?
Speaker 2: I don't even think I have it on that list.  Barat College.
Speaker 1: How do you spell the name of the college?
Speaker 2: B-A-R-E-T [sic.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was at the University of Illinois at the time and I took a year's leave and went to Barat and I was associate professor of sociology and psychology and I had the--and director of African American studies.  I'd always been interested in African American studies anyway so it was a wonderful opportunity.  They came and got me, the nuns, this was a Catholic school, the nuns came and got me while I was sitting in my class at Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] and all of a sudden there were two nuns sitting outside my door.  When I went out, you know, they wanted to interview me because somebody recommended us, recommended me.
Story_ID: 227744
Speaker 1: Now by this time had you been to Africa or to the Caribbean other than Puerto Rico?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  Never dreamed I would go anyplace else at that time, but that was one of the interesting things that we did together and then once I got my degree I had an offer from Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] and from the Association, National Association of Social Workers [Washington, D.C.] also to be research director, but I took the Howard offer and my husband [John H. Wallace] went and ran the Ford Foundation [New York, New York] project.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So the position at Howard was as dean of the--
Speaker 2: School of Social [Work]--associate dean.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then I later became acting dean, and went on to, well I was in--
Speaker 1: Now this is social work, right?  It's different from the school of sociology?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so there's usually never a school of sociologies, there's usually a sociology department, but School of Social Work.  In some places, it's the college of social work.  So at Howard I just had. I was in the School of Social Work as associate dean.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that was very interesting too.  Howard is a, I mean, my first experience at a black college.
Speaker 1: This is in the mid-'70s [1970s]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, it was.  It was in the '70s [1970s], early '70s [1970s] and I was there, I came into a situation where they had, that they were trying to get rid of the dean and they were trying to, they were going to get rid of the dean and they appointed, they had somebody working with them that was going to become dean, this was the vice president.  Once the dean was delivered, and but I had no clue, I was the innocent bystander so to speak, so it was a little difficult there, but as things worked out, the dean did go back to the classroom, the man that was chosen to be dean became dean and I was referred to, for a job at the National Urban League [New York, New York].
Story_ID: 227745
Speaker 1: And so I took a year's, another year's leave [from Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and went to the [National] Urban League [New York, New York] and was, at that time, [HistoryMaker] Vernon [E. Jordan, Jr.] was called the executive director of the National Urban League, Vernon Jordan, and I was deputy director but they changed the titles to president (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  Now this is after, this is after the death of Whitney Young, right?
Speaker 1: Uh-hm.  Yeah, Vernon Jordan was the director.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So I did, you know, at that time people or women did not do this, but I did that commuter thing where I commuted and spent the week there [New York, New York] and came back [Washington, D.C.] on Friday nights and did the laundry and cleaned the house and so forth and then left Sunday night and went back.  This is nothing now because people do all these things, but in those days, people never, never did it.
Speaker 2: How did your family feel about that?
Speaker 1: Well, I, you know, I thought that everything was fine and, 'cause they said, "Yes, go," cause the money was good and this and that, that's how my husband [John H. Wallace] said at the time, but now, we divorced later.  But, and we're back together but he's, but he, you know, his recall was that he didn't like it so now I know, but we didn't--I didn't stay longer than a year 'cause I decided that that was too much and my family would never adjust to New York [New York].  It was just too fast.  My boys [Mark Wallace, Eric Wallace and Victor Wallace], you know, saunter along (laughter).  They not gone get out there, that, to get a cab, they'd never get a cab (laughter).  Not the both, not all of them, but the youngest one particularly.  So, but it was a wonderful growing experience because I went all over the country giving speeches for the Urban League and I was the first woman vice president, and I had never, I was, you know, so protected I had never ever checked into a hotel by myself or anything like that.  And the time that Vernon got shot, that was after that, but I was assistant secretary and was supposed to give that speech that he got shot at, but I, you know, but I learned (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  He got shot in Indiana too, right?
Speaker 1: Um-hm, sure did.
Speaker 2: Right outside of Indianapolis [Indiana].
Speaker 1: That's right.  But that was a wonderful experience and I learned how to speak.  I mean I had one oratorical contest in high school [Englewood High School, Chicago, Illinois], the Elks Oratorical [Contest] and I won a thousand dollars or something.  I went the national and won a thousand dollars, so, but I still, you know, I'm still a shy person so I learned a lot about speaking and so forth at the Urban League and managing, I had a big, I learned, met Ron Brown.  He was a Washington [D.C.] representative then.  And, of course Vernon was a fun boss.  He really was.  He give you all these stories about when he was with the voter registration and all the, you know, he just, he just was a fun person to work for, I mean, and of all the people I worked for in my life, he was probably the most fun and easy going essentially, but still wanted you to do your job and I just feel like I grew up more in that, I'm sure, in that period.  But it took its toll and I'm sure it contributed to our divorce and, which was probably in the '76 [1976] or somewhere in there, something like that, and I went from there to Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] as vice president.
Story_ID: 227746
Speaker 1: To Morgan State [University, Baltimore, Maryland]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.  And, but that was a catastrophe because at Morgan State the president did not check with the State [of Maryland] about my salary and he offered me a salary that he couldn't pay me.  So it was something like $30,000 less that he paid me, than he offered me.
Speaker 1: That's a lot of money less.
Speaker 2: It was and, you know, I had gotten a nice apartment and a new car, all of these things even though I knew I wasn't going to make what I made at the [National] Urban League [New York, New York].  I didn't expect to be minus $30,000 but I was and so that was, I spent a year.  I told Andy [Andrew Billingsley] I'd stay a year but I couldn't stay any longer and I really struggled that year financially because I, it was just my salary and I had two of our sons with me.  The other one was in college.  So it was a tough, a really tough year, but I always, I'm very, well, religious and I believe God has a plan for your life and a lot of the things that happened that are difficult for you are things to make you stronger for the next step, and that's what I feel about Morgan.  And during that period, I did meet the person that became my husband [Reverend Maurice A. Dawkins] and one of the things he did while I was at Morgan, the vice president of finance wanted to take over my job.  Oh he wanted it in the worst way and the president left and I was, I had a radio station and he wanted to take, I was supposed to have a reception opening the radio station and he wouldn't give me the money that I had in my budget.  So the person, it was my fiance we were just friends at the time, but he went to up to one of the oil companies and got $500 from an oil company and I had my reception anyway.  It was a good star in his crown because, you know, we later dated and married, and he became a lobbyist.  He was a lobbyist and became a candidate for the U.S. Senate in Virginia and was in civil rights.  Did know [Reverend Dr.] Martin [Luther King, Jr.].  We have pictures with him, with me and Martin and the March on Washington, a number of civil rights ventures, so we were married twenty-two years when he died.
Story_ID: 227747
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were married [to John H. Wallace] the first time for--
Speaker 2: Twenty-three years.
Speaker 1: Then the second time [to Reverend Maurice A. Dawkins] for twenty-two years.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  And now my husband [John H. Wallace] and I have remarried, my first husband, have remarried.  We've only been married not quite a year.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's interesting.  It's almost like a [HistoryMaker] Della Hardman's story.  I think she dated a guy in coll--in high school, and she married someone else and she went back and married the other guy after the first one died.  So, interesting.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it is interesting and you know, our boy--well our goals were different too before.  I was always looking for what can I do next, what can I conquer next, you know, which was, I enjoyed the challenge of moving somewhere, et cetera.  And of course, in the agriculture department [U.S. Department of Agriculture], of course, a really wide thing of opportunities and all the, all the places I went and saw and things I did he would never have, my present husband, he would tell you, he wouldn't have either.  He never had liked it because I was traveling and all of that, but my husband at that time traveled too, so it didn't bother him, you know, at all.  He was very proud of me and busy doing his own thing with politics and so forth and was a Washington [D.C.] lobbyist, so, you know, now that I'm retired and my husband is retired, we're much more alike than we were before.  We haven't got any big things we want to do.  I don't.  I feel like I been there and done that.  I'm busy, I mean, I'm chair board and I'm on the governor's Commission on Community Service [sic. Volunteer Florida, governor's Commission of Community Service] and I'm a commissioner, you know, and all, but I'm not anxious to, you know--
Story_ID: 227748
Speaker 1: Well tell us (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Do big things.
Speaker 1: --about the agriculture department [U.S. Department of Agriculture].  Now this is a--
Speaker 2: --a major thing.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you went through three administrations in the agriculture department, starting with the [President James Earl "Jimmy"] Carter [Jr.] administration and you replaced, I mean, when you came in just as the, as an assistant, I guess, right, when the former director [sic. secretary] of agriculture left, Earl [L.] Butz and he was like, was he in the [President Gerald Rudolph] Ford [Jr.] administration or was he in the Carter Administration?
Speaker 2: No, he was a Republican.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was in the Ford administration.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So he got in trouble for sort of lewd remarks about black people.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  When the Carter administration came in Carter then began to appoint varieties of people.  And in the agriculture department you had the secretary, and the assistant secretary was under the secretary.  And they are divided, they divide, you know like you could have international affairs and administration and ta da, ta da, ta da, but different, it's divided up in there.  There were forty-four agencies in the agriculture department, 120,000 people and I just sent in my resume to the talent search nobody would--and I wasn't even a Democrat.  I was an Independent registered in Maryland as an Independent.  So when they called me I really didn't believe it.  I was at Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] but I was about to leave and go to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] first for a six week course for vice presidents and so forth that they had at the [Harvard] Business School [Boston, Massachusetts], and then I was going to Western Michigan University [Kalamazoo, Michigan] who had been trying to recruit me forever but I'd always said, "It's too cold in Michigan, I don't want to go."  And then I got this call from the agriculture department and I said, "Agriculture?  I'm from Chicago, Illinois.  I don't know anything about agriculture," but it never occurred to me that they had things like food stamps, and you know, they had a lot of social programs but most people don't even think about them being related to agriculture.  But that's not what they wanted me for.  See I was vice president for administration at Morgan so that gave me the credential for assistant secretary for administration and I went on and took the job at Western Michigan because I knew I had to leave Morgan, I was dying because I didn't have any money, and I moved down to Western Michigan with my son and got started and was the director of the School of Social Work and, you know, was in good shape.  I was healing from my experience at Morgan, and it took them until about September or so to do all the things they had to do like security clearance and all that because I didn't believe it.  And I didn't say that I got this phone call saying the secretary would see me on a Friday either at ten o'clock in the morning or two o'clock in the afternoon, and I didn't know anything about agriculture so I took the two o'clock in the afternoon for this interview.  When I got there, the deputy secretary met me and said, "The secretary is going to offer you this job," and I said, you know it seemed so strange to me, he was going to offer me a job.
Story_ID: 227749
Speaker 1: What clout did you have that you didn't know about?
Speaker 2: (Laughter)  I'm not sure.  I mean, it was, timing.  I just think it was the right time because there were some things going on in the agriculture department [U.S. Department of Agriculture].  The secretary comes with an assistant from his state.  The deputy secretary is from another state, always.  The secretary's assistant wanted to control whoever it was that came into that job.  The deputy secretary wanted to control whoever came into that job.  It was the deputy secretary's friend who found, you know, who looked at the resumes and picked this out, picked me out and said, you know, "Here's a black woman who has the credentials," and I had just gotten my Ph.D. [from Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois].  See that was back then, you know these things wouldn't have been important now, but back then it was unique.  So he, therefore if I got the job that's why he said, that's why he said, "The secretary is going to offer you the job and I want you to take it," because then he would have been the person that I would be indebted to as opposed to the other one.  It was at the right place at the right time and they were grasping for straws and I was the straw (laughter).  That's all I can say.  I don't know any more than that.  But, sure enough, they, he's offered me the job and I said well I'll think about it and the deputy secretary was really upset with me and I said, he gave me his phone number and everything to call him over the weekend, and I did.
Speaker 1: And you got the--
Speaker 2: I did call and, well I didn't call right away, but my husband to be [Reverend Maurice A. Dawkins] said, "You told the secretary you'd think about it? How could you do that?"  And I said, "Well, I'm not used to just saying yes to something like that."  So he said you should call him up and I did.  I called him and said that I, I would accept.
Story_ID: 227750
Speaker 1: So the agriculture department [U.S. Department of Agriculture].  Now what?
Speaker 2: Now what?  Yes, well--
Speaker 1: Your official title is the--
Speaker 2: Assistant secretary for administration.
Speaker 1: Okay, and this is the year 1976?
Speaker 2: Seventy-seven [1977].
Speaker 1: Seventy-seven [1977].
Speaker 2: I was sworn in in December 1977.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In the [President James Earl "Jimmy"] Carter administration.  And, of course, you know, it was very exciting.  I knew from the moment I walked in there that, you know, there would be games played, and so forth, but the experience I had had prior had helped me with that kind of idea.  But, first thing happened, they, we supposed to have a deputy assistant secretary and they had taken my supergrade slot [GS, General Schedule].  At that time they called them.  It's a sixteen and above and transferred it to a black man who was already in the agriculture department, with the idea that I would be crippled.  The deputy--I mean the secretary didn't do this, this is people around him, right?  I would be crippled and not have a deputy.  Well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)  Now why would they do that?  What's the, what's the--
Speaker 2: Get rid of me, I mean, you know--
Speaker 1: Did they resent having a woman there?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, black too, and a woman.  The agriculture department, first of all you need to know at that time was a very southern department.  Most of the people that worked there are white males from the South.  Many Mormons, many folks that never ever think of woman as doing anything.  I mean they didn't know whether to stand up if I came in a room or not to stand up.  I had a man tell me--ask me, well what he said to me was, "Well [HistoryMaker] Joan [Wallace Scott], I mean, I have a woman at the next, at the next level if she would be promoted then she would have to travel and you know her husband wouldn't let her travel."  And I said, "Oh really, have you asked her husband?"  Not even saying have you asked her, but, "Have you asked her husband?"  "Well, no," I said, "well how are you making that decision if, you know, maybe you wouldn't let your wife travel, but maybe, maybe you don't know everybody."  But it was that kind of attitude that seems to us so backward that he didn't even want to make a promotion of the woman.  Well in the three and a half years in the Carter administration, first of all Bob [Robert] Bergland was a wonderful person and he had me come into, I mean every year you had to go for your budget and you had to show all your accomplishments and why you needed whatever it was you were asking for.  So I sat with him every year when we listened to all the forty-four agency heads on the issue of equal opportunity and what had they done in that whole field.  What kind of hires, what kind of promotions, what kind of, what, what had they done.  So that was one positive thing that we were able to do, so we created a climate for, that it a good thing to hire people who were diverse.  In that three and a half years we hired five thousand women and minorities.  I didn't hire them, but the people, these people did because they thought of it as a good thing.  The blacks were in the basement so to speak.  In my office, the head secretary would tell on any black person that came to see me, would call (laughter) her, would call the boss of this person  and say that they were up there and then they would get chewed out for coming up to see me.
Story_ID: 227751
Speaker 1: I had a couple of things that I wanted to make a priority.  One was the African American, the 1890 black colleges [historically black colleges and universities, HBCUs].  The 1890 colleges are the colleges that are land grant colleges and there are about seventeen of them.  The 1862 colleges are land grant, but those are the University of Illinois [at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois], the, you know, the big ones.  But the 1890s are the black land grant colleges, like the Alabama A&M [University; Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University, Normal, Alabama].  Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama] is included in that group.  All the A&M [Agricultural and Mechanical] colleges that are primarily black.  So I discovered that they had only about, when they started out getting money from the agricultural department [U.S. Department of Agriculture], it was like $280,000 for seventeen colleges, which was ridiculous given that the Ohio States [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] of the world got millions of dollars.  And so I made that a priority to do something about that.  And so I had under me, I had management, operations and finance, data services, equal opportunity personnel, contract appeals, administrative law judges and safety and health, which I created that unit.  And so equal opportunity, I created an office for the 1890s in the equal opportunity area.  And their job was to be an advocate for those, for those colleges.
Speaker 2: Now, did you have--was [HistoryMaker] James Cheek involved in any of this stuff?
Speaker 1: Uh-uh, because he's not an 1890 university.  And I also met with those college presidents.  I went and took delegations sometimes to visit those colleges.  But when I left to go to Trinidad, it would be after the [President Ronald Wilson] Reagan administration, I, they took me to dinner, all the presidents and they also recommended that I get an honorary degree, which I did from Alabama A&M, just for that special thing.  And they were now getting seventy-five million dollars and I feel, felt so--I don't know what they're getting now, probably twice or three times that much, but because of that work.
Story_ID: 227752
Speaker 1: The other thing that I was able to do at agriculture department [U.S. Department of Agriculture] was to set up a, what do you call it? When the money comes in and it stays afloat I guess, from the agriculture department.  It comes into banks and then it stays and goes out, you know, may stay a day or whatever, but it's a million dollars a day to a black bank in New Orleans [Louisiana].  I had a finance center in New Orleans and that had, we had about two thousand people down there, and we were able to create a float to the black bank at ten million dollars a day.  So that was another possibility that we were able to do.  But I worked very hard when I was in the agriculture department to get the black colleges [historically black colleges and universities, HBCUs] related to the international things when I moved into the international arena.  And I did.  I was able to take some presidents with me to other countries and so forth.  But I tried to do, but you know, when you're in those jobs, you never do enough for the--the minorities think you never do enough and the majority think you do too much.  So you just have to do whatever it is you can do, but there were so many, you know, there are millions of stories about the agricultural department that I, you know, could tell, but I don't feel--and they were after me constantly.  They was always some inspector general coming to interview me because somebody filed some kind of complaint.  One time a man filed a complaint because someone under me hired a black woman and he was so sure that I knew the black woman.  I mean it was another office that hired this woman.  I'd never seen her in my life, but because she was a black woman and I was a black woman, he was sure that I had, I had had the influence over him to do.  And he hadn't even applied for the job but he filed a discrimination complaint against me.  So, I mean, you know, there were always those things happening, people always after you but I had a wonderful secretary after I finally got rid of the secretary that I had had in my office.  I had a wonderful secretary who was very good at watching my back, and who also was very good at the network of secretaries, and therefore you were, I was able to pretty much, you know, stay on top of things.  And so during the [President Ronald Wilson] Reagan administration, of course, everybody thought I was a Democrat since I had been in the Democratic, since I'd been in the [President James Earl "Jimmy"] Carter [Jr.] administration.  And one time, my husband [Reverend Maurice A. Dawkins] was a Republican, one time someone came to him and said, "We have to get that woman who's a holdover in the agriculture department."  So my husband said, "Well who is that?"  He said, "Well that [HistoryMaker] Joan [Scott] Wallace, you know, she should be out of there, because she's still there.  So we came to you because we know you can help us get rid of her," (laughter) and he said, "I'm sorry but I'm married to her."  So that's how I was able, that is how I was able to bridge the gap between being in the Carter administration and being in the Reagan (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now your ex-husband--
Story_ID: 227753
Speaker 1: --The second husband [Reverend Maurice A. Dawkins], he was in charge of VISTA [Volunteers in Service to America; AmeriCorps VISTA] programs you said?
Speaker 2: But not at that time, he was a lobbyist at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was that husband that I'm talking about.  That was a period, that was a period when I was married to him.  And he was a lobbyist for OIC [Opportunities Industrialization Centers].  You know OIC?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Leon Sullivan?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Leon Sullivan out of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Well he was a great friend of Leon and he was a minister like Leon and they went theological seminary in New York [New York] at the same time, so they were good friends and he became the lobbyist for OIC, but by the time I married him, he went, well he left OIC and went into business for himself and had an office on K Street in Washington [D.C.], so, you know, and he traveled at lot and I traveled a lot so it was not a problem.
Story_ID: 227754
Speaker 1: Do you have any questions about the agriculture department [U.S. Department of Agriculture]?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know a whole lot about the agricultural department, but you mentioned the major things was the assistance you were able to shake down for the black colleges [historically black colleges and universities, HBCUs] that were under the 1890 agricultural department.
Speaker 1: Yes, I did.  And there were other things, but you know, time has gone by and I've forgotten.  So much happened in the agriculture department constantly.
Speaker 2: There was concern in those days I know about black people losing land all over the South, and papers written about it (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)  Yes, and they still have it.  That never ended.
Speaker 2: And I think though recently someone announced that were gaining land.  Black people actually have accumulated more land in the last couple years than they lost.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: Which is odd, you know--
Speaker 1: But the black farmers are still complaining about not getting the money that they are really owed.  That was an issue when I was assistant secretary.  It was not under me, it was really under another assistant secretary, but I went to, down to Mississippi and talked to farmers and was on some seminars.  I mean I went all over the place in the United States and I learned a lot about agriculture.  I learned more about international agriculture having gone overseas.  I was able to, I mean when the administration changed, I didn't want to be assistant secretary and I know they didn't want me to be, so I suggested to the new, I was head of the transition team for [President James Earl "Jimmy"] Carter [Jr.] and the person who was head for the Republicans and I worked together and we did very well.  In fact, he eventually became a secretary of agriculture.
Speaker 2: Who was that?
Speaker 1: That was Dick [Richard] Ling and he, so I told him that I didn't want to stay in that job so he didn't have to worry, I wouldn't stay, but I would like to work on an international level, and I made a list of jobs I would like to have and he gave me the first one that I had on my list which was head of the International Cooperation and Development Agency [sic. Office of International Cooperation and Development, U.S. Department of Agriculture].
Story_ID: 227755
Speaker 1: Now that agency [Office of International Cooperation and Development, U.S. Department of Agriculture] did many things.  They worked with the UN [United Nations], the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the World Food Programme [WFP] and I led delegations to both of those, those meetings.  I led, the one I led last by myself was, and took the U.S. delegation with me, but I didn't have a secretary with me, the secretary with me and that was the World Food Program in Cyprus.  I, you know, when you lead these delegations, you sit in the first chair or the second chair.  If the secretary went, I sat in the second chair.  If I led it, then I sat in the first chair.  When issues came up about apartheid in South Africa, I refused to sit in the first chair because the United States had not done what they needed to do about apartheid, so I would not sit in the first chair and read whatever was written for me to say.  I also had under me The Caribbean Basin Initiative [CBI] and worked with the private sector on issues about the Caribbean, and so some of the free trade things from the Caribbean were a result of what we did.  We sent a thousand people overseas to a hundred countries, you know, we would get them from the agriculture department [U.S. Department of Agriculture] for a different kind of U.S. aid projects, and we trained 2,400 agriculturalists through our land grant system in agriculture.  And the other area that I had was international research and we had five hundred projects in India, Pakistan, and Poland.  We used their currency that belonged to the United States and their, and for projects that would help them and would help the United States so we used zloties in Poland and rupees in India.  So those were interesting projects.  All of it was very, very interesting.  I enjoyed my time in the agriculture department to a point and then at the end I was really glad to be free at last (laughter).  And when I finally retired, and then finally, the last phase of my career, well, almost the last phase of my career was moving from--to Trinidad, where I had an ambassador rank and I was working for the agriculture department, but I was really on loan to the Inter-American Institute for Cooperation on Agriculture [IICA].  That's in Costa Rica, but I had Trinidad.  It takes in the whole of Canada, the United States and all of South and Central America.  And so there are offices throughout that region and they are to help agriculture and so I had the Trinidadian office and lived there for three and a half years.
Story_ID: 227756
Speaker 1: Now how was living in Trinidad, I mean Trinidad's famous--a country famous for revolutionary ideas, I guess in the Caribbean, a lot of people, C.L.R. James, Eric Williams, Tony Martin, a lot of Trinidadians, Ross McCohen [ph.].
Speaker 2: You're right.
Speaker 1: All the political activists seem to come out of Trinidad.  Not all of 'em, a lot of 'em.
Speaker 2: They all went to school at [University of] Oxford [Oxford, England] too.  They did (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)  They're a very bright group.
Speaker 2: All of them got Ph.D.'s at Oxford.  No, it was interesting--
Speaker 1: George Padmore, I just forgot about him.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm, you're right.  We loved it.  We were going to build a home there as a matter of fact and stay there, you know.  Of course we knew all the people on the top, on both parties, and then we knew all the diplomatic corps pretty much.  The American ambassador had a party for us when we left, but, and then we knew, 'cause the Trinidadians were great people, I mean, bright and helpful and, you know, sometimes I remember the holes in the, the potholes in the streets and so forth and all the, and how much, you paid seven dollars for a can of Pringles.  But there was something about the people that was just great, you know, and I mean they were intellectually wonderful to talk to whether you agreed with 'em or not, you know, and you see, they had, you have to pass an exam in order to go to college and after you get in there, you had to pass one to get out of college, so, so they were--I don't remember running into a lot of revolutionary people, but people who had ideas that might have been certainly less conservative than ours.  But my husband [Reverend Maurice A. Dawkins] ended up building the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association] for free while I was there.  He had to have something to do, so he built the Y [YWCA] from falling on the ground and he proceeded to have a concert, brought his sister who was an opera singer, into to raise money for a Y for Trinidad.  So he did, and it's there.  And he finished it in just, just about finished it I guess by the time he passed.  He had come up here from Trinidad.  We still were going to live down there, but it was a wonderful experience being in Trinidad.  And looking at and you see, Trinidadians are Trinidadians first.  They're neither black or white, I mean, they are, but that's not their priority, Trinidad is their priority.  You come to the United States, people are black or white first and then maybe they're Americans.  And then they're complaining forever about it.  So, it's so different there because they don't see things in the same way, and we just had a wonderful time when we were there, just living there and enjoying the people.  That's the best thing I can say.  I can't really put my finger on it, how it's different, but it is.  And we would hear the things about what's going on in the U.S. and we'd think, gee, we're glad we're not there (laughter).
Story_ID: 227757
Speaker 1: Since you retired, now you started, you led, you were part of the delegations that went to Africa to monitor elections.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, but that was my own company.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was called the--
Speaker 2: Americans for Democracy in Africa.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we did that after we went back to Virginia, our home in Virginia and my husband [Reverend Maurice A. Dawkins] got a contract and I got a contract to start a company, a grant, I got a grant to start something with Americans for Democracy in Africa and so I went to, primarily went to Nigeria, went to, I spoke on democracy in Zimbabwe and in Swaziland, took delegations to monitor elections that they had in some of the African countries.  We had the feeling that the U.S. Department of State was not always fair about some of the decisions they made in Africa.  And we were constantly trying to research that and trying to have people come from Carnegie Foundation in several other places to talk about Africa and different parts of African issues and we went to Portland, came to Chicago [Illinois], California, all over the country on forums and then we had these--we did that for two or three years and then my husband became ill again and we went back to Florida.  Then and after that I tried to stay retired, but it's hard when you're a busy person, so I, I took on travelling a hundred miles a day to Florida International University [Miami, Florida] and was associate director there at the School of Social Work [Robert Stempel College of Public Health and Social Work, Florida International University, Miami, Florida], and then I started, then I wrote a project for teaching grantsmanship to small owners of businesses, I mean non-profit organizations in Miami [Florida] and I ran that for two years and then I finally said enough is enough, I'm a quit.  So I quit.
Story_ID: 227758
Speaker 1: Who funded Americans for Democracy in Africa?
Speaker 2: Well we got some funding from the government, we got some funding from countries, African countries, and, you know, some paid, and we took delegations of--the last people we took was some of the college, 1890 college presidents.  That was the last group that I took to Nigeria.  And--
Speaker 1: So, did the Nigerian government pay for some of it?
Speaker 2: They paid for the, especially the last delegation.  They paid for some of it.
Speaker 1: I remember when a lot of people were going to Nigeria, around the time of the, I think one of the candidate was killed and he spent a lot of time in prison.  He came out [sic.] and died, I think as a U.S. state department [U.S. Department of State] was talking to 'em.
Speaker 2: Oh, I remember, [Moshood] Abiola.
Speaker 1: Abiola.
Speaker 2: That's right.  I remember when that happened.
Speaker 1: Abiola, and then Ken Saro-Wiwa and eight other people were executed by the government too.
Speaker 2: Really?
Speaker 1: Yeah, during the same period of time, I think, not too long afterwards and people were, I know [HistoryMaker] Carol Moseley Braun went over and [HistoryMaker] Father [Richard L.] Tolliver from St. Edmund's [Episcopal Church, Chicago, Illinois] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  We knew her and she was a--well Tolliver went with me, and Carol Moseley Braun went on her own, but she, she was a friend of ours I mean in the [U.S.] Congress 'cause we were working with the congress all the time you see, and she was certainly positive.  I was surprised that she went, because it wasn't a politically good thing for her to do.
Speaker 1: It wasn't.  You know she got a lot of--
Speaker 2: Wow, yeah she did.
Speaker 1: --backdraft from that now.  It wasn't.  I mean that some of the news, I know the black journalists went and we talked Ms. [HistoryMaker] Avis LaVelle, I mean not Avis LaVelle, but [HistoryMaker] Dorothy [R.] Leavell from the [Chicago] Crusader went over and other people and it seemed to be a lot of, there's still a lot of confusion about that in terms of--because the Nigerian government under, God I can't think of his name now, but it wasn't the, this was not the, did not seem to be the most progressive government and a lot of repression on the people and that sort of thing and--
Story_ID: 227759
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: It was always hard to determine and that's why we started monitoring elections [in Africa].  And when we went that last time, we were--
Speaker 1: Sani Abacha, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Sani Abacha. And when we (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)  Now he's out of power now yeah.
Speaker 2: --then he died in his sleep.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Very mysteriously.  And lots of people think--
Speaker 1: It seems as though now, correct me if I'm wrong here, but it seems as though a lot of people would call in to sort of co-sign the Abacha government.  He came to Chicago [Illinois], spoke at Chicago State University [Chicago, Illinois] I remember (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  Oh, did he?
Speaker 1: --during that same period of time and there was a lot of bitter rhetoric going back and forth as to whether this, because of the way Moshood Abiola died, and his wife [Alhaja Kudirat Abiola] too, being run over by a car [sic.], I think, shortly after.
Speaker 2: His wife?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I don't remember that.
Speaker 1: Yeah she was run down by a car I think a couple of weeks after he died in a mysterious accident and [Ken] Saro-Wiwa and eight other being killed, being executed by a government and they were the main critics of the government.  And then people going over and coming back saying everything's okay, you know.  Then most of these delegations brought people back and said everything's okay, don't worry.  But in retrospect, now, what would you say?  I mean you could be a Monday morning quarterback on this now.  What was, do you have any sense of what was really going on over there now?
Speaker 2: Well, I know that the last delegation we took, we were doing the elections, there was a lot of graft, I mean somebody gave a whole bunch of money to one of the presidents you know.  They were, it was Nigerian money, but, you know and we were all kind of appalled at that.  Things like the, what do you call those, the ballot boxes were disappearing in some places.  I think this was when he was actually running to be elected.
Speaker 1: Which one? Abacha (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  Abacha.  And, you know, we were not happy at all.  In fact, you know, a mood--not thinking about it now, I just forgotten some of the stuff, but thinking about it then we were very unhappy with it.  With what was going on in that regard, and we were all hoping that he wouldn't run, you know, but nope, nope, he ran.  And I don't remember how it all came out, but we weren't happy with the election, the way in which the election--that's when we stopped going.
Speaker 1: I think Abiola was supposedly had won, then he was arrested and, you know, won subsequently and then he didn't win, having being arrested.
Speaker 2: No, but who's there now?  Is the man that's there now?
Speaker 1: [Olusegun] Obasanjo.
Speaker 2: He won.  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Oh okay.  That's the one.
Speaker 2: Because Abiola was dead by that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You talking about the last time they had--okay, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  Um-hm, um-hm.  Yeah, yeah.  But we weren't really happy about some of the shenanigans that were going on.  We had never seen that before.  It was really something.  I have some pictures of some of the elections, you know, some of the people stand like this in line and just right up against each waiting and waiting and they want to vote and they, you know, that was so interesting to us that we wanted, that they wanted to vote and that they wanted democracy and whenever you would go and talk somewhere that's what they wanted.  The question was whether or not they could get it.  It's very hard, we found.  And I've been to Sudan too since then.  In kind of a similar kind of thing.  People tell you one thing and you, you would think you would like to believe them, but you can't be sure.  I've listened to both sides on the Sudan story as well.  And now I'm really appalled at what's happening.
Story_ID: 227760
Speaker 1: We're just talking about these African trips and if there's any, have you any thoughts after having gone and seen?  What do you really, I mean--
Speaker 2: Well, I think, well, the last time we went I was not happy with the trip.  We saw much, much more corruption in terms of, of the political situation in terms of trying to, people wanting to vote, voting boxes getting taken home by people and things of that sort that we had never seen before.
Speaker 1: Not even in Chicago [Illinois], huh (laughter)?
Speaker 2: (Laughter)  Yeah, absolutely.  But then I went to Sudan with one of the congressmen.  I'm trying to recall his name, former congressman from California.
Speaker 1: Black?
Speaker 2: Black.
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker Ronald] Dellums?
Speaker 2: No, but he was originally from Trinidad.  He's got a Trinidadian accent.  You know him if I could just think of his name.
Speaker 1: Not [HistoryMaker] Willie [L.] Brown?
Speaker 2: Uh-uh.  Willie Brown's not a congressman.  This was a congressman.
Speaker 1: He was at one time.  He did become one at some point.
Speaker 2: Oh, I didn't realize that.  But I'll think of it.  But at any rate (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)  No, maybe not.
Speaker 2: --and then we were with also, last name is [Stanley Hugh] Smith.  He was the president of Shaw University [Raleigh, North Carolina], and he was kind of an aide to this congressman, whose name I cannot recall.  But we went there to look to see Sudan and the issue of slavery and the issue of, and we met a lot of people from the region, from the south, and we sat with them in the yard for dinner and talked about slavery and talked about the war, the tremendously terrible war they've had so long, twenty-seven years or something like that.  And they complained about the other rebels and the kinds of negative things that they had experienced with the other rebels.  One man told me he had been put in prison in a hole in the ground for like five years, I mean.  It was just horror stories that they told.  Much worse, they usually talk about the, quote, Arabs who are black people, but they speak Arabic and they are Muslims (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)  They think they're Arabs.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I was amazed when I was there and saw people my color and darker, you know, who were being called Arabs.  And I even said something to the man that was sitting next to me.  He put his arm next to mine and, you know, said, no, no, no, you know.  But we are Muslims so that's why they called them the Arabs.  But I'll never forget what the guy who was the head of, was a king, I want to call him the king, but he wasn't a king.  He was president, I guess, said when the congressmen said, "What should I tell our president?"  And he said, "Tell him that Allah is here and that," didn't say the Muslims and another name for, you know, "Muslims are here."  Kinda like, we're gonna be here.  And it was kind of eerie when he said it, but it was a confused kind of experience that we had.  And this was when they signed the peace agreement.  They had people from everywhere coming in.  And the people were standing outside waiting to hear about the peace agreement.  But all the rebels, except one, signed the peace agreement.  And he was the one that all the other rebels complained about.  And all of them said there was, there was such a thing as people giving their children away, but everybody denied there was slavery.  And I, so you leave in some of these situations just as confused as you were before you came, I mean, because you can't, you don't feel you can believe everything that's put before you.  You know, that's, and I guess that the best thing to say about all of that.  All of those trips where you're there just a short time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because it can all be manipulated--
Story_ID: 227761
Speaker 1: We always ask this question, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well one thing is that we will become more independent and I mean that in the political sense.  That we will stop putting all of our eggs in a basket, even if it's the Independent basket, but that we'd be, more, will wheel more power politically than we do today.  I was an Independent most of my life and, well I guess I have been an Independent most of my life and it gives you a certain amount of freedom, so that's on the political side.  On the other side that we stop being the victim.  That we get on top of that because, I thank my father [William Edouard Scott] and mother [Esther Fulks Scott] for saying, you know, yeah, racism's out there.  It's always a constant.  It's always a constant.  And it will always be in this country, but we can't not do because of it.  We have to do.  We just have to, you know, you listen to the words of Dick Parsons [HistoryMaker Richard Parsons]  who's the CEO of Time Warner [Inc., New York, New York].  He talks about how, you know, you have to really get on top of it, you just can't let it--it's there.  So we just have to go on and move forward, do whatever it takes and I know we can 'cause I've seen people who have.  And I, you know, I just, I know we have different strengths and weaknesses, we just need to help each and help each other is another very important part, not waiting for somebody else to help.
Story_ID: 227762
Speaker 1: When you back on your life, on your professional life and, life otherwise I guess too, is there any major thing that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: I don't generally look back on it.  You're forcing me today to do that (laughter).
Speaker 1: It's a reflective (unclear).
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I think that I would've, I have enjoyed my careers.  I say that in plural cause I had a few.  I've enjoyed it.  I haven't always known the answers to some things like the questions you asked me about Nigeria and Sudan.  But I think that the fact that I come out with some confusion and some questions is more than I really went in with, if you know what I mean.  You go in with kind of a--I remember being a little afraid when I went to Sudan, but I came out with questions about, and listening to people who had been rebels and what listening to the other side.  I suppose that I didn't always have a chance to listen to both sides.  I tried to as a manager, always tried to do that.  I never really wanted to be liked once you can get over not wanting or needing to be liked and just wanting to be fair is always helpful.  It's a burden off your shoulders if you're a manager.  And maybe I wished that I could have gotten over that sooner, but by the time I got to the agriculture department [U.S. Department of Agriculture] I had gotten over it.  Things I would have done differently?  Well, from a career point of view, everything fed into everything else in terms of up.  Not my plan, but God's plan for my life.  From the point of view of my family, I'd been away from Chicago [Illinois] and they've been here.  They're men now, so I guess I would like to do more coming back and being with them more frequently, like I have this summer, because I missed my grandchildren growing up and things that people enjoy 'cause I'd always, my life has always been what new challenge is out there and I really enjoy challenges and change and going somewhere different, seeing things differently, but my husband [John H. Wallace] is much more of a person who enjoys his environment and so I'm trying to learn more from him to not be one to conquer anything.  And I have given up now some of my community activity. I don't have but three things to do now instead of more than that, but yeah I think that enjoying my family is what I need to do differently--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --more of.
Story_ID: 227763
Speaker 1: We always ask this question too.  When you look back at everything you've done, what would you consider at this point to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: My legacy?  I really haven't got a clue except, except that one always has kind of a legacy when they've gone through this life, learned a few things and see kinda what works.  It does work if you work twice as hard as my father [William Edouard Scott] used to say.  People say we shouldn't have to do that, but it does work if you really put yourself into your work.  It works if you can leave the door open for somebody else once you get in it, for your brothers and your sisters.  You know, I think that also, one has to not be afraid of doing something different, not doing all the same things that folks have done in the past, and, you know, getting out there, taking a risk.  I guess that's the only way you gain knowledge, really.
Story_ID: 227764
Speaker 1: Now the last question is almost as--is there anything else that we haven't talked about that you felt--
Speaker 2: (Laughter)  No, can't be.
Speaker 1: Can't be (laughter).  Okay, well is there anything else, let's see, oh, the last question then would be, similar to legacy but a little bit different.  Ma'am how then would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As being a fair person, I mean as a manager, I tried to be fair.  In conflict I tried to be fair.  I guess that's all (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, that's fair.  Thank you very much.
Story_ID: 227765
Speaker 1: This is my father [William Edouard Scott] painting my mother [Esther Fulks Scott].  My father is an artist, was an artist, and he was preparing for the Chicago Tribune to come and do a story on him, and they did do a page of information on him.  I probably was in college [Bradley University, Peoria, Illinois] at the time.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: My dad was William Edouard Scott and my mother was Esther [Fulks] Scott.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay great, thank you.  Next.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: These are, this is my husband [John H. Wallace] and I and our three sons, Mark [Wallace], Eric [Wallace] and Victor [Wallace].  This is when they were little children.  They're grown men now.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is my middle son.  He had just gotten his Ph.D. and he's with his two sons, one has gone off to college at Rochester Institute of Technology [Rochester, New York], and my husband is there too.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my husband and of me.  We're attending the OIC of Broward County [OIC of South Florida, Fort Lauderdale, Florida] Gala.  I was chair of the board of OIC of Broward County.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Great, what year was this?
Speaker 1: Last year [2003], March.
Speaker 2: This is my oldest son Mark and his wife Mary and they were in Florida visiting.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Very good, next.
Speaker 2: This is our only granddaughter Jahanna Joan [ph.], eight years old.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is our youngest son Victor and Jahanna Joan when she was a baby.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my father with a group of black artists in Chicago [Illinois].  My father is the tall one in the back.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the group includes Richmond Barthe, Charles Dawson and some others.
Speaker 2: [William McKnight] Farrow is another artist that's in that group, probably around 1908 [sic. 1927] or so.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's the one you said is from Dayton [Ohio], right?  Farrow.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, William Farrow.  Arthur Diggs too was in that group.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is a painting called 'Traveling Lord Kindly Light,' [sic. 'Traveling (Lead Kindly Light)'] and this painting is really about my great-grand--my father's great-grandparents [sic. grandparents] coming from Indianapolis [Indiana]--coming from North Carolina to Indianapolis in an oxcart.  It's a painting by my father, William Edouard Scott and it depicts that travel, that journey.
