Story_ID: 40836
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: James Leonard Winston.  That's J-A-M-E-S, L-E-O-N-A-R-D, W-I-N-S-T-O-N.
Speaker 1: And sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: August 24, 1947, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm an attorney, and I also serve as the executive director and general counsel of the National Association of Black Owned Broadcasters [NABAB].  And I'm a partner in the law firm of Rubin, Winston, Diercks, Harris, & Cooke.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is, what's today?  Today is May 3--May 3, that's good--2012.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are at 1201 Connecticut Avenue, Northwest, Suite 200, Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia], in the offices of my law firm.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Story_ID: 40837
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, we ask five lightweight questions as a warm-up, and they only require a short answer.  The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite food?  I like food a lot, so I probably have a lot of favorite foods.  I'll go with blackened catfish.  I'm a big catfish lover.  And I like pecan pie.  Those are two of my favorites.
Speaker 1: Now, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Color, that would probably be blue.
Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summertime.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Probably St. Martin.
Speaker 1: Alright.  And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I'd probably go with my mother's [Corrie Mary Conwill] favorite phrase or saying.  She always told us whenever we were going out as young people, "Think for yourself.  Don't let others do your thinking for you."
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's good advice.
Story_ID: 40838
Speaker 1: So, I'm going to ask about your family history now.  And I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Jeff Winston] side.  And then we'll try to get them together.  We'll start with your mother's side first.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Corrie Mary Conwill, that was her maiden name.  Corrie, C-O-R-R-I-E, Mary, M-A-R-Y, Conwill, C-O-N-W-I-L-L.
Speaker 1: Alright.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: April 25, 1920 in Rienzi, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay, now you have to spell that for us.
Speaker 2: R-I-E-N-Z-I.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, where is Rienzi, Mississippi?  I guess it's in--
Speaker 2: The northern part of Mississippi.  The closest town is Corinth [Mississippi].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And Corinth is near the Mississippi, Tennessee border.
Speaker 1: Right.  That's where the great civil war battle was, in Corinth.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Alright.  Now what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side, and how far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: I know, I remember her parents.  Her father was Mathias, M-A-T-H-I-A-S, Conwill.  And her mother was Francis Conwill.
Speaker 1: Now, okay.  And when were they born?  Around the turn of the century, you think?
Speaker 2: Let's see.  She was born in 1920.  They were born in the 1800s but I'm not sure of the exact year.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I'm thinking maybe l880s or '90s [1890s]. Okay.
Speaker 2: I think, it seems to me it was like, my grandfather was like 1885.  That sounds about right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there are stories that are passed down to the family about Reconstruction or slavery?
Speaker 2: No, no, they didn't talk about those early days.  I didn't spend enough time with my grandparents.  We lived in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], they lived in Mississippi.  So, going to visit them was once every few years.  So I remember basically two or three visits with them during my childhood.  So, I can remember--I can remember them and their mannerisms, but I don't remember any stories about, from them, about life growing up in their time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what did they do for a living?  Did they do farm work, or--
Speaker 2: Farmers, yes.  My grandfather owned a farm and he worked the farm his entire life.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did he own his own land?
Speaker 2: Yes, he did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 40839
Speaker 1: Now did your mother [Corrie Mary Conwill] grow up in Mississippi, or did she grow up in--
Speaker 2: Yes, she grew up there where she was born, in Rienzi [Mississippi].
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  She grew up--did she have a chance to finish school in Mississippi?
Speaker 2: She finished--well, she started one year of college in Mississippi and then she got married.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you know where she went to school?
Speaker 2: It was something like Mississippi Valley [State University], something like that.  I can't remember the exact name now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Mississippi Valley State College or something like that.
Speaker 1: Now I know Mississippi Valley State is in Itta Bena, Mississippi.
Speaker 2: Okay, then that wouldn't be it, because she was up near, she was in that part of the country, so I'm not sure what was up there then, but I don't know.
Speaker 1: I got an idea, but--okay.  Anyway, she, so she went to school for a year, then she--
Speaker 2: Got married.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did she meet your father [Jeff Winston] in--?
Speaker 2: Yes.  What happened was she had moved from her parents' [Mathias Conwill and Francis Conwill] home to my father's mother's home to go to school.  She was living with my father's mother.  And he came home to visit.  He was living in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] at the time.  He came home to visit, and after a couple of visits they decided to get married, and she moved back to Pittsburgh, they both moved back to Pittsburgh.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It wasn't Alcorn [State University?], was it?  Because Alcorn is in northern Mississippi.
Speaker 2: It must have had a different name.  I don't think it was Alcorn, unless it had an earlier name.
Speaker 1: Alcorn A&M, or something.
Speaker 2: No, I don't think it was it.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So, at any rate, alright, so, did your mother have any stories about growing up in Rienzi?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Well, I remember talking to her during the Civil Rights Movement, during the latter stage of the Civil Rights Movement when I was an adult.  And I said to her, "Well it had to be really terrible growing up in Mississippi when you were young, because of all the racism."  And she said, "No, you know, there were certainly, you knew there were places you couldn't go and things you couldn't do, but other than that, it was great growing up in Mississippi when I was a child."  And I said, "But, yeah, but you had to take so much stuff from white people."  And she said, "Not really, we were all just country people.  It was just people living out in the country."  She said, "And so, if kids got into a fight, they just got into a fight just like any other kids."  She said--but her brother, my uncle--she said, "Your Uncle Noel beat up a lot of white boys when we were growing up."  I said, "Well, that's interesting."  Now that stunned me.  And so I said okay, so it was just life in the country when she was growing up in Mississippi where she was.  So that was quite surprising to me.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's like politics.  It's local, I guess.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  They were just local folks, growing up in, all living in rural Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, anything else about growing up there?
Speaker 2: You know they, they chopped a lot of cotton.  You know, they did a lot of the things that you do on farms.  You know, they had mules and all that.  So, I remember just vague, you know, vague comments when we would be on my grandfather's farm, just talking about life on the farm, and you know, what life looked like when they were there, but I don't remember any stories that stand out that she told me about her childhood.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 40840
Speaker 1: Well, let me go to your father's side.  Can you give me your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Jeff Winston.  J-E-F-F.
Speaker 1: Alright.  Did he have a middle name?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: That would be January 20, 1903.
Speaker 1: And where was he born?
Speaker 2: He was born in Booneville, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Alright.  Is that in northern Mississippi as well?
Speaker 2: Yes, it's not too far from Rienzi [Mississippi; where Winston's mother, Corrie Mary Conwill, was born and raised].
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  And so, how far back can you trace his side, and what were they doing?
Speaker 2: What I remember my father telling me is that his father's name was John Winston.  And I did not actually remember--both of my father's parents were deceased probably before I was born.  Certainly, I never knew them.  I think they were deceased before I was born.  And he never really talked, my father was not a talker.  He didn't talk about his life growing up at all.  So, I didn't even remember his mother's name.  I had to look that up.  And her name was Alie, A-L-I-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, he didn't talk about--
Speaker 2: No.  And it's interesting too, because once I looked into their background I realized that both of them were probably born slaves.  They were both born in the 1850s in Mississippi.  So I'm sure that they had a very interesting life, to say the least.
Speaker 1: They witnessed a lot of change.
Speaker 2: Yes, indeed, indeed.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he just didn't have much to say about--
Speaker 2: No, he didn't talk about his parents at all.  I learned a little bit about his brothers and sisters because I met, I met some of them.
Speaker 1: Now did they live in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: No, they lived their entire lives in Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 40841
Speaker 1: Now at some point, he [Winston's father, Jeff Winston] grows up and moves to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], right?
Speaker 2: Right.  So, and the story there is he dropped out of high school [in Booneville, Mississippi] in eleventh grade.   He had heard there was work in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], so he jumped on a freight train, hobo style, and rode the train to Pittsburgh.  He got off in Pittsburgh where he'd find some work there for the winter and then, head on to Philadelphia in the summer. And he never made it to Philadelphia.  He found a decent job in Pittsburgh and just stayed.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did he settle in the Hill District?
Speaker 2: Yes, initially in the Hill District.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The District was made so famous by August Wilson's plays.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Alright, now, what did your dad do for a living?
Speaker 2: He worked on a furnace for Westinghouse Electric.   Westinghouse Electric had these huge factories where they built large turbines and other kinds of major machinery.  And he'd spend a lot of time working on the furnace, forging steel and copper products.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, is this a skill he learned on the job?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so also it's a skill you really can't transfer.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: It's hard to transfer, I guess.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: So, did he work his whole life at Westinghouse?
Speaker 2: Yes, he worked his whole life at Westinghouse.  Well, I shouldn't say that because he probably got there--so if he was about seventeen [years old], about 1920.  So he started working at Westinghouse Electric at some point in time after he got to Pittsburgh, and then got laid off during the [Great] Depression, so he did not work there straight through.  He got laid off Westinghouse Electric during the Depression and worked a number of odd jobs.  He was a short order cook at one time, he told me. And then he went back to Westinghouse Electric after the Depression and he got hired back.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That would be like after the war started, or--
Speaker 2: I don't know when he got hired back.  That's a good question.  Yeah, I'm not sure, I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So it's probably likely--uh, so he was probably just a little bit too young for World War I, and--
Speaker 2: Too young for World War I, and too old for World War II.  His oldest brother died in World War I.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 40842
Speaker 1: So you said that your parents [Corrie Mary Conwill and Jeff Winston] met in Mississippi when your mother was going to college.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And she was staying with his mother [Alie or Alice Winston] then?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Alright.  So, did she talk very much about his mother?
Speaker 2: No, she didn't.  And unfortunately, I never thought to ask her much about her.  She did not.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is Alie Winston that your mother was staying with?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Well, we know that she could provide a place for someone to stay (laughter).
Speaker 2: Right, exactly.
Speaker 1: Interesting, you know, because not everybody can do that.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: So, now, did your mother, did your mother talk about her aspirations, what she was aiming for in terms of education?
Speaker 2: Yes, she wanted to become a teacher.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So she met your father, and is there a story about their meeting, or courtship?
Speaker 2: No.  Apparently he was the most un-romantic man the world has ever met. (laughter)  My mother tells me that he had come down to visit a couple of times and they'd gotten acquainted, and one night they're sitting on the swing on the porch at his mother's house.  And he says "Well, I guess we'll get married in the spring."  And that was his way of proposing.  (laughter)  And, apparently, that was all he needed to say, because she got married and moved on up to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] with him.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he had a pretty good guess, but he didn't want to risk too much.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, okay.  About what year did they get together?
Speaker 2: So that was 1940.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry--I think it was, that may have been 1944 when they got married.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright.  Now, do you have brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: I have one sister [Frances Winston Adderly].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where does she fall in order to you?
Speaker 2: She's one year older than me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So she was born in '46 [1946]?
Speaker 2: In '46 [1946], that's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, I take it when you were growing up--
Speaker 2: They actually had, they actually had a child born in 1945, but he did not survive.  He lasted a few days, but did not survive.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he was named Jeff [Winston], Jr.  He was alive long enough to be named, so he was Jeff, Jr.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 40843
Speaker 1: So when you think about your parents' [Corrie Mary Conwill and Jeff Winston] talents and dispositions and their habits and their looks, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I take after my mother the most.  She was outgoing, and I consider myself fairly outgoing.  And she was someone who was fairly driven from an ambition viewpoint.  I take after my father in steadiness.  When he retired from Westinghouse Electric [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]--he put in forty-something years at Westinghouse Electric, and he'd tell you it wasn't because it was fun working there.  It was a hard job and he had a rough time.  You know, my Ah, I think, personality-wise,father, as I said, my father didn't talk much.  But he did tell me that he regularly would have young white men come in, he would train them, and a while later they would become his foreman.  He never got promoted all the time he was there.  So, when I think about that, I think about what it would have to be like to work through that.  There's a photograph I have of him at Westinghouse Electric, and it's a picture of all the men in his section.  And it's a picture of about forty men, and he's the only black one.  And so I'm thinking, wow, you know, obviously he had to be a very good employee to get this particular section.  And it had to be rough, you know in the 30s [1930s], 40s [1040s], and 50s [1950s] working in a rough job like that.  So, I think very highly--now that I've grown up enough to understand what it means to work in the world.  I recognize that he was someone who exemplified a great deal of dedication to his family, to stay in that job and work those many years at it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 40844
Speaker 1: And did your mother [Corrie Mary Conwill] like basically serve as a housewife all this time?
Speaker 2: My mother was a housewife.  She did hair in the basement at her house for many years.  And then when, well, while my sister [Frances Winston Adderly] and I were in school she became the president of our grade school PTA [Parent Teacher Association].  She became the president of the high school PTA, and after we became old enough to take care of ourselves, we were in high school, she went out and got jobs outside the home.  And she became a salesperson at a major department store in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], a department store called Kaufmann's.  Gimball's and Kaufmann's were like the two big department stores in Pittsburgh at the time.  She became the salesperson there, and then she went on to become a salesperson for North Carolina Mutual Insurance Company.  And it was in that position that she really maxed out her potential, because she went on to become the number one salesperson in Pittsburgh every year for several years.  And every year the number one seller would get a vacation paid for by the company.  And so through that, she got vacations to the Bahamas and Hawaii and all sorts of great places.  So, I was very proud of her for, for just, because she was certainly a middle-aged person by the time she accomplished all those things.  So, I thought that was a great achievement on her part.
Speaker 1: Yeah, exactly.  Just judging from the age that she I guess, started working to become a saleswoman--a black salesperson in a major northern department store was kind of new, around 1962, '63 [1963].  There were none.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Was it around what, '62 [1962], '63 [1963]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it would have been about, probably about '63 [1963], yes.
Speaker 1: Because I remember in my hometown they didn't open up until then.
Story_ID: 40845
Speaker 1: Yes, and it's interesting, because I didn't even realize how segregated Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] was.  Growing up there, you don't really appreciate it until--the first time I came to Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia] was the first time I'd ever seen a black taxi, or a black bus driver in the, you know, in the '65 [1965], '66 [1966] timeframe.  And so, I didn't, you didn't even connect to the fact that you didn't even see these people in these jobs in Pittsburgh, until you leave Pittsburgh.
Speaker 2: And Pittsburgh had the jitneys.
Speaker 1: They had jitneys, exactly.
Speaker 2: Not a, but no--
Speaker 1: But not a licensed taxi, exactly.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That's the way it was in Chicago [Illinois], a lot of cities.  So, do you have a--oh, where did you live in Pittsburgh?  You lived on the Hill [Hill District].
Speaker 1: When my sister [Frances Winston Adderly] and I were born, the family lived on the Hill on a street called Dinwiddie Street.  And Dinwiddie Street was directly up the street from Fifth Avenue High School.  And my sister went to Miller Elementary School for kindergarten.  And then the family moved out to Homewood, which was where people on the Hill were trying to move and buy homes in the early 50s [1950s].  This was 1952.  We moved out to Homewood to Kedron Street, K-E-D-R-O-N, which was across the street from Belmar Elementary School and a couple blocks away from Westinghouse High School.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, Homewood, I've heard of Homewood, too, in Pittsburgh discussions, that it's like a, was it previously another ethnic group there before?
Speaker 1: It was primarily Italians--Italians and Polish.  And black people started moving in just a couple of years earlier, before we moved in.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And it was, unfortunately, it exhibited the term commonly referred to now as "white flight" because as black people started moving in, white people started moving out in droves.  And of course, I only recognize this in history now because I didn't recognize it at the time.  But in my elementary school there was a significant white population, but many of the kids I went to elementary school with did not go to Westinghouse High School with me.  And I remember going back to Westinghouse High School many years later for a reunion, and I was looking at pictures of the football team.  And I saw a picture that showed that in 1958 the Westinghouse High School football team had two black players.  In 1959 it had two white players.
Speaker 2: So, it occurred very rapidly.
Speaker 1: Very rapidly.
Speaker 2: This white flight.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 40846
Speaker 1: Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Probably, well, a couple of memories of living on Dinwiddie Street [in Hill District, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  But what I remember the most is falling down and cutting myself on a, you know, I was trying to take some milk bottles back to the store, and I fell and cut my hands on a milk bottle.  Back in the days when people had milk in glass bottles, they took them back to the store.  So, that kind of--
Speaker 1: You don't remember--
Speaker 2: I vaguely remember what the street looked like, and our neighbors, a couple of the neighbors, but I don't remember a lot of living it, because I was five when I moved from Dinwiddie Street.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So most of your memories are on Kedron Street [Homewood, Pittsburgh]?
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly.
Story_ID: 40847
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: In Homewood [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], Homewood was a wonderful place to grow up in the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s].  Uh, what, you know, what I remember is that we, the kids, we played out in the street.  You know, in the summertime, we were playing in the street all the time.  We played different games in the daytime than in the nighttime.  In the nighttime, it was time to play hide and seek, and we'd play hide and seek until you know, long after dark.  I remember in the daytime we would play in the playground at the local school.  There was a, the big treat would be to go to Highland Park and go to the swimming pool.  You would only get to do that because it was far--as a young child, it was too far to walk, so you would only go when your parents gave you a ride to Highland Park to go to the swimming pool.  I remember Homewood had a very vibrant business district, and every summer they would have old-fashioned bargain days.  It would be a big street fair, and it would be people dressed up in 18th Century garb and, you know, they would be selling all sorts of things out in the street.  And it was a lot of fun.  This was, and that's-Homewood's business district suffered greatly in the 1968 riots.  It got burned up and it never got fully rebuilt.  This, of course, were the riots after Martin Luther King got killed.  So, looking at Homewood in the years immediately after the riots was sad because it changed so dramatically, because needless to say, when businesses leave, then jobs leave.  And so Homewood proceeded on a downhill path and never fully recovered from it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 40848
Speaker 1: Can you describe the house you grew up in [in Homewood, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Ah, it was a frame house.  It was a three-story house on a street full of frame houses.  Ah, they were detached, each one was detached and they had, you had a front yard, you had a small front yard, a backyard, and a small alley beside each house, so you could get from the front to the back of the house.  And the alleys were probably, maybe five feet wide I guess, between the houses.  So, you were in close proximity to all of your neighbors on the street, and most of the neighbors had children roughly the same age.  So that's why we were always, there were always a bunch of us out in the street playing various games.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, did you go to kindergarten at Miller [Elementary School]?
Speaker 2: No, my sister [Frances Winston Adderly] did.   And then we, when the family moved we started, we went to Belmar Elementary [School], which was right there at the corner of Kedron and Lang Avenue.
Story_ID: 40849
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you started at Belmar [Elementary School, Homewood, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  Did you go to kindergarten at Belmar?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So, did you like school?
Speaker 2: I was never in love with school.  I did very well, obviously, and I had teachers I liked, classes I enjoyed from time to time, but I was never one of these kids who was, you know, who was sad when school let out in June, or eager to go back in September.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what did you like to do?  What did you enjoy doing?
Speaker 2: I used to draw, used to draw a lot.  And I got put into some special Saturday morning art classes.  The Carnegie Library [of Pittsburgh] had special Saturday morning art classes, and each school in the city would recommend a couple of students to go to the Saturday morning classes.  And I started doing that while I was in grade school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you have aspirations to become a professional artist, or were you even thinking that way?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't, as a child that age, I didn't even think about careers.  It was just something I liked to do.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Carnegie Library, that's, you know--.  Okay, so did you, so drawing was your specialty?
Speaker 2: Yes, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you have a special subject to draw?
Speaker 2: I used to draw a lot of horses, and I'm not sure why.  I guess because back in those days there were a lot of westerns on TV, so you saw a lot of horses on TV, that's probably why.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's true.  That's true, that's true.  That was when the westerns ruled television.  So, did you have a television from the very early days?
Speaker 2: Ah, let's see.  When did we get a television?  We got a black and white TV while I was a youngster.  Probably shortly after we moved to Homewood, we got a black and white TV.  I remember having a black and white TV for most of the time we lived there, before my grade school years.  And I think at some point when in I was in junior high school or high school, we got a color TV.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, yeah, we were big TV watchers.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you have favorite shows on TV?
Speaker 2: Oh, favorite shows on TV.  The Lone Ranger, Hopalong Cassiday, Lash LaRue--all westerns as it turns out (laughter).  Yes, if it was a western, I was probably watching it on TV back in those days.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what about radio?  Now, Pittsburgh is the home of radio.
Speaker 2: Yes, and I don't remember radio, you know, because by the 1950s, everybody's watching TV by then.  So I don't remember, you know, I can't remember doing any of the radio.  I've heard about the great programs on radio, but I can't remember actually listening to any of them.
Speaker 1: How about music on the radio?  I mean, was--?
Speaker 2: My parents [Corrie Mary Conwill and Jeff Winston] were not music people.  So, until we became, until my sister [Frances Winston Adderly] and I became teenagers, there really wasn't any music in the house.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's interesting, okay.  So, now, what about movies, did you go to movies?
Speaker 2: We went to the movies a lot.  Anything that was big we would see: Ben Hur, The King and I, El Cid, you know.  If it was in cinemascope, that was the big thing, all those big movies--we would go see all of them.  And we would of course--as I said, the Homewood shopping area was a thriving area, and there was a Belmar Theater there, and we would get together, three, four, five, six kids on a Saturday and go in and they would have anywhere from five to seventeen cartoons.  And then they'd have a double-feature after that, and so we'd go in and see--and you know, and it was usually a western or a Army movie or something like that, that we'd go in and see.
Story_ID: 40850
Speaker 1: Now, in those days was there mostly black children in Belmar?
Speaker 2: Yes.  It was predominantly black, but it was, you know, it was probably like 60-40, it wasn't like 99 percent black.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Even when the white flight took place?
Speaker 2: Right, I mean, yeah.   My guess is, and I can't, you know, because it didn't occur to me until years later looking back at it, so I can't tell you--as I said, most of the white kids that graduated from Belmar with me did not go over to Westinghouse [High School].  At that time Westinghouse was a junior and senior high school.  So you started there in seventh grade and stayed there until twelfth.  And most of the white kids I went to school with at Belmar did not go to Westinghouse, but I can't really remember, well, the overall student population at Belmar, to tell you the racial mix overall.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 40851
Speaker 1: Did you like sports?
Speaker 2: I was a sports fan.  I was not very good at sports.  So I liked to watch professional football.  I've always been a big fan of the NFL [National Football League].  But it was just so-so with baseball.  I never got really interested in baseball. But you know, but I've always been a big football fan.
Speaker 1: Those days of the Steelers [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania's NFL team] weren't as good.
Speaker 2: The Steelers weren't--and nobody paid any attention--I was a Jim Brown fan (laughter).  I liked--you know, there was very little on the Steelers to cheer for.   You know, John Henry Johnson was there.
Speaker 1: That's right, John Henry Johnson.
Speaker 2: And, you know, a couple other guys that don't come to mind right now.  But there was nobody, there was no reason to, you know, the Steelers were losing every year, and so there was no reason to cheer for them.
Speaker 1: I remember they had the only quarterback in the NFL without a face mask, Bobby Lane.
Speaker 2: Bobby Lane, right, that's right.
Speaker 1: Back then they all had face masks by then.  But, now, were you exposed to black professionals in the neighborhood?  I mean, having moved to Homewood from the Hill [Hill District in Pittsburgh], I know there probably were still, you probably had your black doctors and lawyers all in the same area.
Speaker 2: Well, there was a black professional area that when I was in high school [Westinghouse High School] I learned about, on the Hill, called Sugar Top.  And that's where they had newer homes, fancier homes and all that, and there were a number of black professionals who lived up there.  But in Homewood, there were very few black professionals.  So, that--on my street there were none.  And I know I went to high school with a girl whose father was a doctor--no lawyers.  And, you know, and certain business people were unheard of back then, other than the family that might own a funeral home. That was, you know, funeral home or a drugstore.  I remember there was a black-owned funeral home and a black-owned drugstore--well, I should say several black-owned funeral homes and at least one black-owned drugstore.
Speaker 1: In Homewood?
Speaker 2: In Homewood.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 40852
Speaker 1: Did you get over to the Hill [Hill District, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] that much?
Speaker 2: Well, we did, because my mother [Corrie Mary Conwill], my mother was a Methodist.  She went to AME Zion Church [African Methodist Episcopal].  My father [Jeff Winston] was a Baptist, so he went to a church in East Liberty.  My mother went to a church on the Hill called Wesley Center AME Zion Church.  My father went to a church called Rodman Street Baptist Church.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, did you mostly go to church with your mother?
Speaker 2: I mostly went to church with my mother.  So we were on the Hill almost every Sunday.
Story_ID: 40853
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Did your family get the [Pittsburgh] Courier?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  We got the Courier every week.  My father was an avid newspaper reader, so he got the Pittsburgh Press everyday and the Courier every week.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did you get a lot of magazines?  Now, those were the days of a lot of magazine subscriptions and that sort of thing.  Did you--
Speaker 2: 'Ebony' pretty regularly, 'Jet' occasionally.  We had a subscription to Ebony, and we'd get Jet every now and then.  I'm trying to think--oh, Life, 'Life Magazine'.  So Life Magazine, Ebony, I remember those two would always be on the table at my house.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 40854
Speaker 1: Now, did you, did you have a favorite subject in school other than art?
Speaker 2: You know, I did well, I did well in math and I did well in science.  But I wouldn't say they were favorites.  I probably, you know, I looked forward to going to art, and you didn't have art everyday.  That was, you know, that was a couple of times a week.  And I had a very nice science teacher, and I liked going to her class.  My interests often varied depending upon how I felt about the teacher more so than the subject matter back in those days.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So that makes sense.
Speaker 2: (Laughter)
Speaker 1: So, so now Belmar [Elementary School], did you have any favorite teachers at Belmar?
Speaker 2: Yes, Miss Hemlinger.  She was the science teacher.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she had, because it was a science class, instead of having desks, they had tables, and you sat around tables.   And she took me and three of my good friends and put us at one of her tables up front, and we were like her star pupils.  And so we liked being in Miss Hemlinger's class because she was always nice to us.
Story_ID: 40855
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now you went to middle school at Westinghouse [High School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Well, that was expected, because you knew that was a neighborhood school and everything.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what about in middle school.  Did your interests change or anything?
Speaker 2: Let's see.  Middle school was the first time I got more interested in athletics.  This was when my friends were going out for middle school teams.  And I went out for a basketball team for one day.  And I realized I didn't belong there. (laughter)  Ah, but some of my friends did play some of the sports.  I remember some of my friends started running track and started playing basketball for the middle school teams.  And at that time I developed a new interest, but my new interest was chess.  One of my friends taught me how to play chess, and he and I played chess everyday at lunchtime, all through middle school.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: So that was my new interest when I got to middle school.
Story_ID: 40856
Speaker 1: Now, were you involved with Boy Scouts or the YWCA [YMCA?] [Young Women's Christian Association]?
Speaker 2: I was a Boy Scout from grade school.  From, yeah, very, fairly young, I was involved with Boy Scouts.
Speaker 1: So, from a Cub Scout?
Speaker 2: No, I started just after Cub Scouts, whatever the age that is, but I started out as a Boy Scout.  And I stayed in through sometime in middle school.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Did you--
Speaker 2: At some point when you stop being a Boy Scout, you become an Explorer.  And the Explorer thing, by the time it was time to become an Explorer, guys just weren't interested in scouting anymore.  So we, I remember a few of us became Explorers, and when they told us they wanted us to buy Explorer uniforms, we were like, "No, we don't really want to buy Explorer uniforms."  (laughter)  It was okay walking around the streets with a Boy Scout uniform as young people, but by the time we became teenagers, no, we can't be walking around in a uniform.
Speaker 1: So, it wasn't cool?
Speaker 2: It wasn't cool anymore. (laughter)
Speaker 1: So, did you go to Scout camp and all that?
Speaker 2: Yes, I went to Scout camp once or twice.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Story_ID: 40857
Speaker 1: Now, so, did you have any favorite teachers in middle school?
Speaker 2: In middle school, let's see.  Who do I--it's funny, I haven't thought about that.  What classes did we take?  My home room teacher, my home room teacher was a science teacher.  His name was Mr. Pointer.  He was good.  Let's see, I'm trying to think.  I can remember my high school [Westinghouse High School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] teachers very well.  I can't remember my middle school teachers as well, though.  I can't think of who else was teaching the middle school back then.  I can remember the high school teachers much better.
Story_ID: 40858
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Now, on into high school--now you're in high school during, you know, sort of the hottest days of the Civil Rights Movement.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And was your family keenly aware of what was going on in the south in those days?
Speaker 2: Yes, but they weren't, you know, they weren't political.  They, you know, they were religious folks, but not, but they didn't make the connection between that and the Civil Rights Movement.  So they would talk about it, but nobody ever said we need to go march, we need to go get involved, we need to do those kinds of things.  So, they were proud of what was happening.  They were proud of Martin Luther King [Jr.] and the whole civil rights movement, but it never moved to, "And therefore we ought to do 'X'."
Speaker 1: Okay.  But your mother [Corrie Mary Conwill] did get involved in the PTA [Parent Teacher Association]?
Speaker 2: Yes.  She was very conscious about making life better for her children.  Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's--
Speaker 2: And my father [Jeff Winston] was very conscious of bringing home a paycheck.
Speaker 1: Alright.  So, now in high school--now, did you get involved in different clubs in high school, or activities beyond just going to class?
Speaker 2: Let me see, in high school.  In high school, I was still doing art classes on Saturday morning.  I was trying to think, what else I did during high school.  No, I can't think of any clubs off the top of my head.
Story_ID: 40859
Speaker 1: Now, in terms of the art classes at the Carnegie [Library, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: The Carnegie Library is one of the great institutions of Pittsburgh.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: And so you have a chance to go there every Saturday for years it seems like?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.
Speaker 1: So, I mean, so what was that experience, that had to really be an enriching experience, just being there.  You probably saw things--
Speaker 2: Yes, you would just wander through the exhibits.  You know, they had sorts of things that, you know, that were just interesting.  You know, they had this huge exhibit and all sorts of things.  They had huge--I remember one exhibit was these huge doors that come from, I can't remember where, but from some ancient civilization.  And the doors were like twenty or thirty feet high, and they came off of some palace somewhere.  You would see all sorts of interesting things that, you know--and because you're doing it every Saturday, you assume, you eventually start taking it for granted, you know, oh yes, this is the Carnegie Library, but I've seen all that stuff before, you know.  So, it's only in retrospect that you appreciate how important that experience was.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, I mean, were there any special programs there on Saturdays that, you know, even think was peripheral to what you were actually doing?
Speaker 2: No.  You know, once we would do the art program--and then we would pretty much hit--jump on the, I guess the trolley.  I think streetcars were still running back then.  I was about to say buses, but I think we were still riding streetcars back then.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Pittsburgh's a hilly place.
Speaker 2: A very hilly place.
Speaker 1: Was it tough in the wintertime?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  Oh yes, we had some rough times because you had streetcars in the street.  If you get ice on a steel streetcar track, you've got a real problem.  We had an accident one night, that my mother [Corrie Mary Conwill] hit an ice patch on the streetcar track and we ended up running into a parked car.  So you had to learn how to drive on the ice in Pittsburgh and be very careful.
Speaker 1: Alright, okay.
Story_ID: 40860
Speaker 1: So, you weren't involved in any clubs.  Did you work in high school [Westinghouse High School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: I worked my senior year.  I worked two years or one, but I had a job at Carnegie Mellon University.  Back then it was called Carnegie Tech.  And I got a job working in a graduate electrical engineering laboratory, and I was like a stock boy, you know, just a little lab assistant.  And I was responsible for keeping the supplies.  What was interesting was the laboratory was a laboratory where they were doing research on semi-conductors.  So, the predecessors for everything--you know, they were studying silicon for developing transistorized equipment.  At the time the idea of an integrated circuit was a cutting edge concept.  Transistors were really just this one little piece of a thing that you would put in a device to replace a tube.  And so the concept of integrated circuits was the kind of research they were working on there.  So, it was a very cutting edge laboratory at the time.
Story_ID: 40861
Speaker 1: I believe you would have been in the eighth grade I think, or seventh or eighth grade, when the transistor radio boom hit.
Speaker 2: Probably so.
Speaker 1: Do you remember having one of those?  Did you get a--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Everybody had a transistor radio at one point.
Speaker 1: And the kids would get them in different colors.
Speaker 2: Right, exactly.
Speaker 1: So--and a lot of radio listening.
Speaker 2: Right.  Yes, yes.  And back then you had a transistor radio and it had one earphone.  They didn't have, come in pairs.  There was just one little earplug.  Yes, I remember that.
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite disc jockey?
Speaker 2: In Pittsburgh we had WAMO.  We had WAMO, W-A-M-O.  Back then it was on AM radio, back in the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s].  And I'm trying to think, who do I remember?  I remember Sir Walter Raleigh.  I'm trying to think.  There was some other DJs, I remember.  But, by the time--jumping ahead--when I got to college, and I don't know when he was on the air, but who I remember from my days in college, is Bobby Bennett.  And he was excellent on the radio, but I don't know if he was actually on the air when I was in high school [Westinghouse High School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] or not.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, were there any black personalities on radio or television when you were growing up, in between grade school or high school?
Speaker 2: Certainly nobody on television.  There were no black people on TV in Pittsburgh.  And I said there was, Sir Walter Raleigh was on the radio, but there were very few--
Speaker 1: Was he white?
Speaker 2: You know I assumed, all this time, I assumed all these years, I assumed Sir Walter Raleigh was black.  Was he not?
Speaker 1: I don't know.  I'm asking, I don't know.
Speaker 2: I think he was.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: (Laughter)  I never saw him in person, but I just assumed he was.
Speaker 1: Now, WAMO was, well, like a top 40 station?
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly.  I mean it was, it was, well it was the black station.  It was the one station that was playing black music most of the time, all of the time, actually.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So it was a black station?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a black station.
Speaker 1: Targeted at a black audience.
Speaker 2: It wasn't black-owned yet, but it was already playing black music.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So black programming?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: That's a big deal in those days.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And still is today, I guess.  Alright, so WAMO, when did WAMO come on the air?
Speaker 2: Well, WAMO, that's the first radio station I remember from my youth.  So, I'm not sure when it went on the air.
Speaker 1: So that's, that is something.  Okay, black format, okay.  So, you come along, you're just on the trail of the rock and roll generation, you know.
Speaker 2: Right.  Yeah, I'm on the front end of the Motown generation.  And speaking of WAMO and Motown, what I can remember--because it was only one black formatted radio station in Pittsburgh, and radio was basically the only form of black entertainment--I can remember going to get a haircut one day while I was in high school and walking back home.  And the Temptations' "My Girl" is the number one song on the radio at the time.  And I leave the barber shop and I'm walking home, and every house I walk past for the next three minutes is playing 'My Girl' (laughter).  So I'm walking down the street hearing My Girl all the way down the street and around the corner, because everybody was listening to the same radio station.  So, that's a very fond memory of life in Pittsburgh and life with WAMO and Motown.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, did you all buy the 45s [music records]?
Speaker 2: Yes, we listened to a lot of 45s.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 40862
Speaker 1: So, now, you weren't involved in any clubs or anything in high school [Westinghouse High School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: I'm trying to think what I did.  I was a manager for the swim team for a year.
Speaker 1: Well, that's an activity.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Swim team manager and--
Speaker 2: And I must have worked for two years, because they had a chess club that I wanted to join, but I was working after school.  I think they had the chess club for two years.  I think I worked [at Carnegie Mellon University/Carnegie Tech] for two years.  That was the one club I did want to join was the chess club, and I wasn't able to do it.
Speaker 1: Were you a good chess player?
Speaker 2: I was a good chess player, you know, and we had a very good team.  The team won the city championship, which was, for me to say for a black high school, that was a huge accomplishment, and I thought I could have made that team.
Story_ID: 40863
Speaker 1: Now, were there any teachers or mentors in the community that played a role in your life when you were in high school [Westinghouse High School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: In high school I had nothing but a string of great teachers.  So, I remember we had an English teacher named Mr. Faith.  He was, most of the teachers were white, okay, so Mr. Faith taught us English for several years.  And he was a good mentor.  He was somebody who talked to you about, you know, learning and made it more interesting.  We had an art teacher, a lady named Miss Baines who was black.  And she was, she tried to encourage me.  When it was actually time for me to go to college, she tried to encourage me to pursue some sort of career where I would use my art, but I didn't listen to her. (laughter)  I didn't think I was that good.  Let's see, we had, oh, math--had a teacher who taught us advanced algebra and trigonometry.  His name was Mr. Bower, Mr. Bower, and he was black, he was very good.  We had, we had a vice principal, a woman named Ella Faizon, who went on to become, I think she ended up being superintendent of schools, assistant superintendent of schools or something.  She went very high in the Pittsburgh school system, one of the first black people to do so.  She was the assistant principal, and she was excellent.  Let's see, I'm trying to think, other teachers--English, math, science, okay.  Now, let's see--history, okay, art.  Yes, those are the ones that come to mind.  Those are the ones who I think stood out.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, alright, so--
Speaker 2: Oh, in speech, one more.  We had a speech teacher, teaching public speaking. I'm looking at his face and I can't think of his name now.   Mr.--it'll come back to me.  I'm looking at his face now, but I can't think of his name right now.  I can't do it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, how were your grades?  Were you an honor student, or just an okay student?
Speaker 2: I was always an excellent student.  So I got, I was on the honor roll my entire school career, and did very well in all my subjects, all As and Bs, and ended up graduating third in my class.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 40864
Speaker 1: So what kind of counseling did you get [at Westinghouse High School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]?  Did they, did you have a good counselor in terms of--
Speaker 2: Well, it's very interesting, because most of my classmates will tell you that we did not have a good counseling system.  However, I'm the exception.  She did a good job by me.  It was an older white woman named Miss Simon, and so you were scheduled to come in and meet with her at the appropriate time.  And so I came and met with her, and she said "Where do you want to go school, what do you want to major in?  I said, "I really hadn't thought about where to go to school, and I really hadn't planned what to major in."  And she said, "You're good in math and science.  You ought to think about becoming an engineer."  Then she told me that--this is now, this is the spring of 1965--and she said "Schools are looking for--." I'm sure she called me, I'm sure she said a colored student.  "They're looking for good colored students, and I think you can get a scholarship to a very good school.  I think I can get you in college, to an Ivy League school."  I said "Okay."  So she said--she mentioned Penn, University of Pennsylvania, to me.  I assumed she was talking about Penn State [University].  She said, "No, no no, not Penn State, the University of Pennsylvania.  It's an Ivy League school based in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]."  So I went to library, looked up Penn, saw it was based--it's inside the city of Philadelphia.  I said well, inside the city of Philadelphia, that's cool, because if I don't like the school, I can hang out in Philadelphia.  And then I looked up engineering as a career, and I saw that electrical engineers were the highest paid college graduates that year.  And so I said "Yes, I'd like to go Penn, I'd like to major in electrical engineering."  Well, my father [Jeff Winston]--when I told my father, and this is 1965--I told my father that Penn cost $2500 a year.  And he told me I'd lost my mind because he was making about $6000 a year.  So the notion that I could go to--and this is $6000 before taxes.  So, the notion that I could go to a school which cost $2500 a year was absurd to him.  And so I said "Ms.  Simon thinks I can get a scholarship."  And he says, "Nobody's going to pay you that kind of money to go to school."  And so--
Speaker 1: He didn't equate being on the Honor Roll with being able to get a scholarship?
Speaker 2: No, not at all.  Because, you know, I mean, because he's a poor black boy from [Boonville] Mississippi and his son is just a poor black boy's son.  (laughter)  And so, and he was making very little money.  And so I told Ms. Simon that I couldn't apply to Penn because my father wouldn't pay the $15 application fee.  And so Miss Simon said, "Well ask your father to come in and see me."  And so I went home and told him what Miss Simon said, and he actually came in to see her, which was surprising.  And what was also surprising was he didn't give her any of the objections he gave me.  So she said, "I think your son can get a scholarship to Penn, and I think you ought to pay the application fee."  He says, "Oh, okay."  I'm like, "Why did you give me all that grief?" (laughter)
Story_ID: 40865
Speaker 1: So, okay.  So, did you get the scholarship to Penn [University of Pennsylvania; Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Right, I got the scholarship to Penn, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, my father [James Winston] figured, his analysis of college was that I could stay at home and he could probably swing enough money for me to get through college if I stayed at home and didn't have to do room and board.  And so he said I should apply to Carnegie Tech [Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  I wanted to apply to Penn, so he did that, too.  And then, Miss Simon [Winston's counselor at Westinghouse High School, Pittsburgh] again contacted me and said that Oberlin [College; Oberlin, Ohio] was looking for black students and they were willing to waive the application fee.  So, I applied to three schools.  They were Carnegie Tech, Penn, and Oberlin, and got accepted into all three and went to Penn.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Penn in Philadelphia, home of the Penn Relays in Philadelphia.  So, how did you like Penn?
Speaker 2: I loved Penn.  I hated electrical engineering.  I was not, I was not--it was interesting, Miss Simon was right.  I was good in math and good in science but I wasn't an engineer type, that wasn't my personality.  And the engineering students who did well in engineering--there was a guy who had been on the front of 'Popular Electronics'.  He had a whole big wall of equipment for his ham radio operation and, you know, he'd built most of the stuff himself.   And I never--you know, as a kid I'd built model airplanes but I never got into sophisticated electronics.  And there those kind of kids who actually, in engineering school, who were coming from families where their fathers were engineers and things like that.  And they were, they were the right personalities for it, I was not.  And so it was a difficult, it was difficult subject matter, and if you weren't dedicated to study it all the time, you weren't going to do well.  And so by the end of my sophomore year, I realized this was a major mistake.  But at the time, Penn had a language requirement for people in liberal arts school.  And if I wanted to transfer from engineering to liberal arts, I was going to have to make up four years of language in two years.  First of all, all the language courses met four times a week at 8:00 AM in the morning, and I was going to have to go to summer school at least twice. (laughter).  And so I said well, I'm not going to do that, so I'll stay in engineering.  So I toughed it out in engineering, and in my junior year I started looking around for a grad school. I said, I need to find a grad school I can go to with an engineering degree.  And so there were very few that fit that bill.  Med school, law school, or urban planning schools were the principal ones I found.  And I definitely didn't want to be a doctor.  The idea of working with peoples' bodies was not something that appealed to me at all.  Uh, and so, I gravitated to law school which I realized that law opens up so many avenues.  You didn't have just to be a lawyer.  There were other things you could do with a law degree.
Story_ID: 40866
Speaker 1: And so by now it's 1968.  I've become a student activist.  We were demonstrating on campus [University of Pennsylvania] and I was helping lead those demonstrations.
Speaker 2: Now, was there a black student organization on campus?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: What was the name of it?
Speaker 1: It was SAAS, The Society of African and Afro American Students.
Speaker 2: The Society of African and Afro American Students.  S-A-A-S?
Speaker 1: Yes, S-A-A-S.
Speaker 2: Okay, alright.  And now, had that organization been there long, or did the group that you came in with form it, or--?  Because you graduated from high school in 1965?
Speaker 1: I graduated in '65 [1965].
Speaker 2: We were still referred to as Negroes in '65 [1965].
Speaker 1: Exactly, exactly.
Speaker 2: Black power had been coined.
Speaker 1: Right.  So, I get to college, and so you start getting introduction into political issues in '67 [1967], because you had, we had the Watts riots, you had the Newark riots.  So by '67 [1967], you're getting conscious of all these issues and then in '68 [1968], [Dr.] Martin Luther King gets killed and Bobby [Robert] Kennedy gets killed.  And I'm sure it was the assassination of Dr. King that took my initial interest in these, what was still being called the civil rights movement issues.   And then once Dr. King gets killed, you start, as a student you start paying more attention to the Stokely Carmichaels and the H. Rapp Browns, because Dr. King, you know, they killed Dr. King.  So, you know, we had to--we can't be as non-violent, as Dr. King was saying.  Look what that got us, so we have to talk to, we listen to these guys who are being radical.  So, you could radicalize in 1968.  I remember it was a watershed year for me in terms of my view of the world and my role in it.  And so by then, so the issue of going to law school made a lot more sense to me at that point, that I could use it as a weapon for social change.
Speaker 2: Now, was SAAS formed after Dr. King was assassinated, or--
Speaker 1: No.  It already existed by then, but it got, it got much more active after Dr. King was assassinated.
Speaker 2: About what year do you think it was formed?  Was it formed while you were there?
Speaker 1: I'm thinking.  It must have been formed by the class ahead of mine.  So, when I got there in '65 [1965], it took a while to get to know some of the upper classmen, so they may have formed it in '65 [1965] or '66 [1966], and it got really active in '67 [1967].  It got extremely active in '68 [1968].  We started holding demonstrations and protests and things.
Speaker 2: Now, I'm thinking, at Penn--now, did, who might have been in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]?  There were some significant figures in Philadelphia.  I don't know if they were associated with Penn, but did you know of a John Churchville, or James Spadey, or--?
Speaker 1: No, I don't know those names.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Yeah, I'm just trying to think of some of the people that I could think of that were doing stuff in Philadelphia.  But so, the students, who was the student leader of SAAS?
Speaker 1: I was.  I think I was the vice chairman of SAAS at some point.  I guess in 1968 I became a, we started having demonstrations, and there was, there were a couple--I'm trying to think--who was the chairman?  There was a guy named Don Maynard who was the chairman for awhile, but not the newspaper publisher, a different Don Maynard.  And a guy named Michael Williams from New Orleans [Louisiana], I remember him.  And then you know, there were a lot of students who took leadership roles at various times.
Speaker 2: Okay, because I know there is an ebb and flow of college, with people coming in and out.
Speaker 1: Yes, exactly, exactly.
Speaker 2: Now was there, I would doubt that there would be a black studies' department yet?
Speaker 1: No.  No, in fact, in fact one of our first protests was to protest the fact there were no black administrators.  And so we got an assistant dean of the college appointed.  And then a guy named Billy Adams, who was, I forget, I think he was a counselor at a high school at the time.  He got appointed assistant dean at the university.  And so his office became our hangout.  And so we would go there--they gave him a big nice ante room and we'd sit around and shoot the breeze.
Speaker 2: And so he was a dean?
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was assistant dean.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Assistant dean of students, I guess his title was.
Speaker 2: Billy Adams, okay.
Speaker 1: He became a lawyer eventually.  He had a law firm called Adams and Adams, with his wife.
Story_ID: 40867
Speaker 1: Now, do you remember what you were doing when you heard about Dr. [Martin Luther] King's assassination?
Speaker 2: Probably coming, let me see, probably coming back from class [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], because I remember there were a bunch of us walking up the street.  We'd just found out.  We were walking back from campus, back from class.  And we were just so angry we couldn't talk.  We were just--I don't remember--I remember walking through campus, there was a group of us, just not saying a word, and just angry.  And I remember a white friend of mine saying to me, "Jim, I heard about Dr. King, I'm so sorry to hear about that."  And I didn't even want to speak to him.  I didn't, you know, I just didn't want to speak at all.  And he was a nice guy, just being, just saying the right thing.  And you're so angry you didn't even want to respond, and I didn't respond.  So, yeah, I remember that afternoon very well.
Story_ID: 40868
Speaker 1: Now, was there any black instructors at Penn when you were there?
Speaker 2: Was it--?
Speaker 1: Any black instructors, professors?
Speaker 2: I never had any.  There were one or two there I think, but you know, they were somewhere like in the anthropology department, you know.  They were certainly not--I'm trying to think if I--I did not know a black professor when I was at Penn.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And was there much interaction between the students at Temple [University] and other black schools?
Speaker 2: Interesting, I pledged Omega Psi Phi [fraternity] when I was there, and there was no campus at Penn.  It was a city campus, a city chapter.  And so we had students from Penn, from Drexel [University], from Temple and Villanova [University], all who participated.  And we would--Temple was centrally located, so we would have meetings over at Temple.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I met a lot of students from Temple.  At first through the fraternity and then eventually once--because that was my sophomore year that I pledged the fraternity--and then in my junior year when we became political, that's when we started going over to Temple for student rallies and things like that.
Speaker 1: I remember in those days that Bill Cosby was putting Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], black Philadelphia on the map, I guess, with his stories about Fat Albert and all that sort of thing, and running track at Temple and all, you know.  Were you all aware of that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: No.  I don't remember--
Speaker 1: He was on 'I Spy' and--
Speaker 2: I mean, I should say, Bill Cosby was famous already, I guess, as a comedian.  He had already done a couple of albums and was doing standup comedy, because I remember his name because they told me that he had started pledging for the fraternity and then dropped out of school.  So--.
Speaker 1: Now, he wasn't that long out of there either, you know, when you started.
Speaker 2: Right.  Yeah, that's right.  And so he went on the road to start his comedy career.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I was wondering if that, you know--.
Story_ID: 40869
Speaker 1: So okay, so you're thinking about law school as the best solution?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: That's really, that sounds really a tough thing, to stick with electrical engineering and you really don't want to do it.
Speaker 2: It was very difficult.  It got, it got to be--certainly in 1968 when we were demonstrating, and definitely if you're demonstrating in the daytime and at night going back having strategy sessions to figure out how to do the next demonstration--it didn't leave a lot of time for studying.  So, the head of the engineering department called me into his office and said "Mr. Winston, we had a meeting among the teachers to talk about students in jeopardy, and your name came up in several different classes."  And he said, "Have you considered the possibility that it may be necessary for you to repeat your junior year?"  And I said, "Wait, time out.  Let's not jump to conclusions here.  I'm sure we can work something out."  And so I told them, you know, let me take two exams late, I'll pass them all.  And so he said, "Okay I'll let you work that out with your teachers."  And so the teachers let me do that.  And I managed to pass all my subjects, not with flying colors, but Cs and Bs in engineering courses, because, you know, you always have to take electives.  So, I'd taken history courses and English literature courses and things like that, and in comparison to electrical engineering courses, they were quite easy.  And so I could manage to get As and Bs in those courses even though I was struggling with the engineering courses, so that my grade point average didn't suffer too badly. And then once I decided that I really wanted to go to law school, in my last year I buckled down and just focused on study.  I know--I'd had the summer of '68 [1968] when school was out to sort of think through what I wanted to do.  And I said, okay you really got to show, you got to get some good grades your next year to show any law school that you applied to that you were distracted in your junior year, but you can really, you're still capable of doing the work.  And so I buckled down the next year and did much better.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you graduated in 1969, right?
Speaker 2: I graduated in 1969, that's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so, now, did you graduate with any honors or anything?
Speaker 2: No, not in engineering school, just happy to get out. (laughter)
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Story_ID: 40870
Speaker 1: Now what law schools did you apply to?
Speaker 2: Boston College [Boston, Massachusetts], Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], maybe Boston U [University, Boston Massachusetts].  I don't know, probably about three or four. And the interesting thing, the only reason I applied to Harvard is my roommate was applying to Harvard.  And I said, "You're applying to Harvard?"  And he said, "Yeah, why not?"  And so I said, "Well, heck if you're applying to Harvard, I'm going to apply to Harvard."   And so we ended up both getting accepted.  So it was, fortunately for us, it was Harvard's effort to significantly increase its black population at the law school.  And so we both, we both got accepted.  Oh, and that's right, I applied, you know, I got turned down at Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut], that's right.  That's the one I got turned down at, that's right.  I never, I never liked Yale after that.  (laughter)  But, so, yeah, so I ended up--and interesting, I got accepted to Harvard and they told me that my financial aid package would be half scholarship, half loan.  And Harvard at the time was, you know, well, everything was expensive relative to where I was coming from in the world.  And so, I'd also applied to Boston College.  Boston College offered me their Martin Luther King scholarship which was full tuition and board plus $1500 spending money.  And so I'm looking at that, and I'm looking at this Harvard half scholarship, half loan and I'm thinking about how much money I'm going owe at the end of three years.  And so I went home [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] after school was out at Penn, after I'd graduated, and I went to see the minister at my mother's [Corrie Mary Conwill] church [AME Zion Church], Reverend Fogey.  He became a Bishop.  He was a Reverend back then.  And so I said, "Reverend Fogey, I've been accepted to law school, but I've got to make a decision and I don't know what to do."  I said, "So I've been accepted to Harvard--." and he said, "End of discussion."  And I said, "But wait."  And he said, "No, no, if you've been accepted to Harvard, there's nothing else to talk about."  And I said, "But, but--."  And he said, "There is no but, there is no but.  You've been accepted at Harvard, you should go to Harvard, end of discussion."  So I went to Harvard. (laughter)  And he was right, he was right.  You know, it, I'm sure you can get a good education at many law schools in this country, but what you get at Harvard is exposure to a class of persons who have expansive reach across the country, both from your professors and from classmates.  And those connections make a difference throughout your career.  And so I've always wanted to thank Reverend Fogey for that guidance, it was the right guidance.
Speaker 1: Is the AME Zion where Reverend--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 40871
Speaker 1: Alright, so, Harvard [University] it is.  So in 1969 in the fall you start Harvard Law School?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now, so how was it?
Speaker 2: It was--I loved law school.  After engineering school [at University of Pennsylvania], law school was wonderful.  You know, you could understand the law.  If you read something three or four times you could understand it.  In engineering school I could read something five or six times and never understand it.  So, and it was interesting.  It was, you know, because law is so connected with everybody's everyday life, that you start, you start getting a whole different grasp of the world around you by studying the law.  So, I enjoyed it immensely. I found the subject matter very enjoyable to be a law student.
Speaker 1: Was there any particular phase of legal studies attractive to you over another?
Speaker 2: No.  You know, it was interesting.  I knew my first year that I didn't like criminal law.  So, I can tell you what I didn't like, I didn't like criminal law.  And, but other than that, I didn't have any feel for what I really wanted to do, to get into.  I had some sense that I wanted to change the world, but I didn't know what that meant.  And, fortunately, because of that, after your first year you have total flexibility for which to choose for the next two years for your classes.  But what they did was they had a recommended curriculum, and because I didn't know what I wanted to do with this law degree, I took a recommended curriculum.  So I took tax and corporations and business planning and accounting.  And it turned out that that was, it was very helpful for me for the rest of my career to take those classes, because I got an understanding of how the business world works.  Not because I thought at the time that I wanted to be in it, but I wanted to understand it.
Story_ID: 40872
Speaker 1: And so, and then, so when I finished school [Harvard Law School], I thought I wanted to be a, I wanted to change the world by working in a social agency.  So, I went to work for the Roxbury Multi-Service Center, which is a social service agency in Boston [Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: In the black community of Boston?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Roxbury?
Speaker 1: Right.  And I had, and at the time also while in law school, Randall Robinson and I, Randall Robinson eventually formed TransAfrica.  He and I had become close friends and we created an organization we called the Pan African Liberation Committee.  He and I and a bunch of undergraduate students staged demonstrations to protest apartheid in South Africa.  We were protesting apartheid in South Africa, and we were also protesting the colonization of Angola and Mozambique and Guinea-Bissau by the Portuguese, and the white supremacist government in Rhodesia, which of course is now Zimbabwe.  So, Randall and I got very involved in doing those kinds of things.  And after I graduated, Randall was working--because Randall was two years ahead of me--he was working at this Roxbury Multi-Service Center, and so I came over there with him because the head of the association, the Roxbury Multi-Service Center at the time-- Percy, what's Percy's last name--? Percy Wilson had--oh, let me go all the way back to high school.  Remember I mentioned the speech teacher.  His name was Herman McClaine.  Alright, I knew it would come to me eventually (laughter).  But the--so Percy Wilson was willing to give Randall and I jobs where we did community activism most of the time and worked on the anti-apartheid movement part of the time as well.
Story_ID: 40873
Speaker 1: But after a year of that [working at the Roxbury Multi-Service Center as a community activist and on the anti-apartheid movement], for a variety of reasons I decided it was time to leave Boston [Massachusetts] and move to New York.  And I went to New York and worked for a large law firm there.   And so I did a whole 180 in terms of my work life.  So, going from a social service agency to working for a big Wall Street law firm--
Speaker 2: Now, what was it, was there any incident or some revelation that took place?
Speaker 1: It was, well, a couple things.  At the time, I was married to my first wife.  And her name is Carmen Tyler Winston--
Speaker 2: Did you meet her at Harvard [Law School]?
Speaker 1: No, we met at Westinghouse High School [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  We met in junior high school.  We go back a long ways.  And, so Carmen wanted to go back to school.  She had been working while I was in law school.  My last two years of law school, she was there.  We got married at the end of my first year.  So, she was working my last two years of law school and she wanted to go back to school and get another degree.  She wanted to become a nurse.  And she already had a bachelor's degree in biology, so in order to get a bachelor's degree in nursing without doing the whole four year program, there was a program at Cornell Nursing School in Manhattan [New York] where you could get a bachelor's degree in nursing in two years.  And so she wanted to go there and do that.  And, I had decided that the work I was doing at Roxbury Multi-Service Center, well, I didn't find it fulfilling.  I didn't feel like we were making any change whatsoever.  And--
Speaker 2: What kind of work were you actually doing there, in terms of--?
Speaker 1: Well, we were advising the social agency on how to develop sustainable change in the community.  So, it was, for example, trying to figure out to help tenants, but not going to court and helping the people that were being evicted, but trying to think through programs for how to make the community change in a more meaningful manner.
Speaker 2: So it wasn't really necessarily legal work.
Speaker 1: Right, exactly.  And, what happened was it was clear to me that if you're a social service agency, you live by getting grants.  So, whatever the grant making community decided was a hot subject that year, that's what you would apply for a grant for.  And so the agency got a grant for an ex-offender program, and they hire an ex-offender to run it.  And they hire the ex-offender at $10,000 a year.  I was making a $10,000 a year.  He was an ex-offender and I had a bachelor's degree from the University of Pennsylvania and a law degree from Harvard [Law School].  And I looked at this, and I said I'm probably over-qualified for where I'm working.  And so I realized that I had too much education for the work I was doing, and decided that I wanted to do something different.  So, when my former wife, when my wife at that time decided she wanted to go to Cornell in Manhattan, I said, okay I'll try to get a job in Manhattan.  Well, I was not a member of the New York Bar, so I couldn't get a job with the Legal Aid Society, and I couldn't get a job with the public defenders, because I wasn't a member of the New York Bar.  And they told me they'd have to pay me like a law student who had just graduated from law school.  I was a member of the Massachusetts Bar, so I said well, this is unacceptable, because I was going to make less money in New York than I was already making in Boston.  They were offering me $7,000 or $8,000 or something.  And so, I decided, you know this doesn't make any sense.  I need to get a job at a real law firm and make real money.  And I got interviewed by a big Wall Street law firm [LeBoeuf, Lamb, Leiby and MacRae], and they represented a lot of public utility companies.  There were a lot of technical issues in their representation.  So, they liked the idea that I was an electrical engineer, and so they hired me and I went to work down on Wall Street.
Story_ID: 40874
Speaker 1: And it was very interesting, because it was, for me, it was an enjoyable experience.  You know, I assumed, I'm the first black they've ever hired [LeBoeuf, Lamb, Leiby and MacRae; law firm on Wall Street, New York].   In fact, when they hired me they didn't even have any black secretaries. (laughter)  There were two black people working, and they were both working, two men working in the mailroom.  And this is a law firm of about seventy lawyers and, you know, seventy or eighty support people.  And so, and so I figure, alright, this is not a law firm where diversity is a priority. (laughter)  And so I said, okay, probably this means I have very little chance of advancement here.  But that's okay, I only want to be here long enough for my wife [Carmen Tyler Winston] to finish up this program and then we'll be out of here.  And so for me, all I wanted to do was do the best job I could do as a young lawyer for my own benefit, because my view was, I'm never going to get a fair shake here, but I'm going to prove to myself that I'm as good as anybody here.  And so I did.  I jumped into the work aggressively and enjoyed it.  And much to my surprise, they enjoyed having me, and they appreciated my work.  I started getting praise and started getting raises.  And so, you know, everyday it got better and better, which surprised me.  And so, when my wife finished her program I was not in any hurry to leave New York.  I said, "Well, I'm doing well here at the firm."  And then it was only about a year later--we stayed there for three years, and then finally we decided that we're now ready to start a family, and New York is a rough place to start a family if you want to buy a house and have a backyard and do all those things that in our view consisted of what a family life should look like.  And so at that point, we decided to leave New York because, not because of the job, but just because New York was not where we wanted to live.
Story_ID: 40875
Speaker 1: When was it that you started LeBoeuf, Lamb, Leiby and MacRae [law firm in New York]?
Speaker 2: 1973.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what year did you decide, to leave New York?
Speaker 2: 1976.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright.  So, what did you have in mind when you were leaving New York?  What were you going to do?
Speaker 2: Move to Washington [District of Columbia].  I'd always liked Washington and my wife [Carmen Tyler Winston] had family here.  And so it was a logical choice for us.  So fortunately, when I told LeBoeuf, Lamb, Leiby and MacRae that I was leaving to move to Washington, they asked me to move down here to their Washington offices.  They said, "If you have to move to Washington, please stay with our Washington office."  And I said, "Well thank you for your offer" and I did.  And I moved down here and didn't like the Washington office very much.  It was a very different experience.  I had--when I told the people in New York that I was going to move to Washington, I was working for a partner.  We were like a team who were to handle the clients up in New England.  And the partner that I was working for said, "Jim, I really wish you would stay.  I think, you know, you've got a future here in this firm."  And so I said, "Thanks, I really appreciate that."  And, you know, he was like a mid-level partner.  And I appreciated that, but I knew he couldn't speak for the whole partnership.  And then I was in my office one day, and the senior partner in the entire firm, Mr. MacRae, of the named partners of LeBoeuf, Lamb and Leiby--they were all deceased, but MacRae was still alive and he was still right in the firm--and he was like the most senior person in the firm.   And he came to visit me in my office, something that never happened.  In other words, we never saw Mr. MacRae.  And if you saw him, it was only to say "Hello Mr. MacRae" as he walked down the hall.  And he came in and he sat with me and he said, "Jim, I know you--he said I know you young lawyers don't see me very often and you probably don't think that I'm paying much attention, and frankly I don't get a chance to see as much of you as I'd like to, but if you're half as good as Jerry Mahr--" who was the partner I was working with--"If you're half as good as Jerry says, I think you should stay here.  I think you could become a partner here one of these days," which was a bombshell for me that I could become a partner at a Wall Street law firm where there were very, very few black partners at the time.  Ah, and so he said, "But if you're committed to moving to Washington, I hope you'll stay with the firm when you move to Washington."  So that was, that was quite a moment for me.  As I said, when I got there I never thought, it never crossed my mind that I would become a partner.  I didn't think that I had a shot at all.  I didn't that that was the kind of company I was even in.  So it was a great--I consider that one of the high points of my professional career that day.
Story_ID: 40876
Speaker 1: So anyway, as a result we [Winston and his wife, Carmen Tyler Winston] moved to Washington [District of Columbia], but the Washington office [of LeBoeuf, Lamb, Leiby and MacRae law firm] was a very different operation and I didn't fit in, so I eventually left and went to work for Western Union Telegraph Company.
Speaker 2: Now, were you the first black partner in the Washington office?
Speaker 1: Yeah, the first black attorney in the Washington office.  I wasn't a partner, but yes, the first black attorney in the Washington office also.
Speaker 2: Well, was it, what was the problem?  What do you think the problem--
Speaker 1: The problem, one of the problems, was that the Washington office did almost exclusively nuclear regulatory commission work.  And I was not comfortable with the idea of nuclear proliferation.  And it never, so I didn't like the work we were doing.  And then, and weekly they would send around these notes of who the new clients were.  And this is 1976, '77 [1977], 1977, and I get a notice that comes around that our new client is the Government of South Africa for nuclear matters.  And you know, I've spent my whole law school career fighting apartheid and I see this law firm representing the Government of South Africa during, you know, many years before the end of apartheid.  It was--
Speaker 2: It was during, when the repression was going on.
Speaker 1: Exactly, exactly.  And so I looked at that, and I said, I can't do this.  And I went and told the head of the Washington office that I can't work here if this is who we're going to represent.  And so they, you know, and I had no rapport.  Unlike New York, I had no rapport with the Washington office people anyhow.  So, they weren't that sorry to see me go.
Speaker 2: Was there like a cultural kind of clash?
Speaker 1: Well, interestingly, what had happened just before I left New York, the Washington office had tried to break off from the New York office and form their own law firm.  And so they notified the New York office they were breaking off and starting their own law firm.  And the New York office said "Well, we're going to sue you if you take any of our clients.  You can't possibly think you're going to stay in the office building that we own."  You know, and they just, and you know, they said we'll crush you, basically.  And so the guys in Washington said, oh, well never mind, I guess we'll stay with the firm.  So when I came down a couple months later, they decided that I was a spy from New York.  (laughter)  So there were a lot of issues going on at the same time in Washington.  So, it never really, never really fit.  But it was certainly the South African Government thing that was the straw that broke the camel's back.  I said, okay, I got to go.
Speaker 2: They didn't treat you badly, I assume, because they probably couldn't afford to do that--
Speaker 1: No.  Yeah, they didn't treat me, they didn't treat me bad until that day when I told them I was going to leave.  They took me out of my office and put me into an office in the basement.  (laughter)  So, it was, okay, I guess everybody's made their position known now.  So I learned my lesson.  Never tell them you're going to leave if you don't have another job yet. (laughter)
Speaker 2: Okay, alright.
Story_ID: 40877
Speaker 1: So, what did you do next [after leaving the Washington office of LeBoeuf, Lamb, Leiby and MacRae law firm]?
Speaker 2: So next I went to work for Western Union Telegraph Company in their Washington office.  And now it's my first exposure, that was my first real exposure to Federal Communications Commission [FCC] work.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, Western Union Telegraph was working with the FCC?
Speaker 2: Yes, they were regulated because they had a service called Telex, which was a service where you typed a message into a typewriter, and it got transmitted by wire.  And because of that, it was regulated by the Federal Communications Commission.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we had a couple of other services regulated by the FCC, but that was the primary one.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, the FCC, this is the, we're in the--
Speaker 2: So it's now 197--?
Speaker 1: '77 [1977] I guess?
Speaker 2: '77 [1977], yes.  Yeah, I left LeBoeuf in '70--around about Christmas of '76 [1976] and started at Western Union in like January of '77 [1977], I think, something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is the [President] Jimmy Carter administration?
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Jimmy Carter has just gotten elected.  And the FCC--and I don't know--he was appointing and that sort of thing, but I don't know if it makes any difference at this junction in the story, but--
Speaker 2: Well, the only, what I remember is he appointed at a mid-level White House position, a guy I went to law school [Harvard Law School]  with.  And so he invited a couple of us over to visit his office in the White House.  It was my first time in the White House, so it was, you know--so, you know, we were what, five years out of law school, so we're still very young men, and we come into our friend's office in the White House.  And we're sitting around with our feet up on the furniture laughing and talking about how great it is that--you know, so it was a heady moment, a heady moment, that somebody we knew was in the White House.
Speaker 1: Who was your friend?
Speaker 2: A friend named Bob Mallison, who's an attorney here in town.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright, so, alright.  Well, tell us what you started finding out about the FCC and how you got--
Speaker 2: Interestingly, just before I left LeBoeuf, Lamb in New York, the firm had a client that had an FCC matter.  And so the group I was with said "This is a fairly small matter, Jim, we'll let you be the lead attorney on it."  I had had three years experience.  I was, you know, I'd developed a fair amount of responsibility within the firm.  And so they sent me down to Washington for a hearing, pre-hearing conference of some kind at one point.  So when I moved to the Washington [District of Columbia] office, they said, "Well good Jim, you're in Washington, you can handle that FCC matter you were working on up here in New York.  Just keep going on with the FCC work."  And so I did, and so when--when I was leaving the Washington office of LeBoeuf looking for a job, I sent my resume to a law firm that forwarded--it represented Western Union and so they forwarded it to Western Union, because Western Union was looking for an in-house person.  And so that's how I got the Western Union job.  And I was able to, when I went to the interview they would tell them that I'd actually worked on an FCC matter previously.  So it was only one matter, but at least it was enough to get my foot in the door.
Story_ID: 40878
Speaker 1: And so Western Union [Telegraph Company] did both Federal Communications Commission [FCC] work, but they were also regulated by State commissions in most states.  And so most of the work I had done when I was in New York was with state public utility commissions.  And so I had the state public utility commission background work as well as the FCC background work, which allowed me to hit the ground running when I got to Western Union.  And so I did about a year and a half at Western Union, but at Western Union I noticed that there was some lack of leadership within the company.  I had the--what happened was the Federal Communications Commission had said to Western Union, "look"-- but what had happened, MCI had been created as a competitor to AT&T, and MCI didn't have its own telephone lines.  It had to buy lines from AT&T to provide the service it was providing.  And AT&T was charging it these very high rates to use its lines.  Western Union was also renting lines from AT&T to provide its telex service, which was its biggest money maker.  And the FCC had said AT&T can't justify why it's charging MCI ten times what it's charging Western Union for the same lines.  So AT&T, you're going to have to make both of these companies pay you the same rates.  And AT&T's position was that everybody will pay the higher rate.  So, the FCC said well obviously we don't want to hit Western Union with this big increase in cost, because there's no, there's zero increase revenue, just an increased cost, of $50 million, with no increased revenue.  So, we're going to let Western Union continue to pay the rates it's paying for five years.  During that time we expect Western Union to buy its own lines, to build its own lines or do whatever other adjustments it needs to make in order to be able to pay for these higher AT&T lines.  When I get to Western Union, it's the beginning of year four of this five-year period.  I accompany the general counsel of the company to a meeting with corporate leadership to discuss this issue.  In the intervening three years, they had not done one thing, they had not built one line to offset this potential $50 million increase they were about to hit.  And so the prevailing wisdom in the company at that time was, well the FCC's not really going to make us pay that at the end of five years because we can't pay it, and they'll give us more time.  And I was thinking that I couldn't imagine that the FCC was going to let them sit and do nothing for five years and then give them more time.  And so it became pretty clear to me--and this was going to be a 50 million increase in their costs.  Their profits for that year had been 50 million, so I'm thinking, this is some high stakes poker you all are playing here.  (laughter)  And if it goes badly, your company is going to be in really bad shape.  And so, and it wasn't, it was not an enjoyable place to work at anymore.  But I had friends who were working at the Federal Communications Commission, and so one of them put me in touch with Commissioner Robert E. Lee, and he interviewed me and hired me to be his legal assistant.  So I managed to escape from Western Union and become a legal assistant to a Commissioner of the FCC, which was a pretty big deal job.
Story_ID: 40879
Speaker 1: Robert E. Lee had been commissioner [of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC)] since the [President Dwight D.] Eisenhower administration, I read.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And he's a curious, he has a curious history.  He's a friend of Joe [Joseph] McCarthy's--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: When they were trying to purge the Communists [during the Red Scare], and some--but he--I know it's some argument that he did not have the credentials or the experience to even discuss matters of communication and that sort of thing.  But he did.  So I, I mean, I don't know if it's, you know--so what was your impression of him, and--?
Speaker 2: Well, it's very interesting, because when my friend told me that Commissioner Robert E. Lee wanted to interview me, I said "Really?  Does he know what to expect when I walk in the room?"  And he said, "Yeah, he knows you're black."  And I said--and he was Republican.  I said "Okay."  So I go into the interview, and very early in the conversation, he says, you know, "My name is Robert E. Lee.  People think I have something to do with the confederate general.  Actually I'm named after Robert Emmet."  He was an Irish American.  Robert Emmet was a famous Irish patriot who helped fight for Irish dependence.  And so that's how he got the Robert E. Lee name.  And so, and then we, we just chatted, and it was a very casual conversation.  He didn't ask me many questions at all.  He just sort of told me about himself and what he wanted to do at the Commission.  And then he asked me if was interested in the job.  I said, "Certainly."  He said "Well then you're hired." (laughter)  And so he loved to point out that he was Republican--but he had, everybody had two legal assistants, and he had two legal assistants.  One was a black man and one was a white woman.  So he said, "They can say what they want about me.  I'm looking like the most liberal commissioner here, the way I see it."  (laughter)  So, it was a good time.  And he was a great guy to work for, because he had a real good sense of humor and, you know, and he had his views of what regulatory work should look like.  He knew where he wanted to go with the decisions and he, you know, and he'd say, "You know, I'm going to vote this way, I'm not going to vote that way."  And you'd come in, you know, and you'd give him your explanation of which way, you know, you saw the law going, and then he'd tell you what he was going to do.  And, but you know, it was, he was not an ideologue at all.  He had some views of what was right for the industry and what was wrong for the industry.  And it was one of the best jobs I've ever had, and the time I spent with him was great.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I know, he was re-appointed by I think [President Lyndon B.] Johnson and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He got re-appointed by five different presidents.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was really quite amazing.
Story_ID: 40880
Speaker 1: So, those days--now, FCC [Federal Communications Commission] today is really not what FCC used to be.
Speaker 2: Not at all.
Speaker 1: FCC used to really regulate the public airways.  They were considered public airways and they regulated it as such.
Speaker 2: That's right.  Yeah.  Those days are long gone by.  And, you know, in my career at NABAB [National Association of Black Owned Broadcasters] I've seen the difference, that it made a big difference in what became the minority ownership policy.
Speaker 1: Tell us what NABOB is.  Now, that was formed in 1976, right, just before--?
Speaker 2: It was formed in 1976, and I took over as executive director in 1982.  NABOB is the National Association of Black Owned Broadcasters.  And it was formed--in 1976 there was a woman named Patty Gray Smith who was working at the National Association of Broadcasters [NAB], which is the general market trade association, it's a very large trade association.  And they have a big annual convention.  And she had met a number of black broadcasters, black companies, black persons who owned radio stations, and when she talked to them they sound like they all had the same kinds of problems--advertisers didn't want to advertise to a black audience.  And the advertisers didn't know enough about a black audience to even know whether or not they should be advertising.  And so after she heard this from several of them, she said "Well you all need to get to know each other, because you know, you've got the same kinds of problems."  So a group of them got together in 1976 at the NAB convention and decided they needed their own organization so that's when they formed NABOB.  They incorporated in 1978 and hired their first executive director shortly thereafter.  And, then the executive director left in '81 [1981], and '81 [1981] happened to be the same year I started my law firm with Eric Rubin, which is now Rubin, Winston, Diercks, Harris & Cooke.  And so I saw an opportunity, because what happened was they were not able to support a full-time staff for the trade association, and I said to the--I came to NABOB and said "Look, I'll run the NABOB trade association out of my law office.  That way, you don't have to worry about all that overhead, just pay me a salary."  And so that's how I became executive director of NABOB, and I've run it out of my law firm all these years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, I've probably, I've jumped ahead a little bit on the story.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the acronym NABOB seems to--now you can tell me if this is any relationship or not.  But Spiro Agnew, the vice president, once criticized the press as, and I think this is in '74 [1974]--he said, he calls them, "Nattering nabobs of negativism."
Speaker 2: Correct, correct.  I've repeated that expression many times over the years.  And to my knowledge, there's no connection between the acronym and the Spiro Agnew comments.
Speaker 1: I often wondered what a nabob is.
Speaker 2: A nabob, according to the dictionary a nabob is a rich or powerful person.  So, yes, so, no complaint being called a nabob, in and of itself.  Spiro took it into a negative direction, but being a nabob itself is not a bad thing.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  I just wanted to put that in there.
Speaker 2: Sure, I appreciate it. (laughter)
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 40881
Speaker 1: So, in 1977, you worked for Robert E. Lee [commissioner of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC)]. So, we still have you with Robert E. Lee.  Now, what was--
Speaker 2: And that's in '78 [1978]--
Speaker 1: '78 [1978].
Speaker 2: --when I started working there.
Speaker 1: Now, what was he doing?
Speaker 2: You know, he was, his claim to fame when he was at the Federal Communications Commission was he was known as the UHF [ultra high frequency] cut commissioner.  When UHF television first started, it was, you know, the original TV stations were two channels, 2 through 13.  And they were called VHF, for very high frequency channels, and that's where TV first began.  Then television expanded to the UHF band, the ultra high frequency band.  And, the ultra high frequency band for analog television did not work nearly as well as VHF television.  So, UHF stations always had to struggle to be successful because of their limited signal, plus you had, you only had three dominant networks.  You had ABC, CBS and NBC, and they all had VHF affiliates.   And so you had the strongest networks with the strongest signals.  So, UHF stations which couldn't use any of that programming, it would have to buy re-run movies and re-run TV shows to put programming on the air.  So they always had a limited signal and limited programming opportunities.  And Commissioner Lee helped promote policies to make it possible for UHF stations to survive, by getting special FCC rules that made it easier for them to operate.
Speaker 1: What was, there's some relationship between DFM and UHF.  I think it is, anyway.
Speaker 2: Ah, there's actually a relationship between FM and VHF, because the low end of the FM band actually connects with channel 6 on the TV band.  And it's interesting because even though we talk about channels 2 through 13, in actual technology terms, it's not a continuous set of frequencies.  So, the frequencies, so you've got channels 2 through 4 that are a set of frequencies.  You've got 5 and 6 that are a set of frequencies.  You've got 1 through 13 that are a different set of frequencies.  And in between 6 and 7, is FM radio, so that the channel 6 and the FM radio are right beside each other, and you can actually have some interference between the two because of that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's--okay, I'm sorry.  I knew there was something, but I couldn't remember what.  So, UHF, I don't--well, so UHF as I recall became popular--I mean the stations, I guess they were allowed to--did they use the UHF frequencies?
Speaker 2: Well, what's happened just in the last couple years is with the digital change-over.  It turns out that with digital television, UHF channels work better than VHF channels.  So that all those--so that now that the whole country is broadcasting in digital for television, those TV stations that you watched on channels 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, they are not actually broadcast on those channels anymore.  They're actually broadcast on UHF channels, but the FCC, because they spent 40 years building up that channel 9 identification, or that channel 7 identification, the FCC allows them to continue to identify themselves as channel 9, but they're actually operating on UHF channels now.  So, it's all, it's all, what you see on TV is not actually what's happening in the technical sense anymore.
Speaker 1: Now, when we were growing up, the stations were all VHF up until we became teenagers--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Or around that period of time--UHF emerged in '62 [1962], '63 [1963]--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: I remember the converter boxes, in my--your TV wouldn't go up any further than 13.
Speaker 2: 12.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so and then they started making TVs with the dials that contained both VHF and UHF, right?
Speaker 2: Correct, exactly.
Speaker 1: So, the benefit--what was Robert E. Lee's rationale in promoting UHF?
Speaker 2: Well, he knew that, you know, at the time, of course, the country was hungry for more TV.  And so with, you know, what he was doing was recognizing that if we're giving out these licenses for this service, you got to help them be competitive with the guys that are already established, uh, and so he helped adopt rules and made it more possible for UHF to prosper.  He helped them increase the power limit so UHF stations were allowed to operate at much higher power than VHF stations, because they needed the higher power to be able to get the same coverage areas of VHF stations.  Those kinds of things he was instrumental in promoting.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I know in many markets you'd have like two stations in the market, and one station may have ABC and NBC or some would have three, but UHF allowed them to have more stations.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Was this, was it Robert E. Lee's idea to democratize television in some way by putting more--
Speaker 2: Yes, I think so.  I think that that's a fair description of it.
Story_ID: 40882
Speaker 1: And he [Robert E. Lee; commissioner of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC)] was a promoter of FM, too, right, I believe?
Speaker 2: Probably not as much, but I'm sure he did.  I mean, he was a big believer in the broadcast industry, so he was a permanent friend of broadcasting.  So, I'm sure he helped FM too.
Speaker 1: Now let me explain that.  Because FM in those days--were when we growing up, FM was, nobody listened to FM.
Speaker 2: Right.  There was nothing on FM except maybe a classic station every now and then--a classical station every now and then, that's right.  And, of course, eventually people figured out that you had much better sound quality with FM.  And the idea--the problem, as is often the problem, the car radio only had an AM receiver in it.  So it wasn't until the radios in cars and radios in homes starting having FM capability, of being received, that people started realizing that you could hear much better on FM.  And then the businessmen said, well if we can give a better sound quality with FM, let's try some of these popular formats with FM.  And, of course, as soon as that happened it took off.
Speaker 1: Now one of the formats that really took off was urban black music on FM.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Urban on FM has done very well for many years.
Speaker 1: So you saw that developing I guess, as it developed in cities like [Washington] D.C. [District of Columbia] and--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, that's right.  Yeah, all the, well, all the major cities.
Story_ID: 55149
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So, Robert E. Lee [commissioner of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC)], we're talking about Robert E. Lee and his policies.  Now, what made it fun to work for Robert E. Lee?
Speaker 2: Because he was such an easy-going guy.  He didn't get rattled, you know.  There were a lot of politics involved in being an FCC commissioner.  You know, this Congress person wants this policy to be adopted by the FCC, and another Congress person wants a competing policy to be adopted.  And, you know, he just didn't, he didn't get stressed out by these conflicting requests, and he took it, you know he took it all in.  He didn't get stressed out by these conflicting requests, and he took it, you know, he took it all in stride.  He'd always tell the staff, you know, give me your best recommendation on what's the best policy.  And that was how he voted.
Story_ID: 55150
Speaker 1: Okay.  I know one feature of the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] in those days was the Fairness Doctrine?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Does that exist any longer?
Speaker 2: No, it doesn't exist any longer.
Speaker 1: Well, tell us what it was.
Speaker 2: The Fairness Doctrine said that if you present one side of an important public issue, you have to present the other side, and you have to give the spokesperson for the other side an opportunity to be heard about the other side.  And that was an important policy because it kept the airways from being overly partisan.  If I'm taking a hard line against an issue as editor--if I'm the owner of a station and I like this position, I know I've got to make time on my station available for people who have an opposing position.  That policy was done away with, and--excuse me, everyday we see the negative implications of that, because now we have this polarized talk radio going on with television where you hear one hard parting line everyday.  You know, you take the Rush Limbaughs of the world and he's got an extremist right-wing position and he's pushing it 24/7 everyday of the year.  And there's no obligation on the part of any of those many stations that carry him, to carry any other viewpoint.  And so it's been a significant part of the polarization of the politics in America, because if you decided I'm a Rush person, you can listen to the radio all day everyday and never hear an opposing position.  You know, and if that's all you're listening to, you can't, you're not getting facts checked.  You don't know if what he's telling you is correct as a matter of fact, or it's just an opinion, or if it's totally made up.  And so, you know, I think it's been very negative for the overall political climate in America.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And in those days if you did not allow the opposite opinion or a fair or balanced set of opinions--
Speaker 2: Back in those days, you could lose a license.  I mean, the FCC--there was a time, I mean, and needless to say if you got a multi-million dollar radio or television station, the notion of losing a license--because then all that equipment that you own is worthless, you don't have any right to use it.  So that's--and you can't sell advertising.  And now you've lost the going concern if you lose that license.  So, so, people were very particular about complying with the rules.  So there was not this stridence of broadcasting of one dogma.  You--you know, a lot of stations decided, you know, we're going to stay away from a lot of these issues altogether.  And, you know, and so that allowed people if they were going to get information, they would get information from newspapers or other places where there was a chance they would get a more balanced presentation of information.  And the stations that did hear controversial subjects went out of their way to make sure they got equal time to both sides.  And that was the best opportunity for the public if you had a station that was going to take on public issues. And they could really do a good job of doing both sides of the issue.  And that was a heyday for broadcasting.
Speaker 1: So, often, and I remember those days when people would appear on talk shows and take an opposite position and--
Speaker 2: Exactly.  It was common to see two different sides of an issue taken on TV at the same, which was perfect.  That's what you need, a kind of give and take from both sides.
Story_ID: 55151
Speaker 1: I guess, there are also some activities during the time that Robert E. Lee [commissioner of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC)] was in office that stimulated the growth of black radio and television.
Speaker 2: Yes, now this--
Speaker 1: Am I getting too far ahead?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, because actually the promotion of what the FCC called minority ownership of broadcast properties began in the early '70s [1970s].  There was a court case called TV Nine versus the FCC, where the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia told the FCC that when you're giving out new broadcast licenses and you--the FCC had a series of criteria that it would use to decide if more than one party applied to obtain a new license.  For example, suppose there was a frequency available for a new radio station in Washington, D.C.  The FCC said we're going to decide, on these criteria, which applicant should get this license.  And in TV Nine, the Court of Appeals said that when you make these determinations you must consider race because there's such a lack of diversity in the broadcast ownership industry, and ownership is the ultimate control over what gets put on the airways.  And so, as a result of the TV Nine case, the FCC began its preference--it's a consideration of race when comparing competing applicants in what the FCC called a comparative hearing.  So that was the beginning of a minority ownership policy.  With that-[President] Jimmy Carter got elected in 1976--that was a 1974 case.  In 1976, Jimmy Carter gets elected president.  He appoints Charles Ferris as the chairman of the Federal Communications Commission, and appoints Tyrone Brown as the second African American commissioner on the FCC.  Benjamin Hooks had been the first, and he resigned and Tyrone Brown was appointed as the second minority member of the FCC.  And under the guidance of Charlie Ferris and Tyrone Brown the FCC decided that they needed to have a minority ownership policy that went beyond the comparative hearing policies that the TV Nine court established.  So the FCC held a hearing in 1977 to invite people to come in and talk about what the minority ownership policy should look like.  And in 1978 they created the minority ownership policy, and it had three prongs.
Story_ID: 55152
Speaker 1: First was the comparative hearing consideration that the TV Nine had required.  Then they added to that something called the tax certificate policy, which was, uh, the key linchpin of the minority ownership policy.  What the tax certificate policy said was if I am the owner of a radio or television station and I choose to sell, if I sell to a company controlled by minorities, I can defer the capital gains tax on that sale. So theoretically I'm selling a radio for $5 million.  I bought it for $1 million, and I got a $4 million gain on that sale.  The capital gain tax was about 25 percent at the time, so I've got a million dollar tax liability I would pay if I sell it to another white buyer.  If I sell it to a minority buyer, I've saved a million dollars in taxes.  So, the beauty of that policy was that prior to the tax certificate policy, minorities wouldn't even hear about stations for sale.  There was an old boy network among brokers within the industry, and one would call the other and they would get the deal done.  So now the seller was saying to the brokers, find me a minority buyer.  So, we went from not knowing that the stations were even for sale, to being called and saying are you interested in buying?  So that was a major change.  And that tax certificate policy over the next several years created a huge increase in the number of African American and Hispanic owners in broadcasting.  The third policy was adopted in 1978 and was called the distress sale policy.  The distress sale policy said if I'm a licensee of a radio or television station and I've gotten into trouble with the FCC [Federal Communications Commission]--the FCC's current policy was that if we the FCC have designated your station for a revocation hearing we think you've violated the communications act and/or rules, and we think we may want to take your license away from you.  Once we've done that, you no longer can sell your station.  You've got a cloud on the title of your station and you're not free to sell it.  And so the FCC and I'm sorry, you're not free to sell it at a profit of any kind.  The distress sale policy said that you could sell the station to a minority at approximately 75 percent of fair market value or that you could sell a distress sale property and make that 75 percent profit as opposed making no profit if you sell it to anybody else.  However, the FCC, there's never a time when the FCC had a lot of distress sale hearings.  So there were never a huge number of stations that were available under the distress sale policy, although some stations were sold.  But the big driving force that created a large number of new minority owners in the late '70s [1970s] and early '80s [1980s], was the tax certificate policy.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now this is in 1978?
Speaker 1: This is '78 [1978].
Speaker 2: And we owe a lot of that work to Tyrone Brown and to--?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Tyrone Brown and Charles Ferris.  Charles Ferris was the chairman and Tyrone Brown was the commissioner [of the FCC], he was the African American commissioner.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But I should, and I should add that at the time these policies were adopted unanimously.  So while they spearheaded it, everybody supported it.  That was a different time in America.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, 1978, so we have this great opportunity.
Story_ID: 55153
Speaker 1: Now what was going on--and I've got some notes here--I don't expect you to remember all this stuff, but I remember as we lead up to this, there are, you mentioned the National Association of Black Owned Broadcasters [NABOB].   But we had so many developments, I guess in terms of ownership, in those days on the radio and a little bit in terms of television.  But we had the development of the Mutual Broadcasting Network and the Sheridan Broadcasting Corporation in '72 [1972], the National Black Network in '73 [1973], still another one, Inner City Broadcasting in 1970 up in New York with Percy Sutton.
Speaker 2: Yes, correct.
Speaker 1: and WOL [radio station] here in [Washington] D.C. [District of Columbia].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: With Dewey Hughes and Cathy Hughes.   And there are many, many others likely--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: But all these developments--these black owned stations and stuff are coming together and they're--so, NABOB--.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  What happened was, all these things came together.  You had the formation of NABOB, you had the FCC [Federal Communications Commission], and NABOB helped promote the FCC's minority ownership policy, and then you had these people who were around looking for African American and Hispanic buyers, and so everything was set for a huge growth.  So, we saw ownership by African Americans go from, in 1976, thirty radio stations, no television stations.  By 1981, it was 140 radio stations and fifteen television stations.
Speaker 1: Now this was something I didn't even know, we had fifteen television stations.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well at our peak we had twenty-one.  We have since, most of those have been sold off now.
Speaker 1: I believe the, was the first one in Detroit [Michigan]?
Speaker 2: The first TV station was in Detroit, WGPR, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  All these--my mind has flipped through all the 'Jet' magazines I've read, you know, to find these--you know.  Well, these are the--
Speaker 2: That's a good place to look for them all, actually.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Story_ID: 55154
Speaker 1: '78 [1978], though, we're on the, you know, we have these great opportunities--'79 [1979]--and they seem to be--then they start to be knocked down in the '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Tell us that story.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well, what happened is in 1980, of course, [President] Jimmy Carter loses the election, the re-election bid, and [President] Ronald Reagan gets elected.  And Ronald Reagan is opposed to affirmative action.  Ronald Reagan appoints Mark Fowler as the chairman of the FCC [Federal Communications Commission].  And Mark Fowler begins his mission to try to undo the minority ownership policies.
Speaker 1: And what's the first thing he does?
Speaker 2: He starts giving speeches.  He was not in a position to, he didn't have votes to actually undo the policies, but he started making speeches about why this was reverse discrimination, and that these policies were not in the best interest of America.
Speaker 1: So, this is, oh--you're saying though, so Mark Fowler headed the FCC, but the body of the FCC is still basically--
Speaker 2: Yes.  You've still got--I'm trying to think--in '81 [1981]--I'm trying to think who were the other commissioners at that time?  Bob [Robert E.] Lee is still a commissioner.  I'm trying to think of--
Speaker 1: Tyrone Brown still there?
Speaker 2: And Tyrone Brown, I'm trying to think of how long he stayed.  Because, yeah, he stayed for awhile, but not a lot longer, because once the administrations changed, it's not, you know, once you have a Republican chairman, it's a different experience for you if you're in a minority party, if you're a Democrat.  So, I can't remember, I can't remember how long--and because the president gets to appoint the chairman, so the chairman always turns over.  So [Charles] Ferris left immediately and I can't remember when Tyrone Brown left.   But slowly Reagan starts making his imprint on the commission.  It starts to change philosophically over time.  But nothing, nothing happened to the policies in terms of eliminating the policies.  What happened was a lack of enthusiasm for the force in them.  So it was no effort to expand.  If there was a close question, you know, you can do this to expand the minority ownership policy.  If you just did this, the Fowler commission would never do that.  So it was dormant, and everybody knew, everybody on the outside knew, because one of the things that happened during the Ferris administration was companies knew I need a waiver from FCC policy.  I want to own a station where the rules say I can't own a station, or something like that.  Companies would come into the FCC and say I'd like a waiver of 'x' rule and I think you'll want to do it because it's part of that process.  I'm going to sell the station to a minority owned company.  So people knew that you could--and that was, you know, because the promotion of minority ownership was viewed as an important public interest benefit for the country.  You could get points with the FCC by coming in and making a proposal that increased minority ownership.  Once Fowler got there, people knew you didn't have to do that.  If you wanted to own a station someplace where you weren't allowed to own a station because of the FCC's ownership rules, you'd just come in and say, you know, I want to own that for whatever reason, and you'd get a waiver.  You didn't have to come and say it's a public interest benefit to minorities by me doing this.  And so, and so all those kinds of extra ways you promote minority ownership, that sort of bully pulpit, people know this is a good thing to get me points with the FCC--that was, that no longer existed.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Ah, so, I think you're right.  Tyrone Brown must have left earlier, because he's partners with Robert Johnson on some level with BET [Black Entertainment Television] in '80 [1980].
Speaker 2: Right, that's right.
Speaker 1: In 1980 they formed BET.  This is the first black cable station, I suppose, or is it?
Speaker 2: BET, yes.  Yes, it was.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so we have the Reagan administration, and at this time though, [U.S.] Congress is still predominantly Democratic, right?
Speaker 2: That's right, that's correct.
Speaker 1: I know there's a--
Speaker 2: That's another reason why they couldn't change the policies, they couldn't get legislation to change the policy.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, policies remained, but enforcement is--
Speaker 2: Exactly, enforcement is reduced.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 55155
Speaker 1: So when you came in in '82 [1982] as the director of NABOB [National Association of Black Owned Broadcasters], you know, what were the issues that faced you?
Speaker 2: Well, what I faced, of course, was Mark Fowler [chairman of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) under President Ronald Reagan], who was making speeches against, opposing, minority ownership policies.  So that was the immediate obstacle.  Fortunately, as you pointed out, we had [U.S.] Congress which was controlled, both houses were controlled by Democrats, and we had a lot of support within Congress.  One of our key supporters, when I first joined NABOB, was Congressman Mickey Leland, Congressman Mickey Leland from Houston [Texas].  And he was on the telecommunications subcommittee of the House Commerce Committee.  The telecommunications subcommittee is the primary House subcommittee that oversees the FCC.  And so he was directly able to, uh, when Mark Fowler came up to the telecommunications subcommittee for oversight hearings, he could challenge Fowler on his positions directly from the bench in those hearings.  So he was able to be a voice for support for minority ownership policies, in opposition to Fowler.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 55156
Speaker 1: But by 1987 the Fairness Doctrine [of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC)] is eliminated, from what I see.  Now how did that happen?
Speaker 2: Now that, and I don't remember, I don't remember all the politics around the elimination of the Fairness Doctrine.  It escapes me right now, but what [Mark] Fowler Fowler [chairman of the FCC under President Ronald Reagan was doing was trying to eliminate as much as he possibly could of broadcast regulatory rules, period.  So it wasn't just minority ownership policy.  He was looking to extend the term of license renewals, license renewals, for three year terms.  He wanted to extend the terms, he wanted to eliminate the ability to challenge license renewals on certain grounds, so he added a systematic policy during his tenure, which was followed up by the next chairman after him, to do away with as much regulation of broadcasting as they could.  And the Fairness Doctrine was a casualty of that deregulation of broadcasting.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It seems the idea is to make it as much as a business-oriented--
Speaker 2: Exactly.  It was the laissez-faire of business operations.  It was what Mark Fowler was moving toward.
Speaker 1: Instead of the idea of the public owned airways.
Speaker 2: That's right. And it was a public, if you were a trustee of the public airways, he thought that was a policy that no longer needed to be enforced.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 55157
Speaker 1: Now I don't want to slip past something that's important in this, but what was NABOB [National Association of Black Owned Broadcasters]--you said we were losing--at one time we had 21 television stations--
Speaker 2: Well, we grew.  Actually, NABOB stations grew all the way into the mid-90s.  It wasn't--in 1995, in 1995 the Republicans take control of [U.S.] Congress for the first time in forty years, in January of that year.
Speaker 1: Is that the Newt Gingrich revolution?
Speaker 2: Right, Newt Gingrich takes over the contract with America, etc.  That month in January of 1995 an African American was supposed to buy a cable television company for, I want to say two or three billion dollars.  But all the money was coming from another cable company that would not have been allowed to buy the company outright.  It was TCI, was the cable company.  I can't remember who they were trying to buy out.
Speaker 1: Viacom, I think, wasn't it?
Speaker 2: Was it Viacom buying TCI, is that what it says?
Speaker 1: It was, well, our notes here--Frank Washington [also a HistoryMaker] was the realtor.
Speaker 2: Frank Washington was the entrepreneur.
Speaker 1: The entrepreneur.  And, let's see, yeah, he was trying to buy, yeah, Viacom.
Speaker 2: So, TCI was trying to buy Viacom's cable company?  And you know, it's been so long since I've had to think about this particular procedure, but the bottom line is that it was a multi-billion dollar proposal.  And it was clear that the cable company that was backing Frank Washington was putting up all the money and was going to have control of the operation, and that it was not going to be a real minority owned company.  And the reason they were doing that was so they could get a tax certificate from the purchase.  Well, this hit all the trade press just as Republicans are taking over Congress, and they grab it and run with it.  This is why you don't need to have these minority ownership policies.  This is just a sham transaction, this is not the minority ownership policy.  This is just a rip-off of the American taxpayer, because these guys are going to avoid paying all these taxes.  And so they took that and ran with it and used it as the reason to abolish the tax certificate policy.  And they passed legislation--they held a hearing and passed legislation just like that, and the tax certificate was gone.   And so the one tool that really made the big difference was now gone.
Story_ID: 55158
Speaker 1: The next year in 1996 the same Congress implements, adopts the tax, I'm sorry, the Telecommunications Act of 1996.  And that statute which started out as a proposal to allow telephone companies and cable companies to get into each other's businesses, well, the National Association of Broadcasters [NAB] and its members decided this was a good time to stick in a portion of the legislation to de-regulate radio and television.  And so what happened was the bill would include a provision that said the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] will have no ownership limits on the number of radio stations one company can own across the entire United States, although it will be limited in the number of stations you can own in any given market.  So at that time you could own no more than forty radio stations across the country.  You could own no more than two AMs or two FMs in any market.  This rule said you could own an unlimited number of radio stations across the country.  You could own as many as eight radio stations in the biggest markets.  And so, immediately upon the enactment of 1996 act, the big companies started gobbling up everything in sight.  The leader of the pack was Clear Channel Communications, which eventually went up to owning within a few years, a thousand radio stations across the country.  And followed by CBS-- I'm trying to think, who else that bid--the Citadel Communications, a number of other companies.  ABC, it owned a large number of radio stations at the time.  So they all, there was just this huge consolidation of ownership in the radio industry over the next few years.  They also loosened up the television rules so that it was possible to own two television stations in certain markets.  And that had the impact of causing a number of television companies that were owned by African Americans to get bought out.  And so we went from twenty-one stations to--now we're down to eight, for TV stations.  Fortunately, there were a number of radio stations.  We had about 240 radio stations at the time.  We still have about 240 radio stations.  Because what happened was a number of African American companies got into the acquisition business themselves, so they bought a number of stations.  Radio One, of course, being the leader.  They, at one point, they were at sixty-five radio stations.  I think they're now around fifty or fifty-two.  But they had gone up as many as sixty-five radio stations.  So that allowed the total number of radio, African American radio stations, to stay roughly the same even though we lost a large number of owners.  So, we went down from 120 companies that were, that owned radio stations, now we're down to about sixty-five.  So, although the total number of radio stations that are owned by African Americans stayed the same, the number of companies owning those stations have decreased dramatically.  And that's a major loss in my view.  Because while Radio One is an excellent company and does an excellent job, you need a variety of owners as well as a variety of stations.
Speaker 2: So, you're saying that we don't need to hear the same thing all the--
Speaker 1: You know, maybe if I'm an owner I might want to carry Steve Harvey or Tom Joyner, but if there are a bunch of different owners making those decisions--we're not all going to make the same decisions.  Some of them will decide, I'll have a local air personality, air person of my own, I won't do any syndicated programming.  So, you lose those kind of individual decisions being made across the country.
Speaker 2: It's pretty much uniform now--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --in a lot of the cities.  Now, President William Jefferson Clinton, who some called the first black president until--actually signed this act, the Telecommunications Act of 1996.
Speaker 1: That's right.  And what happened, they put, they attached that bill to a funding bill.  I can't remember what the funding bill was now.  But there was some funding bill that it was attached to, and he didn't feel that he could veto the bill, because there was a whole lot attached to it.  And the only thing that was objectionable was this one thing about ownership of broadcast properties.  And my perception is that his staff probably did not see the tidal wave that was coming in terms of the consolidation.  So, they probably did not see that, how great the risk was when they signed that legislation, and it turned out to be catastrophic.
Story_ID: 40893
Speaker 1: Telecommunications Act of 1996, it says here in our research that the legislation's primary goal was de-regulation of the broadcasting market.
Speaker 2: From a broadcaster's viewpoint that was the biggest thing it did.  As I said, the impetus for the act actually came from the telephone companies and the cable companies.  But from a broadcaster's viewpoint, that was exactly what it did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, to stray to the purchase of Viacom, which was an issue, you know, before that, but Viacom turns around in 1999 and buys BET [Black Entertainment Television].
Speaker 2: Yes, that's right, that's right.  Ah, that was needless to say, from the viewpoint of those of us who have spent our careers promoting minority ownership, that was a blow.  But the realities that BET recognized then that are crystal clear now for many of us, are that the deck is stacked against you if you're not part of a future conglomerate.  You know, now, you see, you know, BET is doing fine, and actually they've improved some of the programming over that period of time.  Ah, and they appear to operate with a fair amount of autonomy in terms of being able to serve the African American community.  So, in looking at it now, I would say that it was not a negative event at all.  It was a positive event from the BET viewpoint and from the viewpoint of the public they serve.  So, it's an interesting change in America that, you know, that--and I'm not exactly sure how it all plays out, as someone who still feels that minority ownership of businesses is important, that there are things that the owner of the business has the opportunity to decide that can benefit or hurt the community.  It's important to me to see minority owners continue to grow and flourish in whatever the new medium landscape looks like.  And part of the problem that we see in 2012 is that technology is changing this industry so quickly, that nobody even knows what the industry is going to look like in a few years.  You know, now you're seeing more and more television content being delivered over the internet.  What does that mean for broadcasters?  What does that even mean for cable companies?  So, you know, and everything is--and it's got to have a mobile application for it.  You've got to be able to watch TV on mobile devices, you got to be able to watch TV on tablets.  All these things are changing the way these businesses will look in the years ahead.  Ah, for radio, you've got internet radio, you got internet radio now being installed in cars.  You got satellite radio that's been in cars for years, you know.  Prime time--drive time is the prime listening time for traditional radio, and so the beauty of that was that, the person in the car was a captive audience, that he or she's only source of entertainment at one time was the over the air radio station.  Now it's satellite, internet, iPods, you know, that are competing--a number of competing media for your entertainment pleasure when you're in your car, when you're at the beach, wherever you are.  All these things have now changed that dynamic.  So, where it all goes for radio stations and TV stations is going to be a question that's going to be sorted out over the next few years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 40894
Speaker 1: Now what do you think about--are black people involved in the internet television business now?  Like there are companies like Hulu, and there are other companies that are--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, the problem I see right now is that business opportunities are being very technology driven.  African Americans don't have a history in the technology industries.  You know, the Silicon Valley, you know, the story of Steve Jobs [Apple, Inc.] and Bill Gates [Microsoft], where they grew up in these technology environments, and now you see the younger ones coming along, Facebook, and all these new companies are all being driven by technology more so than--it's technology first and content second is the way these things are being driven.  And, you know, we have a rich, long history in the content side of entertainment, but not the technology side.  And so I'm worried that I don't see the entrepreneurs in the African American community that are a part of this wave on the technology side.  So, you know, we've, in my career I've seen groundbreaking broadcasters--Percy Sutton [Inner City Broadcasting Corporation], Bob [Robert L.] Johnson [Black Entertainment Television (BET)], Cathy Hughes [Radio One/TV One]--and I don't see those people coming--I don't see the new technologists coming forward in these new technologies, and that concerns me, that we don't, we're not going to own any of the means of distribution for any of this new content.  And that, my view is you--the ideal business is that you own it from top to bottom at the very beginning; you own it all.  And, you know, we don't, we're not a part of the new technology in any meaningful way that I can see, in terms of the part of the technology that distributes content.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 40895
Speaker 1: Not being from [Washington] D.C. [District of Columbia], I'm always impressed when I come here and hear WHUT, I mean WHUR [radio station].
Speaker 2: WHUR, a great station.
Speaker 1: 'The Koji Nnamdi Show', people like Farad Gidar [ph.]--and--here in D.C. that you don't hear in other cities.
Speaker 2: You know, we've got great radio in D.C.  You know, WHUR is not digital, so they've actually got a second channel now.
Speaker 1: So, in terms of an alternative voice, you have it some places and some places you really don't have it.
Speaker 2: That's right.  I mean, and that's the problem, is that, you know, people are hoping that the internet will be the "be all" substitute voice for African Americans, because theoretically it's so easy to get online and create a voice.  The problem is that it's very hard to get your voice heard, because there's so many people creating voices on the internet, that if you look at who are the biggest companies on the internet, they are the biggest companies in other communications.  So, you've got, you know, the same companies that have dominated the other airwaves are also the biggest companies on the internet right now.  And so, you don't see the kind of flourishing of the African American voice that one might hope to see on the internet.
Story_ID: 40896
Speaker 1: Now, I think in recent years, I think Michael Powell has been, you know, the Commissioner of the FCC [Federal Communications Commission].
Speaker 2: Yeah, Michael Powell was chairman of the FCC, he was chairman of the FCC under--
Speaker 1: [President] George W. Bush.
Speaker 2: Yeah, George W. Bush for the first term.  Then he resigned and Kevin Martin took over for George W. Bush's second term.  And now you have Julius Genachowksi, who was appointed by President [Barack] Obama, now.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Some of us thought that maybe by having a black chairman, things would change a little bit, but--
Speaker 2: No.  You know, the chairman of the FCC is implementing the policies of the president that appointed him or her.  And so that limits the range of activities that that particular person is going to engage in.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, one of the issues, and I guess this is a NABOB [National Association of Black Owned Broadcasters] issue, is Arbitron's portable people meter [PPM].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now you testified before [U.S.] Congress about this?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, I did.  That was a very difficult--that started in 2007 when they announced they were putting these out for, into the marketplace and we were going to be using them for measurement.  And what we saw from the data that came out was that stations targeting African Americans and Hispanics took huge hits.  Now, you've got a company that was selling a measurement service for years and years and years, saying these are accurate audience estimates for these populations.  Then they come out with the PPM and you see there were stations that only had a following--from number one in Chicago [Illinois], WGIC, started out from, fell from number one to number twelve.  You know, and WGIC had been number one in the market for years, as the number one station in the market that was serving an African American audience.  And you saw similar falls for WBLS in New York, and WDAS in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].   But the difference, unfortunately, for NABOB's members is if I'm WBLS, all I've got in New York is stations--I'm Inner City Broadcasting [Corporation]--all I've got is stations serving the African American consumer.  If I take a big hit like that, my company's in trouble.  In Chicago, WGIC at that time was now owned by Clear Channel [Communications].  Clear Channel had--it sold some things, and now they're down to about 800, so somewhere between a thousand and 800 stations around the company, and they had many stations in Chicago.  So, audience measurement is what in gain period they call a zero sum gain, if there's a 100 points to be had, period.  And if somebody loses points, that means somebody automatically gains points, because it's always going to be a hundred points of audience.  And so, if WGCI fell, there was a good possibility one or more Clear Channel stations rose.  So, from Clear Channel's viewpoint, it's money going out of one pocket and coming into another pocket, so there was not an outcry from Clear Channel when WGCI fell.  If I've only got urban stations, if I'm only serving the African American community and my ratings fall like that, then that's a serious problem for me.  And so that was what the black stations and Hispanics that were not owned by the big conglomerates--got together and we created the PPM Coalition, and went to Arbitron and told them that we didn't believe that this PPM measurement process was accurate, and we wanted them to make improvements in it.  And then we went to Congress.  At the time, Congressman Adolphus Towns was the chairman of the House Government Oversight Committee, which had direct overseeing over the FCC as well.  And so he took this issue up and called Arbitron in for hearings, and asked them to explain what the heck is going on here, and asked the FCC to investigate this subject.  And so from that combined effort, we were able to get Arbitron to agree to make major changes in the PPM methodology, to make it more accurate.  So Arbitron is the process of going through those changes now, and we're hoping to see some improvement over time in the kind of measurement we get for stations targeting African American consumers and Hispanic consumers.
Story_ID: 40897
Speaker 1: Well, what was, I mean--why didn't the device [Arbitron's portable people meter (PPM)] work in favor of [minority consumer choices]--
Speaker 2: What happened is Arbitron, the device--and just to go back to the subject we were talking about, the device itself, the device looks like a pager, and what you're supposed to do is carry it on your person at all times.  And the device is supposed to be able to pick up the sound of any radio station that you're near, and then it will process it and determine what station that is, and give that station a rating for your listening time.  There were a number of problems with this.  First of all, Arbitron was not getting the devices to represent a sample of African American and Hispanic households.  The devices were worn all the time, so if I'm at work and I've got my device on, and my boss has his or her favorite radio station on there, the device counts me as a listener to that station, even though I have no interest in listening to that station.  And so when we said that to Arbitron--it said but you're hearing it, and so that counts.  And so, we said, yeah, I'm not paying attention to it, it's background noise to me, I'm not actually listening to it.  And so we said to them, you know there's a difference between being engaged with a radio station and it playing in the background, and this device makes no allowance for that difference.  So in the diary, our filling out an Arbitron diary, I would not write down what radio station was playing that I wasn't listening to, I would write down what I turned on when I got in my car and when I got home. That's my station, that's what I'm turning--and Arbitron's position was, but you're still being exposed to it, and we want a device that measures exposure.  And so our position was you're underminding the whole purpose of the rating process if there's nothing that says that this person is--we no longer have any engagement factor involved in the measurement.  And the fact that there's noise in the background doesn't mean I paid any attention to the song or the commercials, which is the whole idea, the commercial. People who buy commercials want to know who was listening.  And there's a difference between noise being in the background and listening.  So, we, you know, that was at the heart of our problem with Arbitron.  And unfortunately, there's nothing--although they are making strides to get a better representative sample of African Americans and Hispanics using the PPM device, there's nothing about that device that distinguishes between engagement and just being present when the radio is being played.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, I understand, you know, two different, there's going to two different--.  So if your boss is listening to Rush Limbaugh or Bob and Tom all day--
Speaker 2: You're a listener.
Speaker 1: You're picking it up.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: The other thing is, a lot like the one we see, especially in offices, women have earpieces in their ear as they are typing or doing other things on the computer, and they're listening to their own music.
Speaker 2: Right, exactly.  Yes, and so if she's got an earpiece in her ear, you know, this device may pick up the boss's station while she's listening to her station.  Yes, you're absolutely right.
Speaker 1: Now, there's so much of that.  I mean, people wear those earphones more than ever before.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: So, okay.  What was the upshot of that? Did you get any--
Speaker 2: Well, yes, as I said, we got Arbitron to agree to make some major changes in how they recruit participants for the PPM sample.  They, and one of the big things that they did, Arbitron had always used land line telephone numbers to find people to be in their sample.  But in 2007 and certainly now in 2012, 20 or 30 percent of the population doesn't even have a land line phone at home anymore.  They only use cell phones.  So they weren't even in the sample.  And of course, that's young people, that's young African-Americans, young Hispanics and young white people who were being, you know, left out of the sample that was being recruited.  So, if your station is average and you're just playing music to that sample, your sample's not being measured.  So one of the big things that Arbitron agreed to do is to start using cell phones--I'm sorry--start using two things, cell phone numbers and address based samplings.  So instead of sampling phone number 699-3224, they're sampling 18 Main Street.  So now, they're going to--so if you've got a house with no land line phone, you can now be part of the sample.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 40898
Speaker 1: Now, is NABOB [National Association of Black Owned Broadcasters] still a large part of what you do?
Speaker 2: Yes, it is.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Speaker 2: And I still practice law, but I still do NABOB also.
Speaker 1: Well, what's your other practice [Rubin, Winston, Diercks, Harris, & Cooke] like?  And I don't want to just put you in one dimension here, but--
Speaker 2: Alright, well, ah, as I said, we started the firm in 1981, my partner Eric Rubin and I.  Walter Diercks joined us a couple months later, and then Fred Cooke and Jeffrey Harris joined us about ten years after that.  And then, we've got a couple more partners, Max Rieter and Steven Stone, we're all partners in the firm now.  And we do a variety of different things.  My practice is primarily communications, so I represent a number of companies that are NABOB members and a number of companies that are not NABOB members that are white owned companies that own radio and television stations.  My partners do a variety of other things.   We have, my partner Eric Rubin is the general counsel of the Outdoor Advertising Association of America, which is the trade association for billboards.  Our Frederick Cooke was former corporation counsel for District of Columbia and he represents a number of political parties, political persons, in the district.  Unfortunately, today one of his clients, Mr. Harry Thomas, who was a city councilman, was given a prison sentence for theft of government funds.  So, Mr. Cooke was one of the attorneys representing him in that case.  He's represented a number of high profile people, Marion Barry over the years, and persons like that.  And my other partner, one of my partners, was born in Germany.  And he represents a lot of German interests here and abroad.  My partners are experienced litigators, they do a lot of corporate litigation of various kinds.  So and then Steven Stone, has an active estates and trust practice, a lot of wills and that kind of thing.  So we've got a pretty broad-based practice here, and get involved in a lot of interesting things over our thirty, thirty-one years.
Story_ID: 40899
Speaker 1: Now, we always ask this question.  What are some of your hopes, I guess, for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, as a father, obviously I'm very concerned about the African American community moving forward.  I have two daughters [Zahra and Adrienne Winston] from my first marriage [to Carmen Tyler Winston].  My wife [Debra Arrindell] has a son [Brandon Arrindell] and an adopted daughter from her first marriage.  We call it an adopted daughter because it's actually the daughter of her best friend.  Her name, her friend's name was Renee.  Her daughter was Gabby [Gabrianne] Williams, and we have sort of been her surrogate parents for the last several years since her mother died.  So we consider ourselves being the parents of four.  And so looking at life for them is always a concern to me.  I think the country as a whole is experiencing severe economic times, and I don't think those times are going to get a lot better anytime soon.  So I'm delighted all of our children are working, they're gainfully employed, but I worry about job opportunities for them going forward in the future.  I think there are a lot of challenges that the country faces as a whole.  I certainly, I've seen the racial climate get infinitely better during my lifetime, and it never crossed my mind as a young man in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] that I would see a black president [President Barack Obama] in my lifetime.  So I recognize that the country has done well, and while racial issues exist, they're not the same racial issues, basically issues that have changed over time.  And while they will always be here, the issues that my children face are probably more akin to their white counterparts than in my day.  And so, you know, I feel very concerned about the economy, you know, because if you read books like Tom Friedman's 'The World is Flat', you know, you see that we're part of a growing economy.  And you know, the role of the United States in that economy is changing drastically, for, you know, for us having 5 percent of the world's population and using something like 40 percent of its resources.  That's going to be a problem going forward, because, you know, China and India have growing populations, and the ability to serve those populations without dependence upon the United States--and so, increasingly, our role as an economic force in the world has got to diminish.  And I think that's going to mean major challenges for, you know, whoever the president is.  I'm certainly hoping it's going to Barack Obama, but he's going to have--whoever it is, is going to have major challenges going forward in the next four years and for the foreseeable future.  So, I think--what I try to say to my children is be mindful that you're competing with the world, you're not competing with just the kid down the street or in the next cubicle.  And you got to be thinking about that as you look at your career and where you're going, and what you're doing with your career.  And you should be mindful that you've got to be looking broadly for what's going on, in terms of job opportunities and how you fit into the world economy.
Story_ID: 40900
Speaker 1: Now, when you look back at everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, it's interesting, because with the number of African American broadcasters decreasing, I'm troubled about that legacy.  I've worked for NABOB [National Association of Black Owned Broadcasters] for over thirty years now, and I was proud of the growth that we saw for minority ownership over those many years.  And I would certainly have hoped that the legacy would be a thriving number of African American owners of radio and television stations.  Now that that whole industry is in flux, and what entertainment delivery to the home would even look like in the future, is up in the air.  I would hope that there would be a legacy from the people who have been instrumental in bringing NABOB this far to help figure out ways to be part of that next wave, that there will be, that we'll see a new growth in entrepreneurship in the entertainment and information businesses by African Americans.  And I don't know even right now what that will look like, but I'm hoping that we'll continue to see the kind of growth that we need to be an effective part of the American scene.  You know, there was a time when we didn't have a meaningful voice in the governing and the business of this country.  We've seen a lot of growth in those years and I hope that wherever technology takes the businesses, we'll be there with that, and we'll be a part of that new growth.
Speaker 1: What do you envision or what would you think would be, I guess, a set of conditions or policies that would make for more black ownership in the media as it evolves going forward?
Speaker 2: I think one of the things that we have to do as a community is get our young people more involved in technology.  It's clear that wherever media is going, it's being driven there by changes in technology.  And so we need to be part of that changing technology.  We need to have entrepreneurs involved in figuring out where we're going and being a part of it, and growing businesses that will be part of that new technology.
Speaker 1: Okay, innovation is where we need to be?
Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I look back at my life, because I started off in the technology world.  I started off as an electrical engineer.  Unfortunately, I started off at a time when there were not role models to look to for entrepreneurship.  It was not something I was even, it was not a concept I even thought about.  And now today we've got the ability for young people to see entrepreneurs all around them.  And I'm hoping that they'll take that kind of stimulus and say okay, if the big opportunities for entrepreneurship are in technology, that's where I need to try to focus.  And I hope that some of those young people who have the opportunities I had forty years ago will make different choices about technology in terms of what they do with those.
Story_ID: 40901
Speaker 1: Yeah, tell me more about your family.
Speaker 2: Well, as I said, my wife Debra, her name is Debra Arrindell, and she was someone who grew up--her father was in the military, her father was in the [U.S.] Air Force.  His name was Fletcher McNeil, and her mother is Carolyn McNeil.  Her mother is still alive, her mother lives in San Antonio [Texas].  And we've been married since 2005 now.  As I mentioned we have basically four children [Zahra Winston, Adrienne Winston, Brandon Arrindell, Gabrianne Williams], and they're all adults, fortunately.  The youngest is twenty-eight [years old], so we're not raising children anymore.  We get to a chance to actually enjoy life with our adult children, to go on vacations with them and things like that now.  And so that's a big part of my life.  You know, the rest of my family--I mentioned my mother [Corrie Mary Conwill] and father [Jeff Winston].  Well, my sister, I have a sister, her name is Frances Winston Adderley, and she lives in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  She has a daughter Delicia Adderley, and a grandson Lavelle Clark.  I've got a, let's see, my mother had four siblings, and my father had four siblings.  So, unfortunately, they had very few children moving further down in--so, today I have only, I only have three living first cousins.  So that's a fairly small number for people whose parents had so many siblings.  So, that, you know, that's unfortunate.  We don't--and one of them lives in Mississippi, two live in Chicago [Illinois], so I rarely see them.  So that's--and Debra was an only child, so we don't have the huge family reunions that a lot of our contemporaries were able to have.
Story_ID: 40902
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything that we need to discuss that I haven't raised, or you haven't raised, before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: Let's see.  Well, I think we've covered everything.  You surely got my whole life story, made me think about some things I hadn't thought about in many years.
Speaker 1: Yeah, in terms of NABOB [National Association of Black Owned Broadcasters], what does the future look like for NABOB?
Speaker 2: Well, I think the future of NABOB is tied up in all those issues I was talking about about technology.  I think the stations are going to have to figure out how they thrive in this new technology, and it's a challenge facing everybody in the broadcast industry.  It's not just NABOB members.  The whole industry is trying to struggle through--how do we, how do we continue to thrive and make ourselves relevant when we've got so many competing new technologies that we're competing against?   And, you know, some of them appeal to a younger audience, and that audience doesn't feel as connected to radio as someone of my generation.  And I think that makes it more difficult for radio to figure out how we latch onto that younger audience and engage in technologies that will connect with them.
Speaker 1: Do you think we should be increasingly concerned about how some of these new technologies can mobilize action on the part of the people that want social change?  I mean, is NABOB looking at that, or--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I think that the technologies, certain issues--if you look at Twitter and Facebook, these things have shown the ability to connect people in a variety of ways, and one way is for social change.  You know, they, I know that the Occupy Movement and those kinds of people use Facebook and Twitter a lot to galvanize public support.  I think, you know, radio has always been at the center of social change.  Ah, you know, that was, going back to the Civil Rights Movement, you look at A.G. Gaston in Birmingham [Alabama] who owned radio stations at the time of the Civil Rights Movement.  And he was the voice of, his radio station was the voice of the black community in Birmingham during the Civil Rights Movement.  And you come forward today and you look at, you look at something like the young man, [Trayvon] Martin, the young man with the hoodie, that just got killed by [George] Zimmerman.  I can't, I just lost his name.
Speaker 1: Off-camera voice:  Trayvon.
Speaker 2: Trayvon, right.
Speaker 1: I couldn't think of it either.
Speaker 2: Yes, that's Trayvon Martin.  And you know, radio helped make that a national issue.  You know, when you got the Tom Joyners and all those folks bringing people on the air, letting, you know, Reverend [Al] Sharpton on the air, making it a national issue.  So, when you look at that, you see that radio continues to be at the heart of social change, and I suspect that's going to continue for the foreseeable future.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 40903
Speaker 1: Well, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: How would I like to be remembered?  That's good.  As a good father first of all.  I think that's important to me.  As a good husband.  And someone who tried to make a difference, who looked at the situation of race in America, looked at the lack of empowerment in the African American community, and tried to make a change for the better.  I think that's probably the, you know, the thing I'd like to say my career has been about.
Speaker 1: Alright, well, thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Alright, thank you.
