Story_ID: 60785
Speaker 1: Would you say your name and spell it and if you have any nicknames you have used over the years in your personal or professional life? Also give us your birthdate, the actual date and then tell us your age and tell the city and country, city state of birth and spell it for us.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: 'Cause this is being filmed for archive purposes.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Somebody's hearing this information, if we hear it directly from you,
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah.
Speaker 1: We'll know we got it right.
Speaker 2: My name is Jerry Washington Jr.   I'm 59 years old.  I was born on the 12th of Dec... on December 23, 194... I don't know if I should start over again.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And always
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously)  yeah.
Speaker 1: look directly at me as your answering.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Okay.  Let me...  Let me start over again.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My name is Jerry Washington Jr.  I was born December 23, 1940.  I'm presently 59 years old.  And I was born in Merrygold, Mississippi. That's spelled M-E-R-R-Y-G-O-L-D Mississippi [sic, Merigold, Mississippi].
Story_ID: 60786
Speaker 1: Tell us, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Well I, I prefer, soul food.  But I have, been... had the... had the good fortunes of eating most nationalities... other nationalities.  I've had the pleasure of eating their food, and I seem to like most of them.   but right now,  being diabetic I have to watch my diet and eat a little better.  But I'm pretty much close to a vegetarian now, you know.
Speaker 1: Of the vegetables, what's your favorite?
Speaker 2: Apple because I eat 'em like I (unclear), to be honest with you.
Speaker 1: Um, what's your favorite phrase or saying?  (unclear).  Your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Well, well... Basically my favorite phrase is,   "Get up, let's get going."  You know.  And I use that in a sense that, you know, we got to do something about what we need to do.
Speaker 1: And your favorite time of year and season?
Speaker 2: Well I prefer the fall of year.  Because, having an allergy, having an allergy,  not a real serious allergy.  But, the summer, the humidity really bothers me.  It really bothers me, the humidity.  So the summer is not a good time for me.  Spring is not a good time, other than the fact when it's like fall.
Speaker 1: And your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue is my favorite color.
Speaker 1: And your favorite place to vacation?
Speaker 2: Well, even though I haven't been there, I really like London. I was on a Physical Affairs Committee for the National Conference State Legislatures, and we meet quarterly, every three months.  And,  I was in the process of going to London.  It was in session, I left Springfield and was on the state plane leaving.  Going to Chicago where I parked my car at the O'Hare Airport to catch my plane.  And I got a call when I got on the plane, that I had to get off the plane.  From... in Springfield.  And they said,  "Speaker [Mike] Madigan wants you to come back in session."  And I had to go back, because they needed my vote.  So that stopped my trip then, to London.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: To experience it.  But (unclear) I met an individual from London when I was down at,  in, in Orlando, Florida, when I went with D. C. Coleman, Reverend D. C. Coleman. The presiding Elder of the AME Church in Chicago.   and he said, this young... he was with this family, a man and his family.  He said... and,  "Let me tell you something.  If you ever come to London," he said,  "Come to the countryside."  He said, "You will enjoy it more than anything else."  But I never got to the countryside.
Story_ID: 60787
Speaker 1: And can you name your parents?  Both of them and give us their names and spell them for me. And also name your siblings in birth order.
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Willie May Washington.  Her maiden name was Cook.  My father's name is Jerry Washington, Sr. And my mother's mother is Sarah Cook.  Reedmond was her maiden name.  And my grandfather was Peter Cook.  I didn't know my father's side of the family.  As a matter of fact, I don't even... I'm not aware even of their names.  You know?  'Cause I wasn't, uh.... They weren't living when I came along.  But, however, my children are Derrick Washington who's the oldest, and Denise Washington who's also the oldest girl.  And we got Donna Lyn Washington.  She's now at Illinois State.  She just graduated last year with her Bachelor's of Education, Special Education and she's been accepted in a Master's program.  So she's working on her Master's right now.  And she's a single parent.  Donna and her son, they're both going to school and they're doing well.  Deidre Thomas, she just recently got married last year.    Deidre Washington should I say.  And,  is her maiden name is Washington.  But, however, she just graduated with an Associate's Degree last year from David College and she's planning to get back in this year to complete her four-year education.  Then we got Jerry Washington III.   he's the, the youngest of the siblings so far.  And the last one is, uh...  As a matter of fact the last one is the youngest,  Nicholas Washington.  He's the, uh... He's 15 years old.  He's the youngest.  But he's not,  by my,  married wife, you know.  And then I have Renee Swaringtine, who is the oldest girl.
Story_ID: 60788
Speaker 1: Okay.  So those are your children.  Now name your sisters and brothers for me in birth order.
Speaker 2: My sisters and brothers, the oldest is deceased.  Ethel Wade Washington.  She was married several times. I'll just give that, that, that name.  And, the next in line Roosevelt Washington.  He's still living He's a Korean veteran.  The next would be,   Irene Partee.   She's deceased.  And after her comes myself.  And then after me comes my sister Barbara Bullock who lives in Bolingbrook.  After her is Tackla.  That's spelled I believe,  "T a c k l a" Washington.  But she's divorced.  Um, then we got Sharon Perry.  And after her comes two other siblings.  One which is actually my brother Jerome Washington who's the baby of the family and then we got Rodney Washington.  And then... and how that came along, he is the son of my oldest brother.  And his mother at birth decided she didn't want to keep him.  So she gave him up.  And my mother said, "Well, I'm gonna take him.  I'm going to raise him."  And she had him just like he was a baby of hers.
Story_ID: 60789
Speaker 1: Now can you tell me what you remember of your mother and father?  Your mother first.  What stands out in your memory about your mother?
Speaker 2: Well, besides the cooking.  'Cause she was a superb... excellent cook.  She did that for rich, doctors and lawyers out in the Homewood and Flossmoor areas when I was a kid.  'Cause I used to have to go with her.  And I would stay there and play with the kids, other kids... their children, and, we'd get along.  But however, cooking was the one thing.  But the other thing that basically stands out that I think most important she said that, that, "To always tell the truth."  You know.  And, you know, "Do good by others and good will follow you."  Now she would say that to me.
Speaker 1: And what about your father?
Speaker 2: My father Jerry Washington Sr., now he was very active community ac... I would say... We call it community activist now.  But he was that kind of a person when I was a kid coming up.  He was a 33 Degree Mason.  He was chairman of the deacon board at St. Bethel Baptist Church which is, uh... The church is still located in Chicago Heights. But it's not the same building that I was baptized in, that I'm familiar with.   And the minister now,  Reverend Rice, he... We all went to school together.  He was along with my sister Irene, they built them a new church.  And they have a congregation I think close to 3000 membership now.  Matter of fact, in the same vicinity where we lived at our house was.  It's on... It's on 12... It takes in 12th street from 5th Avenue to somewhere near Wentworth.  And we lived at 1316 S. Wentworth.  But the church bought that property and they built they... and they have about a 3,000-member congregation now.
Story_ID: 60790
Speaker 1: What was life like, for you growing up in the Washington household?
Speaker 2: It was a lot of fun. Because I was the baby.  And everybody seemed to want to take care of the baby.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let me... Can I ask you can you answer the questions-Growing up in the Washington household was a lot of fun.  Because as you know, we'll be using different pieces of this.  We got a system.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: and so they'll know what you were saying.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: So I'll ask you again.  What was life like growing up in the Washington home?
Speaker 2: Well it was, it was strict for one reason.  'Cause my mother and father was very strict on us.   and uh...
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Growing up
Speaker 2: yeah growing up.  And she... They
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Growing up in the Washington household
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) household.
Speaker 1: If you'll add that, it will help.
Speaker 2: Yeah.   they were, she was, My mother and father were very strict on us growing up in the household.  And,  we had to be in at a certain time.  And we all ate dinner together.   we all ate breakfast together.  We all ate lunch together, those that were there at the time.  I would never leave for school and didn't have breakfast, you know.  And she would make sure we had that.   'cause we had to walk to school.  And school... and my elementary school from K to sixth was right up... about a block away from where we lived at.   and one of the strange things about it, to show you how goodhearted she was, you know, I used to get chased home every day from school when I was in second and third grade.  And one day I decided, I said "I'm going to stop it."  Now I didn't tell her about it.  I said I was gonna stop it.  Hammond and Prowell funeral directors... They're still out in Chicago Heights.  As a matter of fact, they're the primary funeral directors out in Chicago Heights now.  They were located right on the corner down the street from my house.  And that day it had rained.  And I said, "This is the day I'm gonna stop running."  So I stopped right in front of the funeral director. And I started fighting this little boy.  I beat him so bad.  And he beat... we got muddied up and carrying on.  And Hammond was a big old fat heavy man.  And he came out.  And he said, "Boy what y'all doing?"  He said, "I'm gonna take you home."  As, as you may know the fact that when you did something wrong Mrs. Jones down the street would bring you home.  And, you know, you'd sure enough get a whipping.  But, however, he brought us home.  Brought me home and,  and, and that was one of the worst days of my life.  Even though I was fighting to defend myself, and to stop something from happening, I still got a whipping as though that I did something wrong.  Which in, in my mother's sight I did something wrong.  I wasn't supposed to fight.  Oh, but however, I, I... Two things happened.  One thing happened.   I didn't have to fight no more.  Another thing happened is that I didn't have to worry about her, getting a whipping from her for that no more. 'Cause I didn't have to fight no more.  You know.  And that was in second grade.  I'll never forget that.  You know.   but the other good thing about the house was it was a lot of love in the Washington family.  A lot of love.  Both my father and mother they believed in a lot of love.  I mean they shared it as well as gave it to us, you know.  And you could see it not only in their religious activities at church, but they did it in the community.  And he certainly did it in the community, 'cause he would... He was a laborer.  He didn't have... He wasn't an educated man.  I think he didn't go no further than sixth... maybe not even sixth grade I don't think.  You know.  And she also.  They were farmers.  She... He had a farm down in Mississippi, you know.  Back in the days I guess when the government gave them all that land, and he was able to, to have a farm. But some how he left that and came north.  'Cause he had to.  But however, they, they gave a lot of love.  And that's one thing that if you didn't get nothing else, you got love.  And that love helped you made it through that day.  You know?  And in, in many cases, I could say today it helped me get through life.  You know?
Speaker 1: Can you repeat that last part?
Speaker 2: In many ways, my mother and father's love helped me make it today.  I can say very... In fact, there's the fact that I wouldn't be here today if it hadn't been for the love of my mother and father.  You know.  And they shared much of their love.  You know, and they got love back.  But I don't think they got as much love as they gave.
Story_ID: 60791
Speaker 1: So what do you remember of how your parents of how your parents acquired their farm land?  Do you know anything about that?
Speaker 2: I didn't know anything about that.  As a matter of fact, I wasn't born at that time.   'cause when I came to Chicago I was still practically in the cradle really they tell me. And my mother didn't bring me here.  My uncle, my old...  my mother's oldest brother,  brought me.  They were moving and they... and she came first and my father came later.  You know.  But I don't... All I can recall from conversations, brief conversations I've had in later years that,  the government was giving up that land and they, they had an opportunity to get land.  So they, they took that opportunity to get land, you know.  To individuals in the south.  You know.
Speaker 1: Do you know how many acres it was?
Speaker 2: He had quite a bit from what they told me.  I...  and what... and what... And I say quite a bit.   I would think in excess of 100 acres, you know.  But he had a lot of cattle, you know.  A lot of animals he had from what they tell me.  And, he farmed.  He would take care that, that meat, and also he would,  farm that land, you know, in terms of raising vegetables, and stuff.  You know.  And this is how my mother said we ate many days off of what that land produced.  If it had not been for that land, we wouldn't have eaten, she said.  And times were hard, she said.  It wasn't hard.  I mean it wasn't easy.  Times were very hard for them down south.  Even after they got married.
Story_ID: 60792
Speaker 1: What was the political influence in the Washington household as you remember growing up?
Speaker 2: Well the political influences that uh... My people were Republicanss by... and that's not something they acquired or attained or decided to be when they came north to Chicago and then to Chicago Heights. This is something that happened from the south that they were.  They were... and my mother on her side of the family, you know, they were members of the African Methodist Episcopal Church.  And most Black men and women, were of the Republicans persuasion, back then in the early '30s [1930s] and '20s [1920s].  You know. Because they felt as though [Abraham] Lincoln gave them freedom and, and that was a party that they should support and be a part of.  But however, that's what they were.  They came to Chicago.  But they didn't really get involved in Chicago with politics too much until they came to Chicago Heights.  And, and, and actually got settled there.  'Cause see my father's sister was living out there.  And that's where he really got involved in politics from the standpoint of working on a very, very leadership standpoint.  And, he tells me often...  He told me often about the time when Daley was running.  Old man Daley was running.  But, he said that, uh... And he was in a union.  As a matter of fact, he was secretary of the union.   And he said they came out there and, and they loaded busloads of people to come to Chicago to vote.  Now that's what he told me.  I don't know how true that was, but that's what he said they did.  And that's what helped get the late, Mayor's father elected. He said... He said they were, they were the busloads coming from Chicago Heights or... and other suburbs, you know.  And they voted here in Chicago.  I guess back then they could do that kind of thing.  You know.  But, however, he was the one that would be the most politically active. My mother was very active too.  She was a, a Eastern Star.  And... but she wasn't as active as he was.  She pretty much was a homemaker.  She took... 'Cause she took care of us very well.  Very well.  And the time she was, she was involved with Eastern Star and she was very active in her church, and she ushered.  But my father was, was extremely active in the church in terms of leadership.  He was Chairman of the Deacon Board.  And, he was a part of anything that had to do with anything that church had to make decisions on.  From the standpoint of the trustees and all that.  And, (unclear).  And from a community standpoint,  whenever there was a problem, young black men or women had some problem... Mostly young Black men, they had problems, they needed somebody to step up to the... and bat for them, you know.  And to vouch for 'em.  He would be one of the men along with one of the police officers who were very recognized out there.  Would go and, and defend and, and work to help that individual, you know, get their problem resolved.  You know.
Story_ID: 60793
Speaker 1: Other than deciding you weren't gonna take it any more, the fighting that is, what kind of child were you?  And what was your biggest dream and inspiration as you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Well I, I,  I was a very quiet individual.   I wasn't a very outgoing individual.  I mean all of my life very quiet.  But yet I would communicate, you know.  That wasn't a problem with me communicating.  I could communicate, and I would talk, you know.  But I was quiet.  I was not subdued.  And, some time, in growing up,  I had a lot of friends.  I mingled in school.  And one of the most important things that I was competitive.  I played sports.  You know.  Not realizing a... there may have been some health condition which I wasn't really totally aware of.  'Cause my mother didn't explain it to me, until later years that I... that I got very sick. And I didn't even know that.  You know.  But however, when I was small and she... All she said, "Doctor said you gotta eat a lot of fruit and vegetables."  And today I keep thinking that I can only associate that with being, being a diabetic or something of that nature.  You know.  But, however, I was very competitive 'cause I liked sports.  Basketball, football and track.   And from, from K to eight the only thing that you had to do was play baseball.  Softball as they call it.  And, basketball in junior high school.  We had a team to play basketball. And I was on the first team, you know.  And I never hear the people talk about it.  You know, they made that half-court shot.  I was telling my, my little grandson today.  I said, "You know, I made a half-court shot in seventh grade.  And it went in."  He said, "It did?"  "Yeah it went in." I said.  "And it was at the buzzer."  And... but however, I was very competitive.  And the reason why that was, was simply because of my cousin Homer.  My father's,  sister son, only son.   He was a tremendous athlete as well as academically superb, you know, person.  You know.  And he was an all-state football player and basketball and track there in the high school.  But he was my inspiration in terms of participating in sports.  And he and I were the only people in the family that were involved in sports.
Story_ID: 60794
Speaker 1: Can you name your schools for me from elementary through college?  And tell me what kind of student were you?
Speaker 2: Well, from K to sixth, 'cause then we went from kindergarten to sixth grade. And then you graduated.  You had a brief graduation.  You went there to seventh grade.  But, however, that was at Franklin Elementary School.  It was... Again it was located about two blocks, roughly, about two blocks,  from where we lived at. And one block east of where we lived at on 5th Avenue.  And, and, it from... roughly around 12th Street and 5th Avenue.  That's where the, uh... Eleventh Street, from 11th to 12th street where the, where the school was stretched out to.  But, however, that was the first school.  And we left there and we went to a junior high called Washington Junior High.  See they had two elementaries out there, K to sixth.  They had, Franklin and they had Lincoln.  Lincoln was for those individuals that lived on the other side of the track. And when I say other side of the track, that was about four blocks going west of where I... we lived at.  If you lived there and you lived south of U.S. 30 which is Lincoln highway, you would go to Lincoln Elementary School.  And, all of us, all... Both schools would... when you got in seventh grade went to Washington Junior High School.  It's still there today, but it's a different school.  I happened to go out there recently.  And, they had did some developing on it.  But basically it's a different school.  But it's still in the same location.  But when I was there, they had, an area out in front of the school,  where they had grass and stuff.  And that's where most of us kids played.  And at that time, the kids that were going there were rich, rich white kids.  And it was various different ethnic groups.  They, they went to that school.  And from there they went to Bloom Township, which was mostly rich White folks kids that attended Bloom.  Homewood, Flossmoor, all around in Park Forest.  It was one high school and that's where they went.  You know, until I guess at some point in later years they decided to get the rich, and decided to put up another high school.  And they pull most of the Homewood Flossmoor kids and the Park Forest kids went to a different high school.  You know.
Speaker 1: Now this is all in Chicago Heights?
Speaker 2: This is all in Chicago Heights, Illinois.  And from there,  from Washington Junior High we went to Bloom Township High school which is still the same school as it was when I was attending,  back in, in the '50s [1950s].
Story_ID: 60795
Speaker 1: And so you were a bright student?  An industrious student? Describe yourself.
Speaker 2: Well, academically, in later years... You know, let me back up a little bit.  Academically when I... I failed the first grade.  I don't know how you can fail first grade, but they held me back.  They wouldn't pass me when everybody else passed.  So I was behind one year in school.  And 'cause I guess the teachers... I wouldn't give me a grade  And, and that didn't sit well with my mother.  You know, certainly my father. But certainly my mother.   in second grade, I was... The teacher had, uh...  The teacher would break....  We had pencils two for a nickel.  She would break the pencils on my...Across my hand every day.  I couldn't get the lesson for some reason another.  She said, "Well, every day you come, I'm going to break this pencil."  And she broke those pencils.  And I would go home.  And my mother said... I'd tell Mama, "Mama I need a pencil today."  "Well look, I just gave you a nickel for (Tape appears to pick up in a new place).  And she said that, uh...
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) She would break the pencil across your
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) The teacher would break the pencil across my hand because I didn't... I wasn't responding to the, the lesson text.  And,  now that's what she did.  And she lived in the neighborhood.  This particular teacher, second grade teacher lived in the neighborhood. This particular teacher lived in the neighborhood and,  she would have me come over on Saturdays to take out her garbage.  That's how I got a little money, you know.  And she.... I don't know.  But yet and still she broke them pencils on my hand.  But you know, strangely how it was, it wasn't until my mother stepped up to her and said, 'Well look, you break   another pencil, you know what you're gonna get when you come home."  And I decided I didn't want any more whippings.  At least not from my Mama.  You know, say least my father.  My mama, (laughing).  And so, you know, surprisingly I didn't break any more pencils.  And from that day on, I didn't have any problems at any grade level that I went in.  At any.
Speaker 1: And when you made up your mind you just stopped the fighting and the pencils.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And, and I passed, not necessarily with Cs sometimes.  I passed with Bs sometimes.  You know, had language in high school at Bloom.  And then language,  it wasn't that easy.  You know. Especially with us 'cause we weren't taught no language.  And we, we didn't even think about no language.  But, however, I passed very well.  But this cousin I mentioned to you, he was a... he was an exceptionally smart person academically.  You know.  I mean he did extremely well. But he was my inspiration that, that kept me going.
Story_ID: 60796
Speaker 1: Now tell me where did you go to college and what were your college years like?
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't attend too much college. But I, when I graduated from high school, my close friend and I we decided we were gonna go to the service.  And we were supposed to go down and sign up one day.  He went down to sign up and I didn't go.  So... and so what happened was I went to sign up for Wilson Junior College.  You may be familiar with that.  Which is Kennedy King now.  I signed up at old Wilson Junior College and they had Chicago State which was Teacher's College then out of the same location.  So,  that's where I went.  And I, I spent two years there.  And I didn't get... I didn't complete the full requirement for, for a associate's degree.  But, however, I, I started working because I got married.  And I had to raise a family.  So I had to work.  So but anyway, I, I went a semester at Northwestern University.  I was taking up accounting, you know.  And only did a semester there.  That was the extent of my college education that I had.  Because I was rearing a family.  And that that point I had to start work.  At some point in time, I was working two jobs and going to college at the same time.  I was working at Wards.  You know, I had, uh; in high school we had work-study.  And, and my work-study, my job was at Wards.  I got through the work-study program.  So I kept it after high school.  And, even a while after I got married I kept it.  But I kept it, I ended up... Greyhound bus station has a garage right on Chicago Avenue and Halsted.  And I decided to go in and see if I could get me a fulltime job.  I went on and got me a fulltime job working from 11:00 to 7:00 at night and I worked at Wards from and all I had to do was walk across the bridge and go straight to Wards.   And then I would go, in the afternoon go to school.  And I would come home and get two or three hours of sleep, and get up in time to go to work at night.  Now that's... That was my schedule.  And I did this because I had a family.  And I, and I wanted certain things for the family.  So that we could get 'em.  And at the same time, I wanted to stay in school.  And I didn't want to drop out.  You know.  So I had to make a... that, that tremendous sacrifice.  And it was, it was, it was a sacrifice.  But it was well worth it, I think in the long run.
Story_ID: 60797
Speaker 1: Did your wife work?
Speaker 2: She worked.  Yes my wife worked.  She was also at Wards as a matter of fact on that same work-study program.  But, about 1965 she, decided that she wanted to leave.  And so she started searching around looking for other jobs.  You know.  And she finally got a job at University of Illinois Circle.  And she got it through a employment agency.  And she was so w.... did so well there, they wanted to keep her.  So... And that was in '65 [1965].  And she's still there today, getting ready to retire.  She wants to at the end of this year. But however, she's currently the manager of Human Resource for the whole physical plant for the University of Illinois Circle campus.  All those employees, the ground people, she has to handle all that.  And she had...   she had done all that for 35 years now.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your wife's name?
Speaker 2: Ella Louise Washington.
Speaker 1: Is she a native Chicagoan?
Speaker 2: Yes.  She was born here in Chicago.
Speaker 1: Let's look at your adult life and trace your working path that brought you to --
Story_ID: 60798
Speaker 1: Well, it began primarily after I got out of high school.  And I went to my father one day and I... we sat down and I talked.  I said, "Well, you know, Dad,  besides going to school" 'Cause I didn't want to pursue the service thing, I said, " you know, I got... I'm just, I'm just tired of just doing the everyday thing everybody else is doing."  You know. And which I didn't do too much of that anyway.  'Cause I pretty much was a, a loner, you know, all my life.  And,  he said, "Well, I'll tell you what.  If you don't get involved in the church, get involved in community or, get involved in some political things."  You know.  He said it very simply like that.  He didn't go in to try to explain it to me.  And he made it as, as simple as possible so I could grasp it very quickly.  And I said, "Well I'm going to try the pop... the political thing."  At that time, Alderman Bill Shannon was the Democratic committeeman and Alderman of the 17th Ward, which we were in.  And,
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) What year was this?
Speaker 1: That was around 1960, you know, '61 [1961].  And so I got involved with the young Republicans.  'Cause my father was a Republicans precinct captain in Chicago.  And the, and the Republicans committeeman was a guy by the name of Dudley Martin, Dudley S. Martin.  I'll never forget he was a tremendous orator.  He really... he could speak.  He could really speak.  But, however, he was the Republicans committeeman.  And, so he told me... he said, "Look, come by the office some time and talk with Dudley and I'll bring you to one of the meetings. Which he did.  And he said, "Now I want you to go to one of them Democrat meetings."  Which I did.  And I was so turned off at, at one of those Democrat meetings of Bill Shannon, Alderman Shannon and at 17th Ward.
Story_ID: 60799
Speaker 1: Now tell us what turned you off about this Democratic meeting.
Speaker 2: Well, I went to the meeting.  And, you know, being as quiet and I guess as I was coming up as a, as a child, as a young man.  But still, you know, still communicating with people, I just... They were, they were hollering and shouting over there.  And I just...I couldn't understand it.  I said, "Now this ain't no kind of organization."  You know.  I said, "If this the way people act, I don't have to come over here and get involved with this."  You know.  And then, I saw the manipulation of things, people going on.  You know.   I guess those were the, those people considered something as power brokers within the organization.  You know.  And I said, "Well, you know, I don't plan to come and spend my time and effort, you know, and have to be subjected to this kind of stuff."  You know.  I wasn't looking for a job.  'Cause I had a job.  It wasn't the best of jobs, but it, it fed me and my family.  And it helped me, you know, stay in school.  You know.  And which I could have probably got a political job at any point at any time.  You know.   not because of my educational background. 'Cause it wasn't that much...that much at that time.  But because of the, the demeanor and the way I acted and probably the way I looked.  You know.  And I never did flaunt that.  I just... you know, I was...  You know, if you would have known me, you would never know that I was conscious of the way I looked.  You know, even though I know I, I looked the way I did, because I looked in the mirror every day.  You know.  But the thing that that's somewhat what turned me off.  You know. And I didn't get a chance to meet, Mr. [Bill]Shannon.  I was supposed to have met him. And I went over to meet him one day, and, and they said, "Well, no you can't see him today."  You know.  He was right back there in his little office there.  See the building is still the same building that he had on 75th and Vincennes.  Still there, you know.  It... there's something else there.  I think they got a liquor store and something else on it.  But it's, it's still there.  But, however, so I said, "Well, you know, if this is the kind of treatment I'm gonna have..." And it's not nothing to really get mad over.  But I said, "Well, I'll just go spend me some time with the Republicans."  And it was more or less in... and they talked about being conservative and all that. It was more or less on my downbeat. I'm not saying I'm a conservative black man. Somebody might say are you conservative being black, dude. No, the thing is there is a way of life that people seem to establish in their own time frame. You know and it kind of fit me better. There was more of an outgoing, family kind of thing I, I'm not saying now but at that time they were more friendly, more reaching out to you. You know. At least Dudley Martin and his organization although he was a conman, he was sure enough a con man, I later found he was a conman.
Speaker 1: Give me some examples (unclear).
Speaker 2: Well, some example is the fact that, he would, he would, he would, he would have the meetings.  And he would talk.  And as I said, he knew he was a great orator.  And he would utilize his oratorical ability to be... to persuade somebody to do something for him.  Or do something that he had to... had to get to happen for the white influential people in the party, and he would be getting the benefit from it.  And they wouldn't get nothing.  He would tell them, "Well, we're gonna get this.  We're gonna get that."  And he would... he would... and then you look around, Dudley got it and gone and you just still standing there waiting for it to come.  You know.  But I mean so it... It was no different.  Democrat and I.... And that's the way I concluded that there was no difference in Democrat and Republican.  It's just that I felt a little more at home there.   And maybe it something to do with my mother and father.  I don't know.  But the point is that after I got involved I started out in the young Republican politics.  And it wasn't no blacks really involved at that...  it was only a hand full.  And I can name the, the individuals that were really involved that kept... and some of them are still living now.   as a matter of fact Bill Spragins [ph], he's deceased.  He was a son-in-law of [Samuel B.] S. B. Fuller.  He was a Republican.   William O. Stewart, retired school teacher at Farren.  Dr. Stewart I should say.  'Cause he has a doctorate degree.   His wife is a (unclear) and he's a Republican committeeman of the third ward.  These are men that were there when Attorney Jones Scott.  They came up with him.   Robert Powell, Attorney Powell, he still practicing law downtown.  But he's not doing as much as he used to do.  He used to be with the Attorney General's Office under [William O.] Scott.  Attorney John Tobias Dixon who used to be a Republican committeeman, him and Powell were in office together.  These are some of the men who are still around, who were back, I would say in the glory days of politics.   And there were good things happening in our community compared to what's happening now.  And, so I went to the young Republicans.  And young re...  And, and, and a young people's organization whether it be Democrat or Republican, in most cases it's, it's a lot of fun.  You know, you're just having fun.  You know, and you're enjoying what you're doing.  And you're getting more excited by, by the more enjoyment you get in doing what you're doing.  So I got involved with it.  And most of the White kids, you know, they were... their fathers and mothers or somebody had them involved with it anyway on all levels.  So I said, "Well, you know, if I'm gonna involve myself in it, you know, hey, I'm gonna be involved."  So I took on.
Story_ID: 60800
Speaker 1: Okay, would you say that [Bill]Shannon and [Dudley] Martin represented politicians of the period some may have labeled hacks?
Speaker 2: I would, I would... I... That's a very good description of, of both of those men.  You know, even though they were(unclear) but that's all there was then.  I would say that they're political hacks, yeah.  I really would say that.  Yeah.  Even though that,  they didn't have full control of anything per se, you know.  Other than [Bill] Shannon had more control than [Dudley] Martin.  Because [Dudley] Martin was, uh... I mean Shannon was the Aldermen, you know.  Now this is.... Surprised me.  Martin ran against him for alderman and almost beat him.  A Republican almost beat him.  You know.  And, and would have beat him providing he had, had probably a little more help in certain areas that he needed.  'Cause he could, he could talk.  He could talk.  He could talk that, that talk, and walk that walk.  And that's what he did.
Story_ID: 60801
Speaker 1: What was happening in the state legislature at the time that you know of?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, to be honest with you, I hadn't got to the point of being privileged to the whole structure of the politics, because I was new in it.  And I was just dealing with the local things.  The young Republicans they were on a local standpoint and down at the county.  You know, down at sh... Old Sherman Hotel used to be where the State of Illinois building is now.  That's where we held our meetings at.  But the thing is that, there was a man called J. Horace Gardner.  He was a state rep.  And, how I got familiar with him, one of my friends, a lady whose home I do have now, Mary Wilkerson.   She's a ver... was a very active Republican, very active Republican woman over the years.  And, J. Horace Gardner was a friend of hers.  And the area was the district in which J. Horace ran in. Later somebody got wind that said, that I... they were gonna run me for state rep.  You know.  Talking about "they" being the older power brokers were gonna run me against him.  And he was an old man then.  He was in his... probably late 60s then, in the '60s.   And then, you know...  As I said, you had three member districts.  You had two Democrats and one Republican in the city.  Suburbs you had two Republicans, vice-versa, and one Democrat.  And that was by agreement that they worked it out that way.  And that's the way the law was set up.  And, either party didn't disturb each other in the, in the suburbs.  The only thing that happened, that happened is that (unclear).  How it happened here in the city Jim Taylor.  And old man Daley told him to stop doing it then, but he didn't stop doing it.  You know. But however, that was the only extent that I was aware of the make-up of the legislative aspect of it.  But as I... as I got... grew in the political thing of knowledge and understanding and the way things would be running, and how you had to do things, the campaigning and all that, I began to get more,  privileged and, and, and knowledge concerning really what politics was about.  Like you would go to college and take political science.  That's what I was getting.  I was getting political science education right, right down there where you get it at.  You know.  Not out of the books.
Story_ID: 60802
Speaker 1: Trace or retrace that story regarding Jim Taylor
Speaker 2: Well, in 1972, [James C.] Jim Taylor was, uh... He was in the... he was in legislative then.  But in 1972, uh... And I, I didn't know him prior to '72 [1972].  I didn't... I heard about him.  But I didn't really... never met him.  1972 Jim Taylor was running in the primary.  And, a lady by the name of Peggy Smith Martin had came along on the scene independent, as she was.  And she disrupted the regular Democrat process that had been.  Harold Washington was the Senate.  Prior to him Cecil Partee was the Senate and Harold Washington was one of the Democrats along with Jim Taylor who was a representative down in Springfield. But Peggy Smart came, came along.  Her and Harold Washington won the primary and knocked Jim Taylor out.  Jim's pride and everything was hurt.  And his, and his feeling of the power that he had possessed.  'Cause all the power that he had was in jobs that they were giving him.  You know, that's all he... He didn't have any influence on nothing else.  No contracts, no nothing else.  You know, of, of any magnitude.  So but anyway, he, he lost.  And the only way he could get back is run as an independent in the fall.  Set up his own independent party.  Which you can do that by law.  And that's what he did.  And he...  And, in so doing, he used me.  And how he.... And how'd I come into the using process? As I told you, I ran.  I was working for Blue Cross Blue Shield at that time.  I was a marketing group consultant for Blue Cross and Blue shield.  And, all the papers had endorsed me.  The Tribune which was Republican, SunTimes.  They all endorsed me.  And,  J. Horace Gardner, the man I mentioned to you earlier about. He was running.  And he had one of his individuals on that, they normally put somebody in there too, to prevent somebody else from, from winning the seat. But, however, he, he died before the primary.  And the last time I, I saw... I saw Mr. Gardner downtown at one of those, hearings or something.  And I... He had... I'll never forget.  He had a beautiful coat on.  He had a ... As a matter of fact I subsequently got one myself.  But he had a wool, double breasted, with a belt in the back of the coat, and long length.  And I said, "How you doing representative?"  He said... he said, "Well, I'm doing okay.  But I guess it's gonna be alright."  And that's just the words that he, he spoke to me.  This was in 1972.  I'll never forget it.  And later that week or that month he passed.
Story_ID: 60803
Speaker 1: And, mind you that Jim Taylor had won... was winning... had won the primary now.  And,  so I'm thinking that I was gonna come out after J. Horace Gardner had passed before the primary was up.  Horace was dead and buried.  He had beat me.  And his running mate had beat me.  And, and, and I found out later what the deal was.  See Cecil Partee... These are candidates from the 20th Ward.  Cecil Partee was tied in there.  'Cause he was... Him and Hor... He was, he, he had control of J. Horace Gardner.  See, Horace was his man.   He was working down there with the county clerk or something.  But Hor... J. Horace Gardner was, was Cecil Partee's man, out of the 20th Ward.  And the 20th Ward controlled that situation.  But, however, so they beat me.  And Jim lost.  And so he was huffing and puffing and trying to find a way to get back on.  So he was gonna form his party.  And the only way he can... he can create havoc for the Republicans after I was... lost and I got selected by the committee, legislative committee of Republican committeemen to replace Horace. After they didn't really want me, but I got the majority of men on that. 'cause some of the men that won in the primary were people supportive of my efforts.  You know.  For committeeman, Republican committeeman that year.  And, we went and were getting ready to file my papers to replace my... Horace name with my name.  'Cause that's how you fill a vacancy after it's... after a, after a primary election and some... and somebody's no longer can be on there.  Edward Graham who was J. Horace Gardner's friend, very close.  He along with,  the county Chairman Caharski [ph] in cahoots with,  with,  a fellow by the name of committeeman Eddy McJones [ph], you know, who... I got elected because I filed objections to Dudley Martin to knock Dudley off the ballot.  That way, Eddy was on.  But I didn't realize Eddy came back and he was fighting me.  So anyway, we, we, we won the votes.  And they filed some papers with the state, uh; depar...  State board of Election.  But it had... didn't have my name like it supposed to have on it.  So the only way that I had any hope... and Jim Taylor came to me and said, "Look want a file a writ in my name? 'Cause you know they treat you bad."  I said, "Yeah."  I said, "Yeah, I'll do it."  But now thinking all the time, he was helping himself.  Keeping confusion with them filing the writ.  That's when he went and filed a writ, to keep them confused and not organized.  Where they couldn't, couldn't hurt him.  'Cause at that time, you know, [Walter C.] Babe McAvoy 15th Ward was starting at Ashland.  And it was still mostly, uh; you know, White ethnic families over there.  But, however, and they carried in a lot of votes in that section.  A lot of votes.  And that was the biggest vote that was gonna help carry the Republican candidate over.  They had planned for that.   So Jim... I file a writ in his name, used his attorney.  Now he later became a judge, the man that he, had me for attorney.
Speaker 2: Who was that?
Speaker 1: And you know, I can't rec... recollect his name right now.  But it may come to me.  But, uh...  and one of the... As a matter of fact one of the judges that Jim, uh... was in the law firm was Sophie Hall who's a judge now.  She was in the same law firm that this guy was out of, you know.  And, Sophie wasn't,  she wasn't influential in the law.  She was just a practicing attorney in the law firm.  But later she got her job because of Jim Taylor.  He made her judge.  You know, and he bo... always boasted about it and talked about it.  But, however,  we file this writ.  We won the writ so they, uh... they, they had... it forced them to do certain things in the fall.  And Jim ended up pulling all stops out.  He spent I don't know.  Good money that year.  And he won his election.  Since they didn't put my name, put this other fellow's name on.  Beecham [ph] name was the guy they put on it.  He was as a matter of fact a city policeman.  They put Beecham on it.  And, Beecham lost.  And so Jim, got back.  Now mind you, it still had the three member district on it.
Story_ID: 60804
Speaker 1: Now I did that in '72 [1972].  I didn't have the speaker behind me then in '72 [1972].  '74 [1974] because of my activities in, in the young Republican Party, I was able to get the Speaker of the House of Representatives.  At that time it was Bob Blair.  You know, Bob Blair lost his election 'cause that tax that you got, you know.  They, they passed, and the people voted him out of office.  But however, Bob Blair through the young Republican leadership was able to, endorse my efforts and support me.  Pouncey, Taylor Pouncey was the candidate that Jim was running to take that third seat.  Which wa... they wasn't supposed to do.  But that's what he was doing.  However, and he filed as an independent.  You know, 'cause he couldn't file as a regular, 'cause they'd knock Jim out again.  So he filed as an independent.  And the thing was that I needed to, I needed to file a lawsuit.  You know, at least file challenges to counsels petition that they filed.   So we did.  What the Republican Party did to show you how they core less with each other, White Democratic, Republican, you know.  They... and they have us to think that you, you supposed to dislike you because you're a Democrat.  Or you dislike me because I'm Republican.  But it don't work that way.  But they went and got the top lawyer Kusper and, Raucci.  Andy Raucci, one of the top Democrat lawyers in the city, in the law firm of Kus... Kusper and Raucci.  But anyway they, they got him.  And, we stayed up all night in the Speaker's office.  As a matter of fact, the speaker had the employees working for me.  Stayed up all night in, in his office.  All night.  I had to be in the parade the next day.  The Bud Billiken Day Parade.  And, and we put that objection together.  And I had my brother, who... My oldest brother as my objector.  Not realizing all the circumstances, what was gonna happen.  But I had to be in the parade the next day.  So we got the objection put together after being up all night, putting that stuff together, and working on it.  We, u... I went home and got in a cold tub of water.  'Cause I had to go, go right in the Bud Billiken Parade.  And I was sleepy and tired.  Hadn't had no sleep. Eyes were shutting on us, I was tired, was hurting, paining.  So anyway, got the parade out the way and did that.  And,  then went back to doing what I had to do with... over in the Speaker's office.  But, however, Raucci had called Jim Taylor up and said, "Look Jim, we're gonna knock your man off the ballot."  And which they were.  They had him.  We had him.  We had him.  Were gonna knock him off.  What Jim and them did, they went out... They forged all the signatures, most of 'em.  They didn't circulate no petition.   And he had already circulated but they didn't do that.  See then, you had to not have voted in the primary to be able to sign what was being circulated.  And we found that he... all was circulated was the precinct captain.  And we were able to knock all them names out on that basis.   All the names out.  But here's the catch that... that, that caused me some problems.  Here's another one of my problems.  After '72 [1972], remember, Horace died.  I lost to a deceased man.  You know.  Come back, they fought me in the fall.  Took it away from me, after I was supposed to... name was supposed to be sent down to be placed on the ballot, you know.  This time '74 [1974] come around.  My brother is the objector.  They... Now here's an... Now he's... Now here's a man that's he's what?  67 now, 68 now, somewhere around there.  Been voting all his life.  Come to find out, he wasn't even a registered voter in the city of Chicago.  They then took him out of the machine, everything.   Now you know who got wind of it?  Peggy Smith Martin.  She's the one filed the objection.  So I lost my objection after spending all that time, all that money.  They spent over $10,000.  Yeah they're big.  Raucci is an expensive lawyer.  He don't do nothing unless you got $5,000, $10,000 to start.   And I'll explain to you as I go along, I had to pay $14,000 when I got elected.  You know, and I'll get into that.  But right now --
Story_ID: 60805
Speaker 1: So was it worth that investment and energy and money?
Speaker 2: Yes it was.  Very much worth it.  But it was a lesson to me.  'Cause see I... Here, here you're looking at a person who's not a political seasoned person.   You know, I'm a young guy.  You know, I wasn't, I wasn't, I wasn't seasoned into politics as it's played in the city, or as it's played period.   You know, but I was learning, you know.  What people doing, and how they do things.  But yes, it was very well worth it.  Because,  it taught me another lesson.  That I'll never make that mistake... that mistake again, you know.  But see then they could do that.  They had the machine.  You know, they could steal votes.  They could  (unclear)... And,  again, we... I'm gonna explain something to you down the road on how they were trying to take the thing from Harold [Washington] in '78 [1978].  You know.  And they were gonna take gonna take it from him and from me.
Speaker 1: So in summary, that lesson that you learned was?
Speaker 2: Was if you're gonna... have an objector, object yourself.  Put your name on it.  Now they can't knock you out of the ballot 'cause you're a candidate.  Or you, or you know who you are.  And they know who you are.  And they ain't gonna play that game with you.  You know.  So that's how that went.  So [Taylor] Pouncey got elected.  Oh he was going back and forth down... They stayed together in, in  and had apartment (unclear).  They had, had the same apartment together.  He had one room and Jim had the other. A two-bedroom apartment.  And Jim [Taylor] had one bedroom and he had the other.  They stayed together and road up and down Springfield together.  They had a good time, doing all what they, they were doing, you know.  And as most legislators were doing, they didn't... They weren't functioning too well.  Especially, you know, hours, you know, wasn't functioning well.  You know.  Very few function like Harold.
Story_ID: 60806
Speaker 1: Tell us what you... what led... what year it was and what led to your election.
Speaker 2: Well,  so '74 [1974].  '76 [1976], it hadn't changed the law yet.  You know, Pat Quinn, I think he's the one responsible for that law being changed, that broke the size of the house down from 177 members down to 118 members.  Which presently it is now.    '76 [1976] he got elected.  You know, I was running each year.  You know, but I didn't have the party's real support like I had in '74 [1974].   You know, to spend that money.  But I was still a young Republican and still very active.  '78 [1978] came.  Now that's when Harold [Washington] was running for reelection in Senate.  And Jim Taylor... Old man  [Richard] Daley wanted to get Harold.  And they were using Jim Taylor to use Pouncey, not Pouncey but use, Clarence Barrow.  He died.  As a matter of fact, he died about two or three months ago, I think.  Deceased.  They used him to knock out Harold Washington.  And they almost got him.  They almost got him.  Now how I played a part in 1978 in that?  How I play a part in that.  Harold needed all the help he could get, wherever he could get it.  You know.  They controlled the polling place.  They controlled the judges.  They controlled the machines; they controlled the whole election apparatus.  You know, so if they wanted to do anything, they were gonna do it.  And they were gonna do it this time.  Now mind you, I was a Republican.  And I had access to the Republican county facility office.  You know.   And after the, uh...  And prior to the election, before it happened,  they were doing all kinds of things for me in '78 [1978].  You know.  All kinds of things for me.   in '78 [1978].
Speaker 1: The GOP?
Speaker 2: Yeah.   And the reason why I was doing it because of our present governor, George Ryan.  He was in Springfield.  He was in the House of Representatives.  Ryan wanted to be the Speaker.  And they knew that one vote would have made a difference in him being speakership or not.  And it... And it eventually tur... and you'll see eventually in our conversation you'll see that it eventually turned out that way.  He lost the Speakership by one vote.  But, however, so my friends down in Kankakee got me in with Ryan.  And they were able to get all kinds of support from him.  'Cause they really wanted that seat.  Had Quaker Oats Executives, had all the executives from Northern Trust and all them big time Republican corporations.  Had 'em working for me on Election Day.  You know.  Had 'em out here.  They had to be out here.  They came out at 5:00 in the morning.  They were out here from all... Chuck Curry [ph], he was there, (laughing).  Out there working the polls.  But the point I want to raise is simply that, that we were able to help Harold [Washington] in terms of the money they were spending for me and things I asked for, it  (unclear) down to Harold [Washington], you know.  Meetings and all that stuff.  Harold was getting a lot of help with that.  Now I picked Harold Washington up along with Clarence McClain.   You (unclear) that Clarence McClain house up on the north side here right off lake, lake, lakeshore drive, up north.  About... close about 20 something up north somewhere.  But anyway I picked him up one Saturday morning.  And had made an appointment, arrangements for him to meet Robert Barr, who was a Republican county chairman.  His wife Joan Barr in later years became you may remember she was Mayor of Evanston.  Okay. These, these are friends of mine.  As a matter of fact, she cooked breakfast for us.  And she was, uh... I can't think of the, the professional name that, that she had.  She had professionalism in terms of her cooking.  But she cooked breakfast for us.  I brought Harold up there, Clarence McClain up there.  We sat around the table in the garden area, at his house up there.  And we talked, talked, talked.  And they said that,   "Harold if you have Jerry, we'll see that you get some help in (unclear) it, it comes to him, it'll help you also."  And that's... and they, they lived up to their word.  You know.  And Harold... you would have thought we were brothers.  I was with Harold on every turn he was in.  I was right there with him.  You know.  When we'd go to the media thing, you know, I was with Harold right there.  When we had an interview.  I... Harold and I were right together.  You know.   or an issue I jump... Harold and I were right there.  Even though he was the focusing point.  But the deal with Harold was to get Cecil Partee.   Get Cecil Partee who was a Democrat committeeman of the 20th Ward to, to turn the votes over for me in the fall, enough votes so I could beat Jim Taylor.  You know (unclear).  And,  Harold made arrangements. Set up a meeting with, with Cecil who's deceased now.  God rest his soul.   He was head of the Department of Human Service at that time.  And it was on LaSalle Street  I had an appointment with him. He was late coming in, and,  I was sitting there.  So we went in the office and we talked.  We shook hands.  He said, "Fine Jerry, I'm gonna help you.  I, I talked to Harold and we're gonna, we're gonna make sure... 'Cause I don't want that Jim Taylor."  You know.  And,  I said, "Well fine."  We shook hands.  And I'm thinking ever... the process was in place.  So this is what I'm telling the speaker to be, Governor Ryan now.  And all Bob Barr and all the rest of the Republicans, I'm telling this is what, what, what it was.  And the deal was set.  That we're gonna get Partee.  They were gonna deliver the votes.  And they were, they were pushing left and right.   That's why all these junior executives,  of all these corporations were working for me and doing the things they were doing for me.
Story_ID: 60807
Speaker 1: --there was another part of this puzzle in it. And, and, and that was,  that was when,  when,  after [Bob] Barr had gotten... Again he was county chairman, had, had got his piece together.   He went out and told, told  told the party leaders, "Well we got things in place."   You know.  "[Cecil]Partee's gonna work with Harold [Washington].  He's gonna deliver the vote for us."  Now mind you... I mean unbeknowing to me, I didn't know that this wasn't gonna happen.  See?  That Partee was gonna renege on, on it, and, and backstab him.  You know.
Speaker 2: Why did [Cecil] Partee renege?
Speaker 1: Well, let, let, let, let me get this point.  I'm going to show you.   what happened was that, we went to the party hierarchy. As a matter of fact Illinois Tool Works, one of the biggest Republican around in terms of money wise in the city and corporations and (unclear).  You know.  I had united Republican Fund, all of 'em helping me.  And, so they said, "Uh..." I said, "Well, I need Jesse."   He said, "Okay, what, what are we gonna have to do for Jesse now?"  I said, "Y'all have to talk.  I just need him.   Whatever you gotta do, do for him."  They got to Jesse.  Jesse called, uh... They got the Parker house Sausage guy, Buddy Grisham.  They said, "Get to Jesse.  We need the endorsement of Jesse, Push for Jerry Washington."  I said... and we'll take care of matters.  Buddy Grisham is still on the  Capital Development Board of labor because of me.  They ended up appointing him and he's still in there today.  Jesse went to the endorsement meeting.  Jesse looked up there.  I said, "I'm Jerry Washington."  "Oh you're Jerry Washington.  Man we need to talk."   You know, any time anything that, that, that shines, you know, and that feels good for him, he gonna jump on, (laughing).  I hate to say it like that.  But I'm just putting it very simply.  That's the way it is.  And,  so I got the endorsement that night.  And didn't nothing go with the endorsement but him saying up there, "Well, we endorse Jerry Washington this district..." and so forth.  So back to Cecil Partee now.  I'm thinking all that was in place.  Everybody else thinking it was in place after I then took Harold all up in Evanston, and did all these things.  Went around and,  he spent all this money and time.  Had a big full thing.  I still got it today.   page ad in the, the Defender for me. A real nice thing they did for me, a full-page centerfold in the Defender.  A real nice thing they did that, that was put together for my campaign.  You know, and,  I got a piece... As a matter of fact, I got the brochure that we put together.  I'll show you that today.  You know, a very nice piece.  As a matter of fact when that... when we put that brochure on the street, people were talking about, "Man this Jerry Washington, this guy really got something going here."  You know.  But I had... I was just the kind of a guy that went out and worked hard.  You know.  And,  paid some dues and still paid dues.  And, and things happened.  Sometimes it didn't happen like it should have happened.  You know, but however, Harold knew Partee wasn't gonna deliver.  'Cause he couldn't deliver.  You know.  Not that he didn't want to deliver, he just couldn't deliver.
Speaker 2: Why couldn't he deliver?
Speaker 1: I asked Harold [Washington] that.  He never did... told me.  I was sitting... over there on State street when his... his last office that he had out here.  It was on State Street when he was senator.   We was in his office.  After the election, after it was over with.  I went to him.  I said, "Harold, hey man" I said, "The records show that Partee didn't deliver for me."  He bobbed his head.  And I looked. (unclear)  Harold wasn't out of trouble yet, now.  This is, this is, this... I ain't even tell...  We haven't got to the count yet.  He said, "Yeah.'  He said, "Jerry.  He told me he was gonna do it, but I, I ain't got no control."  I said okay then. But everybody got their piece, but me.  You know.  I'm the one out in the cold.  But I wasn't down.  Because I still had the same people around me and associated with that helped me get to that point.
Story_ID: 60808
Speaker 1: Okay you want to speculate about the reasoning behind. [Cecil]Partee's lack of follow-through?
Speaker 2: Well, well the reason behind it was that, was that they would lose the,  speakership of the House of Representatives.  And I don't think the Democrats wanted to lose that speakership. And it was going to be that close.  And they knew it was going to be that close by one vote. And had I won, rightfully won the seat that the Republican's should have had, then they would have been out of it because of me, you know. But I still would have worked because I'm from the city.  I stand... They understood I had to cross party lines on votes sometimes.  And I would have done that and they would have allowed me to do that without, any,  rep... rep... reprimands to me, you know. But the things that, that's how I, I concluded that it, it evidently was, you know.  Because of that and only because of that, you know.  So but however, that's the way that ended up. Now, Harold [Washington] still had to come to me.  They were getting ready to steal the election from him. As I told you machines can be changed.  They had changed... getting ready to changed the machines on everything.  On paper and everything else. And Harold said, "Man, look we need you." and I said, "Well look, they done gave you everything.  Man, I ain't got nothing." I say, "Okay, I got the key to the Republican's central committee from the county chairman, from the secretary rather. I can call him, he'll, he'll give it to you." Went in there, Timuel Black All was there that Sunday and several other Jewish individuals, I can't call their name from Hyde Park, a very influential individuals that was connected with Harold. We got to central committee, sat down went over all the return sheets that the Republican,  dem... central committee had.  And they copied every last vote, as it supposed to have been.  And they got that. So it went into the cabinets they were ready.  So they couldn't... And Harold had a press conference down there on the fact that they were gonna try and steal it. And they stopped... They decided after  they found out what was going on that they'd reversed their strategy and couldn't do nothing with that cause we had 'em.  We had them. And if it hadn't been for me, he wouldn't've had that.  He wouldn't've had that. Tim Black, if you asked him today, Professor Black, you asked him.  Retired, if you had asked him today he would tell you that God knows he's been blessed, um, blessed Jerry Washington. And he has blessed me. I see where my blessings have came from all the goodness and the righteous that my mother and father talk about steadfastly with me have came to pass.  So, you know.
Story_ID: 60809
Speaker 1: What was your, um, term in office like and what would. What are you most proud of?
Speaker 2: Why I served in the 84th session of the Illinois General Assembly between 1985 and 87 [1987].  And what I'm most proud about, it's so many things.  But to pin it, to... down to be exact; DuSable Museum. Had it not been for myself, well I shouldn't say myself, I should say Howard Brookings and myself, 'cause we sponsored the Bill, in my district to ex, to, expand that DuSable Museum (unclear) over there.  It would never've happened. We got the agreement to get the money from Thompson, then Governor Thompson. And we were able to get our bill through the House, through the Senate and it came out. The other thing what I was most proud about, because see I, I basically... They had Carol, well, Ambassador Carol, now, well then, State Rep Carol Moseley-Braun. They had me handling all the Public Aid Bills because I was in the district that had all Robert Taylor Homes in it. And any way which was, a high rate of, of, single family homes, people on, women on unemployment, I mean, on Public Aid.  But they had me sponsoring all the Public Aid Bills. But the other most... thing that I was very proud of was something dealing with the Veterans.  Colonel Mashant [ph], I don't even know if he is still living or not, retired.   I got involved with him, he was connected with, Congressman Hayes. He was, he was head of his, veterans for the 1st district. But there's a group of veterans in, in, Great Lakes.  And Great Lakes it was at that time, they had the Veterans of Illinois, Inc., organization. And I didn't realize that those veterans when they left there, most of them from wars recently and they had problems. They didn't have no place to go home and stay.  They didn't have no place to stay, some of them. And then, even some that got out here, that may have had something and became homeless; they were lost. So they got to me, you know.  They could've got to Emil and the rest of them.  But they... I don't know why but they came to me; through Mashant I guess because I was involved with Colonel Mashant, you know. So but anyway,  I met with 'em.   I drove all the way up there, one day. There were about 300 veterans, I met up at, at Great Lakes. They had the room, they were all set up and they had me.  I talked to them for about a half an hour.  We... I talked, and we answered questions.  And I sit... And I left them telling, I was going to do one thing.  I said, "Let me do one thing." I said, "You know I'm leaving.  I lost my election but I'm leaving the General Assembly." I said, "But, one thing I will do lastly and I'll have every member in the House and every member of the Senate, vote on it for it to be passed, I will pass a Joint House Senate Resolution." And I don't know the number but I... it's, it's, it's recorded there. Dick Newhouse.  Senator Newhouse was a sponsor in the Senate for me.  And I sponsored it in the House and I walked it over to the Senate and gave it to him and they called it and it passed in the Senate.  And I made each member, and he made each member there a part of this Resolution. What did the Resolution do? The Resolution was actions the Department of Veterans Affairs, of the State of Illinois, 'cause they didn't have any direction at this time to begin to make a ways of finding means to advance housing facilities for veterans, of all wars if there's a need for housing. Now that's the Resolution that Joint House Senate Resolution that passed January the 13th. I'll never forget; 1987. And before the end of the year, I was out of office before the end of the year they started building a veteran's housing over there on South Chicago somewhere. They started changing down here at Manteno.  They did all that because of this Resolution and God knows what else they've done. But that was two of the most highlighted things besides the minor things that were going on. The bill I had for Robert Taylor homes to set up a cultural and recreational, athletic,  facility.
Story_ID: 60810
Speaker 1: Do you think you lost because you were supremely independent?
Speaker 2: No, I and, and, and I come to, to appreciate her to some great extent now, you know.  She's still alderman, Alderman Dorothy Tillman. No I lost because one I didn't have any organization, now. See mind you, Jim Taylor didn't support me this... on my re-election bid.  Had he supported me I probably... we would have probably beat them. 'Cause Tyrone Kenner was the alderman and the committeeman, the times that I beat his organization with,  with, with his man, whose state, state representative. But however, to answer your question, no, I, uh... It was because, primarily because they had a organization to get out here and they talked to the people and they lied to the people. They, st... They came under...   The theme was that "I voted to increase the light bill." Now that's what they told people.  I got a brochure.  I don't think I brought it today.  I'll show it... get it to you sometime so you can see it. They had in there Paul Williams, the lawyer.  Now he left before his term was up.  He spent about two terms down there.  Two  or 3 terms but he, in December of one... his last term he left.  Resigned because he had got a deal from Mike Madigan to become... to, to support him being a lobbyist; making good money.  He's still down there now doing lobby work. But that's what... who Dorothy ran against me. And they tell me, a friend of mine's... I... I... poor Perry Hoisington [ph] was, uh...  had to go in jail.  I mean was incarcerated. They gave a party for him out south.  Some women gave a party for him and I went to it. And one of the ladies is very close to Dorothy.  She said, "Oh, you the Jerry.  Well, I been wanting to meet you.", she said, "When, when, when Dorothy beat you all she was jumping up and down, had your name all on her walls, all around her walls.", say, "I beat Jerry Washington, I beat Jerry Washington." So I, I must have been real hot! Jackie Grimshaw those were my enemies.  They're the ones that, that tried to turn Harold against me. Matter of fact,  I was working for the city.  City of Chicago.  I, I was a field supervisor for the Crisis Intervention Program, a citywide program.  They cut me from the job, in '83 [1983]. And they said, "Why they messing with him?" And the guy,  that worked for Harold [Washington], that,  was in the media sometime.  They were looking for him.  I think Ward was his name.  Anyway I met him.  Had dinner... breakfast with him one day.  And he told me, he said, he said, "He told them people not to mess with you.  You ain't had nothing to do with it.  You were working with Harold.  Working and still working with Harold." But they'd, they'd cut my position out of the budget, you know. So, you know, I lost that job.  But it didn't bother me because I was, you know, I was going to take office the next year anyway. So, but anyway I got, I got another job immediately to fill in the gap.  But however, you know, these are some of the misfortunate things that I've had.  But, uh... And Dorothy always thought that I was against her.  That I had somebody run... And see, what happened was, them white aldermen down there,  Ed Vrydolyak and the guy up north,  his son-in-law is Congressman now.  I can't think of his name.  Blagojevich is, the, the Congressmen. But it's his father-in-law.  No not... No, up north.  Now what's the guy's name? A very powerful man, uh... He was even in the paper talking about, "We gonna get Dorothy Tillman.  We got a candidate..." And they were talking about me! They were throwing my name around that, that I was going to be the candidate against Dorothy to beat her.  Which I did run against her.  But I didn't run against her because of all of this, you know.
Story_ID: 60811
Speaker 1: And that's when I had this near fatal accident.  And even after a near fatal accident during the operation, doctors later told me before I left how... He said, "Jerry I got to tell you...", cause I worked with him in the community.  He said, "We thought we had really lost you, I had given you up.", you know. " But I said, "Well you know it's by Divine Order that,  I'm still here.  And it's by Divine Order from this brain surgery, last year; again from a tumor that I'm still here" you know. But however, this is, this is what has happened.
Speaker 2: Would you retrace your medical challenge for us; from the aneurysm on to tumor?
Speaker 1: Well, according to and I have to go on the police report... 'Cause that whole Saturday is a, is a blank.  I don't remember anything about that Saturday.  But I can go back to my childhood days and tell you about things.  As, as I have. But I can't remember nothing from that Saturday.  The doctor said, "It was some form of amnesia.  Don't worry about it. It may be from the trauma you had to your brain." You know. But the things that, I was campaigning that day and I had a Deputy Sheriff riding with me, you know.
Speaker 2: What year was that?
Speaker 1: That was 1987. and as a matter of fact, the former alderman,  Tyrone Kenner's man was riding with me.  A  Deputy Sheriff.  He's still... When you go down to the civ... civ...   civic center you'll see him now. A little man, Art Turner.  And,  and, he was riding with me.  And supposedly I had dropped him off and I made one more stop.  According to one of my friends, I had to run through to see...  through one of her places, one night. And it had nothing to do with no alcohol.  Wasn't no drugs, 'cause I don't... I'm not involved with no drugs or nothing of that nature. But the things that, he said, Between about 1:00 or 2:00 o'clock in the morning and 6:30 in the morning. According to the police report, they found me at 6:30 in the morning.  And it happened at 50 West 63rd Street between State and Wentworth. Suco... Supposedly my car hit one of those concrete pillars.  And I had lost most of my blood and all. And  all... The lady in the hospital, a  nurse said that, "When they brought me in my whole... My trench coat and suit everything was drenched."  You know.  And she the one that called Dr. Thapedi.  Isaac Thapedi.  His wife is a judge, Judge Thapedi.  A very nice man, very nice man.  Lives out in Olympic Fields and a extremely great neurosurgeon. I mean, he's one of the best.  Could be the best.  He's, he's trained all over this world.  You know, education wise.  But however, that's, that's how they found me.  And I was in a coma.  I was unconscious, went to the hospital.  I didn't come out of that.  I was in a coma for two weeks, and out of all of that there wasn't no brain damage.  You know, at all.  No brain damage at all. And I was in the hospital for a whole month.  Over at St. Bernard Hospital, here in Chicago, Englewood area. And I came out of that.  And,  stranger as it is, I guess because of my will,  in October of that year, I jumped in my son's Trans Am and I drove down to Springfield.  They said, "You're gonna drive?" and I said, "Yeah, I'm gonna drive!" I drove all the way down to Springfield, my granddaughter and I.  And, we drove to Springfield.  Wasn't no problem.  You know, a little fast sports car.  But I, I drove.  You know, I just, just wherever I want to go.  And I had to go down there on business anyway. Dealing with some things still that I had in office about. And I came back and I was driving every since.  I never stopped driving, you know.  Until this last incident that occurred to me now.  In-between time I was on the State medical insurance.  And somehow they identified me with a group of people, that wasn't supposed to have the insurance at that point.  You know. You know, I had paid for it until... up to a point.  You know, cause,   I was with Michael Reese Health plan.  I was with,   Pres-St. Luke, then I transferred to Mich...  Michael Reese Health Plan.  And they gave me a lot of problems.  They wanted to transfer... They, they told Dr. Thapedi, that they had to transfer me down to Michael Reese.  'Cause they weren't going to pay for the hospital out there.  'cause that was over a hundred and some thousand dollars.  The hospital bill came close to a hundred thousand dollars, you know. But, uh... And they even sued us, you know.  And, And then, afterward all I got was an apology from Michael Reese that said, "We're sorry.  We were wrong.", you know, you know. But those are ordeals that you go through with in life.  And I understand that, uh... And I understand too that... But between,19... about 1991 or 92, that's when I had the, the insurance to drop.   I didn't have no insurance.  And for some reason, there... they...  they didn't want... My wife didn't want to transfer me into her insur... Because I guess she had to pick up a bigger piece of the cost of it, you know. I said, "Well what we should've did, we should've went on and transferred in while I had it." You know.  'Cause I had all of them under my insurance plan, you know.  So finally that worked out.  You know, it worked out that,   I eventually got on her plan.  But I didn't get on her plan until 1997.
Story_ID: 60812
Speaker 1: -- leaving the house in January '97 [1997].  Same month, in the evening had my coat on, getting ready to go out.  My ride was coming to pick me up.  And I started having a seizure.  Which I didn't know that's what it was! Facial.  I didn't get... I wasn't un... unconscious.  And I couldn't talk.  And I was running through the house trying to get her attention.  And she didn't know any... And she's, you know, she's a very timid kind of person.  But however, I told her, you know.  I got to the point of pointing to the phone.  So she knew it was something wrong and gotta call 911. So she called and they were questioning what was happening.  And, and, they said, "Well have him lay on his side." I laid on my side, within about 10 minutes maybe 15, at the most, I began to come out of it. So that's what it was, it was a seizure.  But I didn't know what was happening, I thought it had something to do with the aneurysm, you know, you know. And, so they took me to Holy Cross Hospital and,  I didn't have no in... no health insurance at all.  And I stayed in there 3... I stayed in there about a week, Holy Cross I was in there a week. I got out, they sent the bill.  I wrote a letter to the president of the hospital and explained to him about my part... specific circumstance and plight. And he wrote me back and they had to agree to absorb the hospital bill.  And I didn't have to pay on a whole fourteen thousand dollars, I didn't have to pay, you know. And, I wrote him to thank him, you know, which I was very grateful for, you know. So, now I get the insurance, Humana.  I get the insurance.   And, so... effective for July 1st.  So I kept having these seizures, all dur... during '97 [1997]. '98 [1998], I'm still having these seizures. I just didn't know what was wrong.  They still... I... cat... Cat scan on top of cat scan and they... Still nobody found it.  And it wasn't until, last 98 [1998],  99 [1999}] of December, had the the neurologist; I can't think of his name off-hand.  But anyway, he, from St. Bernard.  The doctor there, my primary physician, Dr. Warner, eventually became my primary physician.  He called me and, and he read the, the,  X-ray, not X-ray but,  cat scan.  And it showed that I had a tumor, the size of a Japanese lemon. I never seen a Japanese lemon.  But they told me what size it was.  'Cause the, the intern from University of Illinois Circle came.  And they had... They, they had it measured and everything. They said it was 3 inches long and 2 inches wide. It was on the right hand side, sitting on the side of my brain, in the area where I had the aneurysm.  And the doctor later told me that, that was good that it was there.  Because if it had been on my left side I would've had some problems, you know. And then the other good thing about it, it wasn't malignant.  You know? I didn't have cancer.  And there wasn't no cancer in any other part of my body, according to them. Now, I'll back up just one second, just to bring up dates.
Story_ID: 60813
Speaker 1: While at Holy Cross, the time they took me there, they determined that I had dia... I'm a diabetic.  They... My sugar was up 700 and something, my blood pressure was 200 and something.  I forgot to mention that to you.  But that's, that's how... all this coming.  I'm a diabetic, you know. But however,   that's where... So Dr. Thapedi began to, have the head of the neurologist department down at, at Mercy Hospital.  'Cause I'm in that plan now.  And he's also a part of the University of Illinois's school system. They looked at it.  And Thapedi wanted to have... find a way to go in so he could get it. He said, he just...  He wasn't just... He said, "A lot of guys, they go in and just scoop it up."  He said, "He don't do that.  There's a lot of nerves up there." He said... You know he said, "He may be cutting some nerves.  He may have to cut nerves anyway, but he'll find that out later." You know, he said, "I'll find that out later.", but things that he... He, he had him look at it.  And they determined there was a way that they could take the cat scan to get a clear picture on what he needed to know, to do what he had to do.  And so he went in. I had it, on April of last year.  I, uh... But prior to that, that Saturday before that Monday was April the 10th.  I had went down for my pre...  I guess, pre-operation.  I had to go in for blood tests and all that kind of stuff. And I went in.  And when I got through my granddaughter had, had taken me to the hospital.  I said, "Look take me out to the doctor's office.  I want to see him for a minute." We went over on Cottage Grove 80... 84th and Cottage Grove.  Dr. Warner is out there.  And I'm sitting in the office and the girl had brought me in, got me check-in.  And I was sitting down waiting on him.  He was with another patient.  And while I was sitting there, I began having a seizure again! In his office. I gets up and I start beating on the wall and I get the girl's attention.  'Cause he didn't know what was happening.  And, and she looked at me.  She got kind of frightened and she came back and she said, uh... I said... pointed toward the doctor.  So he came in and I sat down.  Calmed down and in about 10 minutes, it subsided itself again. He said, "I think we better go on, and let you go on in now to the hospital admitted." So he called down.  They had a room and everything ready for me.  She... My daughter... granddaughter took me back down, and I was admitted to the hospital.  And they kept watch over, over the weekend. Monday morning,  my family and  my wife and my daughter,  and my niece...  the one that I spoke to you about,  with the foundation came down.  And they had the,  wonderful operation. They rolled me on in.  And, my daugh... (chuckling) my daughter, she's crazy she...  my youngest daughter she says, "Well,  we want to keep his hair." (chuckling) I got my hair, (chuckling).  I had a lot of hair.  More hair than I have on my head right now.  Anyway, she... I still got it.  But however, went in the operation.  And,  it was about a 4, 4 or 5 hour operation.  And, came out of it. And the first thing I said that, "I want something to eat." And the doctor was amazed that I was talking.  They took me in intensive care but I was just in intensive care waiting for a room.  And they... And they, they said, It's amazing!", they said, "This is amazing!" They said I don't... I told the doctor... doctor again, you know, "Divine intervention.   That allowed you to perform this miracle again." And that's how the operations of my illness has been up to this point.
Story_ID: 60814
Speaker 1: (unclear)  Um, would you summarize your professional life to me.  And then, summarize your life, as Jerry Washington Jr.
Speaker 2: Well my professional life has been, part of it has been,   with the City of Chicago Department of Human Service, Crisis Intervention Management.  Uh...
Speaker 1: Your feelings about it?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, I think I've had a good professional life.  I, I perhaps should have probably,  still been with Blue Cross and Blue Shield.  That would have been the top of my career.  'Cause I had started out after I left those jobs that I mentioned to you earlier,  I had took a job with Washington National Insurance Company.  'Cause I wanted to do something different, you know.  And then I was raising a family, too. And surprising as it was, I made very good money for Washington National.  'Cause I got, people oriented type of person.  The people out there in the area from 43rd Lake Park back over to King Drive, helped me a lot. And I wasn't short of having no business.  I wrote a lot of insurance and I did right by the people.  You know. And I could stay out at 11:00 at night.  And that was during the time, Jeff Fortune was out there.  And them, were out there; and I had no problem at all during that time.  No problem. But however, uh... I, I, I got not boring.  But I wanted to go somewhere.  You know.   I've always wanted to go somewhere.  And I... And I was on jury duty.  And I met a fellow named Chauncey.  He had a Corvette, and we were talking about that.  And we were talking.  He said, "Look, I'm with Blue Cross and Blue Shield.  How would you like to come there?" I said, "I'd never thought about it but, I'd consider taking it." I thought it would be a step up; which it was, a big step up.  I had the interviews about 3 or 4 interviews.  Went through the interviews and got hired. And, I was managing Blue Cross and Blue Shield programs in a number of hospitals.  Well the hospital now, Northwest Memorial Hospital was Chicago West Memorial then.  And, I sold a program in there over... 'bout over 2 or 3 million dollars.  A benefit upgrade.  And everybody... Eve... Them other folks got mad at me, you know.  The people. A lot of my colleagues got mad.  'Cause they said, "How in the world he could do that?" I did that because I had established a relationship with the personnel director. And we got along very fine.  He took me into the building and, (unclear) where the nurses stayed at and all that.  He went to the nurses graduation.  When they jumped in the pool.  You know, all that kind of thing. So that was a... That was a... That was even a, a greater experience and much better. And after I left there, I was... , I was (unclear) from one insurance agency to another.  And then, and eventually I went with the city.  And decided I was gonna run.  And I ran and won.  And,   after I left the city, you know, I went with, Pine Construction Company.  I was the Special Assistant to the owner of Pine Construction Company, you know.  something... Sometimes it had something to do with being a project manager.  But mostly I didn't even get involved with that.  I was really working through him.  and that was a job that I held,  up until my fir... just about my first year in office.  You know, which was '85 [1985], you know.
Story_ID: 60815
Speaker 1: And, since that time I haven't been...  I've been again, as I said been trying to take care of my health.  And it's coming along fine.  I'm really just (unclear)... a few minor things.  Getting ready to try to see which direction I can go in, you know.  'Cause the doctor has claimed me totally disabled, you know. That's what they claim.  That I'm totally disabled.  'Cause I do have problems, in... you know, after a certain period of time.  So I'm gonna have to live with that and deal with what I have to deal with that.  You know.  But things that, uh... I'm not, necessarily hurting or suffering or any kind of way.  And, I... God has been good to me and I think... I still feel there's something yet for me to do. I still write, I still put things together.  I'm still on the local school council. I've been there since '89 [1989]. And I wanted to give that up.  And, uh... And for some reason I just decided to chan... I changed it.  I changed it all, you know, that I had.  Ain't time for me to go yet, you know. And I told the principal, whose there now, Sam Williams, a very fine guy.  He was at Calumet.  I told him, "Had you came here when Valison brought this, Tommy Brown here, the school would have been better and everything else would have happened.  Wouldn't nothing happen like this., you know. And he and I are working very close together now.  So I'd... They need my leadership.  So I'm gonna stay... hang on a little while longer.  You know. And, God knows where I'll... Or where else or what I'll be doing.  But right now, I... I'm just trying to search to find out, you know, what God wants me to do.  I'm conscientiously studying the Bible.  As well as I read daily.  And I'm religiously trying to get my spirit in the right way
Story_ID: 60816
Speaker 1: And, finally, how would you... What would you say to a young school person about life in the state legislature? Or what would you tell them, would be the reason that they should be interested in state government?
Speaker 2: Because government affects everything you do.  When you come into this world, when you're born in this world and when you leave this world. And that never do... never live in a, in a, in a, in a society that you can't have an impact on or influence in or with. And if it gets to a point that you don't have no impact on or no influence with, you might as well be enslaved to somebody, you know. And I tell them in this day and ta... this day and age now, slavery should be long forgotten.  But as we know it, it's not forgotten. And I let them know that unless they get that education, unless they prepare themselves, unless they find means by which the future generation can come together and work together for the good of the community:  And overall look at that we just can't help ourselves.  We gotta help everybody.  But help us so we can help other people.  You know.  But reach out to other people.  And build the kinds of coalitions that would help you, help your community and help your people.  You know.  'Cause it's very important.  And we are lacking in knowledge, lacking in understanding and lacking in so many other things that we... Ten, 20, 30, 40, 50 years from now we...  Our...  This generation now that's in the 20s and coming along behind them, they gonna be so outdated. And the kids, who are gonna be educate themselves are going to be the ones that gone still be in the mix. I hate to use it like that, but that's the terminology I have to say.  They're gonna be in the mix.  Because they're gonn' know what to do, and how to do it. Now they can't never wipe us totally out.  But they're gonna have to deal with us.  But right now we've got... The  Hispanics are coming along now. And, uh... And rightfully so.  They're working hard.  They're doing what they have to do.  And we been here and we gotta start doing what we need to do to sorta help our families and to help our communities out.  'Cause the family is the foundation of everything. And where there's no family foundation, then there's no community foundation.  Somebody else will run the show.
Speaker 1: Thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
